The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Charles Strange, Vol. 3 (of 3), by
Mrs. Henry Wood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story of Charles Strange, Vol. 3 (of 3)
       A Novel

Author: Mrs. Henry Wood

Release Date: January 20, 2012 [EBook #38625]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORY OF CHARLES STRANGE ***




Produced by David Edwards, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









    THE STORY OF CHARLES STRANGE

    A Novel

    BY

    MRS. HENRY WOOD

    AUTHOR OF "EAST LYNNE," ETC.

    IN THREE VOLUMES

    VOL. III.


    LONDON:
    RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON
    Publishers in Ordinary to Her Majesty the Queen
    1888
    [_All Rights Reserved_]




    CONTENTS OF VOL. III.


     CHAPTER                    PAGE

       I. ON THE WATCH             1

      II. TOM HERIOT              29

     III. AN EVENING VISITOR      46

      IV. RESTITUTION             64

       V. CONFESSION              92

      VI. DANGER                 117

     VII. WITH MR. JONES         136

    VIII. AN ACCIDENT            165

      IX. LAST DAYS              185

       X. LAST WORDS             203

      XI. DOWN AT MARSHDALE      226

     XII. IN THE EAST WING       249

    XIII. CONCLUSION             260




THE STORY OF CHARLES STRANGE.




CHAPTER I.

ON THE WATCH.


Mr. Serjeant Stillingfar sat at dinner in his house in Russell Square
one Sunday afternoon. A great cause, in which he was to lead, had
brought him up from circuit, to which he would return when the Nisi
Prius trial was over. The cloth was being removed when I entered. He
received me with his usual kindly welcome.

"Why not have come to dinner, Charles? Just had it, you say? All the
more reason why we might have had it together. Sit down, and help
yourself to wine."

Declining the wine, I drew my chair near to his, and told him what I
had come about.

A few days had gone on since the last chapter. With the trouble
connected with Mrs. Brightman, and the trouble connected with Tom
Heriot, I had enough on my mind at that time, if not upon my
shoulders. As regarded Mrs. Brightman, no one could help me; but
regarding the other----

Was Tom in London, or was he not? How was I to find out? I had again
gone prowling about the book-stall and its environs, and had seen no
trace of him. Had Leah really seen him, or only some other man who
resembled him?

Again I questioned Leah. Her opinion was not to be shaken. She held
emphatically to her assertion. It was Tom that she had seen, and none
other.

"You may have seen some other sailor, sir; I don't say to the
contrary; but the sailor I saw was Captain Heriot," she reiterated.
"Suppose I go again to-night, sir? I may, perhaps, have the good luck
to see him."

"Should you call it good luck, Leah?"

"Ah well, sir, you know what I mean," she answered. "Shall I go
to-night?"

"No, Leah; I am going myself. I cannot rest in this uncertainty."

Rest! I felt more like a troubled spirit or a wandering ghost. Arthur
Lake asked what had gone wrong with me, and where I disappeared to of
an evening.

Once more I turned out in discarded clothes to saunter about Lambeth.
It was Saturday night and the thoroughfares were crowded; but amidst
all who came and went I saw no trace of Tom.

Worried, disheartened, I determined to carry the perplexity to my
Uncle Stillingfar. That he was true as steel, full of loving-kindness
to all the world, no matter what their errors, and that he would aid
me with his counsel--if any counsel could avail--I well knew. And thus
I found myself at his house on that Sunday afternoon. Of course he had
heard about the escape of the convicts; had seen Tom's name in the
list; but he did not know that he was suspected of having reached
London. I told him of what Leah had seen, and added the little episode
about "Miss Betsy."

"And now, what can be done, Uncle Stillingfar? I have come to ask
you."

His kindly blue eyes became thoughtful whilst he pondered the
question. "Indeed, Charles, I know not," he answered. "Either you must
wait in patience until he turns up some fine day--as he is sure to do
if he is in London--or you must quietly pursue your search for him,
and smuggle him away when you have found him."

"But if I don't find him? Do you think it could be Tom that Leah saw?
Is it possible that he can be in London?"

"Quite possible. If a homeward vessel, bound, it may be, for the port
of London, picked them up, what more likely than that he is here?
Again, who else would call himself Charles Strange, and pass himself
off for you? Though I cannot see his motive for doing it."

"Did you ever know any man so recklessly imprudent, uncle?"

"I have never known any man so reckless as Tom Heriot. You must do
your best to find him, Charles."

"I don't know how. I thought you might possibly have suggested some
plan. Every day increases his danger."

"It does: and the chances of his being recognised."

"It seems useless to search further in Lambeth: he must have changed
his quarters. And to look about London for him will be like looking
for a needle in a bottle of hay. I suppose," I slowly added, "it would
not do to employ a detective?"

"Not unless you wish to put him into the lion's mouth," said the
Serjeant. "Why, Charles, it would be his business to retake him. Rely
upon it, the police are now looking for him if they have the slightest
suspicion that he is here."

At that time one or two private detectives had started in business on
their own account, having nothing to do with the police: now they have
sprung up in numbers. It was to these I alluded.

Serjeant Stillingfar shook his head. "I would not trust one of them,
Charles: it would be too dangerous an experiment. No; what you do, you
must do yourself. Once let Government get scent that he is here, and
we shall probably find the walls placarded with a reward for his
apprehension."

"One thing I am surprised at," I said as I rose to leave: "that if he
is here, he should not have let me know it. What can he be doing for
money? An escaped convict is not likely to have much of that about
him."

Serjeant Stillingfar shook his head. "There are points about the
affair that I cannot fathom, Charles. Talking of money--you are
well-off now, but if more than you can spare should be needed to get
Tom Heriot away, apply to me."

"Thank you, uncle; but I don't think it will be needed. Where would
you recommend him to escape to?"

"Find him first," was the Serjeant's answer.

He accompanied me himself to the front door. As we stood, speaking a
last word, a middle-aged man, with keen eyes and spare frame, dressed
as a workman, came up with a brisk step. Mr. Serjeant Stillingfar met
the smile on the man's face as he glanced up in passing.

"Arkwright!" he exclaimed. "I hardly knew you. Some sharp case in
hand, I conclude?"

"Just so, Serjeant; but I hope to bring it to earth before the day's
over. You know----"

Then the man glanced at me and came to a pause.

"However, I mustn't talk about it now, so good-afternoon, Serjeant."
And thus speaking, he walked briskly onwards.

"I wonder what he has in hand? I think he would have told me, Charles,
but for your being present," cried my uncle, looking after him. "A
keen man is Arkwright."

"_Arkwright!_" I echoed, the name now impressing itself upon me.
"Surely not Arkwright the famous detective!"

"Yes, it is. And he has evidently got himself up as a workman to
further some case that he has in hand. He knew you, Charles; depend
upon that; though you did not know him."

A fear, perhaps a foolish one, fell upon me. "Uncle Stillingfar," I
breathed, "can his case be _Tom's_? Think you it is he who is being
run to earth?"

"No, no. That is not likely," he answered, after a moment's
consideration. "Anyway, you must use every exertion to find him, for
his stay in London is full of danger."

It will readily be believed that this incident had not added to my
peace of mind. One more visit I decided to pay to the old ground in
Lambeth, and after that--why, in truth, whether to turn east, west,
north or south, I knew no more than the dead.

Monday was bright and frosty; Monday evening clear, cold and
starlight. The gaslights flared away in the streets and shops; the
roads were lined with wayfarers.

Sauntering down the narrow pavement on the opposite side of the way,
in the purposeless manner that a hopeless man favours, I approached
the book-stall. A sailor was standing before it, his head bent over
the volumes. Every pulse within me went up to fever heat: for there
was that in him that reminded me of Tom Heriot.

I crossed quietly to the stall, stood side by side with him, and took
up a handful of penny dreadfuls. Yes, it was he--Tom Heriot.

"Tom," I cried softly. "Tom!"

I felt the start he gave. But he did not move hand or foot; only his
eyes turned to scan me.

"Tom," I whispered again, apparently intent upon a grand picture of a
castle in flames, and a gentleman miraculously escaping with a lady
from an attic window. "Tom, don't you know me?"

"For goodness' sake don't speak to me, Charley!" he breathed in
answer, the words barely audible. "Go away, for the love of heaven!
I've been a prisoner here for the last three minutes. That policeman
yonder would know me, and I dare not turn. His name's Wren."

Three doors off, a policeman was standing at the edge of the pavement,
facing the shops, as if waiting to pounce upon someone he was
expecting to pass. Even as Tom spoke, he wheeled round to the right,
and marched up the street. Tom as quickly disappeared to the left,
leaving a few words in my ear.

"I'll wait for you at the other end, Charley; it is darker there than
here. Don't follow me immediately."

So I remained where I was, still bending an enraptured gaze upon the
burning castle and the gallant knight and damsel escaping from it at
their peril.

"Betsy says the account comes to seven shillings, Mr. Strange."

The address gave me almost as great a thrill as the sight of Tom had
done. It came from the man Lee, now emerging from his shop.
Involuntarily I pulled my hat lower upon my brow. He looked up and
down the street.

"Oh, I beg pardon--thought Mr. Strange was standing here," he said.
And then I saw my error. He had not spoken to me, but to Tom Heriot.
My gaze was still fascinated by the flaming picture.

"Anything you'd like this evening, sir?"

"I'll take this sheet--half a dozen of them," I said, putting down
sixpence.

"Thank you, sir. A fine night."

"Yes, very. Were you speaking to the sailor who stood here?" I added
carelessly "He went off in that direction, I think," pointing to the
one opposite to that Tom had taken.

"Yes," answered the man; "'twas Mr. Strange. He had asked me to look
how much his score was for tobacco. I dare say he'll be back
presently. Captain Strange, by rights," added Lee chattily.

"Oh! Captain of a vessel?"

"Of his own vessel--a yacht. Not but what he has been about the world
in vessels of all sorts, he tells us; one voyage before the mast, the
next right up next to the skipper. But for them ups and downs where,
as he says, would sailors find their experience?"

"Very true. Well, this is all I want just now. Good-evening."

"Good-evening, sir," replied Caleb Lee.

The end of the street to which Tom had pointed was destitute of shops;
the houses were small and poor; consequently, it was tolerably dark.
Tom was sauntering along, smoking a short pipe.

"Is there any place at hand where we can have a few words together in
tolerable security?" I asked.

"Come along," briefly responded Tom. "You walk on the other side of
the street, old fellow; keep me in view."

It was good advice, and I took it. He increased his pace to a brisk
walk, and presently turned down a narrow passage, which brought him to
a sort of small, triangular green, planted with shrubs and trees. I
followed, and we sat down on one of the benches.

"Are you quite mad, Tom?"

"Not mad a bit," laughed Tom. "I say, Charley, did you come to that
book-stall to look after me?"

"Ay. And it's about the tenth time I have been there."

"How the dickens did you find me out?"

"Chance one evening took Leah into the neighbourhood, and she happened
to see you. I had feared you might be in England."

"You had heard of the wreck of the _Vengeance_, I suppose; and that a
few of us had escaped. Good old Leah! Did I give her a fright?"

We were sitting side by side. Tom had put his pipe out, lest the light
should catch the sight of any passing stragglers. We spoke in
whispers. It was, perhaps, as safe a place as could be found;
nevertheless, I sat upon thorns.

Not so Tom. By the few signs that might be gathered--his light voice,
his gay laugh, his careless manner--Tom felt as happy and secure as if
he had been attending one of her Majesty's levees, in the full glory
of scarlet coat and flashing sword-blade.

"Do you know, Tom, you have half killed me with terror and
apprehension? How could you be so reckless as to come back to London?"

"Because the old ship brought me," lightly returned Tom.

"I suppose a vessel picked you up--and the comrades who escaped with
you?"

"It picked two of us up. The other three died."

"What, in the boat?"

He nodded. "In the open boat at sea."

"How did you manage to escape? I thought convicts were too well looked
after."

"So they are, under ordinary circumstances. Shipwrecks form the
exception. I'll give you the history, Charley."

"Make it brief, then. I am upon thorns."

Tom laughed, and began:

"We were started on that blessed voyage, a cargo of men in irons, and
for some time made a fair passage, and thought we must be nearing the
other side. Such a crew, that cargo, Charles! Such an awful lot!
Villainous wretches, who wore their guilt on their faces, and suffered
their deserts; half demons, most of them. A few amongst them were no
doubt like me, innocent enough; wrongfully accused and condemned----"

"But go on with the narrative, Tom."

"I swear I was innocent," he cried, with emotion, heedless of my
interruption. "I was wickedly careless, I admit that, but the guilt
was another's, not mine. When I put those bills into circulation,
Charles, I knew no more they were forged than you did. Don't you
believe me?"

"I do believe you. I have believed you throughout."

"And if the trial had not been hurried on I think it could have been
proved. It was hurried on, Charles, and when it was on it was hurried
over. I am suffering unjustly."

"Yes, Tom. But won't you go on with your story?"

"Where was I? Oh, about the voyage and the shipwreck. After getting
out of the south-east trades, we had a fortnight's light winds and
calms, and then got into a steady westerly wind, before which we ran
quietly for some days. One dark night, it was the fifteenth of
November, and thick, drizzling weather, the wind about north-west, we
had turned in and were in our first sleep, when a tremendous uproar
arose on deck; the watch shouting and tramping, the officers' orders
and the boatswain's mate's shrill piping rising above the din. One
might have thought Old Nick had leaped on board and was giving chase.
Next came distinctly that fearful cry, 'All hands save ship!' Sails
were being clewed up, yards were being swung round. Before we could
realize what it all meant, the ship had run ashore; and there she
stuck, bumping as if she would knock her bottom out."

"Get on, Tom," I whispered, for he had paused, and seemed to be
spinning a long yarn instead of a short one.

"Fortunately, the ship soon made a sort of cradle for herself in the
sand, and lay on her starboard bilge. To attempt to get her off was
hopeless. So they got us all out of the ship and on shore, and put us
under tents made of the sails. The skipper made out, or thought he
made out, the island to be that of Tristan d'Acunha: whether it was or
not I can't say positively. At first we thought it was uninhabited,
but it turned out to have a few natives on it, sixty or eighty in
all. In the course of a few days every movable thing had been landed.
All the boats were intact, and were moored in a sort of creek, or
small natural harbour, their gear, sails and oars in them."

"Hush!" I breathed, "or you are lost!"

A policeman's bull's-eye was suddenly turned upon the grass. By the
man's size, I knew him for Tom's friend, Wren. We sat motionless. The
light just escaped us, and the man passed on. But we had been in
danger.

"If you would only be quicker, Tom. I don't want to know about boats
and their gear."

He laughed. "How impatient you are, Charles! Well, to get on ahead. A
cargo of convicts cannot be kept as securely under such circumstances
as had befallen us as they could be in a ship's hold, and the
surveillance exercised was surprisingly lax. Two or three of the
prisoners were meditating an escape, and thought they saw their way to
effecting it by means of one of the boats. I found this out, and
joined the party. But there were almost insurmountable difficulties in
the way. It was absolutely necessary that we should put on ordinary
clothes--for what vessel, picking us up, but would have delivered us
up at the first port it touched at, had we been in convict dress? We
marked the purser's slop-chest, which was under a tent, and well
filled, and----"

"Do get on, Tom!"

"Here goes, then! One calm, but dark night, when other people were
sleeping, we stole down to the creek, five of us, rigged ourselves out
in the purser's toggery, leaving the Government uniforms in exchange,
unmoored one of the cutters, and got quietly away. We had secreted
some bread and salt meat; water there had been already on board. The
wind was off the land, and we let the boat drift before it a bit
before attempting to make sail. By daylight we were far enough from
the island; no chance of their seeing us--a speck on the waters. The
wind, hitherto south, had backed to the westward. We shaped a course
by the sun to the eastward, and sailed along at the rate of five or
six knots. My comrades were not as rough as they might have been;
rather decent fellows for convicts. Two of them were from Essex; had
been sentenced for poaching only. Now began our lookout: constantly
straining our eyes along the horizon for a sail, but especially astern
for an outward-bounder, but only saw one or two in the distance that
did not see us. What I underwent in that boat as day after day passed,
and no sail appeared, I won't enter upon now, old fellow. The
provisions were exhausted, and so was the water. One by one three of
my companions went crazy and died. The survivor and I had consigned
the last of them to the deep on the twelfth day, and then I thought my
turn had come; but Markham was worse than I was. How many hours went
on, I knew not. I lay at the bottom of the boat, exhausted and half
unconscious, when suddenly I heard voices. I imagined it to be a
dream. But in a few minutes a boat was alongside the cutter, and two
of its crew had stepped over and were raising me up. They spoke to me,
but I was too weak to understand or answer; in fact, I was delirious.
I and Markham were taken on board and put to bed. After some days,
passed in a sort of dreamy, happy delirium, well cared for and
attended to, I woke up to the realities of life. Markham was dead: he
had never revived, and died of exposure and weakness some hours after
the rescue."

"What vessel had picked you up?"

"It was the _Discovery_, a whaler belonging to Whitby, and homeward
bound. The captain, Van Hoppe, was Dutch by birth, but had been reared
in England and had always sailed in English ships. A good and kind
fellow, if ever there was one. Of course, I had to make my tale good
and suppress the truth. The passenger-ship in which I was sailing to
Australia to seek my fortune had foundered in mid-ocean, and those
who escaped with me had died of their sufferings. That was true so
far. Captain Van Hoppe took up my misfortunes warmly. Had he been my
own brother--had he been _you_, Charley--he could not have treated me
better or cared for me more. The vessel had a prosperous run home. She
was bound for the port of London; and when I put my hand into Van
Hoppe's at parting, and tried to thank him for his goodness, he left a
twenty-pound note in it. 'You'll need it, Mr. Strange,' he said; 'you
can repay me when your fortune's made and you are rich.'"

"_Strange!_" I cried.

Tom laughed.

"I called myself 'Strange' on the whaler. Don't know that it was wise
of me. One day when I was getting better and lay deep in
thought--which just then chanced to be of you, Charley--the mate
suddenly asked me what my name was. 'Strange,' I answered, on the spur
of the moment. That's how it was. And that's the brief history of my
escape."

"You have had money, then, for your wants since you landed," I
remarked.

"I have had the twenty pounds. It's coming to an end now."

"You ought not to have come to London. You should have got the captain
to put you ashore somewhere, and then made your escape from England."

"All very fine to talk, Charley! I had not a sixpence in my pocket, or
any idea that he was going to help me. I could only come on as far as
the vessel would bring me."

"And suppose he had not given you money--what then?"

"Then I must have contrived to let you know that I was home again, and
borrowed from you," he lightly replied.

"Well, your being here is frightfully dangerous."

"Not a bit of it. As long as the police don't suspect I am in England,
they won't look after me. It's true that a few of them might know me,
but I do not think they would in this guise and with my altered
face."

"You were afraid of one to-night."

"Well, _he_ is especially one who might know me; and he stood there so
long that I began to think he might be watching me. Anyway, I've been
on shore these three weeks, and nothing has come of it yet."

"What about that young lady named Betsy? Miss Betsy Lee."

Tom threw himself back in a fit of laughter.

"I hear the old fellow went down to Essex Street one night to
ascertain whether I lived there! The girl asked me one day where I
lived, and I rapped out Essex Street."

"But, Tom, what have you to do with the girl?"

"Nothing; nothing. On my honour. I have often been in the shop,
sometimes of an evening. The father has invited me to some grog in the
parlour behind it, and I have sat there for an hour chatting with him
and the girl. That's all. She is a well-behaved, modest little girl;
none better."

"Well, Tom, with one imprudence and another, you stand a fair
chance----"

"There, there! Don't preach, Charley. What you call imprudence, I call
fun."

"What do you think of doing? To remain on here for ever in this
disguise?"

"Couldn't, I expect, if I wanted to. I must soon see about getting
away."

"You must get away at once."

"I am not going yet, Charley; take my word for that; and I am as safe
in London, I reckon, as I should be elsewhere. Don't say but I may
have to clear out of this particular locality. If that burly policeman
is going to make a permanent beat of it about here, he might drop upon
me some fine evening."

"And you must exchange your sailor's disguise, as you call it, for a
better one."

"Perhaps so. That rough old coat you have on, Charley, might not come
amiss to me."

"You can have it. Why do you fear that policeman should know you,
more than any other?"

"He was present at the trial last August. Was staring me in the face
most of the day. His name's Wren."

I sighed.

"Well, Tom, it is getting late; we have sat here as long as is
consistent with safety," I said, rising.

He made me sit down again.

"The later the safer, perhaps, Charley. When shall we meet again?"

"Ay; when, and where?"

"Come to-morrow evening, to this same spot. It is as good a one as any
I know of. I shall remain indoors all day tomorrow. Of course one does
not care to run needlessly into danger. Shall you find your way to
it?"

"Yes, and will be here; but I shall go now. Do be cautious, Tom. Do
you want any money? I have brought some with me."

"Many thanks, old fellow; I've enough to go on with for a day or two.
How is Blanche? Did she nearly die of the disgrace?"

"She did not know of it. Does not know it yet."

"No!" he exclaimed in astonishment. "Why, how can it have been kept
from her? She does not live in a wood."

"Level has managed it, somehow. She was abroad during the trial, you
know. They have chiefly lived there since, Blanche seeing no English
newspapers; and, of course, her acquaintances do not gratuitously
speak to her about it. But I don't think it can be kept from her much
longer."

"But where does she think I am--all this time?"

"She thinks you are in India with the regiment."

"I suppose _he_ was in a fine way about it!"

"Level? Yes--naturally; and is still. He would have saved you, Tom, at
any cost."

"As you would, and one or two more good friends; but, you see, I did
not know what was coming upon me in time to ask them. It fell upon my
head like a thunderbolt. Level is not a bad fellow at bottom."

"He is a downright good one--at least, that's my opinion of him."

We stood hand locked in hand at parting. "Where are you staying?" I
whispered.

"Not far off. I've a lodging in the neighbourhood--one room."

"Fare you well, then, until to-morrow evening."

"Au revoir, Charley."




CHAPTER II.

TOM HERIOT.


I found my way straight enough the next night to the little green with
its trees and shrubs. Tom was there, and was humming one of our
boyhood's songs taught us by Leah:

    "Young Henry was as brave a youth
      As ever graced a martial story;
    And Jane was fair as lovely truth:
      She sighed for love, and he for glory.

    "To her his faith he meant to plight,
      And told her many a gallant story:
    But war, their honest joys to blight,
      Called him away from love to glory.

    "Young Henry met the foe with pride;
      Jane followed--fought--ah! hapless story!
    In man's attire, by Henry's side,
      She died for love, and he for glory."

He was still dressed as a sailor, but the pilot-coat was buttoned up
high and tight about his throat, and the round glazed hat was worn
upon the front of his head instead of the back of it.

"I thought you meant to change these things, Tom," I said as we sat
down.

"All in good time," he answered; "don't quite know yet what costume to
adopt. Could one become a negro-melody man, think you, Charley--or a
Red Indian juggler with balls and sword-swallowing?"

How light he seemed! how supremely indifferent! Was it real or only
assumed? Then he turned suddenly upon me:

"I say, what are you in black for, Charley? For my sins?"

"For Mr. Brightman."

"Mr. Brightman!" he repeated, his tone changing to one of concern. "Is
he dead?"

"He died the last week in February. Some weeks ago now. Died quite
suddenly."

"Well, well, well!" softly breathed Tom Heriot. "I am very sorry. I
did not know it. But how am I likely to know anything of what the past
months have brought forth?"

It would serve no purpose to relate the interview of that night in
detail. We spent it partly in quarrelling. That is, in differences of
opinion. It was impossible to convince Tom of his danger. I told him
about the Sunday incident, when Detective Arkwright passed the door of
Serjeant Stillingfar, and my momentary fear that he might be looking
after Tom. He only laughed. "Good old Uncle Stillingfar!" cried he;
"give my love to him." And all his conversation was carried on in the
same light strain.

"But you must leave Lambeth," I urged. "You said you would do so."

"I said I might. I will, if I see just cause for doing so. Plenty of
time yet. I am not _sure_, you know, Charles, that Wren would know
me."

"The very fact of your having called yourself 'Strange' ought to take
you away from here."

"Well, I suppose that was a bit of a mistake," he acknowledged. "But
look here, brother mine, your own fears mislead you. Until it is known
that I have made my way home no one will be likely to look after me.
Believing me to be at the antipodes, they won't search London for me."

"They may suspect that you are in London, if they don't actually know
it."

"Not they. To begin with, it must be a matter of absolute uncertainty
whether we got picked up at all, after escaping from the island; but
the natural conclusion will be that, if we were, it was by a vessel
bound for the colonies: homeward-bound ships do not take that course.
Everyone at all acquainted with navigation knows that. I assure you,
our being found by the whaler was the merest chance in the world. Be
at ease, Charley. I can take care of myself, and I will leave Lambeth
if necessary. One of these fine mornings you may get a note from me,
telling you I have emigrated to the Isle of Dogs, or some such
enticing quarter, and have become 'Mr. Smith.' Meanwhile, we can meet
here occasionally."

"I don't like this place, Tom. It must inevitably be attended with
more or less danger. Had I not better come to your lodgings?"

"No," he replied, after a moment's consideration. "I am quite sure
that we are safe here, and there it's hot and stifling--a dozen
families living in the same house. And I shall not tell you where the
lodgings are, Charles: you might be swooping down upon me to carry me
away as Mephistopheles carried away Dr. Faustus."

After supplying him with money, with a last handshake, whispering a
last injunction to be cautious, I left the triangle, and left him
within it. The next moment found me face to face with the burly frame
and wary glance of Mr. Policemen Wren. He was standing still in the
starlight. I walked past him with as much unconcern as I could
muster. He turned to look after me for a time, and then continued his
beat.

It gave me a scare. What would be the result if Tom met him
unexpectedly as I had done? I would have given half I was worth to
hover about and ascertain. But I had to go on my way.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Can you see Lord Level, sir?"

It was the following Saturday afternoon, and I was just starting for
Hastings. The week had passed in anxious labour. Business cares for
me, more work than I knew how to get through, for Lennard was away
ill, and constant mental torment about Tom. I took out my watch before
answering Watts.

"Yes, I have five minutes to spare. If that will be enough for his
lordship," I added, laughing, as we shook hands: for he had followed
Watts into the room.

"You are off somewhere, Charles?"

"Yes, to Hastings. I shall be back again to-morrow night. Can I do
anything for you?"

"Nothing," replied Lord Level. "I came up from Marshdale this morning,
and thought I would come round this afternoon to ask whether you have
any news."

When Lord Level went to Marshdale on the visit that bore so suspicious
an aspect to his wife, he had remained there only one night, returning
to London the following day. This week he had been down again, and
stayed rather longer--two days, in fact. Blanche, as I chanced to
know, was rebelling over it. Secretly rebelling, for she had not
brought herself to accuse him openly.

"News?" I repeated.

"Of Tom Heriot."

Should I tell Lord Level? Perhaps there was no help for it. When he
had asked me before I had known nothing positively; now I knew only
too much.

"Why I should have it, I know not; but a conviction lies upon me that
he has found his way back to London," he continued. "Charles, you look
conscious. Do you know anything?"

"You are right. He is here, and I have seen him."

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Lord Level, throwing himself back in his
chair. "Has he really been mad enough to come back to London?"

Drawing my own chair nearer to him, I bent forward, and in low tones
gave him briefly the history. I had seen Tom on the Monday and Tuesday
nights, as already related to the reader. On the Thursday night I was
again at the trysting-place, but Tom did not meet me. The previous
night, Friday, I had gone again, and again Tom did not appear.

"Is he taken, think you?" cried Lord Level.

"I don't know: and you see I dare not make any inquiries. But I think
not. Had he been captured, it would be in the papers."

"I am not so sure of that. What an awful thing! What suspense for us
all! Can _nothing_ be done?"

"Nothing," I answered, rising, for my time was up. "We can only wait,
and watch, and be silent."

"If it were not for the disgrace reflected upon us, and raking it up
again to people's minds, I would say let him be re-taken! It would
serve him right for his foolhardiness."

"How is Blanche?"

"Cross and snappish; unaccountably so: and showing her temper to me
rather unbearably."

I laughed--willing to treat the matter lightly. "She does not care
that you should go travelling without her, I take it."

Lord Level, who was passing out before me, turned and gazed into my
face.

"Yes," said he emphatically. "But a man may have matters to take up
his attention, and his movements also, that he may deem it inexpedient
to talk of to his wife."

He spoke with a touch of haughtiness. "Very true," I murmured, as we
shook hands and went out together, he walking away towards Gloucester
Place, I jumping into the cab waiting to take me to the station.

Mrs. Brightman was better; I knew that; and showing herself more
self-controlled. But there was no certainty that the improvement would
be lasting. In truth, the certainty lay rather the other way. Her
mother's home was no home for Annabel; and I had formed the resolution
to ask her to come to mine.

The sun had set when I reached Hastings, and Miss Brightman's house.
Miss Brightman, who seemed to grow less strong day by day, which I was
grieved to hear, was in her room lying down. Annabel sat at the front
drawing-room window in the twilight. She started up at my entrance,
full of surprise and apprehension.

"Oh, Charles! Has anything happened? Is mamma worse?"

"No, indeed; your mamma is very much better," said I cheerfully. "I
have taken a run down for the pleasure of seeing you, Annabel."

She still looked uneasy. I remembered the dreadful tidings I had
brought the last time I came to Hastings. No doubt she was thinking
of it, too, poor girl.

"Take a seat, Charles," she said. "Aunt Lucy will soon be down."

I drew a chair opposite to her, and talked for a little time on
indifferent topics. The twilight shades grew deeper, passers-by more
indistinct, the sea less bright and shimmering. Silence stole over
us--a sweet silence all too conscious, all too fleeting. Annabel
suddenly rose, stood at the window, and made some slight remark about
a little boat that was nearing the pier.

"Annabel," I whispered, as I rose and stood by her, "you do not know
what I have really come down for."

"No," she answered, with hesitation.

"When I last saw you at your own home, you may remember that you were
in very great trouble. I asked you to share it with me, but you would
not do so."

She began to tremble, and became agitated, and I passed my arm round
her waist.

"My darling, I now know all."

Her heart beat violently as I held her. Her hand shook nervously in
mine.

"You cannot know all!" she cried piteously.

"I know all; more than you do. Mrs. Brightman was worse after you
left, and Hatch sent for me. She and Mr. Close have told me the whole
truth."

Annabel would have shrunk away, in the full tide of shame that swept
over her, and a low moan broke from her lips.

"Nay, my dear, instead of shrinking from me, you must come nearer to
me--for ever. My home must be yours now."

She did not break away from me, and stood pale and trembling, her
hands clasped, her emotion strong.

"It cannot, must not be, Charles."

"Hush, my love. It _can_ be--and shall be."

"Charles," she said, her very lips trembling, "weigh well what you are
saying. Do not suffer the--affection--I must speak fully--the implied
engagement that was between us, ere this unhappiness came to my
knowledge and yours--do not suffer it to bind you now. It is a fearful
disgrace to attach to my poor mother, and it is reflected upon me."

"Were your father living, Annabel, should you say the disgrace was
also reflected upon _him_?"

"Oh no, no. I could not do so. My good father! honourable and
honoured. Never upon him."

I laughed a little at her want of logic.

"Annabel, my dear, you have yourself answered the question. As I hold
you to my heart now, so will I, in as short a time as may be, hold you
in my home and at my hearth. Let what will betide, you shall have one
true friend to shelter and protect you with his care and love for ever
and for ever."

Her tears were falling.

"Oh please, please, Charles! I am sure it ought not to be. Aunt Lucy
would tell you so."

Aunt Lucy came in at that moment, and proved to be on my side. She
would be going to Madeira at the close of the summer, and the
difficulty as to what was to be done then with Annabel had begun to
trouble her greatly.

"I cannot take her with me, you see, Charles," she said. "In her
mother's precarious state, the child must not absent herself from
England. Still less can I leave her to her mother's care. Therefore I
think your proposal exactly meets the dilemma. I suppose matters have
been virtually settled between you for some little time now."

"Oh, Aunt Lucy!" remonstrated Annabel, blushing furiously.

"Well, my dear, and I say it is all for the best. If you can suggest a
better plan I am willing to hear it."

Annabel sat silent, her head drooping.

"I may tell you this much, child: your father looked forward to it and
approved it. Not that he would have allowed the marriage to take place
just yet had he lived; I am sure of that; but he is not living, and
circumstances alter cases."

"I am sure he liked me, Miss Brightman," I ventured to put in, as
modestly as I could; "and I believe he would have consented to our
marriage."

"Yes, he liked you very much; and so do I," she added, laughing. "I
wish I could say as much for Mrs. Brightman. The opposition, I fancy,
will come from her."

"You think she will oppose it?" I said--and, indeed, the doubt had
lain in my own mind.

"I am afraid so. Of course there will be nothing for it but patience.
Annabel cannot marry without her consent."

How a word will turn the scales of our hopes and fears! That Mrs.
Brightman would oppose and wither our bright prospects came to me in
that moment with the certainty of conviction.

"Come what come may, we will be true to each other," I whispered to
Annabel the next afternoon. We were standing at the end of the pier,
looking out upon the calm sea, flashing in the sunshine, and I
imprisoned her hand momentarily in mine. "If we have to exercise all
the patience your Aunt Lucy spoke of, we will still hope on, and put
our trust in Heaven."

"Even so, Charles." The evening was yet early when I reached London,
and I walked home from the station. St. Mary's was striking half-past
seven as I passed it. At the self-same moment, an arm was inserted
into mine. I turned quickly, wondering if anyone had designs upon my
small hand-bag.

"All right, Charley! I'm not a burglar."

It was only Lake. "Why, Arthur! I thought you had gone to Oxford until
Monday!"

"Got news last night that the fellow could not have me: had to go down
somewhere or other," he answered, as we walked along arm-in-arm. "I
say, I had a bit of a scare just now."

"In what way?"

"I thought I saw Tom pass. Tom Heriot," he added in a whisper.

"Oh, but that's impossible, you know, Lake," I said, though I felt my
pulses quicken. "All your fancy."

"It was just under that gas-lamp at the corner of Wellington Street,"
Lake went on. "He was sauntering along as if he had nothing to do,
muffled in a coat that looked a mile too big for him, and a red
comforter. He lifted his face in passing, and stopped suddenly, as if
he had recognised me, and were going to speak; then seemed to think
better of it, turned on his heel and walked back the way he had been
coming. Charley, if it was not Tom Heriot, I never saw such a likeness
as that man bore to him."

My lips felt glued. "It could not have been Tom Heriot, Lake. You know
Tom is at the antipodes. We will not talk of him, please. Are you
coming home with me?"

"Yes. I was going on to Barlow's Chambers, but I'll come with you
instead."




CHAPTER III.

AN EVENING VISITOR.


The spring flowers were showing themselves, and the may was budding in
the hedges. I thought how charming it all looked, as I turned, this
Monday afternoon, into Mrs. Brightman's grounds, where laburnums
drooped their graceful blossoms, and lilacs filled the air with their
perfume; how significantly it all spoke to the heart of renewed life
after the gloom of winter, the death and decay of nature.

Mrs. Brightman was herself, enjoying the spring-tide. She sat, robed
in crape, on a bench amidst the trees, on which the sun was shining.
What a refined, proud, handsome face was hers! but pale and somewhat
haggard now. No other trace of her recent illness was apparent, except
a nervous trembling of the hands.

"This is a surprise," she said, holding out one of those hands to me
quite cordially. "I thought you had been too busy of late to visit me
in the day-time."

"Generally I am very busy, but I made time to come to-day. I have
something of importance to say to you, Mrs. Brightman. Will you hear
me?"

She paused to look at me--a searching, doubtful look. Did she fear
that I was about to speak to her of her _failing_? The idea occurred
to me.

"Certainly," she coldly replied. "Business must, of course, be
attended to. Would you prefer to go indoors or to sit out here?"

"I would rather remain here. I am not often favoured with such a
combination of velvet lawn and sunshine and sweet scents."

She made room for me beside her. And, with as little circumlocution
as possible, I brought out what I wanted--Annabel. When the heart is
truly engaged, a man at these moments can only be bashful, especially
when he sees it will be an uphill fight; but if the heart has nothing
to do with the matter, he can be as cool and suave as though he were
merely telling an everyday story.

Mrs. Brightman, hearing me to the end, rose haughtily.

"Surely you do not know what you are saying!" she exclaimed. "Or is it
that I fail to understand you? You cannot be asking for the hand of my
daughter?"

"Indeed--pardon me--I am. Mrs. Brightman, we----"

"Pardon _me_," she interrupted, "but I must tell you that it is
utterly preposterous. Say no more, Mr. Strange; not another word. My
daughter cannot marry a professional man. _I_ did so, you may reply:
yes, and have forfeited my proper place in the world ever since."

"Mr. Brightman would have given Annabel to me."

"Possibly so, though I think not. As Mr. Brightman is no longer here,
we may let that supposition alone. And you must allow me to say this
much, sir--that it is scarcely seemly to come to me on any such
subject so soon after his death."

"But----" I stopped in embarrassment, unable to give my reason for
speaking so soon. How could I tell Mrs. Brightman that it was to
afford Annabel a home and a protector: that this, her mother's home,
was not fitting for a refined and sensitive girl?

But I pressed the suit. I told her I had Annabel's consent, and that I
had recently been with her at Hastings. I should like to have added
that I had Miss Brightman's, only that it might have done more harm
than good. I spoke very slightly of Miss Brightman's projected
departure from England, when her house would be shut up and Annabel
must leave Hastings. And I added that I wanted to make a home for her
by that time.

I am sure she caught my implied meaning, for she grew agitated and her
hands shook as they lay on her crape dress. Her diamond rings, which
she had not discarded, flashed in the sunlight. But she rallied her
strength. All her pride rose up in rebellion.

"My daughter has her own home, sir; her home with me--what do you
mean? During my illness, I have allowed her to remain with her aunt,
but she will shortly return to me."

And when I would have urged further, and pleaded as for something
dearer than life, she peremptorily stopped me.

"I will hear no more, Mr. Strange. My daughter is descended on my side
from the nobles of the land--you must forgive me for thus alluding to
it--and it is impossible that I can forget that, or allow her to do
so. Never, with my consent, will she marry out of that grade: a
professional man is, in rank, beneath her. This is my decision, and
it is unalterable. The subject is at an end, and I beg of you never
again to enter upon it."

There was no chance of my pursuing it then, at any rate. Hatch came
from the house, a folded cloak on her arm, and approached her
mistress.

"The carriage is at the gate, ma'am."

Mrs. Brightman rose at once: she was going for a drive. After what had
just passed, I held out my arm to her with some hesitation. She put
the tips of her fingers within it, with a stiff "Thank you," and we
walked to the gate in silence. I handed her into the open carriage;
Hatch disposed the cloak upon her knees, assisted by the footman. With
a cold bow, Mrs. Brightman, who had already as coldly shaken hands
with me, drove away.

Hatch, always ready for a gossip, stood within the little iron gate
while she spoke to me.

"We be going away for a bit, sir," she began. "Did you know it?"

"No. Mrs. Brightman has not mentioned the matter to me."

"Well, we be, then," continued Hatch; "missis and me and Perry. Mr.
Close have got her to consent at last. I don't say that she was well
enough to go before; Close thought so, but I didn't. He wants her
gone, you see, Mr. Charles, to get that fancy out of her head about
master."

"But does she still think she sees him?"

"Not for the past few days," replied Hatch. "She has changed her
bedroom, and taken to the best spare one; and she has been better in
herself. Oh, she'll be all right now for a bit, if only----"

"If only what?" I asked, for Hatch had paused.

"Well, you know, sir. If only she can control herself. I'm certain she
is trying to," added Hatch. "There ain't one of us would be so glad to
find it got rid of for good and all as she'd be. She's put about
frightfully yet at Miss Annabel's knowing of it."

"And where is it that you are going to?"

"Missis talked of Cheltenham; it was early, she thought, for the
seaside; but this morning she got a Cheltenham newspaper up, and saw
that amid the company staying there were Captain and Lady Grace
Chantrey. 'I'm not going where my brother and that wife of his are,'
she says to me in a temper--for, as I dare say you've heard, Mr.
Charles, they don't agree. And now she talks of Brighton. Whatever
place she fixes on, Perry is to be sent on first to take lodgings."

"Well, Hatch," I said, "the change from home will do your mistress
good. She is much better. I trust the improvement will be permanent."

"Ah, if she would but take care! It all lies in that, sir," concluded
Hatch, as I turned away from the gate, and she went up the garden.

       *       *       *       *       *

We must go back for a moment to the previous evening. Leaving behind
us the church of St. Clement Danes and its lighted windows, Lake and
I turned into Essex Street, arm-in-arm, went down it and reached my
door. I opened it with my latch-key. The hall-lamp was not lighted,
and I wondered at Watts's neglect.

"Go on up to my room," I said to Lake. "I'll follow you in a moment."

He bounded up the stairs, and the next moment Leah came up from the
kitchen with a lighted candle, her face white and terrified.

"It is only myself, Leah. Why is the lamp not alight?"

"Heaven be good to us, sir!" she cried. "I thought I heard somebody go
upstairs."

"Mr. Lake has gone up."

She dropped her candlestick upon the slab, and backed against the
wall, looking more white and terrified than ever. I thought she was
about to faint.

"Mr. Charles! I feel as if I could die! I ought to have bolted the
front door."

"But what for?" I cried, intensely surprised. "What on earth is the
matter, Leah?"

"He is up there, sir! Up in your front sitting-room. I put out the
hall-lamp, thinking the house would be best in darkness."

"Who is up there?" For in the moment's bewilderment I did not glance
at the truth.

"Mr. Tom, sir. Captain Heriot."

"_Mr. Tom!_ Up there?"

"Not many minutes ago, soon after Watts had gone out to church--for he
was late to-night--there came a ring at the doorbell," said Leah. "I
came up to answer it, thinking nothing. A rough-looking man stood, in
a wide-awake hat, close against the door there. 'Is Mr. Strange at
home?' said he, and walked right in. I knew his voice, and I knew him,
and I cried out. 'Don't be stupid, Leah; it's only me,' says he. 'Is
Mr. Charles upstairs? Nobody with him, I hope.' 'There's nobody to
come and put his head in the lion's mouth, as may be said, there at
all, sir,' said I; and up he went, like a lamplighter. I put the
hall-lamp out. I was terrified out of my senses, and told him you were
at Hastings, but I expected you in soon. And Mr. Charles," wound up
Leah, "I think he must have gone clean daft."

"Light the lamp again," I replied. "It always _is_ alight, you know.
If the house is in darkness, you might have a policeman calling to
know what was the matter."

Tom was in a fit of laughter when I got upstairs. He had taken off his
rough overcoat and broad-brimmed hat, and stood in a worn--very much
worn--suit of brown velveteen breeches and gaiters. Lake stared at him
over the table, a comical expression on his face.

"Suppose we shake hands, to begin with," said Lake. And they clasped
hands heartily across the table.

"Did you know me just now, in the Strand, Lake?" asked Tom Heriot.

"I did," replied Lake, and his tone proved that he meant it. "I said
to Charley, here, that I had just seen a fellow very like Tom Heriot;
but I knew who it was, fast enough."

"You wouldn't have known me, though, if I hadn't lifted my face to the
lamp-light. I forget myself at moments, you see," added Tom, after a
pause. "Meeting you unexpectedly, I was about to speak as in the old
days, and recollected myself only just in time. I say"--turning
himself about in his velveteens--"should you take me for a
gamekeeper?"

"No, I should not: you don't look the thing at all," I put in testily,
for I was frightfully vexed with him altogether. "I thought you must
have been taken up by your especial friend, Wren. Twice have I been to
the trysting-place as agreed, but you did not appear."

"No; but I think he nearly had me," replied Tom.

"How was that?"

"I'll tell you," he answered, as we all three took chairs round the
fire, and I stirred it into a blaze. "On the Wednesday I did not go
out at all; I told you I should not. On the Thursday, after dusk, I
went out to meet you, Charley. It was early, and I strolled in for a
smoke with Lee and a chat with Miss Betsy. The old man began at once:
'Captain Strange, Policeman Wren has been here, asking questions about
you.' It seems old Wren is well known in the neighbourhood----"

"Captain Strange?" cried Lake. "Who is Captain Strange?"

"I am--down there," laughed Tom. "Don't interrupt, please. 'What
questions?' I said to Lee. 'Oh, what your name was, and where you came
from, and if I had known you long, and what your ship was called,'
answered Lee. 'And you told him?' I asked. 'Well, I should have told
him, but for Betsy,' he said. 'Betsy spoke up, saying you were a
sailor-gentleman that came in to buy tobacco and newspapers; and that
was all he got out of us, not your name, captain, or anything. As
Betsy said to me afterwards, it was not our place to answer questions
about Captain Strange: if the policeman wanted to know anything, let
him apply to the captain himself. Which I thought good sense,'
concluded Lee. As it was."

"Well, Tom?"

"Well, I thought it about time to go straight home again," said Tom;
"and that's why I did not meet you, Charley. And the next day, Friday,
I cleared out of my diggings in that quarter of the globe, rigged
myself out afresh, and found other lodgings. I am nearer to you now,
Charley: vegetating in the wilds over Blackfriars Bridge."

"How could you be so imprudent as to come here to-night? or to be seen
in so conspicuous a spot as the Strand?"

"The fit took me to pay you a visit, old fellow. As to the Strand--it
is a fine thoroughfare, you know, and I had not set eyes on it since
last summer. I walked up and down a bit, listening to the church
bells, and looking about me."

"You turn everything into ridicule, Tom."

"Better that, Charley, than into sighing and groaning."

"How did you know that Leah would open the door to you? Watts might
have done so."

"I had it all cut-and-dried. 'Is Mrs. Brown at home?' I should have
said, in a voice Watts would never have known. 'Mrs. Brown don't live
here,' old Watts would have answered; upon which I should have
politely begged his pardon and walked off."

"All very fine, Tom, and you may think yourself amazingly clever; but
as sure as you are living, you will run these risks once too often."

"Not I. Didn't I give old Leah a scare! You should have heard her
shriek."

"Suppose it had been some enemy--some stickler for law and
justice--that I had brought home with me to-night, instead of Lake?"

"But it wasn't," laughed Tom. "It was Lake himself. And I guess he is
as safe as you are."

"Be sure of that," added Lake. "But what do you think of doing,
Heriot? You cannot hide away for ever in the wilds of Blackfriars. _I_
would not answer for your safety there for a day."

"Goodness knows!" said Tom. "Perhaps Charley could put me up here--in
one of his top bedrooms?"

Whether he spoke in jest or earnest, I knew not. He might remember
that I was running a risk in concealing him even for an hour or two.
Were it discovered, the law might make me answer for it.

"I should like something to eat, Charley."

Leaving him with Lake, I summoned Leah, and bade her bring up quickly
what she had. She speedily appeared with the tray.

"Good old Leah!" said Tom to her. "That ham looks tempting."

"Mr. Tom, if you go on like this, loitering in the open streets and
calling at houses, trouble will overtake you," returned Leah, in much
the same tone she had used to reprimand him when a child. "I wonder
what your dear, good mother would say to it if she saw you throwing
yourself into peril. Do you remember, sir, how often she would beg of
you to be good?"

"My mother!" repeated Tom, who was in one of his lightest moods. "Why,
you never saw her. She was dead and buried and gone to heaven before
you knew anything of us."

"Ah well, Master Tom, you know I mean Mrs. Heriot--afterwards Mrs.
Strange. It wouldn't be you, sir, if you didn't turn everything into a
jest. She was a good mother to you all."

"That she was, Leah. Excused our lessons for the asking, and fed us on
jam."

He was taking his supper rapidly the while; for, of course, he had to
be away before church was over and Watts was home again. The man might
have been true and faithful; little doubt of it; but it would have
added one more item to the danger.

Lake went out and brought a cab; and Tom, his wide-awake low on his
brow, his rough coat on, and his red comforter round about his throat,
vaulted into it, to be conveyed over Blackfriars Bridge to any point
that he might choose to indicate.

"It is an amazing hazard his going about like this," cried Lake, as we
sat down together in front of the fire. "He must be got out of England
as quickly as possible."

"But he won't go."

"Then, mark my words, Charles, bad will come of it."




CHAPTER IV.

RESTITUTION.


Time had gone on--weeks and weeks--though there is little to tell of
passing events. Things generally remained pretty much as they had
been. The Levels were abroad again. Mrs. Brightman on the whole was
better, but had occasional relapses; Annabel spent most of her time at
Hastings; and Tom Heriot had not yet been taken.

Tom was now at an obscure fishing village on the coast of Scotland,
passing himself off as a fisherman, owning a small boat and pretending
to fish. This did not allay our anxiety, which was almost as great as
ever. Still, it was something to have him away from London. Out of
Great Britain he refused to move.

Does the reader remember George Coney's money, that so strangely
disappeared the night of Mr. Brightman's death? From that hour to this
nothing has been seen or heard of it: but the time for it was now at
hand. And what I am about to relate may appear a very common-place
ending to a mystery--though, indeed, it was not yet quite the ending.
In my capacity of story-teller I could have invented a hundred
romantic incidents, and worked them and the reader up to a high point
of interest; but I can only record the incident as it happened, and
its termination was a very matter-of-fact one.

I was sitting one evening in the front room: a sitting-room now--I
think this has been said before--smoking my after-dinner cigar. The
window was open to the summer air, which all day long had been
intensely hot. A letter received in the morning from Gloucestershire
from Mr. Coney, to which his son had scrawled a postscript: "Has that
bag turned up yet?" had set me thinking of the loss, and from that I
fell to thinking of the loss of the Clavering will, which had followed
close upon it. Edmund Clavering, by the way, had been with me that day
to impart some news. He was going to be married--to a charming girl,
too--and we were discussing settlements. My Lady Clavering, he said,
was figuring at Baden-Baden, and report ran that she was about to
espouse a French count with a fierce moustache.

Presently I took up the _Times_, not opened before that day, and was
deep in a police case, which had convulsed the court in Marlborough
Street with laughter, and was convulsing me, when a vehicle dashed
down Essex Street. It was the van of the Parcels Delivery Company.

"Mr. Strange live here?" was the question I heard from the man who had
descended from the seat beside the driver, when Watts went out.

"All right," said Watts.

"Here's a parcel for him. Nothing to pay."

The driver whipped up his horse, then turned sharply round,
and--overturned the van. It was not the first accident of a similar
nature, or the last by many, that I have seen in that particular spot.
How it is I don't know, but drivers, especially cabmen, have an
unconquerable propensity for pulling their horses round in a
perilously short fashion at the bottom of Essex Street, and sometimes
the result is that they come to grief. I threw down my newspaper and
leaned out at the window watching the fun. The street was covered with
parcels, and the driver and his friend were throwing off their
consternation in choice language. One hamper could not be picked up:
it had contained wine loosely packed, and the broken bottles were
lying in a red pool. Where the mob collected from, that speedily
arrived to assist, was a marvel. The van at length took its departure
up the street, considerably shorn of the triumph with which it had
dashed down.

This had taken up a considerable space of time, and it was growing too
dark to resume my newspaper. Turning from the window, I proceeded to
examine the parcel which Watts had brought up on its arrival and
placed on the table. It was about a foot square, wrapped in brown
paper, sealed and tied with string; and, in what Tony Lumpkin would
have called a confounded cramped, up-and-down hand, where you could
not tell an izzard from an R, was directed "C. Strange, Esquire."

I took out my penknife, cut the string, and removed the paper; and
there was disclosed a pasteboard-box with green edges, also sealed. I
opened it, and from a mass of soft paper took out a small canvas bag,
tied round with tape, and containing thirty golden sovereigns!

From the very depth of my conviction I believed it to be the bag we
had lost. It was the bag; for, on turning it round, there were Mr.
Coney's initials, S. C., neatly marked with blue cotton, as they had
been on the one left by George. It was one of their sample barley
bags. I wondered if they were the same sovereigns. Where had it been?
Who had taken it? And who had returned it?

I rang the bell, and then called to Watts, who was coming up to answer
it, to bring Leah also. It was my duty to tell them, especially Leah,
of the money's restitution, as they had been inmates of the house when
it was lost.

Watts only stared and ejaculated; but Leah, with some colour, for
once, in her pale cheeks, clasped her hands. "Oh, sir, I'm thankful
you have found it again!" she exclaimed. "I'm heartily thankful!"

"So am I, Leah, though the mystery attending the transaction is as
great as ever; indeed, more so."

It certainly was. They went down again, and I sat musing over the
problem. But nothing could I make out of it. One moment I argued that
the individual taking it (whomsoever it might be) must have had
temporary need of funds, and, the difficulty over, had now restored
the money. The next, I wondered whether anyone could have taken the
bag inadvertently, and had now discovered it. I locked the bag safely
up, wrote a letter to George Coney, and then went out to confide the
news to Arthur Lake.

Taking the short cuts and passages that lead from Essex Street to the
Temple, as I generally did when bound for Lake's chambers, I was
passing onwards, when I found myself called to--or I thought so.
Standing still in the shade, leaning against the railings of the
Temple Gardens, was a slight man of middle height: and he seemed to
say "Charley."

Glancing in doubt, half stopping as I did so, yet thinking I must have
been mistaken, I was passing on, when the voice came again.

"Charley!"

I stopped then. And I declare that in the revulsion it brought me you
might have knocked me down with a feather; for it was Tom Heriot.

"I was almost sure it was you, Charles," he said in a low voice; "but
not quite sure."

I had not often had such a scare as this. My heart, with pain and
dismay, beat as if it meant to burst its bonds.

"Can it possibly be _you_?" I cried. "What brings you here? Why have
you come again?"

"Reached London this morning. Came here when dusk set in, thinking I
might have the luck to see you or Lake, Charley."

"But why have you left Scotland? You were safer there."

"Don't know that I was. And I had grown tired to death of it."

"It will end in death, or something like it, if you persist in staying
here."

Tom laughed his gay, ringing laugh. I looked round to see that no one
was about, or within hearing.

"What a croaker you are, old Charley! I'm sure you ought to kill the
fatted calf, to celebrate my return from banishment."

"But, Tom, you _know_ how dangerous it is, and must be, for you to be
here in London."

"And it was becoming dangerous up there," he quickly rejoined. "Since
the summer season set in, those blessed tourists are abroad again,
with their staves and knapsacks. No place is safe from them, and the
smaller and more obscure it is, the more they are sure to find it. The
other day I was in my boat in my fishing toggery, as usual, when a
fellow comes up, addresses me as 'My good man,' and plunges into
queries touching the sea and the fishing-trade. Now who do you think
that was, Charles?"

"I can't say."

"It was James Lawless, Q.C.--the leader who prosecuted at my trial."

"Good heavens!"

"I unfastened the boat, keeping my back to him and my face down, and
shot off like a whirlwind, calling out that I was behind time, and
must put out. I took good care, Charles, not to get back before the
stars were bright in the night sky."

"Did he recognise you?"

"No--no. For certain, no. But he would have done so had I stayed to
talk. And it is not always that I could escape as I did then. You must
see that."

I saw it all too plainly.

"So I thought it best to make myself scarce, Charles, and leave the
tourists' haunts. I sold my boat; no difficulty in that; though, of
course, the two men who bought it shaved me; and came over to London
as fast as a third-class train would bring me. Dare not put my nose
into a first-class carriage, lest I should drop upon some one of my
old chums."

"Of all places, Tom, you should not have chosen London."

"Will you tell me, old fellow, what other place I could have pitched
upon?"

And I could not tell.

"Go where I will," he continued, "it seems that the Philistines are
likely to find me out."

We were pacing about now, side by side, keeping in the shade as much
as possible, and speaking under our breath.

"You will have to leave the country, Tom; you must do it. And go
somewhere over the seas."

"To Van Diemen's Land, perhaps," suggested Tom.

"Now, be quiet. The subject is too serious for jesting. I should
think--perhaps--America. But I must have time to consider. Where do
you mean to stay at present? Where are you going to-night?"

"I've been dodging about all day, not showing up much; but I'm going
now to where I lodged last, down Blackfriars way. You remember?"

"Yes, I remember: it is not so long ago."

"It is as safe as any other quarter, for aught I can tell. Any way, I
don't know of another."

"Are you well, Tom?" I asked. He was looking thin, and seemed to have
a nasty cough upon him.

"I caught cold some time ago, and it hangs about me," he replied. "Oh,
I shall be all right now I'm here," he added carelessly.

"You ought to take a good jorum of something hot when you get to bed
to-night----"

Tom laughed. "I _am_ likely to get anything of that sort in any
lodging I stand a chance of to-night. Well done, Charley! I haven't
old Leah to coddle me."

And somehow the mocking words made me realize the discomforts and
deprivations of Tom Heriot's present life. How would it all end?

We parted with a hand-shake: he stealing off on his way to his
lodging, I going thoughtfully on mine. It was a calm summer evening,
clear and lovely, the stars twinkling in the sky, but all its peace
had gone out for me.

It was impossible to foresee what the ending would or could be. At
any moment Tom might be recognised and captured, so long as he
inhabited London; and it might be difficult to induce him to leave it.
Still more difficult to cause him to depart altogether for other lands
and climes.

Not long before, I had consulted with Mr. Serjeant Stillingfar as to
the possibility of obtaining a pardon for Tom. That he had not been
guilty was indisputable, though the law had deemed him so. But the
Serjeant had given me no encouragement that any such movement would be
successful. The very fact, as he pointed out, of Tom Heriot's having
escaped clandestinely, would tell against him. What, I said then, if
Tom gave himself up? He smiled, and told me I had better not ask his
opinion upon the practical points of the case.

So the old trouble was back again in full force, and I knew not how to
cope with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The summer sun, glowing with light and heat, lay full upon Hastings
and St. Leonard's. The broad expanse of sea sparkled beneath it; the
houses that looked on the water were burning and blistering under the
fierce rays. Miss Brightman, seated at her drawing-room window,
knitting in hand, observed that it was one of the most dazzling days
she remembered.

The remark was made to me and to Annabel. We sat at the table
together, looking over a book of costly engravings that Miss Brightman
had recently bought. "I shall leave it with you, Charles," she said,
"when I go away; you will take care of it. And if it were not that you
are tied to London, and it would be too far for you to go up and down
daily, I would leave you my house also--that you might live in it, and
take care of that during my absence."

Mrs. Brightman had come to her senses. Very much, I confess, to my
astonishment, much also I think to Annabel's, she had put aside her
prejudices and consented to our marriage. The difficulty of where her
daughter was to be during Miss Brightman's sojourn in Madeira had in
a degree paved the way for it. Annabel would, of course, have returned
to her mother; she begged hard to be allowed to do so: she believed it
her duty to be with her. But Miss Brightman would not hear of it, and,
had she yielded, I should have interposed my veto in Mr. Brightman's
name. In Hatch's words, strong in sense but weak in grammar, "their
home wasn't no home for Miss Annabel."

Mrs. Brightman could only be conscious of this. During her sojourn at
Brighton, and for some little time after her return home, she had been
very much better; had fought resolutely with the insidious foe, and
conquered. But alas! she fell away again. Now she was almost as bad as
ever; tolerably sober by day, very much the opposite by night.

Miss Brightman, dating forward, seeing, as she feared, only shoals and
pitfalls, and most anxious for Annabel, had journeyed up to Clapham to
her sister-in-law, and stayed there with her a couple of days. What
passed between them even Hatch never knew; but she did know that her
mistress was brought to a penitent and subdued frame of mind, and that
she promised Lucy Brightman, with many tears, to _strive_ to overcome
her fatal habit for the good God's sake. And it was during this visit
that she withdrew her opposition to the marriage; when Miss Brightman
returned home she carried the consent with her.

And my present visit to Hastings was to discuss time and place and
other matters; more particularly the question of where our home was to
be. A large London house we were not yet rich enough to set up, and I
would not take Annabel to an inferior one; but I had seen a charming
little cottage at Richmond that might suit us--if she liked the
locality.

Closing the book of engravings, I turned to Miss Brightman, and
entered upon the subject. Suddenly her attention wavered. It seemed to
be attracted by something in the road.

"Why, bless my heart, _it is_!" she cried in astonishment. "If ever I
saw Hatch in my life, that is Hatch--coming up the street! Annabel,
child, give me the glasses."

The glasses were on the table, and I handed them to her. Annabel flew
to the window and grew white. She was never free from fears of what
might happen in her mother's house. Hatch it was, and apparently in
haste.

"What can be the matter?" she gasped. "Oh, Aunt Lucy!"

"Hatch is nodding heartily, as if not much were wrong," remarked Miss
Brightman, who was watching her through the glasses. "Hatch is
peculiar in manner, as you are aware, Mr. Charles, but she means no
disrespect by it."

I smiled. I knew Hatch quite as well as Miss Brightman knew her.

"Now what brings you to Hastings?" she exclaimed, rising from her
chair, when Hatch was shown in.

"My missis brought me, ma'am," returned Hatch, with composure. "Miss
Annabel, you be looking frighted, but there's nothing wrong. Yesterday
morning, all in a flurry like, your mamma took it into her head to
come down here, and we drove down with----"

"_Drove_ down?"

"Yes, ma'am, with four posters to the carriage. My missis can't abear
the rail; she says folks stare at her: and here we be at the Queen's
Hotel, she, and me, and Perry."

"Would you like to take a chair, Hatch?" said Miss Brightman.

"My legs is used to standing, ma'am," replied Hatch, with a nod of
thanks, "and I've not much time to linger. It was late last night when
we got here. This morning, up gets my missis, and downstairs she comes
to her breakfast in her sitting-room, and me with her to wait upon
her, for sometimes her hands is shaky, and she prefers me to Perry or
anybody else----"

"How has your mistress been lately?" interposed Miss Brightman.

"Better, ma'am. Not always quite the thing, though a deal better on
the whole. But I must get on about this morning," added Hatch
impressively. "'Waiter,' says my missis when the man brings up the
coffee. 'Mum?' says he. 'I am subject to spadical attacks in the
chest,' says she, 'and should like to have some brandy in my room:
they take me sometimes in the middle of the night. Put a bottle into
it, the very best French, and a corkscrew. Or you may as well put two
bottles,' she goes on; 'I may be here some time.' 'It shall be done,
mum,' says he. I was as vexed as I could be to hear it," broke off
Hatch, "but what could I do? I couldn't contradict my missis and tell
the man that no brandy must be put in her room, or else she'd drink
it. Well, ma'am, I goes down presently to my own breakfast with Perry,
and while we sat at it a chambermaid comes through the room: 'I've put
two bottles of brandy in the lady's bedroom, as was ordered,' says
she. With that Perry looks at me all in a fluster--he have no more
wits to turn things off than a born idiot. 'Very well,' says I to her,
eating at my egg as if I thought nothing; 'I hopes my missis won't
have no call to use 'em, but she's took awful bad in the chest
sometimes, and it's as well for us to be ready.' 'I'm sure I pities
her,' says the girl, 'for there ain't nothing worse than spasms. I has
'em myself occasional----'"

When once Hatch was in the full flow of a narrative, there was no
getting in a word edgeways, and Miss Brightman had to repeat her
question twice: "Does Perry know the nature of the illness that
affects Mrs. Brightman?"

"Why, in course he does, ma'am," was Hatch's rejoinder. "He couldn't
be off guessing it for himself, and the rest I told him. Why, ma'am,
without his helping, we could never keep it dark from the servants at
home. It was better to make a confidant of Perry, that I might have
his aid in screening the trouble, than to let it get round to
everybody. He's as safe and sure as I be, and when it all first came
out to him, he cried over it, to think of what his poor master must
have suffered in mind before death took him. Well, ma'am, I made haste
over my breakfast, and I went upstairs, and there was the bottles and
the corkscrew, so I whips 'em off the table and puts them out of
sight. Mrs. Brightman comes up presently, and looks about and goes
down again. Three separate times she comes up, and the third time she
gives the bell a whirl, and in runs the chambermaid, who was only
outside. 'I gave orders this morning,' says my lady, 'to have some
brandy placed in the room.' 'Oh, I have got the brandy,' says I,
before the girl could speak; 'I put it in the little cupboard here,
ma'am.' So away goes the girl, looking from the corners of her eyes at
me, as if suspicious I meant to crib it for my own use: and my
mistress began: 'Draw one of them corks, Hatch.' 'No, ma'am,' says I,
'not yet; please don't.' 'Draw 'em both,' says missis--for there are
times," added Hatch, "when a trifle puts her out so much that it's
hazardous to cross her. I drew the cork of one, and missis just
pointed with her finger to the tumbler on the wash-handstand, and I
brought it forward and the decanter of water. 'Now you may go,' says
she; so I took up the corkscrew. 'I told you to leave that,' says she,
in her temper, and I had to come away without it, and the minute I was
gone she turned the key upon me. Miss Annabel, I see the words are
grieving of you, but they are the truth, and I can but tell them."

"Is she there now--locked in?" asked Miss Brightman.

"She's there now," returned Hatch, with solemn enunciation, to make up
for her failings in grammar, which was never anywhere in times of
excitement; "she is locked in with them two bottles and the corkscrew,
and she'll just drink herself mad--and what's to be done? I goes at
once to Perry and tells him. 'Let's get in through the winder,' says
Perry--which his brains is only fit for a gander, as I've said many a
time. 'You stop outside her door to listen again downright harm,' says
I, 'that's what you'll do; and I'll go for Miss Brightman.' And here
I'm come, ma'am, running all the way."

"What can I do?" wailed Miss Brightman.

"Ma'am," answered Hatch, "I think that if you'll go back with me, and
knock at her room door, and call out that you be come to pay her a
visit, she'd undo it. She's more afeared of you than of anybody
living. She can't have done herself much harm yet, and you might coax
her out for a walk or a drive, and then bring her in to dinner
here--anything to get her away from them two dangerous bottles. If I
be making too free, ma'am, you'll be good enough to excuse me--it is
for the family's sake. At home I can manage her pretty well, but to
have a scene at the hotel would make it public."

"What is to be the ending?" I exclaimed involuntarily as Miss
Brightman went in haste for her bonnet.

"Why, the ending must be--just what it will be," observed Hatch
philosophically. "But, Mr. Charles, I don't despair of her yet.
Begging your pardon, Miss Annabel, you'd better not come. Your mamma
won't undo her door if she thinks there's many round it."

Annabel stood at the window as they departed, her face turned from me,
her eyes blinded with tears. I drew her away, though I hardly knew how
to soothe her. It was a heavy grief to bear.

"My days are passed in dread of what tidings may be on the way to me,"
she began, after a little time given to gathering composure. "I ought
to be nearer my mother, Charles; I tell Aunt Lucy so almost every day.
She might be ill and dead before I could get to her, up in London."

"And you will be nearer to her shortly, Annabel. My dear, where shall
our home be? I was thinking of Richmond----"

"No, no," she interrupted in sufficient haste to show me she had
thoughts of her own.

"Annabel! It shall not be _there_: at your mother's. Anywhere else."

"It is somewhere else that I want to be."

"Then you shall be. Where is it?"

She lifted her face like a pleading child's, and spoke in a whisper.
"Charles, let me come to you in Essex Street."

"_Essex Street!_" I echoed in surprise. "My dear Annabel, I will
certainly not bring you to Essex Street and its inconveniences. I
cannot do great things for you yet, but I can do better than that."

"They would not be inconveniences to me. I would turn them into
pleasures. We would take another servant to help Watts and Leah; or
two if necessary. You would not find me the least encumbrance; I would
never be in the way of your professional rooms. And in the evening,
when you had finished for the day, we would dine, and go down to
mamma's for an hour, and then back again. Charles, it would be a
happy home: let me come to it."

But I shook my head. I did not see how it could be arranged; and said
so.

"No, because at present the idea is new to you," returned Annabel.
"_Think it over_, Charles. Promise me that you will do so."

"Yes, my dear; I can at least promise you that."

There was less trouble with Mrs. Brightman that day than had been
anticipated. She opened her door at once to her sister-in-law, who
brought her back to the Terrace. Hatch had been wise. In the afternoon
we all went for a drive in a fly, and returned to dinner. And the
following day Mrs. Brightman, with her servants, departed for London
in her travelling-carriage, no scandal whatever having been caused at
the Queen's Hotel. I went up by train early in the morning.

It is surprising how much thinking upon a problem simplifies it. I
began to see by degrees that Annabel's coming to Essex Street could
be easily managed; nay, that it would be for the best. Miss Brightman
strongly advocated it. At present a large portion of my income had to
be paid over to Mrs. Brightman in accordance with her husband's will,
so that I could not do as I would, and must study economy. Annabel
would be rich in time; for Mrs. Brightman's large income, vested at
present in trustees, must eventually descend to Annabel; but that time
was not yet. And who knew what expenses Tom Heriot might bring upon
me?

Changes had to be made in the house. I determined to confine the
business rooms to the ground floor; making Miss Methold's parlour,
which had not been much used since her death, my own private
consulting-room. The front room on the first floor would be our
drawing-room, the one behind it the dining-room.

Leah was in an ecstasy when she heard the news. The workmen were
coming in to paint and paper, and then I told her.

"Of course, Mr. Charles, it--is----"

"Is what, Leah?"

"Miss Annabel."

"It should be no one else, Leah. We shall want another servant or two,
but you can still be major-domo."

"If my poor master had only lived to see it!" she uttered, with
enthusiasm. "How happy he would have been; how proud to have her here!
Well, well, what turns things take!"




CHAPTER V.

CONFESSION.


October came in; and we were married early in the month, the wedding
taking place from Mrs. Brightman's residence, as was of course only
right and proper. It was so very quiet a wedding that there is not the
least necessity for describing it--and how can a young man be expected
to give the particulars of his own? Mr. Serjeant Stillingfar was
present; Lord and Lady Level, now staying in London, drove down for
it; and Captain Chantrey gave his niece away. For Mrs. Brightman had
chosen to request him to accept her invitation to do so, and to be
accompanied by his wife, Lady Grace. Miss Brightman was also present,
having travelled up from Hastings the day before. Three or four days
later on, she would sail for Madeira.

I could not spare more than a fortnight from work, leaving Lennard as
my locum tenens. Annabel would have been glad to spare less, for she
was haunted by visions of what might happen to her mother. Though
there was no especial cause for anxiety in that quarter just now, she
could never feel at ease. And on my part I was more anxious than ever
about Tom Heriot, for more reasons than one.

The fortnight came to an end, all too soon: and late on the Saturday
evening we reached home. Watts threw open the door, and there stood
Leah in a silk gown. The drawing-room, gayer than it used to be, was
bright with a fire and preparations for tea.

"How homelike it looks!" exclaimed Annabel. "Charles," she whispered,
turning to me with her earnest eyes, as she had been wont to do when a
child: "I will not make the least noise when you have clients with
you. You shall not know I am in the house: I will take care not to
drop even a reel of cotton on the carpet. I do thank you for letting
me come to Essex Street: I should not have seemed so completely your
wife had you taken me to any but your old home."

The floors above were also in order, their chambers refurnished. Leah
went up to them with her new mistress, and I went down to the clerks'
office, telling Annabel I should not be there five minutes. One of the
clerks, Allen, had waited; but I had expected Lennard.

"Is Mr. Lennard not here?" I asked. "Did he not wait? I wrote to him
to do so."

"Mr. Lennard has not been here all day, sir," was Allen's reply. "A
messenger came from him this morning, to say he was ill."

We were deep in letters and other matters, I and Allen, when the front
door opened next the office door, and there stood Arthur Lake,
laughing, a light coat on his arm.

"Fancy! I've been down the river for a blow," cried he. "Just landed
at the pier here. Seeing lights in your windows, I thought you must
have got back, Charley."

We shook hands, and he stayed a minute, talking. Then, wishing
good-night to Allen, he backed out of the room, making an almost
imperceptible movement to me with his head. I followed him out,
shutting the office door behind me. Lake touched my arm and drew me
outside.

"I suppose you've not heard from Tom Heriot since you were away,"
breathed Lake, in cautious tones, as we stood together on the outer
step.

"No; I did not expect to hear. Why?"

"I saw him three days ago," whispered Lake. "I had a queer-looking
letter on Wednesday morning from one Mr. Dominic Turk, asking me to
call at a certain place in Southwark. Of course, I guessed it was
Tom, and that he had moved his lodgings again; and I found I was
right."

"Dominic Turk!" I repeated. "Does he call himself _that_?"

Lake laughed. "He is passing now for a retired schoolmaster. Says he's
sure nobody can doubt he is one as long as he sticks to that name."

"How is he? Has any fresh trouble turned up? I'm sure you've something
bad to tell me."

"Well, Charley, honestly speaking, it is a bad look-out, in more ways
than one," he answered. "He is very ill, to begin with; also has an
idea that a certain policeman named Wren has picked up an inkling of
his return, and is trying to unearth him. But," added Lake, "we can't
very well talk in this place. I've more to say----"

"Come upstairs, and take tea with me and Annabel," I interrupted.

"Can't," said he; "my dinner's waiting. I'm back two hours later than
I expected to be; it has been frizzling, I expect, all the time.
Besides, old fellow, I'd rather you and I were alone. There's fearful
peril looming ahead, unless I'm mistaken. Can you come round to my
chambers to-morrow afternoon?"

"No: we are going to Mrs. Brightman's after morning service."

"It must be left until Monday, then; but I don't think there's much
time to be lost. Good-night."

Lake hastened up the street, and I returned to Allen and the letters.

With this interruption, and with all I found to do, the five minutes'
absence I had promised my wife lengthened into twenty. At last the
office was closed for the night, Allen left, and I ran upstairs,
expecting to have kept Annabel waiting tea. She was not in the
drawing-room, the tea was not made, and I went up higher and found her
sobbing in the bedroom. It sent me into a cold chill.

"My love, what is this? Are you disappointed? Are you not happy?"

"Oh, Charles," she sobbed, clinging to me, "you _know_ I am happy. It
is not that. But I could not help thinking of my father. Leah got
talking about him; and I remembered once his sitting in that very
chair, holding me on his knee. I must have been about seven years old.
Miss Methold was ill----"

At that moment there came a knock and a ring at the front door. Not a
common knock and ring, but sharp, loud and prolonged, resounding
through the house as from some impatient messenger of evil. It
startled us both. Annabel's fears flew to her mother; mine to a
different quarter, for Lake's communication was troubling and
tormenting me.

"Charles! if----"

"Hush, dear. Listen."

As we stood outside on the landing, her heart beating against my
encircling hand, and our senses strained to listen, we heard Watts
open the front door.

"Has Mr. Strange come home?" cried a voice hurriedly--that of a
woman.

"Yes," said Watts.

"Can I speak to him? It is on a matter of life and death."

"Where do you come from?" asked Watts, with habitual caution.

"I come from Mr. Lennard. Oh, pray do not waste time!"

"All right, my darling; it is not from your mother," I whispered to
Annabel, as I ran down.

A young woman stood at the foot of the stairs; I was at a loss to
guess her condition in life. She had the face and manner of a lady,
but her dress was poor and shabby.

"I have come from my father, sir--Mr. Lennard," she said in a low
tone, blushing very much. "He is dangerously ill: we fear he is dying,
and so does he. He bade me say that he must see you, or he cannot die
in peace. Will you please be at the trouble of coming?"

One hasty word despatched to my wife, and I went out with Miss
Lennard, hailing a cab, which had just set down its freight some
doors higher up. "What is the matter with your father?" I questioned,
as we whirled along towards Blackfriars Bridge, in accordance with her
directions.

"It is an attack of inward inflammation," she replied. "He was taken
ill suddenly last night after he got home from the office, and he has
been in great agony all day. This evening he grew better; the pain
almost subsided; but the doctor said that might not prove a favourable
symptom. My father asked for the truth--whether he was dying, and the
answer was that he might be. Then my father grew terribly uneasy in
mind, and said he must see you if possible before he died--and sent me
to ascertain, sir, whether you had returned home."

The cab drew up at a house in a side street, a little beyond
Blackfriars Bridge. We entered, and Miss Lennard left me in the front
sitting-room. The remnants of faded gentility were strangely mixed
with bareness and poverty. Poor Lennard was a gentleman born and bred,
but had been reduced by untoward misfortune. Trifling ornaments stood
about; "antimacassars" were thrown over the shabby chairs. Miss
Lennard had gone upstairs, but came down quickly.

"It is the door on the left, sir, on the second landing," said she,
putting a candle in my hand. "My father is anxiously expecting you,
but says I am not to go up."

It was a small landing, nothing in front of me but a bare white-washed
wall, and _two_ doors to the left. I blundered into the wrong one. A
night-cap border turned on the bed, and a girlish face looked up from
under it.

"What do you want?" she said.

"Pardon me. I am in search of Mr. Lennard."

"Oh, it is the next room. But--sir! wait a moment. Oh, wait, wait!"

I turned to her in surprise, and she put up two thin white hands in an
imploring attitude. "Is it anything bad? Have you come to take him?"

"To take him! What do you mean?"

"You are not a sheriff's officer?"

I smiled at her troubled countenance. "I am Mr. Strange--come to see
how he is."

Down fell her hands peacefully. "Sir, I beg your pardon: thank you for
telling me. I know papa has sometimes been in apprehension, and I lie
here and fear things till I am stupid. A strange step on the stairs,
or a strange knock at the door, sets me shaking."

The next room was the right one, and Lennard was lying in it on a low
bed; his face looked ghastly, his eyes wildly anxious.

"Lennard," I said, "I am sorry to hear of your illness. What's the
matter?"

"Sit down, Mr. Strange; sit down," he added, pointing to a chair,
which I drew near. "It is an attack of inflammation: the pain has
ceased now, but the doctor says it is an uncertain symptom: it may be
for better, or it may be for worse. If the latter, I have not many
hours to live."

"What brought it on?"

"I don't know: unless it was that I drank a draught of cold water
when I was hot. I have not been very strong for some time, and a
little thing sends me into a violent heat. I had a long walk, four
miles, and I made nearly a run of it half the way, being pressed for
time. When I got in, I asked Leah for some water, and drank two
glasses of it, one after the other. It seemed to strike a chill to me
at the time."

"It was at the office, then. Four miles! Why did you not ride?"

"It was not your business I was out on, sir; it was my own. But
whether that was the cause or not, the illness came on, and it cannot
be remedied now. If I am to die, I must die; God is over all: but I
cannot go without making a confession to you. How the fear of death's
approach alters a man's views and feelings!" he went on, in a
different tone. "Yesterday, had I been told I must make this
confession to you, I should have said, Let me die, rather; but it
appears to me now to be an imperative duty, and one I must nerve
myself to perform."

Lennard lay on his pillow, and looked fixedly at me, and I not less
fixedly at him. What, in the shape of a "confession," could he have to
make to me? He had been managing clerk in Mr. Brightman's office long
before I was in it, a man of severe integrity, and respected by all.

"The night Mr. Brightman died," he began under his panting breath,
"the bag of gold was missing--George Coney's. You remember it."

"Well?"

"I took it."

Was Lennard's mind wandering? He was no more likely to take gold than
I was. I sat still, gazing at him.

"Yes, it was I who took it, sir. Will you hear the tale?"

A deep breath, and the drawing of my chair closer to his bedside, was
my only answer.

"You are a young man, Mr. Strange. I have taken an interest in you
since you first came, a lad, into the office, and were under my
authority--Charles, do this; Charles, do the other. Not that I have
shown any especial interest, for outwardly I am cold and
undemonstrative; but I saw what you were, and liked you in my heart.
You are a young man yet, I say; but, liking you, hoping for your
welfare, I pray Heaven that it may never be your fate, in after-life,
to be trammelled with misfortunes as I have been. For me they seem to
have had no end, and the worst of them in later years has been that
brought upon me by an undutiful and spendthrift son."

In a moment there flashed into my mind _my_ later trouble in Tom
Heriot: I seemed to be comparing the one with the other. "Have you
been trammelled with an undutiful son?" I said aloud.

"I have been, and am," replied Lennard. "It has been my later cross.
The first was that of losing my property and position in life, for, as
you know, Mr. Strange, I was born and reared a gentleman. The last
cross has been Leonard--that is his name, Leonard Lennard--and it has
been worse than the first, for it has kept us _down_, and in a
perpetual ferment for years. It has kept us poor amongst the poor: my
salary, as you know, is a handsome one, but it has chiefly to be
wasted upon him."

"What age is he?"

"Six-and-twenty yesterday."

"Then you are not forced to supply his extravagance, to find money for
his faults and follies. You are not obliged to let him keep you down."

"By law, no," sighed poor Lennard. "But these ill-doing sons sometimes
entwine themselves around your very heartstrings; far rather would you
suffer and suffer than not ward off the ill from them. He has tried
his hand at many occupations, but remains at none; the result is
always trouble: and yet his education and intellect, his good looks
and perfect, pleasant manners, would fit him for almost any
responsible position in life. But he is reckless. Get into what scrape
he would, whether of debt, or worse, here he was sure of a refuge and
a welcome; I received him, his mother and sisters loved him. One of
them is bedridden," he added, in an altered tone.

"I went first by mistake into the next room. I probably saw her."

"Yes, that's Maria. It is a weakness that has settled in her legs;
some chronic affection, I suppose; and there she has lain for ten
months. With medical attendance and sea air she might be restored,
they tell me, but I can provide neither. Leonard's claims have been
too heavy."

"But should you waste means on him that ought to be applied to her
necessities?" I involuntarily interrupted.

He half raised himself on his elbow, and the effort proved how weak he
was, and his eyes and his voice betrayed a strange earnestness. "When
a son, whom you love better than life itself, has to be saved from the
consequences of his follies, from prison, from worse disgrace even
than that, other interests are forgotten, let them be what they may.
Silent, patient needs give way to obtrusive wants that stare you in
the face, and that may bear fear and danger in their train. Mr.
Strange, you can imagine this."

"I do. It must ever be so."

"The pecuniary wants of a young man, such as my son is, are as the cry
of the horse-leech. Give! give! Leonard mixes sometimes with distant
relatives, young fellows of fashion, who are moving in a sphere far
above our present position, although I constantly warn him not to do
it. One of these wants, imperative and to be provided for in some way
or other, occurred the beginning of February in this year. How I
managed to pay it I can hardly tell, but it stripped me of all the
money I could raise, and left me with some urgent debts upon me. The
rent was owing, twelve months the previous December, and some of the
tradespeople were becoming clamorous. The landlord, discerning the
state of affairs, put in a distress, terrifying poor Maria, whose
illness had then not very long set in, almost to death. That I had
the means to pay the man out you may judge, when I tell you that we
had not the money to buy a joint of meat or a loaf of bread."

Lennard paused to wipe the dew from his brow.

"Maria was in bed, wanting comforts; Charlotte was worn out with
apprehension; Leonard was away again, and we had nothing. Of my wife I
will not speak: of delicate frame and delicately reared, the
long-continued troubles have reduced her to a sort of dumb apathy. No
credit anywhere, and a distress in for rent! In sheer despair, I
resolved to disclose part of my difficulty to Mr. Brightman, and ask
him to advance me a portion of my next quarter's salary. I hated to do
it. A reduced gentleman is, perhaps, over-fastidious. I know I have
been so, and my pride rose against it. In health, I could not have
spoken to you, Mr. Charles, as I am now doing. I went on,
shilly-shallying for a few days. On the Saturday morning Charlotte
came to me with a whisper: 'That man in the house says if the rent is
not paid to-night, the things will be taken out and sold on Monday: it
is the very last day they'll give.' I went to the office, my mind made
up at length, and thinking what I should say to Mr. Brightman. Should
I tell him part of the truth, or should I urge some plea, foreign to
it? It was an unusually busy day: I dare say you remember it, Mr.
Charles, for it was that of Mr. Brightman's sudden death. Client after
client called, and no opportunity offered for my speaking to him in
private. I waited for him to come down, on his way out in the evening,
thinking I would speak to him then. He did not come, and when the
clients left, and I went upstairs, I found he was stopping in town to
see Sir Edmund Clavering. I should have spoken to him then, but you
were present. He told me to look in again in the course of the
evening, and I hoped I might find him alone then. You recollect the
subsequent events of the night, sir?"

"I shall never forget them."

"When I came in, as he directed me, between seven and eight o'clock,
there occurred that flurry with Leah--the cause of which I never knew.
She said Mr. Brightman was alone, and I went up. He was lying in your
room, Mr. Charles; had fallen close to his own desk, the deep drawer
of which stood open. I tried to raise him; I sprinkled water on his
face, but I saw that he was dead. On the desk lay a small canvas bag.
I took it up and shook it. Why, I do not know, for I declare that no
wrong thought had then come into my mind. He appeared to have
momentarily put it out of the drawer, probably in search of something,
for his private cheque-book and the key of the iron safe, that I knew
were always kept in the drawer, lay near it. I shook the bag, and its
contents sounded like gold. I opened it, and counted thirty
sovereigns. Mr. Brightman was dead. I could not apply to him; and yet
money I must have. The temptation upon me was strong, and I took it.
Don't turn away from me, sir. There are some temptations too strong to
be resisted by a man in his necessities."

"Indeed, I am not turning from you. The temptation was overwhelmingly
great."

"Indeed," continued the sick man, "the devil was near me then. I put
the key and the cheque-book inside, and I locked the drawer, and
placed the keys in Mr. Brightman's pocket, where he kept them, and I
leaped down the stairs with the bag in my hand. It was all done in a
minute or two of time, though it seems long in relating it. Where
should I put the bag, now I had it? Upon my person? No: it might be
missed directly, and inquired for. I was in a tumult--scarcely sane, I
believe--and I dashed into the clerks' office, and, taking off the lid
of the coal-box, put it there. Then I tore off for a surgeon. You know
the rest. When I returned with him you were there; and the next
visitor, while we were standing round Mr. Brightman, was George Coney,
after his bag of money. I never shall forget the feeling when you
motioned me to take Mr. Brightman's keys from his pocket to get the
bag out of the drawer. Or when--after it was missed--you took me with
you to search for it, in the very office where it was, and I moved the
coal-box under the desk. Had you only happened to lift the lid, sir!"

"Ah!"

"When the search was over, and I went home, I had put the bag in my
breastpocket. The gold saved me from immediate trouble, but----"

"You have sent it back to me, you know--the bag and the thirty
pounds."

"Yes, I sent it back--tardily. I _could_ not do it earlier, though the
crime coloured my days with remorse, and I never knew a happy moment
until it was restored. But Leonard had been back again, and
restoration was not easy."

Miss Lennard opened the door at this juncture. "Papa, the doctor is
here. Can he come up? He says he ought to see you."

"Oh, certainly, he must come up," I interposed.

"Yes, yes, Charlotte," said Lennard.

The doctor came in, and stood looking at his patient, after putting a
few questions. "Well," said he, "you are better; you will get over
it."

"Do you really think so?" I asked joyfully.

"Decidedly I do, now. It has been a sharp twinge, but the danger's
over. You see, when pain suddenly ceases, mortification sometimes sets
in, and I could not be sure. But you will do this time, Mr. Lennard."

Lennard had little more to say; and, soon after the doctor left, I
prepared to follow him.

"There's a trifle of salary due to me, Mr. Strange," he whispered;
"that which has been going on since Quarter Day. I suppose you will
not keep it from me?"

"Keep it from you! No. Why should I? Do you want it at once? You can
have it if you do."

Leonard looked up wistfully. "You do not think of taking me back
again? You will not do that?"

"Yes, I will. You and I shall understand each other better than ever
now."

The tears welled up to his eyes. He laid his other hand--I had taken
one--across his face. I bent over him with a whisper.

"What has passed to-night need never be recurred to between us; and I
shall never speak of it to another. We all have our trials and
troubles, Lennard. A very weighty one is lying now upon me, though it
is not absolutely my own--_brought_ upon me, you see, as yours was.
And it is worse than yours."

"Worse!" he exclaimed, looking at me.

"More dangerous in its possible consequences. Now mind," I broke off,
shaking him by the hand, "you are not to attempt to come to Essex
Street until you are quite strong enough for it. But I shall see you
here again on Monday, for I have two or three questions to ask you as
to some of the matters that have transpired during my absence.
Good-night, Lennard; keep up a good heart; you will outlive your
trials yet."

And when I left him he was fairly sobbing.




CHAPTER VI.

DANGER.


Mrs. Brightman was certainly improving. When I reached her house with
Annabel on the following day, Sunday, between one and two o'clock, she
was bright and cheerful, and came towards the entrance-gates to meet
us. She, moreover, displayed interest in all we told her of our
honeymoon in the Isle of Wight, and of the places we had visited.
Besides that, I noticed that she took water with her dinner.

"If she'll only keep to it," said Hatch, joining me in her
unceremonious fashion as I strolled in the garden later, smoking a
cigar. "Yes, Mr. Charles, she's trying hard to put bad habits away
from her, and I hope she'll be able to do it."

"I hope and trust she will!"

"Miss Brightman went back to Hastings the day after the wedding-day,"
continued Hatch; "but before she started she had a long interview with
my mistress, they two shut up in missis's bedroom alone. For pretty
nigh all the rest of the day, my missis was in tears, and she has not
touched nothing strong since."

"Nothing at all!" I cried in surprise, for it seemed too good to be
true. "Why, that's a fortnight ago! More than a fortnight."

"Well, it is so, Mr. Charles. Not but that missis has tried as long
and as hard before now--and failed again."

It was Monday evening before I could find time to go round to
Lake's--and he did not come to me. He was at home, poring over some
difficult law case by lamp-light.

"Been in court all day, Charley," he cried. "Have not had a minute to
spare for you."

"About Tom?" I said, as I sat down. "You seemed to say that you had
more unpleasantness to tell me."

"Aye, about Tom," he replied, turning his chair to face me, and
propping his right elbow upon his table. "Well, I fear Tom is in a bad
way."

"In health, you mean?"

"I do. His cough is frightful, and he is more like a skeleton than a
living being. I should say the illness has laid hold of his lungs."

"Has he had a doctor?"

"No. Asks how he is to have one. Says a doctor might (they were his
own words) smell a rat. Doctors are not called in to the class of
people lodging in that house unless they are dying: and it would soon
be seen by any educated man that Tom is not of _their_ kind. My
opinion is, that a doctor could not do him much good now," added Lake.

He looked at me as he spoke; to see, I suppose, whether I took in his
full meaning. I did--unhappily.

"And what do you think he is talking of now, Charles?" returned Lake.
"Of giving himself up."

"Giving himself up! What, to justice?"

Lake nodded. "You know what Tom Heriot is--not much like other
people."

"But why should he think of _that_? It would end everything."

"I was on the point of asking him why," said Lake. "Whether I should
have had a satisfactory answer, I cannot say; I should think he could
not give one; but we were interrupted. Miss Betsy Lee came in."

"Who? What?" I cried, starting from my chair.

"The young lady you told me of who lives in Lambeth--Miss Betsy Lee.
Sit down, Charley. She came over to bring him a pot of jelly."

"Then he has let those people know where he is, Lake! Is he mad?"

"Mad as to carelessness," assented Lake. "I tell you Tom Heriot's not
like other people."

"He will leave himself no chance."

"She seems to be a nice, modest little woman," said Lake; "and I'll go
bail her visit was quite honest and proper. She had made this jelly,
she told Tom, and she and her father hoped it would serve to
strengthen him, and her father sent his respects, and hopes to hear
that Captain Strange was feeling better."

"Well, Lake, the matter will get beyond me," I said in despair. "Only
a word dropped, innocently, by these people in some dangerous quarter,
and where will Tom be?"

"That's just it," said Lake. "Policeman Wren is acquainted with them."

"Did you leave the girl there?"

"No. Some rough man came into the room smoking, and sat down,
evidently with the intention of making an evening of it; he lives in
the same house and has made acquaintance with Tom, or Tom with him.
So I said good-night, and the girl did the same, and we went down
together. 'Don't you think Captain Strange looks very ill, sir?' said
she as we got into the street. 'I'm afraid he does,' I answered. 'I'm
sure he does, sir,' she said. 'It's a woeful pity that somebody should
be coming upon him for a big back debt just now, obliging him to keep
quiet in a low quarter!' So that is what Tom has told his Lambeth
friends," concluded Lake.

Lake gave me the address in Southwark, and I determined to see Tom the
next evening. In that, however, I was disappointed. One of our oldest
clients, passing through London from the country on his way to Pau,
summoned me to him on the Tuesday evening.

But I went on Wednesday. The stars were shining overhead as I
traversed the silent street, making out Tom's lodgings. He had only an
attic bedroom, I found, and I went up to it. He was partly lying
across the bed when I entered.

I almost thought even then that I saw death written in his face.
White, wan, shadowy it looked; much changed, much worn from what it
was three weeks before. But it lighted up with a smile, as he got up
to greet me.

"Halloa, Charley!" cried he. "Best congratulations! Made yourself into
a respectable man. All good luck to yourself and madam. I'm thinking
of coming to Essex Street to pay the wedding visit."

"Thank you," said I, "but do be serious. My coming here is a hazard,
as you know, Tom; don't let us waste in nonsense the few minutes I may
stay."

"Nonsense!" cried Tom. "Why, do you think I should be afraid to
venture to Essex Street?--what nonsense is there in that? Look here,
Charley!"

From some box in a dark corner of the room, he got out an old big blue
cloak lined with red, and swung it on. The collar, made of some black
curly wool, stood up above his ears. He walked about the small room,
exhibiting himself.

"Would the sharpest officer in Scotland Yard take me for anyone but
old Major Carlen?" laughed he. "I'm sure I look like his double in
this elegant cloak. It was his, once."

"His! What, Major Carlen's?"

"Just so. He made me a present of it."

"You have seen him, then!"

"I sent for him," answered Tom, putting off the old cloak and coughing
painfully after his recent exertion. "I thought I should like to see
the old fellow; I was not afraid he'd betray me; Carlen would not do
that; and I dropped a quiet note to his club, taking the chance of his
being in town."

"Taking the chance! Suppose he had not been in town, Tom, and the note
had fallen into wrong hands--some inquisitive waiter, let us say, who
chose to open it?"

"Well--what then? A waiter would only turn up his nose at Mr. Dominic
Turk, the retired schoolmaster, and close up the note again for the
Major."

"And what would Major Carlen make of Mr. Dominic Turk?"

"Major Carlen would know my handwriting, Charley."

"And he came in answer to it?"

"He came: and blew me up in a loud and awful fashion; seemed to be
trying to blow the ceiling off. First, he threatened to go out and
bring in the police; next, he vowed he would go straight to Blanche
and tell her all. Finally, he calmed down and promised to send me one
of his cast-off cloaks to disguise me, in case I had to go into the
streets. Isn't it a beauty?"

"Well, now, Tom, if you can be serious for once, what is going to
become of you, and what is to be done? I've come to know."

"Wish I could tell you; don't know myself," said he lightly.

"What was it you said to Lake about giving yourself up?"

"Upon my word of honour, Charley, I sometimes feel inclined to do it.
I couldn't be much worse off in prison than I am here. Sick and sad,
lad, needing comforts that can't be had in such a place as this; no
one to see after me, no one to attend to me. Anyway, it would end the
suspense."

I sat turning things about in my mind. It all seemed so full of
hazard. That he must be got away from his present quarters was
certain. I told him so.

"But you are so recklessly imprudent, you see, Tom," I observed, "and
it increases the risk. You have had Miss Betsy Lee here."

Tom flung himself back with a laugh. "She has been here twice, the
good little soul. The old man came once."

"Don't you think you might as well take up your standing to-morrow on
the top of the Monument, and proclaim yourself to the public at large?
You try me greatly, Tom!"

"Try you because I see the Lees! Come, Charley, that's good. They are
as safe as you are."

"In intention perhaps. How came you to let them know you were to be
found here?"

"How came I?" he carelessly rejoined. "Let's see? Oh, I remember. One
evening when I was hipped, fit to die of it all and of the confinement
to this wretched room, I strolled out. My feet took me to the old
ground--Lambeth--and to Lee's. He chanced to see me, and invited me
in. Over some whisky and water, I opened out my woes to them; not of
course the truth, but as near as might be. Told them of a curmudgeon
creditor of past days that I feared was coming down upon me, so that I
had to be in close hiding for a bit."

"But you need not have told them where."

"Oh, they'll be cautious. Miss Betsy was so much struck with my cough
and my looks that she said she should make some jelly for me, of the
kind she used to make for her mother before she died; and the good
little girl has brought me some over here twice in a jar. They are
all right, Charley."

It was of no use contending with him. After sitting a little time
longer, I promised that he should shortly see me again or hear from
me, and took my departure. Full of doubt and trouble, I wanted to be
alone, to decide, if possible, what was to be done.

What to do about Tom I knew not. That he required nursing and
nourishment, and that he ought to be moved where he could have it, was
indisputable. But--the risk!

Three-parts of the night I lay awake, thinking of different plans.
None seemed feasible. In the morning I was hardly fit for my day's
work, and set to it with unsteady nerves and a worried brain. If I had
only someone to consult with, some capable man who would help me! I
did think of Mr. Serjeant Stillingfar; but I knew he would not like
it, would probably refuse advice. One who now and again sat in the
position of judge, sentencing men himself, would scarcely choose to
aid in concealing an escaped convict.

I was upstairs in the dining-room at one o'clock, taking luncheon with
Annabel, when the door was thrown back by Watts and there loomed into
the room the old blue cloak with the red lining. For a moment I
thought it was the one I had seen the past night in Southwark, and my
heart leaped into my mouth. Watts's quiet announcement dispelled the
alarm.

"Major Carlen, sir."

The Major unclasped his cloak after shaking hands with us, and flung
it across the sofa, just as Tom had flung his on the bed. I pointed to
the cold beef, and asked if he would take some.

"Don't mind if I do, Charles," said he, drawing a chair to the table:
"I'm too much bothered just now to eat as I ought. A pretty kettle of
fish this is, lad, that you and I have had brought upon us!"

I gave him a warning look, glancing at Annabel. The old fellow
understood me--she had not been trusted with the present trouble.
That Tom Heriot had effected his escape, Annabel knew; that it was
expected he would make his way home, she knew; but that he had long
been here, and was now close at hand, I had never told her. Why
inflict upon her the suspense I had to endure?

"Rather a chilly day for the time of year," observed the Major, as he
coughed down his previous words. "Just a little, Mrs. Strange;
underdone, please."

Annabel, who carved at luncheon-time, helped him carefully. "And what
kettle of fish is it that you and Charles are troubled with, Major?"
she inquired, smiling.

"Ah--aw--don't care to say much about it," answered the Major, more
ready at an excuse than I should have deemed him. "Blanche is up to
her ears in anger against Level; says she'll get a separation from
him, and all that kind of nonsense. But you and I may as well not make
it our business, Charles, I expect: better let married folk fight out
their own battles. And have you heard from your Aunt Lucy yet, Mrs.
Strange?"

So the subject was turned off for the time; but down below, in my
office, the Major went at it tooth and nail, talking himself into a
fever. All the hard names in the Major's vocabulary were hurled at
Tom. His original sin was disgraceful enough, never to be condoned,
said the Major; but his present imprudent procedure was worse, and
desperately wicked.

"Are Blanche and her husband still at variance?" I asked, when he had
somewhat cooled down on the other subject.

"They just are, and are likely to remain so," growled the Major. "It's
Blanche's fault. Men have ways of their own, and she's a little fool
for wishing to interfere with his. Don't let your wife begin that,
Charles; it's my best advice to you. You are laughing, young fellow!
Well, perhaps you and Level don't row in quite the same boat; but you
can't foresee the shoals you may pitch into. No one can."

We were interrupted by Lennard, who had come back on the previous day,
pale and pulled down by his sharp attack of illness, but the same
efficient man of business as ever. A telegram had been delivered,
which he could not deal with without me.

"I'll be off, then," said the Major; "I suppose I'm only hindering
work. And I wish you well through your difficulties, Charles," he
added significantly. "I wish all of us well through them. Good-day,
Mr. Lennard."

The Major was ready enough to wish _that_, but he could not suggest
any means by which it might be accomplished. I had asked him; and he
confessed himself incompetent to advise. "I should send him off to sea
in a whaling-boat and keep him there," was all the help he gave.

Lennard stayed beyond time that evening, and was ready in my private
room to go over certain business with me that had transpired during my
own absence. I could not give the necessary attention to it, try as
earnestly as I would: Tom and _his_ business kept dancing in my brain
to the exclusion of other things. Lennard asked me whether I was ill.

"No," I answered; "at least, not in body." And as I spoke, the thought
crossed me to confide the trouble to Lennard. He had seen too much
trouble himself not to be safe and cautious, and perhaps he might
suggest something.

"Let Captain Heriot come to me," he immediately said. "He could not be
safer anywhere. Sometimes we let our drawing-room floor; it is vacant
now, and he can have it. My wife and my daughter Charlotte will attend
to his comforts and nurse him, if that may be, into health. It is the
best thing that can be done with him, Mr. Charles."

I saw that it was, seeming to discern all the advantages of the
proposal at a grasp, and accepted it. We consulted as to how best to
effect Tom's removal, which Lennard himself undertook. I dropped a
hasty note to "Mr. Turk" to prepare him to be in readiness the
following evening, and Lennard posted it when he went out. He had no
sooner gone, than the door of my private room slowly opened, and,
rather to my surprise, Leah appeared.

"I beg your pardon, sir, for presuming to disturb you here," she said;
"but I can't rest. There's some great trouble afloat; I've seen it in
your looks and ways, sir, ever since Sunday. Your face couldn't
deceive me when you were my little nursling, Master Charles, and it
can't deceive me now. Is it about Mr. Tom?"

"Well, yes, it is, Leah."

Her face turned white. "He has not got himself taken, surely!"

"No; it's not so bad as that--yet."

"Thank Heaven for it!" she returned. "I knew it was him, and I'm all
in a twitter about him from morning till night. I can't sleep or eat
for dreading the news that any moment may bring of him. It seems to
me, Mr. Charles, that one must needs be for ever in a twitter in this
world; before one trouble is mended, another turns up. No sooner am I
a bit relieved about poor Nancy, that unfortunate daughter of mine,
than there comes Mr. Tom."

The relief that Leah spoke of was this: some relatives of Leah's
former husband, Nancy's father, had somehow got to hear of Nancy's
misfortunes. Instead of turning from her, they had taken her and her
cause in hand, and had settled her and her three children in a general
shop in Hampshire near to themselves, where she was already beginning
to earn enough for a good living. The man who was the cause of all the
mischief had emigrated, and meant never to return to Europe.

And Leah had taken my advice in the matter, and disclosed all to
Watts. He was not in the least put out by it, as she had feared he
would be; only told her she was a simpleton for not having told him
before.




CHAPTER VII.

WITH MR. JONES


    My Dear Charles,--I particularly wish you to come to me. I want
    some legal advice, and I would rather you acted for me than
    anyone else. Come up this morning, please.
                                     Your affectionate sister,
                                                         BLANCHE.

The above note, brought from Gloucester Place on Monday morning by one
of Lady Level's servants, reached me before ten o'clock. By the
dashing character of the handwriting, I judged that Blanche had not
been in the calmest temper when she penned it.

"Is Lord Level at home?" I inquired of the man Sanders.

"No, sir. His lordship went down to Marshdale yesterday evening. A
telegram came for him, and I think it was in consequence of that he
went."

I wrote a few words to Blanche, telling her I would be with her as
soon as I could, and sent it by Sanders.

But a lawyer's time is not always his own. One client after another
kept coming in that morning, as if on purpose; and it was half-past
twelve in the day when I reached Gloucester Place.

The house in Gloucester Place was, and had been for some little time
now, entirely rented by Lord Level of Major Carlen. The Major, when in
London, had rooms in Seymour Street, but lived chiefly at his club.

"Her ladyship has gone out, sir," was Sanders's greeting to me, when
he answered my ring at the door-bell.

"Gone out?"

"Just gone," confirmed Major Carlen, who was there, it seemed, and
came forward in the wake of Sanders. "Come in, Charles."

He turned into the dining-room, and I after him. "Blanche ought to
have waited in," I remarked. "I have come up at the greatest
inconvenience."

"She has gone off in a tantrum," cried the Major, lowering his voice
as he carefully closed the door and pushed a chair towards me, just as
if the house were still in his occupancy.

"But where has she gone?" I asked, not taking the chair, but standing
with my elbow on the mantelpiece.

"Who's to know? To you, in Essex Street, I shouldn't wonder. She was
on the heights of impatience at your not coming."

"Not to Essex Street, I think, Major. I should have seen her."

"Nonsense! There's fifty turnings and windings between this and Essex
Street, where you might miss one another; your cab taking the straight
way and she the crooked," retorted the Major. "When Blanche gets her
back up, you can't easily put it down."

"Something has gone contrary, I expect."

"Nothing has gone contrary but herself," replied the Major, who seemed
in a cross and contrary mood on his own part. "Women are the very
deuce for folly."

"Well, what is it all about, sir? I suppose you can tell me?"

The Major sat down in Lord Level's easy-chair, pushed back his cloak,
and prepared to explain.

"What it's all about is just nothing, Charles; but so far as Madam
Blanche's version goes, it is this," said he. "They were about to sit
down, yesterday evening, to dinner--which they take on Sundays at five
o'clock (good, pious souls!), and limit their fare to roast beef and a
tart--when a telegram arrived from Marshdale. My lord seemed put out
about it; my lady was no doubt the same. 'I must go down at once,
Blanche,' said he, speaking on the spur of the moment. 'But why?
Where's the need of it?' returned she. 'Surely there can be nothing
at Marshdale to call you away on Sunday and in this haste?' 'Yes,'
said he, 'there is; there's illness.' And then, Blanche says, he tried
to cough down the words, as if he had made a slip of the tongue. 'Who
is ill?' said Blanche. 'Let me see the telegram.' Level slid the
telegram into his pocket, and told her it was Mr. Edwards, the old
steward. Down he sat again at the table, swallowed a mouthful of beef,
sent Sanders to put up a few things in his small portmanteau, and was
off in a cab like the wind. Fact is," added the Major, "had he failed
to catch that particular train, he would not have got down at all,
being Sunday; and Sanders says that catching it must have been a near
shave for his lordship."

"Is that all?"

"No. This morning there was delivered here a letter for his lordship;
post-mark Marshdale, handwriting a certain Italian one that Blanche
has seen before. She has seen the writer, too, it seems--a fair lady
called Nina. Blanche argues that as the letter came from Marshdale,
the lady must be at Marshdale, and she means to know without delay,
she says, who and what this damsel is, and what the tie may be that
binds her to Lord Level and gives her the right to pursue him, as she
does, and the power to influence his movements, and to be at her beck
and call. The probability is," added the shrewd Major, "that this
person wrote to him on the Saturday, but, being a foreigner, was not
aware that he would not receive her letter on Sunday morning. Finding
that he did not arrive at Marshdale on the Sunday, and the day getting
on, she despatched the telegram. That's how I make it out, Charles; I
don't know if I am right."

"You think, then, that some Italian lady is at Marshdale?"

"Sure of it," returned the Major. "I've heard of it before to-day.
Expect she lives there, making journeys to her own land between
whiles, no doubt. The best and the worst of us get homesick."

"You mean that she lives there in--in--well, in a manner not quite
orthodox, and that Lord Level connives at it?"

"Connives at it!" echoed the old reprobate. "Why, he is at the top and
bottom of it. Level's a man of the world, always was, and does as the
world does. And that little ignorant fool, Blanche, ferrets out some
inkling of this, and goes and sets up a fuss! Level's as good a
husband to her as can be, and yet she's not content! Commend me to
foolish women! They are all alike!"

In his indignation against women in general, Major Carlen rose from
his chair and began striding up and down the room. I was pondering on
what he had said to me.

"What right have wives to rake up particulars of their husbands'
private affairs?" he demanded fiercely. "If Level does go off to
Marshdale for a few days' sojourn now and again, is it any business of
Blanche's what he goes for, or what he does there, or whom he sees?
Suppose he chose to maintain a whole menagerie of--of--Italian monkeys
there, ought Blanche to interfere and make bones over it?"

"But----"

"He does not offend her; he does not allow her to see that anything
exists to offend her: why, then, should she suspect this and suspect
that, and peep and peer after Level as if she were a detective told
off expressly to watch his movements?" continued the angry man. "Only
an ignorant girl would dream of doing it. I am sick of her folly."

"Well now, Major Carlen, will you listen to me for a moment?" I said,
speaking quietly and calmly as an antidote to his heat. "I don't
believe this. I think you and Blanche are both mistaken."

He brought himself to an anchor on the hearthrug, and stared at me
under his thick, grizzled eyebrows. "What is it that you don't
believe, Charles?"

"This that you insinuate about Marshdale. I have faith in Lord Level;
I like Lord Level; and I think you are misjudging him."

"Oh, indeed!" responded the Major. "I suppose you know what a wild
blade Level always was?"

"In his early days he may have been. But you may depend upon it that
when he married he left his wild ways behind him."

"All right, young Charles. And, upon my word, you are pretty near as
young in the world's depths as Blanche herself is," was the Major's
sarcastic remark. "Do you wish to tell me there's nothing up at
Marshdale, with all these mysterious telegrams to Level, and his
scampers back in answer? Come!"

"I admit that there seems to be some mystery at Marshdale. Something
that we do not understand, and that Lord Level does not intend us to
understand; but I must have further proof before I can believe it is
of any such nature as you hint it, Major. For a long time past, Lord
Level has appeared to me like a man in trouble; as if he had some
anxiety on his mind."

"Well," acquiesced the Major equably, "and what can trouble a man's
mind more than the exactions of these foreign syrens? Let them be
Italian, or Spanish, or French--what you will--they'll worry your life
out of you in the long-run. What does that Italian girl do at
Marshdale?"

"I cannot say. For my own part I do not know that one is there. But if
she be, if there be a whole menagerie of Italian ladies there, as you
have just expressed it, Major----"

"I said a menagerie of monkeys," he growled.

"Monkeys, then. But whether they be monkeys or whether they be ladies,
I feel convinced that Lord Level is acting no unworthy part--that he
is loyal to his wife."

"You had better tell her so," nodded the Major; "perhaps she'll
believe you. I told her the opposite. I told her that when women
marry gay and attractive men, they must look out for squalls, and
learn to shut their eyes a bit in going through life. I bade her
bottle up her fancies, and let Marshdale and her husband alone, and
not show herself a simpleton before the public."

"What did she say to that?"

"Say? It was that piece of advice which raised the storm. She burst
out of the room like a maniac, declaring she wouldn't remain in it to
listen to me. The next thing was, I heard the street-door bang, and
saw my lady go out, putting on her gloves as she went. You came up two
minutes afterwards."

I was buried in thought again. He stood staring at me, as if I had no
business to have any thought.

"Look here, Major: one thing strikes me forcibly: the very fact of
Lord Level allowing these telegrams to come to him openly is enough to
prove that matters are not as you and Blanche suspect. If----"

"How can a telegram come secretly?" interrupted the Major.

"He would take care that they did not come at all--to his house."

"Oh, would he?" cried the old reprobate. "I should like to know how he
could hinder it if any she-fiend chooses to send them."

"Rely upon it he would hinder it. Level is not one to be coerced
against his will by either man or woman. Have you any idea how long
Blanche will remain out?"

"Just as much as you have, Charley. She may remain away till night,
for all I know."

It was of no use, then, my staying longer; and time, that day, was
almost as precious to me as gold. Major Carlen threw on his cloak, and
we went out together.

"I should not wonder if my young lady has gone to Seymour Street,"
remarked the Major. "The thought has just occurred to me."

"To your lodgings, you mean?" I asked, thinking it very unlikely.

"Yes; Mrs. Guy is there. The poor old thing arrived from Jersey on
Saturday. She has come over on her usual errand--to consult the
doctors; grows more ridiculously fanciful as she grows older. You
might just look in upon her now, Charles; it's close by: and then
you'll see whether Blanche is there or not."

I spared a few minutes for it. Poor Mrs. Guy looked very poorly
indeed; but she was meek and mild as ever, and burst into tears as I
greeted her. Her ailments I promised to go and hear all about another
time. Yes, Blanche was there. When we went in, she was laughing at
something Mrs. Guy had said, and her indignation seemed to have
subsided.

I could not stay long. Blanche came out with me, thinking I should go
back with her to Gloucester Place. But that was impossible; I had
already wasted more time than I could well spare. Blanche was vexed.

"My dear, you should not have gone out when you were expecting me.
You know how very much I am occupied."

"Papa vexed me, and drove me to it," she answered. "He said--oh, such
wicked things, that I could not and would not stay to listen. And all
the while I knew it was not that he believed them, but that he wanted
to make excuses for Lord Level."

I did not contradict her. Let her retain, and she could, some little
veneration for her step-father.

"Charles, I want to have a long conversation with you, so you must
come to me as soon as you can," she said. "I mean to have a separation
from my husband; perhaps a divorce, and I want you to tell me how I
must proceed in it. I did think of applying to Jennings and Ward, Lord
Level's solicitors, but, perhaps, you will be best."

I laughed. "You don't suppose, do you, Blanche, that Lord Level's
solicitors would act for you against him."

"Now, Charles, you are speaking lightly; you are making game of me.
Why do you laugh? I can tell you it is more serious than you may
think for! and I am serious. I have talked of this for a long time,
and now I _will_ act. How shall I begin?"

"Do not begin at all, Blanche," I said, with earnestness. "_Do
nothing._ Were your father living--were your mother living, they would
both give you this advice--and this is not the first time I have
enjoined it on you. Ah, my dear, you do not know--you little guess
what misery to the wife such a climax as this which you propose would
involve."

Blanche had turned to the railings round the interior of Portman
Square, and halted there, apparently looking at the shrubs. Her eyes
were full of tears.

"On the other hand, Charles, you do not know, you cannot guess, what I
have to bear--what a misery it makes of my life."

"Are you _sure_ of the facts that make the misery?"

"Why, of course I am."

"I think not, Blanche. I think you are mistaken."

She turned to me in surprise. "But I _can't_ be mistaken," she said.
"How can I be? If Lord Level does not go to Marshdale to--to--to see
people, what does he go for?"

"He may go for something quite different. My dear, I have more
confidence in your husband than you have, and I think you are wrong. I
must be off; I've not another moment; but these are my last words to
you, Blanche.--Take no action. Be still. _Do nothing._"

By half-past four o'clock, the most pressing of my work was over for
the day, and then I took a cab to Lincoln's Inn to see Mr. Serjeant
Stillingfar. He had often said to me, good old uncle that he was:
"Come to me always, Charles, when you are in any legal doubt or
difficulty, or deem that my opinion may be of use to you." I was in
one of those difficulties now. Some remarkably troublesome business
had been laid before me by a client; I could not see my way in it at
all, and was taking it to Serjeant Stillingfar.

The old chambers were just as they used to be; as they were on the day
which the reader has heard of, when I saw them for the first time.
Running up the stairs, there sat a clerk at the desk in the narrow
room, where young Lake, full of impudence, had sat that day, Mr.
Jones's empty place beside it now, as it was then.

"Is the Serjeant in?" I asked the clerk.

"No, sir; he's not out of Court yet. Mr. Jones is in."

I went on to the inner room. Old Jones, the Serjeant's own especial
clerk, was writing at his little desk in the corner. Nothing was
changed; not even old Jones himself. He was not, to appearance, a day
older, and not an ounce bigger. Lake used to tell him he would make
his fortune if he went about the country in a caravan and called
himself a consumptive lamp-post.

"My uncle is not back from Court, Graham says," I observed to the
clerk, after shaking hands.

"Not yet," he answered. "I don't think he'll be long. Sit down, Mr.
Strange."

I took the chair I had taken that first day years ago, and waited. Mr.
Jones finished the writing he was about, arranged his papers, and then
came and stood with his back to the fire, having kept his quill in his
hand. It must be a very hot day indeed which did not see a fire in
that grate.

"If the Serjeant is not back speedily, I think I must open my business
to you, and get your opinion, Mr. Jones," I said. "I dare say you
could give me one as well as he."

"Some complicated case that you can't quite manage?" he rejoined.

"It's the most complicated, exasperating case I nearly ever had
brought to me," I answered. "I think it is a matter more for a
detective officer to deal with than a solicitor. If Serjeant
Stillingfar says the same, I shall throw it up."

"Curious things, some of those detective cases," remarked Mr. Jones,
gently waving his pen.

"They are. I wouldn't have to deal with them, _as_ a detective, for
the world. Shall I relate this case to you?"

He took out his watch and looked at it. "Better wait a bit longer, Mr.
Charles. I expect the Serjeant every minute now."

"Don't you wonder that my uncle continues to work?" I cried presently.
"He is old now. _I_ should retire."

"He is sixty-five. If you were not young yourself, you would not call
that old."

"Old enough, I should say, for work to be a labour to him."

"A labour that he loves, and that he is as capable of performing as he
was twenty years ago," returned old Jones. "No, Mr. Charles, I do not
wonder that he should continue to work."

"Did you know that he had been offered a judgeship?"

Old Jones laughed a little. I thought it was as much as to say there
was little which concerned the Serjeant that he did not know.

"He has been offered a judgeship more than once--had it pressed upon
him, Mr. Charles. The last time was when Mr. Baron Charlton died."

"Why! that is only a month or two ago!"

"Just about nine weeks, I fancy."

"And he declined it?"

"He declines them all."

"But what can be his motive? It would give him more rest than he
enjoys now----"

"I don't altogether know that," interrupted the clerk. "The judges are
very much over-worked now. It would increase his responsibility; and
he is one to feel that, perhaps painfully."

"You mean when he had to pass the dread sentence of death. A new judge
must always feel that at the beginning."

"I heard one of our present judges say--it was in this room, too, Mr.
Charles--that the first time he put on the black cap he never closed
his eyes the whole night after it. All the Bench are not so sensitive
as that, you know."

A thought suddenly struck me. "Surely," I cried, "you do not mean that
_that_ is the reason for my uncle's refusing a seat on the Bench!"

"Not at all. He'd get over that in time, as others do. Oh no! that has
nothing to do with it."

"Then I really cannot see what can have to do with it. It would give
him a degree of rest; yes, it would; and it would give him rank and
position."

"But it would take from him half his income. Yes, just about half, I
reckon," repeated Mr. Jones, attentively regarding the feather of the
pen.

"What of that? He must be putting by heaps and heaps of money--and he
has neither wife nor child to put by for."

"Ah!" said the clerk, "that is just how we all are apt to judge of a
neighbour's business. Would it surprise you very much, sir, if I told
you that the Serjeant is _not_ putting by?"

"But he must be putting by. Or what becomes of his money?"

"He spends it, Mr. Charles."

"_Spends it!_ Upon what?"

"Upon other people."

Mr. Jones looked at me from across the hearthrug, and I looked at him.
The assertion puzzled me.

"It's true," he said with a nod. "You have not forgotten that great
calamity which happened some ten or twelve years ago, Mr. Charles?
That bank which went to pieces, and broke up homes and hearts? _Your_
money went in it."

As if I could forget that!

"The Serjeant's money, all he had then saved, went in it," continued
the clerk. "Mortifying enough, of course, but he was in the full swing
of his prosperity, and could soon have replaced it. What he could not
so easily replace, Mr. Charles, was the money he had been the means
of placing in the bank belonging to other people, and which was lost.
He had done it for the best. He held the bank to be thoroughly sound
and prosperous; he could not have had more confidence in his own
integrity than he had in that bank; and he had counselled friends and
others whom he knew, who were not as well off as he was, to invest all
they could spare in it, believing he was doing them a kindness.
Instead of that, it ruined them."

I thought I saw what the clerk was coming to. After a pause, he went
on:

"It is these people that he has been working for, Mr. Charles. Some of
them he has entirely repaid--the money, you know, which he caused them
to lose. He considered it his duty to recompense them, so far as he
could; and to keep them, where they needed to be kept, until he had
effected that. For those who were better off and did not need present
help, he put money by as he could spare it, investing it in the funds
in their name: I dare say your name is amongst them. That's what Mr.
Serjeant Stillingfar does with his income, and that's why he keeps on
working."

I had never suspected this.

"I believe it is almost accomplished now," said the clerk. "So nearly
that I thought he might, perhaps, have taken the judgeship on this
last occasion. But he did not. 'Just a few months longer in harness,
Jones,' he said to me, 'and then----?' So I reckon that we shall yet
see him on the Bench, Mr. Charles."

"He must be very good."

"Good!" echoed old Jones, with emotion; "he is made of goodness. There
are few people like him. He would help the whole world if he could. I
don't believe there's any man who has ever done a single service for
him of the most trifling nature but he would wish to place beyond the
reach of poverty. 'I've put a trifle by for you, Jones,' he said to me
the other day, 'in case you might be at a loss for another such place
as this when my time's over.' And when I tried to thank him----"

Mr. Jones broke down. Bringing the quill pen under his eyes, as if he
suddenly caught sight of a flaw thereon, I saw a drop of water fall on
to it.

"Yes, Mr. Charles, he said that to me. It has taken a load from my
mind. When a man is on the downhill of life and is not sure of his
future, he can't help being anxious. The Serjeant has paid me a
liberal salary, as you may well guess, but he knows that it has not
been in my power to put by a fraction of it. 'You are too generous
with your money, Serjeant,' I said to him one day, a good while ago.
'Ah no, Jones, not at all,' he answered. 'God has prospered me so
marvellously in these later years, what can I do but strive to prosper
others?' Those were his very words."

And with these last words of Jones's our conference came to an end.
The door was abruptly thrown open by Graham to admit the Serjeant. Mr.
Jones helped him off with his wig and gown, and handed him the little
flaxen top that he wore when not on duty. Then Jones, leaving the room
for a few moments, came back with a glass of milk, which he handed to
his master.

"Would not a glass of wine do you more good, uncle?" I asked.

"No, lad; not so much. A glass of milk after a hard day's work in
Court refreshes me. I never touch wine except at a dinner. I take a
little then; not much."

Sitting down together when Mr. Jones had again left us, I opened my
business to the Serjeant as concisely as possible. He listened
attentively, but made no remark until the end.

"Now go over it all again, Charles." I did so: and this second time I
was repeatedly interrupted by remarks or questions. After that we
discussed the case.

"I cannot see any reason why you should not take up the matter," he
said, when he had given it a little silent consideration. "I do not
look upon it quite as you do; I think you have formed a wrong
judgment. It is intricate at present; I grant you that; but if you
proceed in the manner I have suggested, you will unravel it."

"Thank you, Uncle Stillingfar. I can never thank you enough for all
your kindness to me."

"Were you so full of anxiety over this case?" he asked, as we were
shaking hands, and I was about to leave. "You look as though you had a
weight of it on your brow."

"And so I have, uncle; but not about this case. Something nearer
home."

"What _is_ it?" he returned, looking at me.

"It is---- Perhaps I had better not tell it you."

"I understand," he slowly said. "Tom Heriot, I suppose. Why does he
not get away?"

"He is too ill for that at present: confined to his room and his bed.
Of course, he does not run quite so great a risk as he did when he
persisted in parading the streets, but danger is always imminent."

"He ought to end the danger by getting away. Very ill, is he?"

"So ill that I think danger will soon be all at an end in another way;
it certainly will be unless he rallies."

"What is the matter with him?"

"I cannot help fearing that consumption has set in."

"Poor fellow! Oh, Charles, how that fine young man has spoilt his
life! Consumption?--Wait a bit--let me think," broke off the Serjeant.
"Why, yes, I remember now; it was consumption that Colonel Heriot's
first wife died of--Tom's mother."

"Tom said so the last time I saw him."

"Ah. He knows it, then. Better not see him too often, Charles. You are
running a risk yourself, as you must be aware."

"Yes; I know I am. It is altogether a trial. Good-day, uncle."

I shook hands with Jones as I passed through his room, and ran down
the stairs, feeling all the better for my interview with him and with
his patron, Mr. Serjeant Stillingfar.




CHAPTER VIII.

AN ACCIDENT.


The drawing-room floor at Lennard's made very comfortable quarters for
Tom Heriot, and his removal from the room in Southwark had been
accomplished without difficulty. Mrs. Lennard, a patient, mild, weak
woman, who could never have been strong-minded, made him an excellent
nurse, her more practical and very capable daughter, Charlotte, aiding
her when necessary.

A safer refuge could not have been found in London. The Lennards were
so often under a cloud themselves as regarded pecuniary matters, so
beset at times by their unwelcome creditors--the butcher, baker and
grocer--that the chain of their front door was kept habitually
fastened, and no one was admitted within its portals without being
first of all subjected to a comprehensive survey. Had some kind friend
made a rush to the perambulating policeman of the district, to inform
him that the domicile of those Lennards was again in a state of siege,
he would simply have speculated upon whether the enemy was this time
the landlord or the Queen's taxes. It chanced to be neither; but it
was well for the besieged to favour the impression that it was one or
the other, or both. Policemen do not wage war with unfortunate
debtors, and Mr. Lennard's house was as safe as a remote castle.

"Mr. Brown" Tom was called there; none of the household, with the
exception of its master, having any idea that it was not his true
name. "One of the gentlemen clerks in Essex Street, who has no home in
London; I have undertaken to receive him while he is ill," Mr.
Lennard had carelessly remarked to his wife and daughters before
introducing Tom. They had unsuspecting minds, except as regarded their
own creditors, those ladies--ladies always, though fallen from their
former state--and never thought to question the statement, or to be at
all surprised that Mr. Strange himself took an interest in his clerk's
illness, and paid an evening visit to him now and then. The doctor who
was called in, a hard-worked practitioner named Purfleet, did his best
for "Mr. Brown," but had no time to spare for curiosity about him in
any other way, or to give so much as a thought to his antecedents.

And just at first, after being settled at Lennard's, Tom Heriot seemed
to be taking a turn for the better. The warmth of the comfortable
rooms, the care given to him, the strengthening diet, and perhaps a
feeling that he was in a safer asylum than he had yet found, all had
their effect upon him for good.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Hatch!" called out Mrs. Brightman.

Hatch ran in from the next room. "Yes, ma'am."

"Let Perry go and tell the gardener to cut some of his best grapes,
white and purple, and do you arrange them in a basket. I shall go up
to Essex Street and see my daughter this afternoon, and will take them
to her. Order the carriage for half-past two o'clock."

"Miss Annabel will be finely pleased to see you, ma'am!" remarked
Hatch.

"Possibly so. But she is no longer Miss Annabel. Go and see about the
grapes."

When Mrs. Brightman's tones were cold and haughty, and they sounded
especially so just now, she brooked no dilatoriness in those who had
to obey her behests. Hatch turned away immediately, and went along
talking to herself.

"She's getting cross and restless again. I'm certain of it. In a
week's time from this we shall have her as bad as before. And for ever
so many weeks now she has been as cautious and sober as a judge! Hang
the drink, then! Doctors may well call it a disease when it comes to
this stage with people. Here--I say, Perry!"

The butler, passing along the hall, heard Hatch's call, and stopped.
She gave her cap-strings a fling backwards as she advanced to him.

"You are to go and tell Church to cut a basket of grapes, and to mix
'em, white and black. The very best and ripest that is in the
greenhouse; they be for Miss Annabel."

"All right, I'll go at once," answered Perry. "But you need not snap a
man's nose off, Hatch, or look as if you were going to eat him. What
has put you out?"

"Enough has put me out; and you might know that, old Perry, if you had
any sense," retorted Hatch. "When do I snap people's noses off--which
it's my tone, I take it, that you mean--except I'm that bothered and
worried I can't speak sweet?"

"Well, what's amiss?" asked Perry.

They were standing close together, and Hatch lowered her voice to a
whisper. "The missis is going off again; I be certain sure on't."

"_No!_" cried Perry, full of dismay. "But, look here, Hatch"--suddenly
diving into one of his jackets--"she can't have done it; here's the
cellar-key. I can be upon my word that there's not a drain of anything
out."

"You always did have the brains of a turkey, you know, Perry," was
Hatch's gracious rejoinder; "and I'm tired of reminding you of it. Who
said missis had took anything? Not me. She haven't--yet. As you
observe, there's nothing up for her to take. But she'll be ordering
you to bring something up before to-morrow's over; perhaps before
to-day is."

"Dear, dear!" lamented the faithful servant. "Don't you think you may
be mistaken, Hatch? What do you judge by?"

"I judge by herself. I've not lived with my missis all these years
without learning to notice signs and tokens. Her manner to-day and
her restlessness is just as plain as the sun in the sky. I know what
it means, and you'll know it too, as soon as she gives you her orders
to unlock the cellar."

"Can nothing be done?" cried the unhappy Perry. "Could I _lose_ the
key of the cellar, do you think, Hatch? Would that be of any good?"

"It would hold good just as long as you'd be in getting a hammer and
poker to break it open with; you've not got to deal with a pack of
schoolboys that's under control," was Hatch's sarcastic reproof. "But
I think there's one thing we might try, Perry, and that is, run round
to Mr. Close and tell him about it. Perhaps he could give her
something to stop the craving."

"I'll go," said Perry. "I'll slip round when I've told Church about
the grapes."

"And the carriage is ordered early--half-past two; so mind you are in
readiness," concluded Hatch.

Perry went to the surgeon's, after delivering his orders to the
gardener. But Mr. Close was not at home, and the man came away again
without leaving any message; he did not choose to enter upon the
subject with Mr. Dunn, the assistant. The latter inquired who was ill,
and Perry replied that nobody was; he had only come to speak a private
word to Mr. Close, which could wait. In point of fact, he meant to
call later.

But the curiosity of Mr. Dunn, who was a very inquisitive young man,
fonder of attending to other people's business than of doing his own,
had been aroused by this. He considered Perry's manner rather
mysterious, as well as the suppression of the message, and he enlarged
upon the account to Mr. Close when he came in. Mr. Close made no
particular rejoinder; but in his own mind he felt little doubt that
Mrs. Brightman was breaking out again, and determined to go and see
her when he had had his dinner.

Perry returned home, and waited on his mistress at luncheon, quaking
inwardly all the time, as he subsequently confessed to Hatch, lest
she should ask him for something that was not upon the table. However,
she did not do so; but she was very restless, as Perry observed; ate
little, drank no water, and told Perry to bring her a cup of coffee.

At half-past two the carriage stood at the gate, the silver on the
horses' harness glittering in the sun. Quickly enough appeared the
procession from the house. Mrs. Brightman, upright and impassive,
walking with stately step; Hatch, a shawl or two upon her arm, holding
an umbrella over her mistress to shade her from the sun; Perry in the
background, carrying the basket of grapes. Perry would attend his
mistress in her drive, as usual, but not Hatch.

The servants were placing the shawls and the grapes in the carriage,
and Mrs. Brightman, who hated anything to be done after she had taken
her seat, was waiting to enter it, when Mr. Close, the surgeon, came
bustling up.

"Going for a drive this fine day!" he exclaimed, as he shook hands
with Mrs. Brightman. "I'm glad of that. I had been thinking that
perhaps you were not well."

"Why should you think so?" asked she.

"Well, Perry was round at my place this morning, and left a message
that he wanted to see me. I----"

Mr. Close suppressed the remainder of his speech as his gaze suddenly
fell on Perry's startled face. The man had turned from the carriage,
and was looking at him in helpless, beseeching terror. A faithful
retainer was Perry, an honest butler; but at a pinch his brains were
no better than what Hatch had compared them with--those of a turkey.

Mrs. Brightman, her countenance taking its very haughtiest expression,
gazed first at the doctor, then at Perry, as if demanding what this
might mean; possibly, poor lady, she had a suspicion of it. But Hatch,
ready Hatch, was equal to the occasion: _she_ never lost her presence
of mind.

"I told Perry he might just as well have asked young Mr. Dunn for 'em,
when he came back without the drops," said she, facing the surgeon and
speaking carelessly. "Your not being in didn't matter. It was some
cough-drops I sent him for; the same as those you've let us have
before, Mr. Close. Our cook's cough is that bad, she can't sleep at
night, nor let anybody else sleep that's within earshot of her room."

"Well, I came round in a hurry, thinking some of you might be
suffering from this complaint that's going about," said Mr. Close,
taking up the clue in an easy manner.

"That there spasadic cholera," assented Hatch.

"Cholera! It's not cholera. There's nothing of that sort about," said
the surgeon. "But there's a good bit of influenza; I have half a dozen
patients suffering from it. A spell of bright weather such as this,
though, will soon drive it away. And I'll send you some of the drops
when I get back, Hatch."

Mrs. Brightman advanced to the carriage; the surgeon was at hand to
assist her in. Perry stood on the other side his mistress. Hatch had
retreated to the gate and was looking on.

Suddenly a yell, as of something unearthly, startled their ears. A
fierce-looking bull, frightened probably by the passers-by on the
road, and the prods given to it by the formidable stick of its driver,
had dashed behind the carriage on to the foot-path, and set up that
terrible roar. Mr. Close looked round, Perry did the same; whilst Mrs.
Brightman, who was in the very act of getting into her carriage, and
whose nerves were more sensitive than theirs, turned sharply round
also and screamed.

Again Hatch came to the rescue. She had closed the umbrella and lodged
it against the pillar of the gate, for here they were under the shade
of trees. Seizing the umbrella now, she opened it with a great dash
and noise, and rushed towards the bull, pointing it menacingly. The
animal, no doubt more startled than they were, tore away and gained
the highroad again. Then everyone had leisure to see that Mrs.
Brightman was lying on the ground partly under the carriage.

She must have fallen in turning round, partly from fright, partly from
the moving of the carriage. The horses had also been somewhat startled
by the bull's noise, and one of them began to prance. The coachman had
his horses well in hand, and soon quieted them; but he had not been
able to prevent the movement, which had no doubt chiefly caused his
mistress to fall.

They quickly drew her from under the carriage and attempted to raise
her; but she cried out with such tones of agony that the surgeon
feared she was seriously injured. As soon as possible she was conveyed
indoors on a mattress. Another surgeon joined Mr. Close, and it was
found that her leg was broken near the ankle.

When it had been set and the commotion was subsiding, Perry was
despatched to Essex Street with the carriage and the bad news--the
carriage to bring back Annabel.

"What was it you really came to my surgery for, Perry?" Mr. Close took
an opportunity of asking him before he started.

"It was about my mistress, sir," answered the man. "Hatch felt quite
sure, by signs and tokens, that Mrs. Brightman was going to--to--be
ill again. She sent me to tell you, sir, and to ask if you couldn't
give her something to stop it."

"Ah, I thought as much. But when I saw you all out there, your
mistress looking well and about to take a drive, I concluded I had
been mistaken," said the surgeon.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had run upstairs during the afternoon to ask a question of Annabel,
and was standing beside her at the drawing-room window, where she sat
at work, when a carriage came swiftly down the street, and stopped at
the door.

"Why, it is mamma's!" exclaimed Annabel, looking out.

"But I don't see her in it," I rejoined.

"Oh, she must be in it, Charles. Perry is on the box."

Perry was getting down, but was not quite so quick in his movements as
a slim young footman would be. He rang the door-bell, and I was
fetched down to him. In two minutes afterwards I had disclosed the
news to my wife, and brought Perry upstairs that she might herself
question him. The tears were coursing down her cheeks.

"Don't take on, Miss Annabel," said the man, feeling quite too much
lost in the bad tidings to remember Annabel's new title. "There's not
the least bit of danger, ma'am; Mr. Close bade me say it; all is sure
to go on well."

"Did you bring the carriage for me, Perry?"

"Yes, ma'am, I did. And it was my mistress herself thought of it. When
Mr. Close, or Hatch--one of 'em it was, I don't know which--told her
they were going to send me for you, she said, 'Let Perry take the
carriage.' Oh, ma'am, indeed she is fully as well as she could be: it
was only at first that she seemed faintish like."

Annabel went back in the carriage at once. I promised to follow her as
early in the evening as I could get away. Relying upon the butler's
assurance that Mrs. Brightman was not in the slightest danger; that,
on the contrary, it would be an illness of weeks, if not of months,
there was no necessity for accompanying Annabel at an inconvenient
moment.

"It is, in one sense, the luckiest thing that could have happened to
her," Mr. Close remarked to me that evening when we were conversing
together.

"Lucky! How do you mean?"

"Well, she _must_ be under our control now," he answered in
significant tones, "and we were fearing, only to-day, that she was on
the point of breaking out again. A long spell of enforced abstinence,
such as this, may effect wonders."

Of course, looking at it in that light, the accident might be called
fortunate. "There's a silver lining to every cloud."

Annabel took up her abode temporarily at her mother's: Mrs. Brightman
requested it. I went down there of an evening--though not every
evening--returning to Essex Street in the morning. Tom's increasing
illness kept me in town occasionally, for I could not help going to
see him, and he was growing weaker day by day. The closing features of
consumption were gaining upon him rapidly. To add to our difficulties,
Mr. Policeman Wren, who seemed to follow Tom's changes of domicile in
a very ominous and remarkable manner, had now transferred his beat
from Southwark, and might be seen pacing before Lennard's door ten
times a day.

One morning when I had come up from Clapham and was seated in my own
room opening letters, Lennard entered. He closed the door with a
quiet, cautious movement, and waited, without speaking.

"Anything particular, Lennard?"

"Yes, sir; I've brought rather bad news," he said. "Captain Heriot is
worse."

"Worse? In what way? But he is not Captain Heriot, Lennard; he is Mr.
Brown. Be careful."

"We cannot be overheard," he answered, glancing at the closed door.
"He appeared so exceedingly weak last night that I thought I would sit
up with him for an hour or two, and then lie down on his sofa for the
rest of the night. About five o'clock this morning he had a violent
fit of coughing and broke a blood-vessel."

"What did you do?"

"I know a little of the treatment necessary in such cases, and we got
the doctor to him as soon as possible. Mr. Purfleet does not give the
slightest hope now. In fact, he thinks that a very few days more will
bring the ending."

I sat back in my chair. Poor Tom! Poor Tom!

"It is the best for him, Mr. Charles," spoke Lennard, with some
emotion. "Better, infinitely, than that of which he has been running
the risk. When a man's life is marred as he has marred his, heaven
must seem like a haven of refuge to him."

"Has he any idea of his critical state?"

"Yes; and, I feel sure, is quite reconciled to it. He remarked this
morning how much he should like to see Blanche: meaning, I presume,
Lady Level."

"Ah, but there are difficulties in the way, Lennard. I will come to
him myself, but not until evening. There's no immediate danger, you
tell me, and I do not care to be seen entering your house during the
day while he is in it. The big policeman might be on the watch, and
ask me what I wanted there."

Lennard left the room and I returned to my letters. The next I took up
was a note from Blanche. Lord Level was not _yet_ back from Marshdale,
she told me in it; he kept writing miserable scraps of notes in which
he put her off with excuses from day to day, always assuring her he
hoped to be up on the morrow. But she could see she was being played
with; and the patience which, in obedience to me and Major Carlen, she
had been exercising, was very nearly exhausted. She wrote this, she
concluded by saying, to warn me that it was so.

Truth to say, I did wonder what was keeping Level at Marshdale. He had
been there more than a week now.




CHAPTER IX.

LAST DAYS.


Tom Heriot lay on his sofa in his bedroom, the firelight flickering on
his faded face. This was Monday, the third day since the attack spoken
of by Lennard, and there had not been any return of it. His voice was
stronger this evening; he seemed better altogether, and was jesting,
as he loved to do. Leah had been to see him during the day, and he was
recounting one or two of their passages-at-arms, with much glee.

"Charley, old fellow, you look as solemn as a judge."

Most likely I did. I sat on the other side the hearthrug, gazing as I
listened to him; and I thought I saw in his face the grayness that
frequently precedes death.

"Did you know that that giant of the force, Wren, had his eye upon me,
Charley?"

"No! Why do you say so?"

"Well, I think he has--some suspicion, at any rate. He parades before
the house like a walking apparition. I look at him from behind the
curtains in the other room. He paraded in like manner, you know,
before that house in Southwark and the other one in Lambeth."

"It may be only a coincidence, Tom. The police are moved about a good
deal from beat to beat, I fancy."

"Perhaps so," assented Tom carelessly. "If he came in and took me, I
don't think he could do much with me now. He accosted Purfleet
to-day."

"Accosted Purfleet!"

Tom nodded. "After his morning visit to me, he went dashing out of the
street-door in his usual quick way, and dashed against Wren. One
might think a regiment of soldiers were always waiting to have their
legs and arms cut off, and that Purfleet had to do it, by the way he
rushes about," concluded Tom.

"Well?"

"'In a hurry this morning, doctor,' says old Wren, who is uncommonly
fond of hearing himself talk. 'And who is it that's ill at Mr.
Lennard's?' 'I generally am in a hurry,' says Purfleet, 'and so would
you be if you had as many sick people on your hands. At Lennard's?
Why, that poor suffering daughter of his has had another attack, and I
don't know whether I shall save her.' And, with that, Purfleet got
away. He related this to me when he came in at tea-time."

A thought struck me. "But, Tom, does Purfleet know that you are in
concealment here? Or why should he have put his visits to you upon
Maria Lennard?"

"Why, how could he be off knowing it? Lennard asked him at first, as a
matter of precaution, not to speak of me in the neighbourhood. Mr.
Brown was rather under a cloud just now, he said. I wouldn't mind
betting a silver sixpence, Charley, that he knows I am Tom Heriot."

I wondered whether Tom was joking.

"Likely enough," went on Tom. "He knows that you come to see me, and
that you are Mr. Strange, of Essex Street. And he has heard, I'll lay,
that Mr. Strange had a wicked sort of half-brother, one Captain
Heriot, who fell into the fetters of the law and escaped them,
and--and may be the very Mr. Brown who's lying ill here. Purfleet can
put two and two together as cleverly as other people, Charles."

"If so, it is frightfully hazardous----"

"Not at all," interrupted Tom with equanimity. "He'd no more betray
me, Charley, than he'd betray himself. Doctors don't divulge the
secrets of their patients; they keep them. It is a point of honour in
the medical code: as well as of self-interest. What family would call
in a man who was known to run about saying the Smiths next door had
veal for dinner to-day, and they ought to have had mutton? If no more
harm reaches me than any brought about by Purfleet, I am safe enough."

It might be as he said. And I saw that he would be incautious to the
end.

At that moment Mrs. Lennard came in with something in a breakfast-cup.
"You are a good lady," said Tom gratefully. "See how they feed me up,
Charley!"

But for the hollow tones, the hectic flush and the brilliant eyes, it
might almost have been thought he was getting better. The cough had
nearly left him, and the weakness was not more apparent than it had
been for a week past. But that faint, deep, _far-away_ sounding voice,
which had now come on, told the truth. The close was near at hand.

After Mrs. Lennard had left the room with the empty cup, Tom lay back
on the sofa, put his head on the pillow, and in a minute or two seemed
to be asleep. Presently I moved gently across the hearthrug to fold
the warm, light quilt upon his knees. He opened his eyes.

"You need not creep, Charley. I am not asleep. I had a regular good
sleep in the afternoon, and don't feel inclined for it now. I was
thinking about the funeral."

"The funeral!" I echoed, taken back. "Whose funeral?"

"Mine. They won't care to lay me by my mother, will they?--I mean my
own mother. The world might put its inquisitive word in, and say that
must be Tom Heriot, the felon. Neither you nor Level would like that,
nor old Carlen either."

I made no answer, uncertain what to say.

"Yet I should like to lie by her," he went on. "There was a large
vault made, when she died, to hold the three of us--herself, my father
and me. _They_ are in it; I should like to be placed with them."

"Time enough to think of that, Tom, when--when--the time comes," I
stammered.

"The time's not far off now, Charley."

"Two nights ago, when I was here, you assured me you were getting
better."

"Well, I thought I might be; there are such ups and downs in a man's
state. He will appear sick unto death to-day, and tomorrow be driving
down to a whitebait dinner at Greenwich. I've changed my opinion,
Charley; I've had my warning."

"Had your warning! What does that mean?"

"I should like to see Blanche," he whispered. "Dear little Blanche!
How I used to tease her in our young days, and Leah would box my ears
for it; and I teased you also, Charley. Could you not bring her here,
if Level would let her come?"

"Tom, I hardly know. For one thing, she has not heard anything of the
past trouble, as you are aware. She thinks you are in India with the
regiment, and calls you a very undutiful brother for not writing to
her. I suppose it might be managed."

"Dear little Blanche!" he repeated. "Yes, I teased her--and loved her
all the time. Just one visit, Charley. It will be the last until we
meet upon the eternal shores. Try and contrive it."

I sat thinking how it might be done--the revelation to Blanche,
bringing her to the house, and obtaining the consent of Lord Level;
for I should not care to stir in it without his consent. Tom appeared
to be thinking also, and a silence ensued. It was he who broke it.

"Charles!"

"Yes?"

"Do you ever recall events that passed in our old life at White
Littleham Rectory? do any of them lie in your memory?"

"I think all of them lie in it," I answered. "My memory is, you know,
a remarkably good one."

"Ay," said Tom. And then he paused again. "Do you recollect that
especial incident when your father told us of his dream?" he continued
presently. "I picture the scene now; it has been present to my mind
all day. A frosty winter morning, icicles on the trees and frosty
devices on the window-panes. You and I and your father seated round
the breakfast-table; Leah pouring out the coffee and cutting bread and
butter for us. He appeared to be in deep thought, and when I remarked
upon it, and you asked him what he was thinking of, he said his dream.
D'you mind it, lad?"

"I do. The thing made an impression on me. The scene and what passed
at it are as plain to me now as though it had happened yesterday.
After saying he was thinking of his dream, he added, in a dubious
tone, 'If it _was_ a dream.' Mr. Penthorn came in whilst he was
telling it.

"He was fast asleep; had gone to bed in the best of health, probably
concocting matter for next Sunday's sermon," resumed Tom, recalling
the facts. "Suddenly, he awoke at the sound of a voice. It was his
late wife's voice; your mother, Charley. He was wide awake on the
instant, and knew the voice for hers; she appeared to be standing at
the bedside."

"But he did not see her," I put in.

"No; he never said he saw her," replied Tom Heriot. "But the
impression was upon him that a figure stood there, and that after
speaking it retreated towards the window. He got up and struck a light
and found the room empty, no trace of anyone's having been in it.
Nevertheless he could not get rid of the belief, though not a
superstitious man, that it was his wife who came to him."

"In the spirit."

"In the spirit, of course. He knew her voice perfectly, he said. Mr.
Penthorn rather ridiculed the matter; saying it was nothing but a
vivid dream. I don't think it made much impression upon your father,
except that it puzzled him."

"I don't think it did," I assented, my thoughts all in the past. "As
you observe, Tom, he was not superstitious; he had no particular
belief in the supernatural."

"No; it faded from all our minds with the day--Leah's perhaps
excepted. But what was the result? On the fourth night afterwards he
died. The dream occurred on the Friday morning a little before three
o'clock; your father looked at his watch when he got out of bed and
saw that it wanted a quarter to three. On Tuesday morning at a quarter
to three he died in his study, into which he had been carried after
his accident."

All true. The circumstances, to me, were painful even now.

"Well, what do you make of it, Charles?"

"Nothing. But I don't quite understand your question."

"Do you think his wife really came to him?--That she was permitted to
come back to earth to warn him of his approaching death?"

"I have always believed that. I can hardly see how anyone could doubt
it."

"Well, Charley, I did. I was a graceless, light-headed young wight,
you know, and serious things made no impression on me. If I thought
about it at all, it was to put it down to fancy; or a dream, as Mr.
Penthorn said; and I don't believe I've ever had the thing in my mind
from that time to this."

"And why should it come back to you now?" I asked.

"Because," answered Tom, "I think I have had a similar warning."

He spoke very calmly. I looked at him. He was sitting upright on the
sofa now, his feet stretched out on a warm wool footstool, the quilt
lying across his knees, and his hands resting upon it.

"What can you mean, Tom?"

"It was last night," he answered; "or, rather, this morning. I was in
bed, and pretty soundly asleep, for me, and I began to dream. I
thought I saw my father come in through the door, that one opening to
the passage, cross the room and sit down by the bedside with his face
turned to me. I mean my own father, Colonel Heriot. He looked just as
he used to look; not a day older; his fine figure erect, his bright,
wavy hair brushed off his brow as he always wore it, his blue eyes
smiling and kindly. I was not in the least surprised to see him; his
coming in seemed to be quite a matter of course. 'Well, Thomas,' he
began, looking at me after he had sat down; 'we have been parted for
some time, and I have much to say to you.' 'Say it now, papa,' I
answered, going back in my dream to the language of childhood's days.
'There's not time now,' he replied; 'we must wait a little yet; it
won't be long, Thomas.' Then I saw him rise from the chair, re-cross
the room to the door, turn to look at me with a smile, and go out,
leaving the door open. I awoke in a moment; at the very moment, I am
certain; and for some little time I could not persuade myself that
what had passed was not reality. The chair in which he had sat stood
at the bedside, and the door was wide open."

"But I suppose the chair had been there all night, and that someone
was sitting up with you? Whoever it was must have opened the door."

"The chair had been there all night," assented Tom. "But the door had
_not_ been opened by human hands, so far as I can learn. It was old
Faith's turn to sit up last night--that worthy old soul of a servant
who has clung to the Lennards through all their misfortunes. Finding
that I slept comfortably, Faith had fallen asleep too in the big chair
in that corner behind you. She declared that the door had been firmly
shut--and I believe she thought it was I who had got up and opened
it."

"It was a dream, Tom."

"Granted. But it was a warning. It came--nay, who can say it was not
_he_ who came?--to show me that I shall soon be with him. We shall
have time, and to spare, to talk then. I have never had so vivid a
dream in my life; or one that so left behind it the impression that it
had been reality."

"Well----"

"Look here," he interrupted. "Your father said, if you remember, that
the visit paid to him, whether real or imaginary, by his wife, and the
words she spoke, had revived within him his recollections of her
voice, which had in a slight degree begun to fade. Well, Charles, I
give you my word that I had partly forgotten my father's appearance; I
was only a little fellow when he died; but his visit to me in my dream
last night has brought it back most vividly. Come, you wise old
lawyer, what do you say to that?"

"I don't know, Tom. Such things _are_, I suppose."

"If I got well and lived to be a hundred years old, I should never
laugh at them again."

"Did you tell Leah this when she was here to-day?"

"Ay; and of course she burst out crying. 'Take it as it's meant,
Master Tom,' said she, 'and prepare yourself. It is your warning.'
Just as she had told your father, Charles, that that other was _his_
warning. She was right then; she is right now."

"You cannot know it. And you must not let this trouble you."

"It does not trouble me," he answered quickly. "Rather the contrary,
for it sets my mind at rest. I have had little hope of myself for some
time past; I have had none, so to say, since that sudden attack a few
nights ago; nevertheless, I won't say but a grain of it may have still
deluded me now and again. Hope is the last thing we part with in this
world, you know, lad. But this dream-visit of my father has shown me
the truth beyond all doubt; and now I have only to make my packet, as
the French say, and wait for the signal to start."

We talked together a little longer, but my time was up. I left him for
the night and apparently in the best of spirits.

Lennard was alone in his parlour when I got downstairs. I asked him
whether he had heard of this fancy of Tom's about the dream.

"Yes," he answered. "He told me about it this evening, when I was
sitting with him after tea; but he did not seem at all depressed by
it. I don't think it matters much either way," added Lennard
thoughtfully, "for the end cannot be far off now."

"He has an idea that Purfleet guesses who he really is."

"But he has no grounds for saying it," returned Lennard. "Purfleet
heard when he was first called in that 'Mr. Brown' wished to be kept
_en cachette_, if I may so put it; but that he should guess him to be
Captain Heriot is quite improbable. Because Captain Heriot is aware of
his own identity, he assumes that other people must needs be aware of
it."

"One might trust Purfleet not to betray him, I fancy, if he does guess
it?"

"That I am sure of," said Lennard warmly. "He is kind and benevolent.
Most medical men are so from their frequent contact with the dark
shades of life, whether of sickness or of sorrow. As to Purfleet, he
is too hard-worked, poor man, to have much leisure for speculating
upon the affairs of other people."

"Wren is still walking about here."

"Yes; but I think he has been put upon this beat in the ordinary way
of things, not that he is looking after anyone in particular. Mr.
Strange, if he had any suspicion of Captain Heriot in Lambeth, he
would have taken him; he would have taken him again when in Southwark;
and he would, ere this, have taken him here. Wren appears to be one of
those gossiping men who must talk to everybody; and I believe that is
all the mystery."

Wishing Lennard good-night, I went home to Essex Street, and sat down
to write to Lord Level. He would not receive the letter at Marshdale
until the following afternoon, but it would be in time for him to
answer me by the evening post.




CHAPTER X.

LAST WORDS.


The next day, Tuesday, I was very busy, hurrying forward to get down
to Clapham in time for dinner in the evening. Lennard's report in the
morning had been that Captain Heriot was no worse, and that Mr.
Purfleet, who had paid him an early visit, said there might be no
change for a week or more.

In the afternoon I received a brief note from Mr. Serjeant
Stillingfar, asking me to be in Russell Square the following morning
by eight o'clock: he wished to see me very particularly.

Knowing that when he named any special hour he meant it, and that he
expected everyone who had dealings with him to be as punctual as
himself, I came up to town on the Wednesday morning, and was at his
house a few minutes before eight o'clock. The Serjeant was just
sitting down to breakfast.

"Will you take some, Charles?" he asked.

"No, thank you, uncle. I have just come up from Clapham, and
breakfasted before starting."

"How is Mrs. Brightman going on?"

"Quite well. It will be a long job, the doctors say, from something
unusual connected with the fracture, but nothing dangerous."

"Sit down, Charles," he said. "And tell me at once. Is Captain
Heriot," lowering his voice, "in a state to be got away?"

The words did not surprise me. The whole night it had been in my mind
that the Serjeant's mandate concerned Tom Heriot.

"No; it would be impossible," I answered. "He has to be moved gently,
from bed to sofa, and can only walk, if he attempts it at all, by
being helped on both sides. Three or four days ago, a vessel on the
lungs broke; any undue exertion would at once be fatal."

"Then, do I understand you that he is actually dying?"

"Undoubtedly he is, sir. I was with him on Monday night, and saw in
his face the gray hue which is the precursor of death. I am sure I was
not mistaken----"

"That peculiar hue can never be mistaken by those who have learnt from
sad experience," he interrupted dreamily.

"He may linger on a few days, even a week or so, I believe the doctor
thinks, but death is certainly on its road; and he must die where he
is, Uncle Stillingfar. He cannot be again moved."

The Serjeant sat silent for a few moments. "It is very unfortunate,
Charles," he resumed. "Could he have been got away it would be better
for him, better for you all. Though, in truth, it is not I who ought
to suggest it, as you well know; but sometimes one's private and
public duties oppose each other."

"Have you heard anything, uncle?"

"I have heard from a sure source that the authorities know that
Captain Heriot is in London. They know it positively: but not, I
think, where he is concealed. The search for him will now commence in
earnest."

"It is, indeed, unfortunate. I have been hoping he would be left to
die in peace. One thing is certain: if the police find him they can
only let him remain where he is. They cannot remove him."

"Then nothing can be done: things must take their course," sighed the
Serjeant. "You must take precautions yourself, Charles. Most probably
the movements of those connected with him will now be watched, in the
hope that they may afford a clue to his hiding-place."

"I cannot abandon him, Uncle Stillingfar. I must see him to the end.
We have been as brothers, you know. He wants to see Blanche, and I
have written about it to Lord Level."

"Well, well, I cannot advise; I wish I could," he replied. "But I
thought it my duty to let you know this."

"A few days will, in any case, see the ending," I whispered as I bade
him goodbye. "Thank you for all your sympathy, uncle."

"My boy, there is One above," raising his hand reverently, "who has
more pity for us than we have for one another. He can keep him in
peace yet. Don't forget that, Charles."

To my office, then, and the morning letters. Amidst them lay Lord
Level's answer. Some of its contents surprised me.

     "Marshdale House,

     "Tuesday Evening.

     "DEAR CHARLES,

     "If you like to undertake the arrangement of the visit you
     propose, do so. I have no objection. For some little time now
     I have thought that it might be better that my wife should know
     the truth. You see she is, and has been, liable to hear it at
     any moment through some untoward revelation, for which she
     would not be prepared; and the care I have taken to avoid this
     has not only been sometimes inconvenient to myself, but
     misconstrued by Blanche. When we were moving about after our
     marriage, I kept her in unfrequented places, as far as I could,
     to spare her the chance of this; men's lips were full of it
     just then, as you know. Blanche resented that bitterly, putting
     it all down to some curious purposes of my own. Let her hear
     the truth now. I am not on the spot to impart it to her myself,
     and shall be glad if you will do so. Afterwards you can take
     her to see the invalid. I am sorry for what you say of his
     state. Tell him so: and that he has my sympathy and best
     wishes.

     "Blanche has been favouring me lately with some letters written
     in anything but a complimentary strain. One that I received
     this morning coolly informs me that she is about to 'Take
     immediate steps to obtain a formal separation, if not a
     divorce.' I am not able to travel to London and settle things
     with her, and have written to her to tell her to come here to
     me. The fact is, I am ill. Strange to say, the same sort of low
     fever which attacked me when I was at Marshdale last autumn has
     returned upon me now. It is not as bad as it was then, but I am
     confined to bed. Spare the time to bring Blanche down, there's
     a good fellow. I have told her that you will do so. Come on
     Thursday if convenient to you, and remain the night. She shall
     hear what I have to say to her; after that, she can talk of a
     separation if she likes. You shall hear it also.

                                             "Ever truly yours,

                                                     "LEVEL."

Whilst deliberating upon the contents of this letter, and how I could
best carry out its requests, Lennard came in, as usual on his arrival
for the day, to give me his report of Tom Heriot. There was not any
apparent change in him, he said, either for the better or the worse. I
informed Lennard of what I had just heard from the Serjeant.

Then I despatched a clerk to Gloucester Place with a note for Blanche,
telling her I should be with her early in the evening, and that she
must not fail to be at home, as my business was important.

Twilight was falling when I arrived. Blanche sat at one of the windows
in the drawing-room, looking listlessly into the street in the fading
light. Old Mrs. Guy, who was staying with her, was lying on the
dining-room sofa, Blanche said, having retired to it and fallen asleep
after dinner.

How lovely Blanche looked; but how cross! She wore a pale blue silk,
her favourite colour, with a gold necklace and open bracelets, from
which drooped a heart set with sapphires and diamonds; and her fair,
silken hair looked as if she had been impatiently pushing it about.

"I know what you have come for, Charles," she said in fretful tones,
as I sat down near her. "Lord Level prepared me in a letter I received
from him this morning."

"Indeed!" I answered lightly. "What did the preparation consist of?"

"I wrote to him," said Blanche. "I have written to him more than once,
telling him I am about to get a separation. In answer, my lord
commands me down to Marshdale"--very resentfully--"and says you are to
take me down."

"All quite right, Blanche; quite true, so far. But----"

"But I don't know that I shall go. I think I shall not go."

"A wife should obey her husband's commands."

"I do not intend to be his wife any longer. And you cannot wish me to
be, Charles; you ought not to wish it. Lord Level's conduct is simply
shameful. What right has he to stay at Marshdale--amusing himself down
there?"

"I fancy he cannot help staying there at present. Has he told you he
is ill?"

She glanced quickly round at me.

"Has he told _you_ that he is so?"

"Yes, Blanche; he has. He is too ill to travel."

She paused for a moment, and then tossed back her pretty hair with a
scornful hand.

"And you believed him! Anything for an excuse. He is no more ill than
I am, Charles; rely upon that."

"But I am certain----"

"Don't go on," she interrupted, tapping her dainty black satin slipper
on the carpet; a petulant movement to which Blanche was given, even as
a child. "If you have come for the purpose of whitening my husband to
me, as papa is always doing. I will not listen to you."

"You will not listen to any sort of reasoning whatever. I see that, my
dear."

"Reasoning, indeed!" she retorted. "Say sophistry."

"Listen for an instant, Blanche; consider this one little item: I
believe Lord Level to be ill, confined to his bed with low fever, as
he tells me; you refuse to believe it; you say he is well. Now,
considering that he expects us both to be at Marshdale to-morrow, can
you not perceive how entirely, ridiculously void of purpose it would
be for him to say he is seriously ill if he is not so?"

"I don't care," said my young lady. "He is deeper than any fox."

"Blanche, my opinion is, and you are aware of it, that you misjudge
your husband. Upon one or two points I _know_ you do. But I did not
come here to discuss these unpleasant topics--you are in error there,
you see. I came upon a widely different matter: to disclose something
to you that will very greatly distress you, and I am grieved to be
obliged to do it."

The words changed her mood. She looked half frightened.

"Oh!" she burst forth, before I had time to say another word. "Is it
my husband? You say he is ill! He is not dead?"

"My dear, be calm. It is not about your husband at all. It is about
some one else, though, who is very ill--Tom Heriot."

Grieved she no doubt was; but the relief that crept into her face,
tone and attitude proved that the one man was little to her compared
with the other, and that she loved her husband yet with an impassioned
love.

By degrees, softening the facts as much as possible, I told the tale.
Of Tom's apprehension about the time of her marriage; his trial which
followed close upon it; his conviction, and departure for a penal
settlement; his escape; his return to England; his concealments to
evade detection; his illness; and his present state. Blanche shivered
and cried as she listened, and finally fell upon her knees, and buried
her face in the cushions of the chair.

"And is there _no_ hope for him, Charles?" she said, looking up after
a while.

"My dear, there is no hope. And, under the circumstances, it is
happier for him to die than to continue to live. But he would like to
see you, Blanche."

"Poor Tom! Poor Tom! Can we go to him now--this evening?"

"Yes; it is what I came to propose. It is the best time. He----"

"Shall I order the carriage?"

The interruption made me laugh. My Lord Level's state carriage and
powdered servants at that poor fugitive's door!

"My dear, we must go in the quietest manner. We will take a cab as we
walk along, and get out of it before turning into the street where he
is lying. Change this blue silk for one of the plainest dresses that
you have, and wear a close bonnet and a veil."

"Oh, of course; I see. Charles, I am too thoughtless."

"Wait an instant," I said, arresting her as she was crossing the room.
"I must return for a moment to our controversy touching your husband.
You complained bitterly of him last year for secluding you in dull,
remote parts of the Continent, and especially for keeping you away
from England. You took up the notion, and proclaimed it to those who
would listen to you, that it was to serve his own purposes. Do you
remember this?"

"Well?" said Blanche timidly, her colour coming and going as she stood
with her hands on the table. "He did keep me away; he did seclude me."

"It was done out of love for you, Blanche. Whilst your heart felt
nothing but reproach for him, his was filled with care and
consideration for you; where to keep you, how to guard you from
hearing of the disgrace and trouble that had overtaken your brother.
_We_ knew--I and Mr. Brightman--Lord Level's motive; and Major Carlen
knew. I believe Level would have given years of his life to save you
from the knowledge always and secure you peace. Now, Blanche, my dear,
as you perceive that, at least in that one respect, you misjudged him
then, do you not think you may be misjudging him still?"

She burst into tears. "No, I don't think so," she said. "I wish I
could think so. You know that he maintains some dreadful secret at
Marshdale; and that--that--wicked Italians are often staying
there--singers perhaps; I shouldn't wonder; or ballet-dancers--anyway,
people who can have no right and no business to be there. You know
that one of them stabbed him--Oh yes, she did, and it was a woman with
long hair."

"I do not know anything of the kind."

"Charles, you look at me reproachfully, as if the blame lay with me
instead of him. Can't you see what a misery it all is for me, and that
it is wearing my life away?" she cried passionately, the tears falling
from her eyes. "I would rather _die_ than separate from him, if I were
not forced to it by the goings on at that wretched Marshdale. What
will life be worth to me, parted from him? I look forward to it with a
sick dread. Charles, I do indeed; and now, when I know--what--is
perhaps--coming----"

Blanche suddenly crossed her arms upon the table, hid her face upon
them, and sobbed bitterly.

"What is perhaps coming?"

"I'm afraid it is, Charles."

"But what is?"

"An heir, perhaps."

It was some moments before I took in the sense of the words. Then I
laughed.

"Oh well, Blanche! Of course you ought to talk of separation with
_that_ in prospect! Go and put your things on, you silly child: the
evening is wearing away."

And she left the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Side by side on the sofa, Blanche's fair head pillowed upon his
breast, his arm thrown round her. She had taken off her bonnet and
mantle, and was crying quietly.

"Be calm, my dear sister. It is all for the best."

"Tom, Tom, how came you to do it?"

"I didn't do it, my dear one. That's where they were mistaken. I
should be no more capable of doing such a thing than you are."

"Then why did they condemn you--and say you were guilty?"

"They knew no better. The guilty man escaped, and I suffered."

"But why did you not tell the truth? Why did you not accuse him to the
judge?"

"I told the judge I was innocent; but that is what most prisoners say,
and it made no impression on him," replied Tom. "For the rest, I did
not understand the affair as well as I did after the trial. All had
been so hurried; there was no time for anything. Yes, Blanche, you may
at least take this solitary bit of consolation to your heart--that I
was not guilty."

"And that other man, who was?" she asked eagerly, lifting her face.
"Where is he?"

"Flourishing," said Tom. "Driving about the world four-in-hand, no
doubt, and taking someone else in as he took me."

Blanche turned to me, looking haughty enough.

"Charles, cannot anything be done to expose the man?" she cried. Tom
spoke again before I could answer.

"It will not matter to me then, one way or the other. But, Charley, I
do sometimes wish, as I lie thinking, that the truth might be made
known and my memory cleared. I was reckless and foolish enough, heaven
knows, but I never did that for which I was tried and sentenced."

Now, since we had been convinced of Tom Heriot's innocence, the
question whether it would be possible to clear him before the world
had often been in my mind. Lake and I had discussed it more than once.
It would be difficult, no doubt, but it was just possible that time
might place some advantage in our hands and open up a way to us. I
mentioned this now.

"Ay, difficult enough, I dare say," commented Tom. "With a hundred
barriers in the way--eh, Charley?"

"The chief difficulty would lie, I believe, in the fact you
acknowledged just now, Tom--your own folly. People argue--they argued
at the time--that a young man so reckless as you were would not stick
at a trifle."

"Just so," replied Tom with equanimity. "I ought to have pulled up
before, and--I did not. Well; you know my innocence, and now Blanche
knows it, and Level knows it, and old Carlen knows it; you are about
all that are near to me; and the public must be left to chance.
There's one good man, though, I should like to know it, Charles, and
that's Serjeant Stillingfar."

"He knows it already, Tom. Be at ease on that score."

"Does _he_ think, I wonder, that my memory might ever be cleared?"

"He thinks it would be easier to clear you than it would be to trace
the guilt to its proper quarter; but the one, you see, rests upon the
other. There are no proofs, that we know of, to bring forward of that
man's guilt; and----"

"He took precious good care there should be none," interrupted Tom.
"Let Anstey alone for protecting himself."

"Just so. But--I was going to say--the Serjeant thinks you have one
chance in your favour. It is this: The man, Anstey, being what he is,
will probably fall into some worse crime which cannot be hidden or
hushed up. When conviction overtakes him, he may be induced to confess
that it was he, and not Captain Heriot, who bore the lion's share in
that past exploit for which you suffered. Rely upon this, Tom--should
any such chance of clearing your memory present itself, it will not be
neglected. I shall be on the watch always."

There was silence for a time. Tom was leaning back, pale and
exhausted, his breath was short, his face gray, wan and wasted.

"Has Leah been to see you?" Blanche asked him.

"Yes, twice; and she considers herself very hardly dealt by that she
may not come here to nurse me," he replied.

"Could she not be here?"

I shook my head. "It would not be safe, Blanche. It would be running
another risk. You see, trouble would fall upon others as well as Tom,
were he discovered now: upon me, and more especially upon Lennard."

"They would be brought to trial for concealing me, just as I was
brought to trial for a different crime," said Tom lightly. "Our
English laws are comprehensive, I assure you, Blanche. Poor Leah says
it is cruel not to let her see the end. I asked her what good she'd
derive from it."

Blanche gave a sobbing sigh. "How can you talk so lightly, Tom?"

"Lightly!" he cried, in apparent astonishment. "I don't myself see
very much that's light in that. When the end is at hand, Blanche, why
ignore it?"

She turned her face again to him, burying it upon his arm, in utmost
sorrow.

"Don't, Blanche!" he said, his voice trembling. "There's nothing to
cry for; nothing. My darling sister, can't you see what a life mine
has been for months past: pain of body, distress and apprehension of
mind! Think what a glorious change it will be to leave all this for
Heaven!"

"Are you _sure_ of going there, dear?" she whispered. "Have you made
your peace?"

Tom smiled at her. Tears were in his own eyes.

"I think so. Do you remember that wonderful answer to the petition of
the thief on the cross? The promise came back to him at once, on the
instant: 'Verily, I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be with Me in
Paradise.' He had been as much of a sinner as I, Blanche."

Blanche was crying softly. Tom held her to him.

"Imagine," he said, "how the change must have broken on that poor man.
To pass from the sorrow and suffering of this life into the realms of
Paradise! There was no question as to his fitness, you see, or whether
he had been good or bad; all the sin of the past was condoned when he
took his humble appeal to his Redeemer: 'Lord, remember me when Thou
comest into Thy kingdom!' Blanche, my dear, I know that He will also
remember me."




CHAPTER XI.

DOWN AT MARSHDALE.


It was Thursday morning, the day on which Blanche Level was to travel
to Marshdale. She sat in her dining-room at Gloucester Place, her
fingers busy over some delicate fancy-work, her thoughts divided
between the sad interview she had held with Tom Heriot the previous
night, and the forthcoming interview with her husband; whilst her
attention was partially given to old Mrs. Guy, who sat in an
easy-chair by the fire, a thick plaid shawl on her shoulders and her
feet on the fender, recounting the history of an extraordinary pain
which had attacked her in the night. But as Mrs. Guy rarely passed a
night without experiencing some extraordinary pain or other, Blanche
listened absently.

"It is the heart, my dear; I am becoming sure of that," said the old
lady. "Last year, if you remember, the physician put it down to
spleen; but when I go to him tomorrow and tell him of this dreadful
oppression, he will change his opinion."

"Don't you think you keep yourself too warm?" said Blanche, who looked
so cool and fresh in her pretty morning dress. "That shawl is heavy,
and the fire is warm; yet it is still quite summer weather."

"Ah, child, you young people call it summer weather all the year round
if the sun only shines. When you get to be my age, Blanche, you will
know what cold means. I dare say you'll go flying off to Marshdale
this afternoon in that gossamer dress you have on, or one as thin and
flowing."

"No, I shan't," laughed Blanche; "it would be tumbled and spoilt by
the time I got there. I shall go in that pretty new gray cashmere,
trimmed with silk brocade."

"That's a lovely dress, child; too good to travel in. And you tell me
you will be back to-morrow. I don't think that very likely, my
dear----"

"But I intend to be," interrupted Blanche.

"You will see," nodded the old lady. "When your husband gets you
there, he will keep you there. Give my love to him, Blanche, and say I
hope he will be in town before I go back to Jersey. I should like to
see him."

Blanche was not paying particular attention to this message. Her
attention was attracted by a telegraph boy, who seemed to be
approaching the door. The next moment there was a loud knock, which
made Mrs. Guy start. Blanche explained that it was a telegram.

"Oh, dear," cried the old lady. "I don't like telegrams; they always
give me a turn. Perhaps it's come from Jersey to say my house is
burned down."

The telegram, however, had come from Marshdale. It was addressed to
Lady Level, and proved to be from her husband.

     "_Do not come to Marshdale to-day. Put it off until next week.
     I am writing to you. Wait for letter. Let Charles know._"

Now my Lady Level, staring at the message, and being in chronic
resentment against her husband, all sorts of unorthodox suspicions
rife within her, put the worst possible construction upon this
mandate.

"I _knew_ how much he would have me at Marshdale!" she exclaimed in
anger, as she tossed the telegram on the table. "'Don't come down till
next week! Wait for letter!' Yes, and next week there'll come another
message, telling me I am not to go at all, or that he will be back
here. It _is_ a shame!"

"But what is it?" cried old Mrs. Guy, who did not understand, and knew
nothing of any misunderstanding between Blanche and her husband. "Not
to go, you say? Is his lordship ill?"

"Oh, of course; very ill, indeed," returned Blanche, suppressing the
scorn she felt.

Putting the telegram into an envelope, she addressed it to me, called
Sanders, and bade him take it at once to my office. He did so. But I
had also received one to the same effect from Lord Level, who, I
suppose, concluded it best to send to me direct. Telling Sanders I
would call on Lady Level that evening, I thought no more about the
matter, and was glad, rather than otherwise, that the journey to
Marshdale was delayed. This chapter, however, has to do with Blanche,
and not with me.

Now, whether the step that Lady Level took had its rise in an innocent
remark made by Mrs. Guy, or whether it was the result of her own
indignant feeling, cannot be told. "My dear," said the old lady, "if
my husband were ill, I should go to him all the more." And that was
just what Blanche Level resolved to do.

The previous arrangement had been that she should drive to my office,
to save me time, pick me up, and so onwards to Victoria Station, to
take the four o'clock train, which would land us at Marshdale in an
hour.

"My dear, I thought I understood that you were not going to Marshdale;
that the telegram stopped you," said Mrs. Guy, hearing Blanche give
orders for the carriage to be at the door at a quarter past three to
convey her to Victoria, and perceiving also that she was making
preparations for a journey.

"But I intend to go all the same," replied Blanche. "And look here,
dear Mrs. Guy, Charles has sent me word that he will call here this
evening. When he comes, please give him this little note. You won't
forget?"

"Not I, child. Major Carlen is always telling me I am silly; but I'm
not silly enough to forget messages."

The barouche waited at the door at the appointed time, and Lady Level
was driven to Victoria, where she took train for Marshdale. Five
o'clock was striking out from Lower Marshdale Church when she arrived
at Marshdale Station.

"Get out here, miss?" asked the porter, who saw Lady Level trying to
open the door.

"Yes."

"Any luggage?"

"Only this bag," replied Lady Level.

The man took charge of it, and she alighted. Traversing the little
roadside station, she looked to where the fly generally stood; but no
fly was there. The station-master waited for her ticket.

"Is the fly not here?" she inquired.

"Seems not," answered the master indifferently. But as he spoke he
recognised Lady Level.

"I beg your pardon, my lady. The fly went off with some passengers who
alighted from the last up-train; it's not back yet."

"Will it be long, do you know?"

"Well--I---- James," he called to the porter, "where did the fly go
to?"

"Over to Dimsdale," replied the man.

"Then it won't be back for half an hour yet, my lady," said the
station-master to Lady Level.

"Oh, I can't wait all that time," she returned, rather impatiently. "I
will walk. Will you be good enough to send my bag after me?"

"I'll send it directly, my lady."

She was stepping from the little platform when a thought struck her,
and she turned to ask a question of the station-master. "Is it safe to
cross the fields now? I remember it was said not to be so when I was
here last."

"On account of Farmer Piggot's bull," replied he. "The fields are
quite safe now, my lady; the bull has been taken away."

Lady Level passed in at the little gate, which stood a few yards down
the road, and was the entrance to the field-way which led to
Marshdale House. It was a warm evening, calm and sunny; not a leaf
stirred; all nature seemed at rest.

"What will Archibald say to me?" she wondered, her thoughts busy. "He
will fly into a passion, perhaps. I can't help it if he does. I am
determined now to find out why I am kept away from Marshdale and why
he is for ever coming to it. This underhand work has been going on too
long."

At this moment, a whistle behind her, loud and shrill, caused her to
turn. She was then crossing the first field. In the distance she
espied a boy striding towards her: and soon recognised him for the
surly boy, Sam Doughty. He carried her bag, and vouchsafed her a short
nod as he came up.

"How are you, Sam?" she asked pleasantly.

"Didn't think about its being you," was Sam's imperturbable answer, as
he walked on beside her. "When they disturbs me at my tea and says I
must go right off that there same moment with a passenger's bag for
Marshdale House, I took it to be my lord's at least."

"Did they not let you finish your tea?" said Lady Level with a smile.

"Catch 'em," retorted Sam, in a tone of resentment. "Catch 'em a
letting me stop for a bite or a sup when there's work to do; no, not
if I was starving for 't. The master, he's a regular stinger for being
down upon a fellow's work, and t'other's a----I say," broke off Mr.
Sam, "did you ever know a rat?--one what keeps ferreting his nose into
everything as don't concern him? Then you've knowed James Runn."

"James Runn is the porter, I suppose?" said Lady Level, much amused.

"Well, he is, and the biggest sneak as ever growed. What did he go and
do last week? We had a lot o' passengers to get off by the down train
to Dover, the people from the Grange it were, and a sight o' trunks.
I'd been helping to stow the things in the luggage-van, and the
footman, as he was getting into his second-class carriage, holds out a
shilling, open handed. I'd got my fingers upon it, I had, when that
there James Runn, that rascally porter, clutches hold of it and says
it were meant for him, not for me. I wish he was gone, I do!"

"The bull is gone, I hear," remarked Lady Level.

"Oh, he have been gone this long time from here," replied the boy,
shifting the bag from one shoulder to the other. "He took to run at
folks reg'lar, he did; such fun it were to hear 'em squawk! One old
woman in a red shawl he took and tossed. Mr. Drewitt up at the House
interfered then, and told Farmer Piggot the bull must be moved; so the
farmer put him over yonder on t'other side his farm into the two-acre
meadow, which haven't got no right o' way through it. I wish he had
tossed that there James Runn first and done for him!" deliberately
avowed Sam, again shifting his burden.

"You appear to find that bag heavy," remarked Lady Level.

"It's not that heavy, so to say," acknowledged the surly boy; "it's
that I be famishing for my tea. Oh, that there Runn's vicious, he
is!--a sending me off when I'd hardly took a mouthful!"

"Well, I could not carry it myself," she said laughingly.

"_He_ might ha' brought it; he had swallowed down his own tea, he had.
It's not so much he does--just rushes up to the doors o' the trains
when they comes in, on the look out for what may be give to him,
making believe he's letting folks in and out o' the carriages. I see
my lord give him a shilling t'other day; that I did."

"When my lord arrived here, do you mean?"

"No, 'twarn't that day, 'twere another. My lord comes on to the
station asking about a parcel he were expecting of. Mr. Noakes, he
were gone to his dinner, and that there Runn answered my lord that he
had just took the parcel to Marshdale House and left it with Mr. Snow.
Upon which my lord puts his hand in his pocket and gives him a
shilling. I see it."

Lady Level laughed. It was impossible to help it. Sam's tone was so
intensely wrathful.

"Do you see much of Lord Level?" she asked.

"I've not see'd him about for some days. It's said he's ill."

"What is the matter with him?"

"Don't know," said Sam. "It were Dr. Hill's young man, Mitcham, I
heard say it. Mother sent me last night to Dr. Hill's for her physic,
and Mr. Mitcham he said he had not been told naught about her physic,
but he'd ask the doctor when he came back from attending upon my Lord
Level."

"Is your mother ill?" inquired Sam's listener.

"She be that bad, she be, as to be more fit to be a-bed nor up,"
replied the boy: and his voice really took a softer tone as he spoke
of his mother. "It were twins this last time, you see, and there's
such a lot to do for 'em all, mother can't spare a minute in the day
to lie by: and father's wages don't go so fur as they did when there
was less mouths at home."

"How many brothers and sisters have you?"

"Five," said Sam, "not counting the twins, which makes seven. I be the
eldest, and I makes eight. And, if ever I does get a shilling or a
sixpence gived me, I takes it right home to mother. I wish them there
two twins had kept away," continued Sam spitefully; "mother had her
hands full without them. Squalling things they both be."

Thus, listening to the boy's confidences, Lady Level came to the
little green gate which opened to the side of the garden at Marshdale
House. Sam carried the bag to the front door. No one was to be seen.
All things, indoors and out, seemed intensely quiet.

"You can put it down here, Sam," said Lady Level, producing
half-a-crown. "Will you give this to your mother if I give it to you?"

"I always gives her everything as is gived to me," returned Sam
resentfully. "I telled ye so."

Slipping it into his pocket, the boy set off again across the fields.
Lady Level rang the bell gently. Somehow she was not feeling so well
satisfied with herself for having come as she felt when she started.
Deborah opened the door.

"Oh, my lady!" she exclaimed in surprise, but speaking in a whisper.

"My bag is outside," said Lady Level, walking forward to the first
sitting-room, the door of which stood open. Mrs. Edwards met her.

"Dear, dear!" exclaimed the old lady, lifting her hands. "Then Snow
never sent those messages off properly after all! My lady, I am sorry
you should have come."

"I thought I was expected, Mrs. Edwards, and Mr. Strange with me,"
returned Blanche coldly.

"True, my lady, so you were; but a telegram was sent off this morning
to stop you. Two telegrams went, one to your ladyship and one to Mr.
Strange. It was I gave the order from my lord to Snow, and I thought I
might as well send one also to Mr. Strange, though his lordship said
nothing about it."

"But why was I stopped?" questioned Blanche.

"On account of my lord's increased illness," replied Mrs. Edwards. "He
grew much worse in the night; and when Mr. Hill saw how it was with
him this morning, he said your ladyship's visit must be put off. Mr.
Hill is with him now."

"Of what nature is his illness?"

"My lady, he has not been very well since he came down. When he got
here we remarked that he seemed low-spirited. In a few days he began
to be feverish, and asked me to get him some lemonade made. Quarts of
it he drank: cook protested there'd be a failure of lemons in the
village. 'It is last year's fever back again,' said his lordship to
me, speaking in jest. But, strange to say, he might as well have
spoken in earnest, for it turns out to be the same sort of fever
precisely."

"Is he very ill?"

"He is very ill indeed to-day," answered Mrs. Edwards. "Until this
morning it was thought to be a light attack, no danger attending it,
nor any symptom of delirium. But that has all changed, and this
afternoon he is slightly delirious."

"Is there--danger?" cried Blanche.

"Mr. Hill says not, my lady. Not yet, at all events. But--here he is,"
broke off Mrs. Edwards, as the doctor's step was heard. "He will be
able to explain more of the illness to your ladyship than I can."

She left the room as Mr. Hill entered it. The same cheerful, hearty
man that Blanche had known last year, with a fine brow and benevolent
countenance. Blanche shook hands with him, and he sat down near her.

"So you did not get the telegram," he began, after greeting her.

"I did get it," answered Blanche, feeling rather ashamed to be obliged
to confess it. "But I--I was ready, and I thought I would come all the
same."

"It is a pity," said Mr. Hill. "You must not let your husband see you.
Indeed, the best thing you can do will be to go back again."

"But why?" asked Blanche, turning obstinate. "What have I done to him
that he may not see me?"

"You don't understand, child," said the surgeon, speaking in his
fatherly way. "His lordship is in a critical state, the disease having
manifested itself with alarming rapidity. If he can be kept perfectly
calm and still, its progress may be arrested and danger averted. If
not, it will assuredly turn to brain-fever and must run its course.
Anything likely to rouse him in the smallest degree, no matter
whether it be pleasure or pain, must be absolutely kept from him. Only
the sight of you might bring on an excitement that might be--well, I
was going to say fatal. That is why I suggested to his lordship to
send off the telegram."

"You knew I was coming down, then?" said Blanche.

"My dear, I did know; and---- But, bless me, I ought to apologize to
your ladyship for my familiarity of speech," broke off the kindly
doctor, with a smile.

Blanche answered by smiling too, and putting her hand into his.

"I lost a daughter when she was about your age, my dear; you put me in
mind of her; I said so to Mrs. Edwards when you were here last autumn.
She was my only child, and my wife was already gone. Well, well! But
that's beside the present question," he added briskly. "Will you go
back to town, Lady Level?"

"I would rather remain, now I am here," she answered. "At least, for a
day or two. I will take care not to show myself to Lord Level."

"Very well," said the doctor, rising. "Do not let him either hear you
or see you. I shall be in again at nine to-night."

"Who is nursing him?" asked Blanche.

"Mrs. Edwards. She is the best nurse in the world. Snow, the head
gardener, helps occasionally; he will watch by him to-night; and
Deborah fetches and carries."

Lady Level took contrition to herself as she sat alone. She had been
mentally accusing her husband of all sorts of things, whilst he was
really lying in peril of his life. Matters and mysteries pertaining to
Marshdale were not cleared up; but--Blanche could not discern any
particular mystery to wage war with just now.

Tea was served to her, and Blanche would not allow them to think of
dinner. Mrs. Edwards had a room prepared for her in a different
corridor from Lord Level's, so that he would not be in danger of
hearing her voice or footsteps.

Very lonely felt Blanche when twilight fell, as she sat at the window.
She thought she had never seen trees look so melancholy before, and
she recalled what Charles Strange had always said--that the sight of
trees in the gloaming caused him to be curiously depressed. Presently,
wrapping a blue cloud about her head and shoulders, she strolled out
of doors.

It was nearly dark now, and the overhanging trees made it darker.
Blanche strolled to the front gate and looked up and down the road.
Not a soul was about; not a sound broke the stillness. The house
behind her was gloomy enough; no light to be seen save the faint one
that burnt in Lord Level's chamber, whose windows faced this way; or a
flash that now and then appeared in the passages from a lamp carried
by someone moving about.

Blanche walked up and down, now in this path, now in that, now sitting
on a bench to think, under the dark trees. By-and-by, she heard the
front door open and someone come down the path, cross to the side
path, unlock the small door that led into the garden of the East Wing
and enter it. By the very faint light remaining, she thought she
recognised John Snow, the gardener.

She distinctly heard his footsteps pass up the other garden; she
distinctly heard the front door of the East Wing open to admit him,
and close again. Prompted by idle curiosity, Blanche also approached
the little door in the wall, found it shut, but not locked, opened it,
went in, advanced to where she had full view of the wing, and stood
gazing up at it. Like the other part of the house, it loomed out dark
and gloomy: the upper windows appeared to have outer bars before them;
at least, Blanche thought so. Only in one room was there any light.

It was in a lower room, a sitting-room, no doubt. The lamp, standing
on the centre table, was bright; the window was thrown up. Beside it
sat someone at work; crochet-work, or knitting, or tatting; something
or other done with the fingers. Mrs. Snow amusing herself, thought
Blanche at first; but in a moment she saw that it was not Mrs. Snow.
The face was dark and handsome, and the black hair was adorned with
black lace. With a sensation as of some mortal agony rushing and
whirling through her veins, Lady Level recognised her. It was Nina,
the Italian.

Nina, who had been the object of her suspicious jealousy; Nina, who
was, beyond doubt, the attraction that drew her husband to Marshdale;
and who, as she fully believed, had been the one to stab him a year
ago!

Blanche crept back to her own garden. Finding instinctively the
darkest seat it contained, she sat down upon it with a faint cry of
despair.




CHAPTER XII.

IN THE EAST WING.


What will not a jealous and angry woman do? On the next morning
(Friday) Blanche Level, believing herself to be more ignominiously
treated than ever wife was yet, despatched a couple of telegrams to
London, both of them slightly incomprehensible. One of the telegrams
was to Charles Strange, the other to Arnold Ravensworth; and both were
to the same effect--they must hasten down to Marshdale to her
"protection" and "rescue." And Mr. Ravensworth was requested to bring
his wife.

"She will be some little countenance for me; I'm sure I dare not
think how I must be looked upon here," mentally spoke my Lady Level in
her glowing indignation.

Lord Level was better. When Mr. Hill paid his early visit that Friday
morning, he pronounced him to be very much better; and John Snow said
his lordship had passed a quiet night. "If we can only keep him
tranquil to-day and to-night again, there will be no further danger
from the fever," Mr. Hill then observed to Lady Level.

The day went on, the reports from the sick-room continuing favourable:
my lord was lying tranquil, his mind clear. My lady, down below, was
anything but tranquil: rather she felt herself in a raging fever. In
the evening, quite late, the two gentlemen arrived from London, not
having been able to come earlier. Mrs. Ravensworth was not with them;
she could not leave her delicate baby. Lady Level had given orders for
chambers to be prepared.

After they had partaken of refreshments, which brought the time to ten
o'clock, Lady Level opened upon her grievances--past and present.
Modest and reticent though her language still was, she contrived to
convey sundry truths to them. From the early days of her marriage she
had unfortunately had cause to suspect Lord Level of disloyalty to
herself and of barefaced loyalty to another. Her own eyes had seen him
more than once with the girl called Nina at Pisa; had seen him at her
house, sitting side by side with her in her garden smoking and
talking--had heard him address her by her Christian name. This woman,
as she positively knew, had followed Lord Level to England; this woman
was harboured at Marshdale. She was in the house now, in its East
Wing. She, Blanche, had seen her there the previous evening.

Mr. Ravensworth's severe countenance took a stern expression as he
listened; he believed every word. Charles Strange (I am not speaking
just here in my own person) still thought there might be a mistake
somewhere. He could not readily take up so bad an opinion of Lord
Level, although circumstances did appear to tell against him. His
incredulity irritated Blanche.

"I will tell you, then, Charles, what I have never disclosed to mortal
man," she flashed forth, in a passionate whisper, bending forward her
pretty face, now growing whiter than death. "You remember that attack
upon Lord Level last autumn. You came down at the time, Arnold----"

"Yes, yes. What about it?"

"It was that woman who stabbed him!"

Neither spoke for a moment. "Nonsense, Blanche!" said Mr. Strange.

"But I tell you that it was. She was in night-clothes, or something of
that kind, and her black hair was falling about her; but I could not
mistake her Italian face."

Mr. Ravensworth did not forget Lady Level's curious behaviour at the
time; he had thought then she suspected someone in particular. "Are
you _sure_?" he asked her now.

"I am sure. And you must both see the danger I may be in whilst
here," she added, with a shiver. "That woman may try to stab me, as
she stabbed him. She must have stabbed him out of jealousy, because
I--her rival--was there."

"You had better quit the house the first thing in the morning, Lady
Level, and return to London," said Mr. Ravensworth.

"That I will not do," she promptly answered. "I will not leave
Marshdale until these shameful doings are investigated; and I have
sent for you to act on my behalf and bring them to light. No longer
shall the reproach be perpetually cast upon me by papa and Charles
Strange, that I complain of my husband without cause. It is my turn
now."

That something must be done, in justice to Lady Level, or at least
attempted, they both saw. But what, or how to set about it, neither of
them knew. They remained in consultation together long after Blanche
had retired to rest.

"We will go out at daybreak and have a look at the windows of this
East Wing," finally observed Mr. Ravensworth.

Perhaps that was easier said than done. With the gray light of early
morning they were both out of doors; but they could not find any
entrance to the East Wing. The door in the wall of the front garden
was locked; the entrance gates from the road were locked also. In the
garden at the back--it was more of a wilderness than a garden--they
discovered a small gate in a corner. It was completely overgrown with
trees and shrubs, and had evidently not been used for years and years.
But the wood had become rotten, the fastenings loose; and by their
united strength they opened it.

They found themselves in a very large space of ground indeed. Grass
was in the middle, quite a field of it; and round it a broad gravel
walk. Encompassing all on three sides rose a wide bank of shrubs and
overhanging trees. Beyond these again was a very high wall. On the
fourth side stood the East Wing, high and gloomy. Its windows were
all encased with iron bars, and the lower windows were whitened.

Taking a survey of all this, one of them softly whispering in
surprise, Mr. Ravensworth advanced to peer in at the windows. Of
course, being whitened, he had his trouble for his pains.

"It puts me in mind of a prison," remarked Charles Strange.

"It puts me in mind of a madhouse," was the laconic rejoinder of Mr.
Ravensworth.

They passed back through the gate again, Mr. Ravensworth turning to
take a last look. In that minute his eye was attracted to one of the
windows on the ground floor. It opened down the middle, like a French
one, and was being shaken, apparently with a view to opening it--and
if you are well acquainted with continental windows, or windows made
after their fashion, you may remember how long it has taken you to
shake a refractory window before it will obey. It was at length
effected, and in the opening, gazing with a vacant, silly expression
through the close bars, appeared a face. It remained in view but a
moment; the window was immediately closed again, Mr. Ravensworth
thought by another hand. What was the mystery?

That some mystery did exist at Marshdale, apart from any Italian
ladies who might have no fair right to be there, was pretty evident.
At breakfast the gentlemen related this little experience to Blanche.

Madame Blanche tossed her head in incredulity. "Don't be taken in,"
she answered. "Windows whitened and barred, indeed! It is all done
with a view to misleading people. She was sitting at the _open_ window
at work on Thursday night."

After breakfast, resolved no longer to be played with, Blanche
proceeded upstairs to Mr. Drewitt's rooms, her friends following her,
all three of them creeping by Lord Level's chamber-door with noiseless
steps. His lordship was getting better quite wonderfully, Mrs. Edwards
had told them.

The old gentleman, in his quaint costume, was in his sitting-room,
taking his breakfast alone. Mrs. Edwards took her meals anywhere, and
at any time, during her lord's illness. Hearing strange footsteps in
the corridor, he rose to see whose they were, and looked considerably
astonished.

"Does your ladyship want me?" he asked, bowing.

"I--yes, I think I do," answered Lady Level. "Who keeps the key of
that door, Mr. Drewitt?" pointing to the strong oaken door at the end
of the passage.

"I keep it, my lady."

"Then will you be kind enough to unlock it for me? These gentlemen
wish to examine the East Wing."

"The East Wing is private to his lordship," was the steward's reply,
addressing them all conjointly. "Without his authority I cannot open
it to anyone."

They stood contending a little while: it was like a repetition of the
scene that had been enacted there once before; and, like that, was
terminated by the same individual--the surgeon.

"It is all right, Mr. Drewitt." he said; "you can open the door of the
East Wing; I bear you my lord's orders. I am going in there to see a
patient," he added to the rest.

The steward produced a key from his pocket, and put it into the lock.
It was surprising that so small a key should open so massive a door.

They passed, wonderingly, through three rooms _en suite_: a
sitting-room, a bedroom, and a bath-room. All these rooms looked to
the back of the house. Other rooms there were on the same floor, which
the visitors did not touch upon. Descending the staircase, they
entered three similar rooms below. In the smaller one lay some
garden-tools, but of a less size than a grown man in his strength
would use, and by their side were certain toys: tops, hoops, ninepins,
and the like. The middle room was a sitting-room; the larger room
beyond had no furniture, and in that, standing over a humming-top,
which he had just set to spin on the floor, bent the singular figure
of a youth. He had a dark, vacant face, wild black eyes, and a mass of
thick black hair, cut short. This figure, a child's whip in his hand,
was whipping the top, and making a noise with his mouth in imitation
of its hum.

Half madman, half idiot, he stood out, in all his deep misfortune,
raising himself up and staring about him with a vacant stare. The
expression of Mr. Ravensworth's face changed to one of pity. "Who are
you?" he exclaimed in kindly tones. "What is your name?"

"Arnie!" was the mechanical answer, for brains and sense seemed to
have little to do with it; and, catching up his top, he backed against
the wall, and burst into a distressing laugh. Distressing to a
listener; not distressing to him, poor fellow.

"Who is he?" asked Mr. Ravensworth of the doctor.

"An imbecile."

"So I see. But what connection has he with Lord Level's family?"

"He is a connection, or he would not be here."

"Can he be--be--a son of Lord Level's?"

"A son!" interposed the steward, "and my lord but just married! No,
sir, he is not a son, he is none so near as that; he is but a
connection of the Level family."

The lad came forward from the wall where he was standing, and held out
his top to his old friend the doctor. "Do, do," he cried, spluttering
as he spoke.

"Nay, Arnie, you can set it up better than I: my back won't stoop
well, Arnie."

"Do, do," was the persistent request, the top held out still.

Mr. Ravensworth took it and set it up again, he looking on in greedy
eagerness, slobbering and making a noise with his mouth. Then his note
changed to a hum, and he whipped away as before.

"Why is he not put away in an asylum?" asked Mr. Ravensworth.

"Put away in an asylum!" retorted the old steward indignantly. "Where
could he be put to have the care and kindness that is bestowed upon
him here? Imbecile though he is, madman though he may be, he is dear
to me and my sister. We pass our lives tending him, in conjunction
with Snow and his wife, doing for him, soothing him: where else could
that be done? You don't know what you are saying, sir. My lord, who
received the charge from his father, comes down to see him: my lord
orders that everything should be done for his comfort. And do you
suppose it is fitting that his condition should be made public? The
fact of one being so afflicted is slur enough upon the race of Level,
without its being proclaimed abroad."

"It was he who attacked Lord Level last year?

"Yes, it was; and how he could have escaped to our part of the house
will be a marvel to me for ever. My sister says I could not have
slipped the bolt of the passage door as usual, but I know I did bolt
it. Arnie had been restless that day; he has restless fits; and I
suppose he could not sleep, and must have risen from his bed and come
to my sitting-room. On my table there I had left my pocket-knife, a
new knife, the blades bright and sharp; and this he must have picked
up and opened, and found his way with it to my lord's chamber. Why he
should have attacked him, or anyone else, I know not; he never had a
ferocious fit before."

"Never," assented Mr. Hill, in confirmation.

Mr. Drewitt continued: "He has been imbecile and harmless as you see
him now, but he has never disturbed us at night; he has, as I say,
fits of restlessness when he cannot sleep, but he is sufficiently
sensible to ring a bell communicating with Snow's chamber if he wants
anything. If ever he has rung, it has been to say he wants meat."

"Meat!"

The steward nodded. "But it has never been given to him. He is cunning
as a fox; they all are; and were we to begin giving him food in the
middle of the night we must continue to do it, or have no peace.
Eating is his one enjoyment in life, and he devours everything set
before him--meat especially. If we have any particular dainty upstairs
for dinner or supper, I generally take him in some. Deborah, I
believe, thinks I eat all that comes up, and sets me down for a
cannibal. He has a hot supper every night. About a year ago we got to
think it might be better for him to have a lighter one, and we tried
it for a week; but he moaned and cried all night long for his hot
meat, and we had to give it him again. The night this happened we had
veal cutlets and bacon, and he had the same. He asked for more, but I
would not give it; perhaps that angered him, and he mistook my lord
for me. Mr. Hill thought it might be so. I shall never be able to
account for it."

The doctor nodded assent; and the speaker went on:

"His hair was long then, and he must have looked just like a maniac
when the fit of fury lay upon him. Little wonder that my lady was
frightened at the sight of him. After he had done the deed he ran back
to his own room; I, aroused by the commotion, found him in his bed. He
burst out laughing when he saw me: 'I got your knife, I got your
knife,' he called out, as if it were a feat to be proud of. His
movements must have been silent and stealthy, for Snow had heard
nothing."

At this moment there occurred an interruption. The Italian lady
approached the room with timid, hesitating steps, and peeped in. "Ah,
how do you do, doctor?" she said in a sweet, gentle voice, as she held
out her hand to Mr. Hill. Her countenance was mild, open, and honest;
and a conviction rushed on the instant into Blanche's mind that she
had been misjudging that foreign lady.

"These good gentlepeople are come to see our poor patient?" she added,
curtseying to them with native grace, her accent quite foreign. "The
poor, poor boy," tears filling her eyes. "And I foretell that this
must be my lord's wife!" addressing Blanche. "Will she permit a poor
humble stranger to shake her by the hand for her lord's sake--her
lord, who has been so good to us?"

"This lady is sister to the unfortunate boy's mother," said the
doctor, in low tones to Blanche. "She is a good woman, and worthy to
shake hands with you, my lady."

"But who was his father?" whispered Blanche.

"Mr. Francis Level; my lord's dead brother."

Her countenance radiant, Blanche took the lady's hand and warmly
clasped it. "You live here to take care of the poor lad," she said.

"But no, madam. I do but come at intervals to see him, all the way
from Pisa, in Italy. And also I have had to come to bring documents
and news to my lord, respecting matters that concern him and the poor
lad. But it is over now," she added. "The week after the one next to
come, Arnie goes back with me to Italy, his native country, and my
journeys to this country will be ended. His mother, who is always ill
and not able to travel, wishes now to have her afflicted son with
her."

Back in the other house again, after wishing Nina Sparlati good-day,
the astonished visitors gathered in Mr. Drewitt's room to listen to
the tale which had to be told them. Mrs. Edwards, who was awaiting
them, and fonder of talking than her brother, was the principal
narrator. Blanche went away, whispering to Charles Strange that she
would hear it from him afterwards.

"We were abroad in Italy," Mrs. Edwards began: "it is many years ago.
The late lord, our master then, went for his health, which was
declining, though he was but a middle-aged man, and I and my brother
were with him, his personal attendants, but treated more like friends.
The present lord, Mr. Archibald, named after his father, was with
us--he was the second son, not the heir; the eldest son, Mr.
Level--Francis was his name--had been abroad for years, and was then
in another part of Italy. He came to see his father when we first got
out to Florence, but he soon left again. 'He'll die before my lord,' I
said to Mr. Archibald; for if ever I saw consumption on a man's face,
it was on Mr. Level's. And I remember Mr. Archibald's answer as if it
was but yesterday: 'That's just one of your fancies, nurse: Frank
tells me he has looked the last three years as he looks now.' But I
was right, sir; for shortly after that we received news of the death
of Mr. Level; and then Mr. Archibald was the heir. My lord, who had
grown worse instead of better, was very ill then."

"Did the late lord die in Italy?" questioned Mr. Ravensworth.

"You shall hear, sir. He grew very ill, I say, and we thought he
would be sure to move homewards, but he still stayed on. 'Archibald
likes Florence,' he would say, 'and it's all the same to me where I
am.' 'Young Level stops for the _beaux yeux_ of the Tuscan women,' the
world said--but you know, sir, the world always was censorious; and
young men will be young men. However, we were at last on the move;
everything was packed and prepared for leaving, when there arrived an
ill-favoured young woman, with some papers and a little child, two
years old. Its face frightened me when I saw it. It was, as a child,
what it is now as a growing man; and you have seen it today," she
added in a whisper. "'What is the matter with him?' I asked, for I
could speak a little Italian. 'He's a born natural, as yet,' she
answered, 'but the doctors think he may outgrow it in part.' 'But who
is he? what does he do here?' I said. 'He's the son of Mr. Level,' she
replied, 'and I have brought him to the family, for his mother, who
was my sister, is also dead.' 'He the son of Mr. Level!' I uttered,
knowing she must speak of Mr. Francis. 'Well, you need not bring him
here: we English do not recognise chance children.' 'They were married
three years ago,' she coolly answered, 'and I have brought the papers
to prove it. Mr. Level was a gentleman and my sister not much above a
peasant; but she was beautiful and good, and he married her, and this
is their child. She has been dying by inches since her husband died;
she is now dead, and I am come here to give up the child to his
father's people."

"Was it true?" interrupted Mr. Strange.

"My lord thought so, sir, and took kindly to the child. He was brought
home here, and the East Wing was made his nursery----"

"Then that--that--poor wretch down there is the true Lord Level!"
interrupted Mr. Ravensworth.

"One day, when my lord was studying the documents the woman had left,"
resumed Mrs. Edwards, passing by the remark with a glance, "something
curious struck him in the certificate of marriage; he thought it was
forged. He showed it to Mr. Archibald, and they decided to go back to
Italy, leaving the child here. All the inquiries they made there
tended to prove that, though the child was indeed Mr. Francis Level's,
there had been no marriage, or semblance of one. All the same, said my
lord, the poor child shall be kindly reared and treated and provided
for: and Mr. Archibald solemnly promised his father it should be so.
My lord died at Florence, and Mr. Archibald came back Lord Level."

"And he never forgot his promise to his father," interposed the
steward, "but has treated the child almost as though he were a true
son, consistent with his imbecile state. That East Wing has been his
happy home, as Mr. Hill can testify: he has toys to amuse him, the
garden to dig in, which is his favourite pastime; and Snow draws him
about the paths in his hand-carriage on fine days. It is a sad
misfortune, for him and for the family; but my lord has done his
best."

"It would have been a greater for my lord had the marriage been a
legal one," remarked Mr. Ravensworth.

"I don't know that," sharply spoke up the doctor. "As an idiot I
believe he could not inherit. However, the marriage was not a legal
one, and my lord is my lord. The mother is not dead; that was a
fabrication also; but she is ill, helpless, and is pining for her son;
so now he is to be taken to her; my lord, in his generosity, securing
him an ample income. It was not the mother who perpetrated the fraud,
but the avaricious eldest sister. This sister, the one you have just
seen, is the youngest; she is good and honourable, and has done her
best to unravel the plot."

That was all the explanation given to Mr. Ravensworth. But the doctor
put his arm within that of Charles Strange, and took him into the
presence of Lord Level.

"Well," said his lordship, who was then sitting up in bed, and held
out his hand, "have you been hearing all about the mysteries,
Charles?"

"Yes," smiled Mr. Strange. "I felt sure that whatever the mystery
might be, it was one you could safely explain away if you chose."

"Ay: though Blanche did take up the other view and want to cut my head
off."

"She was your own wife, your _loving_ wife, I am certain: why not have
told her?"

"Because I wanted to be quite sure of certain things first," replied
Lord Level. "Listen, Charles: you have my tale to hear yet. Sit down.
Sit down, Hill. How am I to talk while you stand?" he asked, laughing.

"When we were in Paris after our marriage a year ago, I received two
shocks on one and the same morning," began Lord Level. "The one told
me of the trouble Tom Heriot had fallen into; the other, contained in
a letter from Pisa, informed me that there _had been a marriage_ after
all between my brother and that girl, Bianca Sparlati. If so, of
course, that imbecile lad stood between me and the title and estate;
though I don't think he could legally inherit. But I did not believe
the information. I felt sure that it was another invented artifice of
Annetta, the wretched eldest sister, who is a grasping intriguante. I
started at once for Pisa, where they live, to make inquiries in
person: travelling by all sorts of routes, unfrequented by the
English, that my wife might not hear of her brother's disgrace. At
Pisa I found difficulties: statements met me that seemed to prove
there had been a marriage, and I did not see my way to disprove them.
Nina, a brave, honest girl, confessed to me that she doubted them, and
I begged of her, for truth and right's sake, to help me as far as she
could. I cannot enter into details now, Strange; I am not strong
enough for it; enough to say that ever since, nearly a whole year,
have I been trying to ferret out the truth: and I only got at it a
week ago."

"And there was no marriage?"

"Tell him, Hill," said Lord Level, laughing.

"Well, a sort of ceremony did pass between Francis Level and that
young woman, but both of them knew at the time it was not legal, or
one that could ever stand good," said the doctor. "Now the real facts
have come to light. It seems that Bianca had been married when very
young to a sailor named Dromio; within a month of the wedding he
sailed away again and did not return. She thought him dead, took up
her own name again and went home to her family; and later became
acquainted with Francis Level. Now, the sailor has turned up again,
alive and well----"

"The first husband!" exclaimed Charles Strange.

"If you like to call him so," said Mr. Hill; "there was never a
second. Well, the sailor has come to the fore again; and
honest-hearted Nina travelled here from Pisa with the news, and we
sent for his lordship to come down and hear it. He was also wanted
for another matter. The boy had had a sort of fit, and I feared he
would die. My lord heard what Nina had to tell him when he arrived; he
did not return at once to London, for Arnie was still in danger, and
he waited to see the issue. Very shortly he was taken ill himself, and
could not get away. It was good news, though, about that resuscitated
sailor!" laughed the doctor, after a pause. "All's well that ends
well, and my Lord Level is his own man again."

Charles Strange sought an interview with his sister--as he often
called her--and imparted to her these particulars. He then left at
once for London with Mr. Ravensworth. Their mission at Marshdale was
over.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lord Level, up and dressed, lay on a sofa in his bedroom in the
afternoon. Blanche sat on a footstool beside him. Her face was hidden
upon her husband's knee and she was crying bitter tears.

"Shall you ever forgive me, Archibald?"

He was smiling quietly. "Some husbands might say no."

"You don't know how miserable I have been."

"Don't I! But how came you to fall into such notions at first,
Blanche? To suspect me of ill at all?"

"It was that Mrs. Page Reid who was with us at Pisa. She said all
sorts of things."

"Ah!"

"_Won't_ you forgive me, Archibald?"

"Yes, upon condition that you trust me fully in future. Will you,
love?" he softly whispered.

She could not speak for emotion.

"And the next time you have a private grievance against me, Blanche,
tell it out plainly," he said, as he held her to him and gave her kiss
for kiss.

"My darling, yes. But I shall never have another."




CHAPTER XIII.

CONCLUSION.


I, Charles Strange, took up this story at its commencement, and I take
it up now at its close.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a lovely day at the end of summer, in the year following the
events recorded in the last chapter, and we were again at Marshdale
House.

The two individuals who had chiefly marred the peace of one or another
of us in the past were both gone where disturbance is not. Poor Tom
Heriot was mouldering in his grave near to that in which his father
and mother lay, not having been discovered by the police or molested
in any way; and the afflicted Italian lad had died soon after he was
taken to his native land. Mr. Hill had warned Nina Sparlati that, in
all probability, he would not live long. Mrs. Brightman, I may as well
say it here, had recovered permanently; recovered in all ways, as we
hoped and believed. The long restraint laid upon her by her illness
had effected the cure that nothing else might have been able to
effect, and re-established the good habits she had lost. But Miss
Brightman was dead; she had not lived to come home from Madeira, and
the whole of her fortune was left to Annabel. "So you can live where
you please now and go in for grandeur," Arthur Lake said to me and my
wife. "All in good time," laughed Annabel; "I am not yet tired of
Essex Street."

And now we had come down in the sunny August weather when the courts
were up, to stay at Marshdale.

You might be slow to recognise it, though. Recalling the picture of
Marshdale House as it was, and looking at it now, many would have said
it could not be the same.

The dreary old structure had been converted into a light and beautiful
mansion. The whitened windows with their iron bars were no more. The
disfiguring, unnaturally-high walls were gone, and the tangled shrubs
and weeds, the overgrowth of trees that had made the surrounding land
a wilderness, were now turned into lovely pleasure-grounds. The gloomy
days had given place to sunny ones, said Lord Level, and the gloomy
old structure, with its gloomy secrets, should be remembered no more.

Marshdale was now their chief home, his and his wife's, with their
establishment of servants. Mr. Drewitt and Mrs. Edwards had moved into
a pretty dwelling hard by; but they were welcomed whenever they liked
to go to the house, and were treated as friends. The steward kept the
accounts still, and Mrs. Edwards was appealed to by Blanche in all
domestic difficulties. She rarely appeared before her lady but in her
quaint gala attire.

We were taking tea out of doors at the back of the renovated East
Wing. The air bore that Sabbath stillness which Sunday seems to bring:
distant bells, ringing the congregation out of church, fell
melodiously on the ear. We had been idle this afternoon and stayed at
home, but all had attended service in the morning. Mr. Hill had called
in and was sitting with us. Annabel presided at the rustic tea-table;
Blanche was a great deal too much occupied with her baby-boy, whom she
had chosen to have brought out: a lively young gentleman in a blue
sash, whose face greatly resembled his father's. Next to Lord Level
sat my uncle, who had come down for a week's rest. He was no longer
Serjeant Stillingfar; but Sir Charles, and one of her Majesty's
judges.

"Won't you have some tea, my dear?" he said to Blanche, who was
parading the baby.

By the way, they had named him Charles. Charles Archibald; to be
called by the former name: Lord Level protested he would not have
people saying Young Archie and Old Archie.

"Yes, Blanche," said he, taking up the suggestion of the judge. "Do
let that child go indoors: one might think he was a new toy. Here,
I'll take him."

"Archibald need not talk," laughed Blanche, looking after her husband,
who had taken the child from her and was tossing it as he went
indoors. "He is just as fond of having the baby as I am. Neither need
you laugh, Mr. Charles," turning upon me; "your turn will come soon,
you know."

Leaving the child in its nursery in the East Wing, Lord Level came
back to his place; and we sat on until evening approached. A peaceful
evening, promising a glorious sunset. An hour after midday, when we
had just got safely in from church, there had been a storm of thunder
and lightning, and it had cleared the sultry air. The blue sky above,
flecked with gold, was of a lovely rose colour towards the west.

"The day has been a type of life: or of what life ought to be,"
suddenly remarked Mr. Hill. "Storm and cloud succeeded by peace and
sunshine."

"The end is not always peaceful," said Lord Level.

"It mostly is when we have worked on for it patiently," said the
judge. "My friends, you may take the word of an old man for it--that a
life of storm and trouble, through which we have struggled manfully to
do our duty under God, ever bearing on in reliance upon Him, must of
necessity end in peace. Perhaps not always perfect and entire peace in
this world; but assuredly in that which is to come."

THE END.


BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD.

_S. & H._




Transcriber's Note:


Inconsistent and archaic spelling retained.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Charles Strange, Vol. 3
(of 3), by Mrs. Henry Wood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORY OF CHARLES STRANGE ***

***** This file should be named 38625.txt or 38625.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/6/2/38625/

Produced by David Edwards, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
