Project Gutenberg's With Drake on the Spanish Main, by Herbert Strang

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: With Drake on the Spanish Main

Author: Herbert Strang

Illustrator: Archibald Webb

Release Date: February 18, 2012 [EBook #38795]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WITH DRAKE ON THE SPANISH MAIN ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Illustration: Cover art]





[Frontispiece: "The Spaniard swung round."]





WITH DRAKE ON THE

SPANISH MAIN


BY

HERBERT STRANG



ILLUSTRATED IN COLOUR BY ARCHIBALD WEBB



LONDON

HENRY FROWDE

HODDER & STOUGHTON

1908




OXFORD: HORACE HART

PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY



Copyright, 1907, by the BOBBS MERRILL COMPANY in the

United States of America




PREFACE

The romancer, in choosing as the setting for a tale the period of a man
who looms large in history, finds himself on the horns of a dilemma.
He cannot place his fictional near his historical hero without either
dwarfing the former until the young reader ceases to find him
interesting, or robbing the latter of some of the glamour with which
history invests him.

In the following pages I have tried to meet the difficulty by making
Francis Drake the presiding genius of the story.  The deeds of Dennis
Hazelrig are akin to those of Drake; the same spirit of adventure
dominates them: and when, in the course of the story, the real and the
fictitious personages meet, it is, I trust, without loss of dignity to
either.

HERBERT STRANG.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I

JETSAM


CHAPTER II

SEA-GIRT


CHAPTER III

A WRECK--AND MIRANDOLA


CHAPTER IV

SALVAGE


CHAPTER V

THE EDGE OF THE MARSH


CHAPTER VI

THE SPANISH WHIP


CHAPTER VII

AMOS TURNPENNY


CHAPTER VIII

HALF-PIKES AND MACHETES


CHAPTER IX

AMOS TELLS HIS STORY


CHAPTER X

THE MAROONS BUILD A CANOE


CHAPTER XI

THE MAIN


CHAPTER XII

BENEATH THE WALLS


CHAPTER XIII

THE TAKING OF FORT AGUILA


CHAPTER XIV

VAE VICTIS


CHAPTER XV

A LONG CHASE


CHAPTER XVI

JAN BIDDLE, MASTER


CHAPTER XVII

THE DEMI-CULVERIN


CHAPTER XVIII

JUAN THE MAROON


CHAPTER XIX

DRAKE'S CAMP


CHAPTER XX

A RAID THROUGH THE FOREST


CHAPTER XXI

MAIDEN ISLE AGAIN


CHAPTER XXII

A FIGHT ON THE CLIFFS


CHAPTER XXIII

BOMBARDED


CHAPTER XXIV

THE LEAGUER OF SKELETON CAVE


CHAPTER XXV

THE MULE TRAINS


CONCLUSION




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

LOI
"The Spaniard swung round"  _Frontispiece_.  _See p._ 78

Map of Maiden Isle

Dennis saves Mirandola

"Captain singled out Captain"

"The sailor threw up his left hand to ward off the attack"

"A shot fell immediately in their wake"

Map to illustrate Drake's adventures

"The seaman flung him bodily at the fourth Spaniard."
ELOI



CHAPTER I

Jetsam

Daybreak!  But, eastward, no glory of dawn.  Black thundrous clouds
roll sullenly across a livid sky, riven at moments by pale zigzags of
flame.  Rain tumbles in cascades.  League upon league of white-crested
waves chase one another in fury, hissing, roaring as they hurl
themselves upon a stubborn shore, only to be broken and thrown back
into the seething turmoil.  The wind outstrips them, shrieking as it
cleaves a way through the massed foliage, in mad haste to reach the
mainland and smite the yielding tops of Darien's palms and pines.

The shelving sandy beach is strewed with the jetsam of the storm.
Here, a tangled heap of seaweed, left by a breaker when, spent with its
own rage, it falls back baffled.  There, a log of wood, hard by
nameless creatures of the sea, destroyed by the fury of their own
element.  And here, high up the strand, beneath a bank overgrown with
large-leaved plants, lies a human form, huddled, motionless.

The waves do not touch it now; the storm has exhausted itself; the tide
is ebbing.  Minute by minute the sea becomes less boisterous; the strip
of sand widens; the rain ceases.  By and by the sun breaks through the
eastern sky, and, gathering strength, disperses the lingering clouds
and flings his radiance over the scene.  His beams, falling aslant
through a gap in the cliffs, strike upon the draggled form on the sand;
it stirs slightly, stretching itself as a leaf uncurls.  At last, when
the air quivers with heat, and all things lie under a shimmering haze,
Dennis Hazelrig heaves a sigh, opens his eyes, and looks amazedly about
him.

His eyes close; for some minutes he remains still; then he lifts
himself slightly, falls back with a gasp, and lies again as one dead.
But Nature is recovering under the beneficent rays.  Pigeons are cooing
in the branches above; parrots are screaming; insects drone their
burden; and when a mosquito, adventuring forth, alights on a human
cheek, and tastes, Dennis is stung once more into consciousness.  He
starts up, brushes the marauder away, staggers to his feet, and, to
prevent himself from falling, clutches at a tuft of grass in the
overhanging bank.  Its thin blade-like edge draws blood from his hand,
and he looks at the red stain as at some strange phenomenon.  Then he
laughs huskily, checks the sound as though it too is unfamiliar, and
laughs again--a short sobbing laugh.

"Certes, I am alive!" he mutters.


An hour or two passed before Dennis ventured once more to try his
tottering legs.  The sun's heat had dried his clothes, which, as he
ruefully observed, had been so rent by the buffeting waves that they
hung upon him precariously.  But in the same genial warmth his strength
was returning, and though all his body ached, he could now move without
a stagger.  Catching sight of some clams near him, he was conscious of
a vast emptiness within, and felt for the clasp-knife which he was wont
to wear slung about his waist.  It still hung upon its chain.  He had
opened and eaten, ravenously, a dozen of the shellfish before he
realized that after all his thirst exceeded his hunger, and he looked
round for a spring of fresh water.  He walked some paces along the
shore, groaning with every movement, until his ear caught the musical
ripple of a stream, and he saw a rivulet flowing across the sand from a
narrow water-course in the cliff.  In an instant he was down on his
knees, drinking his fill.

Refreshed with the draught, he rose and began to consider.  He was
alive: that was the first thing.  It seemed marvellous to him.  The
tornado had ceased.  Looking round, he could hardly believe that the
sea now so calm was the same sea which, but a few hours before, had
been a raging monster.  As far as the eye could scan it stretched away,
shimmering in the sunlight, only a white crest here and there giving
sign of its late disturbance.  Not a sail broke the line of the
horizon.  What had become of the _Maid Marian_ and her crew and his
companion adventurers on board?  Had they, had any of them, been cast
ashore like himself, on some other part of this strange coast?  If he
had escaped, why not others?  There was something cheering in the
thought, and instinctively he braced himself for a search when,
remembering that awful night--the amazing suddenness of the blast that
struck the bark, rending the sails like ribands, snapping the mainmast
like a reed, the tumultuous waves, the crashing thunder, the bursts of
lightning, the deluge that poured down from the heavens--as he
remembered these battling elements he shuddered involuntarily; could it
be otherwise than by a miracle that he had survived?

He lived over again his last conscious moments.  The mainmast had gone
by the board.  He heard the hoarse shout of Miles Barton the master,
calling upon the men to cut away the wreckage.  He was with them at the
task, struggling to keep his feet, when the gallant vessel staggered
under the onslaught of a tremendous sea, and he was swept off her deck.
He heard cries all around him, but could see nothing for the darkness
and the blinding rain.  Striving to keep his head above water, he felt
his strength failing, so puny was it against the might of the
passionate waves, when he encountered a floating spar, and clung to it
with the tenacity of despair.  After that he knew nothing.  His grip
must have relaxed, for the spar was not near him when he awoke to
consciousness on the beach.  Yet it seemed that this had been his
salvation.  He must have held to it until near the shore; then some
mountainous breaker had torn him away and hurled him to the spot where
he had lately opened his eyes again upon the world.

Hapless bark!  It was scarcely possible that she had survived the
hurricane.  And what of the souls on board with him?  What of Miles
Barton, the bluff sea-dog her master, and his cheery crew, and the
score of gallant gentlemen who had sailed out of Plymouth Sound but two
months before, gay, high-hearted adventurers for the Spanish Main?
Where was Sir Martin Blunt, the blithe captain of the band, and Philip
Masterton, and Harry Greville, and Francis Tring, all young men of
mettle, whom Dennis was proud to call his friends, and who, though but
little his elders in years, had seen and done things in the great world
that made him burn with envious admiration?  Alas! he could not but
fear that the sea had swallowed them.

But then again came the thought: might not Fortune have befriended them
too?  Why imagine the worst?  And Dennis thrust sad thought from his
mind; hope was not dead.  His meal had given him strength to search,
and search he would.

He looked about him.  The sandy beach was narrow.  It was overhung by
cliffs of varying height, in parts merely a low bank, in parts reaching
an altitude of perhaps forty or fifty feet.  They were covered with the
dense vegetation of the tropics.  Some distance to the north of where
he stood the receding tide had left bare a long ledge of massive rock,
running up into the highest part of the cliff.  To the south the shore
was less rocky, and within half a mile curved round to the east.  It
was in this direction that he decided to go.

But he had not walked far along the glistening sand when he suddenly
bethought himself.  Signs of life there had yet been none, save the
cries of birds from the trees above him.  But what if he came upon a
fishing village, and found himself among enemies--the wild red men of
whom he had heard, the Spaniards of whose terrible deeds returning
navigators made such grim tales for the winter nights at home?  Where
was he?  On some shore of the Caribbean Sea, he made no doubt, for only
the day before, when the _Maid Marian_ was sailing merrily westward,
Sir Martin had declared, and old Miles had borne him out, that but a
few more days would bring them to the point where they expected to meet
other adventurers who had preceded them on the same quest for
excitement and gain.

And Dennis halted as one dazed when the full sense of his calamity was
borne in upon him.  He was alone!--alone!  There might be, for all he
knew, thousands of people almost within hail of him; but he was none
the less alone, for they would be of another race, speaking another
tongue, unfriendly, hostile.  He sat down on a smooth rock and, resting
his elbows on his knees and his chin on his hands, stared moodily out
to sea.  Between him and all that he held dear stretched this wide
ocean for thousands of miles.  In utter hopelessness he wondered why it
had not swallowed him up with all his comrades, instead of casting him
here, a battered miserable body.

The mood passed.  He had escaped the perils of the sea, not by his own
strength, but by the hand of Providence.  If perchance he had more to
fear from man than from nature--why, it behoved him, an English boy,
and a Devon boy to boot, to face his destiny with a stout heart.  After
all, he was of the same stuff as Master Walter Raleigh and Master
Francis Drake and many another bold man of Devon.  He could not think
that any one of them, in his situation, would give way to black
despair; and, lifting his aching body from the shore, he walked on: he
would at least learn somewhat of his surroundings.

The beach, he found, bore gradually to the left, so that he could see
but a short distance ahead.  Still he encountered no signs of life,
save here and there a scuttling crab, and the rank plant growths above
him, whence now and again a bird fluttered out and wheeled screaming
about his head, and then soared clattering into the foliage.  Soon he
tired of this monotonous tramping over sand, which appeared to lead no
whither; and observing at length a cleft in the rocks, whence a shallow
stream swiftly poured itself upon the beach, he bethought himself he
might more quickly make a discovery if he pushed his way up the
water-course, which must by and by lead to higher ground.  He turned in
obedience to this impulse, waded through the stream, that wound this
way and that between banks thickly covered with vegetation, and after
what seemed an eternity to his aching limbs, found himself upon a cliff
overlooking the sea.  His wandering had brought him by a circuit to a
point north of the spot where he had awoke to consciousness.

The cliff on which he stood was much higher than the surrounding
country.  To right and left the ground shelved downwards, and he now
perceived that the coast on both sides had an inward trend; that, in
fact, the cliff was also a promontory.  Turning round, he found that
his view was blocked by the trees except in one direction, where a
sudden dip in the ground gave him an outlook over several miles.  And
there, surely, at the far end of the vista, was the sea again.  For the
first time the suspicion occurred to him that he had been cast upon an
island.

He went to the farthest point of the cliff to scan more carefully the
horizon.  Looking across the sea, which from the beach had seemed an
unbroken plain, he now saw in the far distance several dark vague
shapes rising a little above the surface.  These must be islands.  To
the north, somewhat nearer to him, and somewhat more definite, were
similar forms, which seemed to grow in size during the hour or more he
watched them, no doubt owing to the fall of the tide.  Far to the south
he descried a long dark bar upon the horizon; this must be land, many
miles away, probably the mainland.  His view to the east being almost
entirely shut out by the foliage, he could feel no certainty that his
suspicion was justified; but he felt a stirring of interest and
excitement now: supposing it were indeed an island, how did the
discovery bear upon his lot?

Once more he turned and gazed along the valley at whose end he saw the
sea.  It could not be many miles away; perhaps in an hour or so he
could reach it.  The island, apparently, was not a large one, so that
he could not go far without meeting its inhabitants.  He looked around
for any signs of habitation--a roof-top, a column of smoke; but there
was none.  Next moment he reflected that, if the island were small, it
would not take him long to make its circuit and search every yard of
the beach for tracks of his late comrades--of the _Maid Marian_ too.
Still cherishing a hope that some might have survived like himself, he
set off to descend the cliff towards the beach, every downward step
racking his bruised limbs and strained joints.  When he gained the
beach, he once more tramped southward, his eagerness lending him speed.
He passed the water-course up which he had struck inland, and soon
after came upon scattered articles of wreckage, among them the broken
topmast of the _Maid Marian_.  With a sigh for his lost comrades he
passed on.

The sun had risen high in the heavens, and Dennis was fain to rest.

"I'm a poor battered hulk," he said aloud, finding some little solace
in the sound of his voice, "and hungry--how hungry I am!"

He looked around for food, spied some shell-fish and ate them raw,
quenching the ensuing thirst at another stream that rippled down from
the interior.  The feeling of nervousness lest he should encounter
strangers again took hold upon him, and he felt a desire to hide.  He
found himself casting uneasy, almost terrified glances around him from
the nook in which he was now resting, somewhat sheltered from the sun's
fierce rays.  Then, conquering the feeling, he rose again to continue
his search of the beach.  He must by and by, he thought, come upon some
quay or harbour.  When he should see it, he would halt and consider his
course of action: whether to advance and risk the meeting with
strangers, or to retreat until with recovered strength and a clearer
mind he could prepare himself for what might be in store.

As he proceeded, he noticed that the jungle frequently approached to
within a few feet of the mass of weed that marked high-water.  At one
spot he discovered, almost buried in the sand, the worm-eaten
stern-post of a vessel.  He could distinguish one or two letters of her
name.  Many a ship, he doubted not, had been wrecked on this coast,
many a hapless wight had been cast up by the tide, alive or dead.  By
and by he came, on the southern side of the island, to high cliffs, and
he set about scaling that which offered the easiest ascent, to obtain a
view of sea and land from this point of vantage also.  It was densely
wooded, and as he mounted he heard, besides the cries of startled
birds, other sounds that struck uncannily upon his ear.  In his
weakened state any new note in these sounds set his nerves tingling,
and more than once he stopped, and could scarcely prevent himself from
turning and speeding back to the beach, where at least there was
nothing to cause him fresh tremors.

Near the top of the cliff the wood thinned away somewhat, and when he
reached its highest point he found himself on a stretch of greensward.
Northward the ground sloped gently down to a clump of trees, of a
species unknown to him, tall, with slender trunks, which it seemed to
him he could climb as easily as the masts on the _Maid Marian_.  He
made his way to them, half minded to swarm up the tallest of the group,
so that from its summit he might gain a view, possibly, over the whole
island, and solve the question that troubled him--whether somewhere
upon it there was a settlement of men.  Only when he reached the foot
of the trunk did he remember his weakness.  He stood leaning against
it, and gazing up its length felt that at present his muscles were
incapable of the feat.

All at once his eyes became fixed in his head.  Travelling to the top,
where a mass of foliage crowned the towering stem, they had lighted
upon a face, that seemed to be peering at him from between the leaves.
The feeling of fright that had before almost paralysed him seized him
again.  But next moment he laughed aloud.

"Ninny that I am!" he murmured.  "Afraid of a monkey!"

He looked again.  The monkey, a large long-tailed specimen of its kind,
was gazing at him gravely, with a look so human that it reminded him of
his old schoolmaster at Winchester.  With the sportive instinct of a
boy--Dennis was not yet seventeen--he stooped, picked up a stout piece
of fallen branch, and flung it upward.

"Stir, Sir Monkey!" he cried.  "I hail thee as the lord of this island!"

The wood struck the branch on which the monkey was perched.  Chattering
angrily, it flung its long arms around the branch above, and swung
itself up, resting there, blinking and showing its teeth at this
unmannerly intruder.

"A big fellow indeed!" said Dennis to himself.  "I will not climb.  If
the beast is angered, as he seems, he would be no mean foe in his high
perch.  I'll not try a bout with you, Sir Monkey.  For this time,
farewell!"

And he went on, smiling a little as he became conscious that the
meeting with the monkey had cheered him.




CHAPTER II

Sea-Girt

Besides the birds, and the ground animals which he heard at times
scurrying through the undergrowth, the sole inhabitant of the island
that Dennis had yet discovered was a monkey.  Though he was beginning
to suspect that his fears of encountering hostile human folk had been
needless, he still felt a timid reluctance to leave the coast-line for
the interior; and having given up for the present his idea of climbing
a tree to obtain a wider view, he contented himself with walking to the
top of the cliff, to continue his observations from that point.  His
native courage was returning; yet, as he mounted the cliff, he moved
for the most part under cover of the trees; the dread of possible
enemies still made him wary, though every now and then he forgot his
precautions, only remembering them again when the sense of his
loneliness forced itself upon him, or when he was momentarily startled
by a sudden sound.

Panting a little from his exertions when he gained the summit,
conscious of his bodily weakness, of bruised limbs and strained sinews,
he looked eagerly around.  Eastward stretched an illimitable expanse of
sea; he scanned it longingly, yet doubtfully, for while it was from
that quarter, or from the channel between the island and the mainland,
that he might hope for rescue from a friendly ship, it was thence also
that he might be descried perchance by an enemy.  He sat down on the
grass, once more yielding to the heavy sense of forlornness, and
thinking sadly of his lost companions.  How long he remained there he
knew not; his mind wandered a little: he thought afterwards that he had
probably slept, for he suddenly awoke to the consciousness of a gnawing
hunger.  He had walked far, and the few shell-fish he had picked up on
the shore gave but meagre sustenance.  Stiff and cramped, he rose to
search again for food.

There was nothing edible in his immediate neighbourhood.  The trees
sprang to a lofty height, and bore no fruit.  Plucking up his courage,
he made his way slowly down the slope towards the middle of the island.
The vegetation grew thicker as he proceeded; there was no path or road;
all was a wild tangle.  At first he saw nothing wherewith to ease his
pangs; never in his life had he taken a thought for his next meal; it
was a new experience.  Often enough at home he had plucked fruits as
they grew; he remembered with a strange homesick feeling many a boyish
depredation upon neighbouring orchards, out of sheer mischief, not from
a longing for food.  But there were no apple-trees or plum-trees here.
And when at last he came upon a broad-leaved tree upon which grew huge
clusters of a yellowish fruit, in shape like monstrous pea-pods, he
hesitated, wondering whether this might not be one of those evil trees
of which he had heard, one taste of which would turn his skin black,
and fire him with a raging thirst, and afflict him with a madness whose
end was death.  But his natural appetite would not be gainsaid.  With
hope and misgiving mingled he at last stretched up his hand and plucked
one of the tempting pods, and stripped off the skin, and nibbled a
morsel of the soft fruit within.  It was delicious; but so was the
devil's fruit of mariners' tales--the more delicious the more
poisonous.  Somewhat anxiously he waited; there was no change in the
colour of his skin; he watched it through the rents of his tattered
garments; and indeed it seemed to him that any change would be for the
better, for he perceived for the first time that he was already black
and blue with bruises.  He bit off another and a larger piece; then,
with the ravenous haste of one long fasting, he let prudence fly, and
ate the whole fruit, and another, and another, until he saw with
surprise and qualms that his feet were encircled by a ring of empty
skins.  But he felt astonishingly refreshed and invigorated; he must
eat one more; and thus, timorously and recklessly, he made acquaintance
with the banana.

Of water for drink there was abundance.  He drank gladly at a stream,
and wandered on.  It was strange that he no longer felt alone.  He saw
no man, nor any trace of one; he had become accustomed now to the
rustle of birds and the swish of four-footed creatures moving amid the
greenwood; what then caused him to look apprehensively around?  What
was this odd feeling of expectation that possessed him?  There was
nothing to account for it, and by and by the nervousness which had left
him during his search for food returned in greater force.  It was not
lessened when he suddenly became aware that the sun was setting.
Darkness, he knew, would soon envelop him, and there came with a rush
upon his mind the memory of his early childhood, when night, with its
silence, its blackness, had filled him with terror.  He felt that a
night in the solitude of these unfamiliar trees would be unbearable,
and, guiding himself by the sunset glow, he hurriedly plunged through
the jungle towards the shore.  There, under the open sky, he could feel
more at ease.

His course brought him to the beach on the southern side, where, in the
morning, he remembered having seen, though in his despondency he had
not heeded, a number of half-rotten staves of casks.  These might, he
thought, serve him for making a rude shelter.  He soon found the spot,
and then noticed, what had escaped his dazed observation before, that
close by the staves there lay a medley of stripped branches.  Had some
one, at some time, built himself of these materials a shelter in that
very place?  He gathered the stuff together and rigged up a crazy hut,
such as he had seen erected by shepherds on the moors of Devon.  The
day had been hot, but he knew from his experience on shipboard that the
nights were cold; already he felt a sharpness in the air, and shivered
in his tatters.  The hut would defend him somewhat from the chill of
night.

Another fear seized upon him with the approach of dark.  His mind had
been so occupied with thoughts of human enemies that the possibility of
the island harbouring wild beasts had not, in the daylight, occurred to
him.  The darkness, he knew, brought forth small and great beasts; and
he remembered with a shudder the tales told him by one of the hardy
adventurers on board the _Maid Marian_--of packs of wild dogs that
scoured these tropic woods, devouring sleeping men; of the hideous
cayman, that lurked upon the shore, and, having swallowed
hundredweights of stones to increase its heaviness, seized upon some
unwary creature, and dragged it down into the watery depths, to feast
upon it at leisure.  All wild beasts, he had heard, were afraid of
fire; he had his flint and steel, secure in a leather pouch upon his
girdle; but he had no dry timber; the sodden wood of the staves and
branches of which he had built his hut would be useless, and he shrank
from issuing forth into the now darkening woods to find material that
would serve.  He comforted himself with the recollection that not once
during his tramp around the island had he seen any animal larger than a
hare, save the monkey; and he resigned himself to make the best of what
he feared would be a cheerless night.

The dark fell rapidly, again he had that strange feeling that he was
not alone.  He went to the entrance of the hut, where he had drawn some
of the worm-eaten branches, strung together with a few creepers, across
as a door.  Peering out, he saw nothing but the darkened cliffs and the
sea, heard nothing but the wash of the surf, the rustle of the breeze,
and the soft tones of wood-pigeons.  He returned to the rear of the
cabin, where he had strewed leaves for his couch.  As he lay back upon
it and looked up to the roof he started, and instinctively seized a
branch for protection: above him shone two greenish eyes peeping
through one of the many gaps.  His hasty movement disturbed the
watcher, and Dennis heaved a sigh of relief as he heard a shrill
chattering above, and knew it for the gibber of a monkey.  Springing up
he dashed out of the cabin to drive the intruder away.  He was just in
time to see the monkey springing up the nearest tree.

It was long before he fell asleep.  Then his rest was fitful and
disturbed, not only through his over-wrought nerves, but by the
nocturnal cries of creatures in the forest, and the attentions of
insects, which nipped and stung with importunate malice.  In spite even
of them, however, he slept; and when with the rising of the sun they
betook their satiated bodies elsewhere, he lay till the morning was
drawing towards noon in the sound sleep of exhausted nature.

Opening his eyes upon bright day, he was tempted by the smoothness of
the sea to bathe.  When he flung off his clothes he laughed to see the
parti-coloured patches on his skin.  Blue, and yellow, and black, the
bruises reminded him of his battering in the storm, and his laughter
turned to sighing as he thought once more of his comrades and their
hapless fate.  But in the physical joy of swimming he again plucked up
heart, and he left the stinging water with a most healthy hunger.  The
recollection of his feast of fruit drew him into the woodland.  He
wandered long before he lighted upon the banana grove, and though, in
the course of roaming, he saw other fruit-bearing trees, he resisted
for the present the temptation to climb and taste; when once his hunger
was appeased by the fruit he knew, he could more safely make an
experiment on the unknown.

He saw, too, many animals which had escaped his notice previously.
There were hedgehogs, and tortoises, and giant spiders, and scorpions
to which he gave a wide berth; but he caught no glimpse of any
four-footed beast to cause him dread, and having by this time made up
his mind that there were no human beings on the island, he went more
fearlessly, with a readier eye to note the features of his new abode.

Happening once to halt and glance back he saw, perched in the branches
of a tree not many yards away, a monkey.  Was it the same, he wondered,
as that which had peered at him out of the tree he had thought of
climbing, and pried upon him in his humble cabin?  It seemed to be of
the same size; it had spindly limbs and a long slender tail; but
probably there was a colony of the strange creatures on the island.

"Good morrow, Sir Monkey," he said, again finding a pleasure in the
sound of his voice.  "Are you lonely too?  You were not, surely, cast
like me upon this island, far away from kith and kin.  You have a wise
and solemn look: what secrets do you harbour in that shallow skull of
yours?  And what do you think of me, I wonder, when you look at me with
those cunning little eyes?  I wish you could speak, for here am I
prating to myself like an old gossip of eighty."

As he moved on it was very soon clear that the monkey was dogging him.
He amused himself by putting the matter to the test.  When he sat down,
the monkey stopped, and remained almost perfectly still, partially
concealing itself among the leaves.  When Dennis rose and went on his
way the monkey followed, springing from branch to branch with amazing
dexterity, always keeping at a distance.  Dennis became interested,
fascinated, as he watched the movements of the agile creature.

"Truly, Sir Monkey," he said, "I begin to wish I had a tail."

And as the day wore on, and the monkey kept pace with him wherever he
went, he began to find in its presence something of the comfort of
human companionship.  Once, as he sat resting under a tree, the broken
skin of a fruit he had eyed longingly fell within a couple of yards of
him, and looking up he saw the monkey sucking with relish at another of
the same kind.

"Aha! my fine fellow," said Dennis, "you have something of a man about
you, and mayhap what is good for you is good for me too."

And he climbed a tree on which the pale yellow fruit was hanging, and
plucked one, and made a wry mouth at his first taste of the tartish
lime.

Thus the day passed in aimless yet not unprofitable wandering.  Warned
by his experience of the previous night, he resolved to prepare his
shelter somewhat earlier.  Where should it be?  He was determined not
to go back to the cabin, for the insects had plagued him there
unmercifully, and he could only ward them off by means of a fire.  But
flame by night and smoke by day rising from the shore would assuredly
provoke curiosity among the crew of any passing ship; and since, of the
vessels likely to pass in these latitudes, the most would undoubtedly
be Spaniards, he was loath to attract visitors who might prove so
eminently undesirable.  Yet, as he knew from his experience in woods at
home, the insects would be even more numerous inland than at the shore.
A fire he must have, and it struck him that if he could find, somewhere
in the middle of the island, a sheltered hollow, he might safely kindle
there a few sticks, trusting that the over-arching foliage would
prevent a glow in the sky, and that the smoke, in the night-time, would
pass unobserved.

About a mile from the edge of the eastern cliff was a spring whence a
little stream flowed westward.  At its source but an inch or two wide,
it gathered volume on its winding course, and Dennis, tracking it,
wondering by what circuit it would finally reach the sea, discovered
that it ran at length into a somewhat extensive marsh.  He knew nothing
about rainfall and land drainage, but being a lad of some powers of
observation and reasoning, he was not long in coming to the conclusion
that the marsh collected as in a cup the water that fell on the
surrounding high ground during such torrential rains as had fallen on
the night of the storm.  It was clear that there must be an outlet, or
the marsh would be a lake, and this outlet he found amid thick
undergrowth towards the western cliff near which he had been thrown by
the sea.

Penetrating the dense jungle, he discovered that the outflow poured
through a channel some three feet deep.  Only a small stream now
trickled down its centre; the banks were sandy and dry, and the
interlaced foliage so arched it over, that Dennis decided he might rest
in it secure from observation, and even run the risk of kindling a fire
at night.  It seemed scarcely necessary to bring the staves of his
cabin over several miles of difficult country to this spot; the trees
themselves formed a sufficient shelter; but with his clasp-knife he
cleared away some of the undergrowth, and lopped off a few low-growing
branches to make a little enclosure; and by the time the natural shade
deepened at the approach of night, he had fenced in a few square yards
and scooped out a hollow in the middle for his fire.

All the time he was working the monkey watched every movement from a
branch overhead.  Dennis was not at first aware of the animal's
presence, so closely hidden was it by the foliage.  Only when he struck
a spark from his flint, and after some ineffectual attempts succeeded
in blowing up a flame, did the monkey reveal its hiding-place by a
little gibber of amazement.

"So ho! my friend," cried Dennis, looking up vainly.  "You haunt me
like a familiar.  Have you never seen a fire?  Do not let your
curiosity tempt you too far, for, much as I value your company, I had
rather you remained at your present comfortable distance until I know
you a little better.  Play the sentinel, Sir Monkey, if you will."

Dennis felt very well satisfied with his contrivance as he sat by the
fire, eating a supper of bananas before laying himself down on a bed of
leaves.  The smoke defended him somewhat from the insect pests; the
warmth was comforting; and the cheerful glow gave him a sense of
homeness and well-being.  He fed the fire more than once during the
night, waking, it seemed, when the diminished heat warned him that the
fuel needed replenishing, And when he awoke from his longest spell of
sleep the dawn was stealing through the trees, birds were cooing,
whistling, chattering overhead, and the monkey, on a low branch, was
watching him with unalterable gravity.




CHAPTER III

A Wreck--and Mirandola

Dennis, as he made his breakfast, pondered deeply on the situation,
taking the monkey in to his confidence.  "Could we change parts, Sir
Monkey--if I were you, and you were Dennis Hazelrig, what would you do?
This is your island: we will call it yours; I am your guest.  You seem
to be a solitary creature like myself: are you miserable, I wonder?
Does your loneliness trouble you?  There is food for us both: it is so
warm that for the present, at least, I need no more clothes than you;
neither of us will starve.  How old are you?  You look wise enough to
be very old.  Am I to remain on this island until I have a beard as
long and white as Sir Parson's at home?  Oh, you cannot understand what
I say, for all your wise look: you cannot know what a wretched mortal I
am.  What can I do?"

The monkey only blinked at him, and plucked a dark plum-like fruit from
the bough and munched it.

For a time Dennis sat listless, feeling too wretched even to move from
the spot.  Then he got up and made his way back to the cliff.  He stood
on the summit, scanning the whole circumference of the shining sea.
Not a sail was in sight.  He scarcely knew whether he was disappointed
or not.  Supposing a vessel hove into view, he durst not try to attract
the attention of some one on board.  If it were English it would be
welcome as a spar to a drowning man.  If it were Spanish, he might as
well jump into the maw of some sea monster.  Yet how could he discover
its nationality without at the same time betraying his presence?
Several times during that third day he climbed to the same spot, and
looked out with the same eagerness; not one glimpse did he catch of a
white wing upon the water; and he always turned away with the same
uncertainty.

He spent hours in roaming, as aimlessly as before, along the beach and
through the woodland.  Coming in the course of the day to the cliff
near which he had been cast ashore, he remembered that hitherto he had
not made a complete circuit of the island; the beach northward appeared
to be barred by huge masses of rock.  In his present mood he had no
curiosity to see what lay beyond; he supposed indeed that, if he did
care to clamber toilsomely over the barrier, he would simply arrive at
a point of the beach which he had already reached from the other side.

But later in the day, when the tedium of inaction had become
unbearable, he started to explore the lower course of the streamlet on
whose bank he had slept.  He found that the channel gradually widened,
the banks growing higher as he neared the sea.  By and by he came upon
a wide pool on whose rim a mass of seaweed lay rotting in the sun, and
stooping out of sheer curiosity he dipped his finger and, tasting,
discovered that the water was salt, as he had supposed.  Clearly at
high tide the sea came thus far up the gully.  The entrance was as yet
hidden from him by the jutting shoulder of the cliff, but he could hear
now the light rumble of surf upon the beach, and he went on, feeling
some curiosity to learn whereabouts on the shore he would arrive.

He had taken but a few more steps when, rounding the projecting cliff,
he came upon a scene which petrified him with astonishment.  Docked in
the sand, lying over on her side, was the battered hulk of a two-masted
vessel.  Her stern was somewhat towards him, and he read, painted
there, the word _Maid_; but so familiar was he with her lines that he
needed not the rest of the name; this was in very truth the wreck of
the _Maid Marian_.  Of her two masts only the stumps remained: her
deck, inclined towards him, was littered with a medley of rigging; her
rudder was gone, part of her bulwarks torn away.

There was an uncanny look about the hapless vessel as she lay there on
the sandy beach, at the head of a small bay bounded by the cliffs on
either side.  Dennis felt just such a thrill as he might have felt had
he come suddenly upon the body of a friend.  The solitude, the silence,
intensified by the rustling wash of the surf, the background of
boundless sky and ocean, combined to affect him with a sense of
desolation.  He felt a shrinking reluctance to approach, and when he
had conquered this and stood beneath the vessel's quarter, it was some
time before he summoned up the resolution to climb on board.  Then he
mounted slowly, hesitatingly, by the aid of a loose shroud, holding his
breath as if fearful of disturbing a sleeper.

All was intensely still.  Multitudinous insects were crawling this way
and that among the litter of rigging: save for these there was no sign
of life--where for two months as merry a company as ever trod deck had
talked and laughed and jested.  Dennis felt a lump in his throat as he
recalled the little incidents of the voyage: quarter-staff bouts with
old Miles Barton, wrestling matches with Harry Greville, sword-play
sometimes with the captain himself.

The hatchways were battened down.  He shrank from going below.  Evening
was drawing on; he would leave the wreck now, and return in the
morning.  And as he set his foot once more on the beach, and began to
retrace his steps up the gully, he saw the monkey grinning at him from
a tree on the cliff, and was surprised to find how pleasant and
consoling was the creature's company.

Hard on his discovery of the wreck came another discovery.  Retracing
his way up the chine, he noticed a green ledge on the cliff, some few
feet above his head, on the right-hand side.  The thought occurred to
him to rest there for a little; he could reach it by an easy climb.
When he gained the ledge, he found that it ran back for a longer
distance than he had supposed below.  At its further end grew a wild
mass of bushes and trees, some of which bore a plum-like fruit that he
had seen the monkey eating with enjoyment.

He went to pluck some of the fruit, and penetrating a little way into
the thicket, he suddenly perceived that the bushes appeared to grow
across an opening in the rock.  He pulled the strands aside, and looked
into the dark entrance of a cave.  The discovery interested him.  Might
he not find here a better lodging than the rude shelter he had made on
the bank of the stream?  It was far above high-water mark, and
conveniently placed for refuge, being accessible landwards only by the
rocky channel, and wholly hidden from observation at sea.  Yet he
paused before stepping into the cave.  Might it not be a wild beast's
lair?  True, he had seen no animals which he could have any cause to
fear, but at this moment of overstrung nerves he felt a child's dread
of the dark.

"A proper adventurer, in good sooth!" he said to himself.  "The skirts
of a nurse would befit me better than an island in the Spanish Main."

And without more ado he took a step forward and entered.

The daylight was quenched within a few feet of the opening.  Striking a
spark from his flint, he kindled a mass of dried grass he had stowed in
his pouch for this purpose, and started as the brief flame lit the
interior, for there, almost at his feet, lay a human skeleton.
Incontinently he dropped his torch and fled,--scoffing, when once more
in the free air, at his lack of courage.  But the wish to make this his
abode was vanished.  He had no fancy to consort with skeletons, and
besides, the damp and musty atmosphere of the cave was unpleasant.
Without delay he set off to regain his former resting-place.

These new discoveries had introduced a disturbing element into his life
on the island.  Uninhabited as it apparently was now, clearly it had
not always been so.  What was the history of that skeleton?  Were there
others further within the cave?  It was not the remains of a castaway,
for not even in the fiercest hurricane could the sea penetrate so far.
Had some poor wretched fugitive fled there for refuge from a human
enemy, and been slain or starved?  These questions kept him wakeful
long that night, and haunted him even while he slept.

With morning light he thought less of the cave and more of the wreck.
The _Maid Marian_ had left Plymouth well equipped with stores; the
hatchways had been battened down in the storm, and unless the sea had
poured in through holes stove in her sides, there must be below decks a
considerable quantity of materials that would prove serviceable if his
stay on the island was to be lengthened.  As soon as he had finished
his breakfast he set off to return to the chine.  It was no surprise to
him now to observe the monkey following, like an attendant lackey.

"Come, Sir Monkey," he said, with an attempt at gaiety, "let us go
together and inspect our treasure trove."

He felt again a strange sense of awe as he climbed into the vessel's
waist, and trod her planks delicately.  But remarking that her position
had been shifted slightly by the incoming tide during the night, and
that little streams of water were escaping from holes on to the sand,
he reflected that it behoved him to lose no time if he wished to secure
her contents, for any day a tempest might spring up and shatter the
hulk irretrievably.  Gulping down the timidity that still troubled him,
he climbed to the quarter-deck, and went forward through the broken
doorway into the main cabin.

The floor was littered with the possessions of his dear lost comrades.
Here was Harry Greville's sword; near it a pistol-case that had
belonged to Philip Masterton.  He stepped over these and other relics
and entered the captain's cabin beyond.  Here, too, all was ruin and
disorder.  Garments, instruments of navigation, an ink-horn, trumpets,
a drum, Sir Martin's arms and breastplate, the big leather-bound book
in which he wrote his diary of the voyage, lay pell-mell on the floor.
Dennis could hardly bear to look upon these mementoes of the lost, and
he soon turned his back on them and returned to the open part of the
vessel, where he sat for a time, given up to melancholy brooding.

At last he rose, threw off the oppression, and ventured to force up the
main hatch forward of the mainmast and descend.

[Illustration: Insulae Virginis Charta]

Even now he could not bear to remain long below.  He explored the whole
length of the vessel in sections, returning at short intervals to
breathe the fresh air and enjoy the cheerful sunlight.  On one of these
occasions he was amused to see that his faithful attendant had now
ventured to quit the security of its tree, and was sitting on a rock
within a few yards of the vessel, an interested spectator.

His inspection of the contents of the vessel fully rewarded him.  In
the steward's store abaft the mainmast he found a large number of
utensils--an iron pease-pot, a copper fish-kettle, a skimmer, several
wooden ladles, a gridiron, a frying-pan, a couple of pipkins, a
chafing-dish, a fire-shovel, a pair of bellows, trays, platters,
porringers, trenchers, drinking-cans, two well-furnished tinder-boxes,
candles, and candlesticks.  There were casks of beer and wine, great
boxes of biscuits, bags of oatmeal, pease, and salt, whole sides of
home-cured bacon, several cheeses, a tierce of vinegar, jars of honey
and sugar, flasks of oil, pots of balsam and other salves, a pledget
for spreading plasters, a pair of scissors, and several rolls of linen,
these last evidently provided for the exigencies of fighting.  In the
carpenter's store forward there were hammers, awls, chisels, files, a
saw, hundreds of nails, both sixpenny and fourpenny.  In the armoury
were half-pikes, cutlasses, muskets, with bandoliers, rests, and
moulds, calivers, barrels of gunpowder and tar, and leaden bullets,
such as were to be bought at Plymouth six pounds for threepence.  And
as to the other appurtenances of a well-found ship, Dennis was almost
bewildered by the quantity of them--bolts, and chains, and pulleys,
buckets, mops, sand-glasses, horn lanterns, faggots for fuel,
fishing-nets, articles of apparel, things for trade and barter: the
list would fill a page or two.  And he rejoiced exceedingly to find
that all were in good condition, even the cheeses: there could not be
even a rat on board to commit depredations.

Surveying this great and substantial store, Dennis rubbed his head in
puzzlement.

"'Tis a month's work," he said ruefully, "and for one pair of hands.
The grave and reverend signor yonder will scarce assist, I trow,
indeed, 'tis to be feared he may be thievishly inclined, and needs must
I bestow the goods skilfully.  Well, to it; time and tide, they say,
waits for no man."

He began by carrying the biscuits and other perishables from the hold
to the bulwarks, where he rigged up a running tackle, and lowered the
bags and boxes to the sand beneath.  So intent was he upon his task
that it was with a start of surprise and alarm he noticed that the tide
was flowing in, and had almost reached the vessel.  Threatened with the
loss of the precious stores, he was hard put to it to drag and carry
and roll them up the beach beyond the reach of the waves, and the sun
was far down towards the western horizon before he had them high and
dry.  By this time the sea was several feet deep around the vessel, and
the thought struck him: what if the wreck were to float away on the
tide and all the remaining salvage be snatched from him?  So grave a
misfortune must be prevented.  At once he swam out to the ship, and
securely fastening to the stump of the broken mast one of the stout
cables he found below, he again plunged into the sea, and in a little
had wound the other end about two sturdy trees growing out from the
cliff.

While the wreck remained in its present position it was desirable that
he should have his lodging close by.  There was no shelter on the shore
itself, nor did the cliff promise a comfortable abiding place; and his
thoughts returned to the cave, which was a good deal nearer than the
spot where he had rested the previous night.

Among the things he had brought ashore were a lantern, a tinder-box,
and a candle.  Fortified with a light, he entered the cave with less
tremor than on the previous evening, and looked about him.  The cave
was deep: his light did not reach the further extremity.  The roof was
damp and green with moss.  There was the skeleton, stretched on the
rocky floor.  By its side, as he now saw, lay a hatchet of curious
shape: a little beyond were some coloured beads.  But within the circle
of light he discovered no other remnants of humanity; these were not
very terrible after all, and he might have taken up his abode there but
for the fusty, humid atmosphere.  He gave up the idea of sleeping in
the cave, but made for himself, just outside and across the entrance, a
couch of cloaks taken from the wreck.

Before settling himself for the night, he returned to the base of the
cliff, opened with the hatchet one of his precious boxes of biscuits,
and taking a handful, sat on a flat rock to make an unaccustomed
supper.  He had barely eaten a mouthful when he saw a brown figure leap
from somewhere above his head, swoop on the still open box, clutch one
of the biscuits, and spring away with a long chatter of delight.

"Ah, knave!" he exclaimed, "my prophetic soul avouched that your
gravity cloaked an evil bent.  You are a thief, Sir Monkey.  But I do
not grudge you the biscuit; your constancy in attendance merits some
reward.  A toothsome morsel, is it not?  It pleases me to see your
pleasure, and--yes, I have it!  You are my sole companion on this
island; why should we not be friends?  You must learn a rightful
humility, to be sure.  Regarding me as the dispenser of luxuries, will
you not love me, with the respectful love of a dependent?  Come, let us
see."

Rising from his seat in time to forestall a second application to the
biscuit box, he went to it, took half a dozen, shut down the lid, and
returned to the rock.

"Now, Mirandola," he said--"I name you Mirandola for your wisdom, not
your larceny--here in my hand I hold one of the twice-cooked, the
fellow of the one you found so delectable.  Come and take it, and give
thanks."

But the animal sat motionless on its branch, grinning and gibbering.

"You do me wrong to suspect me," Dennis went on.  "Well, this is to
prove my good faith."

He flung the biscuit on to the sand a few yards away, and laughed
quietly to see what ensued.  The monkey chattered volubly with
excitement, swung itself to a lower branch, then back to its former
perch, where it sat for a moment blinking and grinning.  Then it
descended with extraordinary rapidity to the foot of the tree, crouched
behind the trunk while a man might count ten, and with frantic haste,
as though fearful its courage would not endure, it darted on all fours
across to the biscuit, looking in its movements like a gigantic spider.
Seizing the delicacy, it sped back to the tree, squatted on the lowest
branch, and set its jaws right merrily to work.

"That is your first lesson, Mirandola," said Dennis, placing the
remaining biscuits in his pouch, in full sight of the animal.  "The
second begins at once; it enjoineth patience."

And heedless of the loud outcry made by the monkey when it saw these
choice comestibles disappear, Dennis returned to his couch, and laid
himself down for the night.




CHAPTER IV

Salvage

Rising with the sun, Dennis set about making a more careful examination
of the hull of the _Maid Marian_.  The leaks in her timbers were rather
more serious than he had supposed.  Clearly they would prevent her from
drifting out to sea on the tide, but they would also render her final
break-up inevitable in the event of a violent storm from the
north-west.  There were signs on the face of the cliff that at times
the waves dashed over the narrow beach of sand against the wall of rock
beyond.  In these latitudes, as the fate of the _Maid Marian_ proved,
storms arose without warning, and with incredible swiftness; and it
behoved Dennis to make all speed in saving the ship's stores.

At low tide on this day, and on many that followed, he worked hard at
his task.  He rigged up a block and pulley in the waist, by means of
which he was able to hoist casks and other heavy objects up the
hatchways and lower them over the side of the vessel.  It was more
difficult to convey them from the vessel to a place of safety beyond
the reach of the tide.  At first he tried to haul them by a rope, but
finding soon that he succeeded only in working up a ridge of sand which
rendered haulage exhausting and in some cases impossible, he bethought
himself of the device of employing rollers, such as he had seen used by
fishermen on the beach at home.  It was an easy matter, with the tools
now at hand, to lop off and strip some straight boughs suited to his
purpose, and upon these he brought, slowly and not without pains, the
bulkier goods to safe harbourage.  The tide always rose about the
vessel too soon for his impatience; but the work was arduous, the
intervals were really needed for rest, and they gave opportunities of
furthering his acquaintance with the monkey.

His relations with Mirandola, indeed, were placed on a sound and
satisfactory footing long before he had emptied the hull.  The biscuits
were invaluable.  At intervals, now long, now short, he would throw one
towards the monkey, which watched all his doings at the wreck day by
day with unfailing regularity.  Little by little he diminished the
length of his throw, until, on the third day after his first lesson,
Mirandola had gained sufficient confidence to approach him to within a
few inches.  On the fourth day, after keeping the monkey waiting longer
than usual, Dennis took a biscuit from his pouch, held it for a moment
between his fingers, then put it back again.

"It is time, Mirandola," he said, "that your education was completed.
You are, I verily believe, as wise as a serpent; will you not believe
that I am harmless as a dove?  This is the same biscuit I stowed but
now in my pouch; it is for you; it is yours if you will take it
mannerly.  No, I will not cast it on the sand; it is more seemly to
take it from my hand, and, I do assure you, it will be no less
relishable.  Come, then, dear wiseacre; have I ever deceived you?  Show
a little confidence in your true friend and well-wisher."

He held forth the biscuit, with an alluring smile.  Mirandola cocked
his head on one side, gazed at this dispenser of delectable things with
a searching solemnity, and then crawled forward with watchful eye,
dubiously halting more than once.  At length he came to Dennis's feet,
and sat up, with so gravely sad an expression that Dennis found it hard
not to laugh.  Then, thrusting up his long arm, he made a grab at the
biscuit.

"Not so, Mirandola," said Dennis, holding it beyond the monkey's reach.
"Manners maketh man; assuredly they will not mar monkeys.  Ape the
gentle philosopher your namesake; be courteous and discreet.  Now, once
more."

He lowered the biscuit slowly, keeping his eyes on the creature's face.
But with a suddenness that took him aback, Mirandola raised himself on
his hind legs, flung out an arm, and, before Dennis could withdraw it,
held the biscuit in his skinny paw.

"Wellaway!" laughed Dennis.  "I may keep my breath to cool my porridge,
for all the effect my words have upon your savage nature."

Then, to his surprise, the monkey came to him again, and held out his
hand.

"You shall not be disappointed," he said.  "Not for the world would I
reject your advances.  Here is a biscuit, and with this, shall we say,
our friendship is sealed."

And it was not long before Mirandola would sit upon his knee, and take
food from his hand with all mannerliness; and, its distrust gone,
showed itself to be as affectionate and devoted as a dog.

Dennis availed himself in other ways of the hours when the tide
interrupted his labour with the stores.  There was no lack of planking
and tarpaulin in the vessel; these he utilized in building on the
ledge, and near a fresh spring that ran out of the cliff, a little hut
about two trees that grew near enough together to form uprights for his
roof.  Then he erected two small sheds close by, wherein to shelter his
goods from the weather.  At first he fumbled with the unfamiliar tools,
not omitting to pinch his fingers as he hammered in the nails.  But he
soon acquired a certain dexterity, and was indeed mightily pleased with
his handiwork.

Every now and again he made a trip across the island, to discover
whether any vessels were in sight.  Once or twice he descried a sail on
the horizon; once, indeed, he felt some excitement and anxiety as he
saw a bark under full sail bearing straight, as he thought, for the
shore.  But in this he was mistaken; the vessel altered her course, and
Dennis, watching her diminishing form, hardly knew whether to be glad
or sorry.  He was in truth too busy for self-commiseration: work filled
his days, unbroken sleep his nights.  His feeling of loneliness had
almost entirely passed away, for Mirandola was his inseparable
companion, and it pleased his fancy to talk to the monkey as to a human
being.

So engrossing had his labour been that he had taken no account of the
passage of time.  It came upon him with a shock, once, that the
unnumbered days were flitting away.  The idea that he was doomed to
grow old upon this island, and linger out his years in endless
solitude, struck his imagination with a chill, and set him climbing the
cliff in a kind of frenzy, to scan once more the wide horizon for a
sail.  If at that moment a vessel had hove in sight, he would have
flown a flag, fired a musket, to attract attention, reckless what crew
it bore, so deep was his yearning to see a fellow man.  When the fit
passed, it left him with a new desire.  Never yet had the possibility
occurred to him of leaving the island.  Could he construct a raft, or
build a boat--nay, was there a chance of making the _Maid Marian_
herself, battered as she was, seaworthy?  The absurdity of attempting
to navigate single-handed a bark of near a hundred tons set him
laughing; but the idea suggested a new outlet for his energy, just at
the time when the conclusion of his salvage work had bereft him of
occupation.

He became fired with the purpose of saving the vessel.  The weather
hitherto had been perfect; but sooner or later a storm must come, and
then the ship would be ground to splinters against the cliff.  Was it
possible to float her?  He had unloaded what he imagined to be a good
many tons of stores; thus lightened, could she be moved?  If he could
succeed in floating her, whither could she be taken?  His tour of the
island had failed to discover any harbour; there was little to gain and
much to lose by allowing himself to drift about aimlessly in such a
hulk.  Suddenly an idea struck him.  Would it not be possible to devise
some means of floating her up the gully, round the shoulder of the
cliff?  Her draught was not great: at high tide the water was deep
enough to carry her many yards beyond her present position, to a point
where she would be at once invisible from the open sea and protected
from the weather.

At the next fall of the tide he made a thorough inspection of the
wreck.  It was easy to find the leaks, for at every ebb the water that
had entered the vessel at the flood gushed out in tiny cascades.  Many
a time he had seen ships careened and caulked in the dockyard at
Plymouth.  He had plenty of rope of which to make oakum, and of tar
more than enough to meet his needs; in his search through the vessel he
had lighted on no caulking iron, but a long nail would serve, and it
should go hard with him, he thought, but he would make the old hulk
sound and seaworthy ere many days were gone.

He found an unexpected assistant in Mirandola.  He had teased out but
an inch or two of rope when the monkey squatted down by his side and
began with his strong nimble fingers to copy him, looking up in his
face with an air of such busy importance that Dennis was fain to lie
back and laugh.

"By my troth, Sir Mirandola," he said, "this is friendship indeed.  And
you outdo me, on my soul; you pick two inches to my one.  'Tis not the
daintiest of work for fingers untrained to it, and if it pleases you,
why, I will e'en leave it to you, and admire this unwonted usefulness
in a philosopher."

But he found that when he ceased, the monkey ceased also.

"Poor knave!" he said.  "You see not the end.  'Tis but an apish trick
after all.  Well, God forbid that I should judge your motive; I am
thankful for your help, and we will work together."

Between them the two collaborators soon had a fine heap of oakum ready
for use, and a couple of days' hard work at low tide sufficed to caulk
all the seams.  Mirandola's share in this second part of the job gave
Dennis more amusement.  The busy creature solemnly dabbed tar on sound
parts of the timbers, and chattered with disgust when he discovered
that the stuff clung to his hairy skin, defying all his efforts to get
rid of it.

"I' faith, I named you more fittingly than I wot," quoth Dennis.
"Pico, your illustrious namesake, was a gentleman of rare and delicate
taste.  Touch pitch and thou art defiled.  But a little turpentine,
mayhap, will cleanse the outward spots; and as for your inward
hurt--what think you of a spread of honey on your biscuit?"

Mirandola thought nobly of the new delicacy, and came in time to look
for honey whenever he had imitated Dennis with more than usual energy.

The leaks having been well caulked, Dennis proceeded to pump the water
from the lower parts of the hold.  He awaited the next high tide with
great eagerness.  To his joy the vessel floated, and rode fairly
upright on her keel.  The tide carried her several yards up the beach,
leaving her again high and dry at the ebb.

But Dennis now found himself faced by a difficulty.  He wished to get
the vessel round the shoulder of the cliff, so that the tide might
carry her up the chine to the pool below his hut and sheds.  The
distance was barely eighty yards, but he had noticed, from the movement
of a log floating some little way out, that the set of the current was
from north to west; so that if once she were allowed to float free, and
felt the force of the current, she would probably drift away in the
opposite direction from what he desired.  On the other hand, if she
were driven too high on the beach, she might stick so firmly in the
sand that it would be impossible to move her, and then she would lie at
the mercy of the first north-west gale.

His little nautical knowledge was at first at a loss.

"Mirandola, your speechless wisdom is of no avail," he said ruefully,
as he sat at his fire one evening, feeding the monkey with pease
porridge.  "You and I are both landsmen; unlike you, I adventured
forth, to gain gold, and fight the don Spaniards, if so the fates
should ordain.  Here is never a Spaniard to fight, and as for gold, the
wealth of Croesus would not at this moment benefit me a jot.  If I had
been bred to the sea, now, I should not be at this pass."

But long cogitation, and another visit to the ship, determined a course
of action.  The windlass, he discovered, was uninjured, and though it
was very stiff, he could still manage to turn it.  A big jagged rock
jutted out from the cliff near the shoulder round which the vessel must
be warped.  To this rock he carried a rope from the stump of the
mainmast and securely fastened it.  This would prevent the vessel from
drifting out to sea.  Then, with a hatchet from the ship's stores he
cut a number of thick branches from the trees along the gully, and
pitching them into the pool floated them one by one on to the beach
alongside the wreck.  There was plenty of rope on board to fashion
these into a stout raft, on to which, with the aid of the windlass, he
lowered a kedge anchor just sufficiently heavy to hold the vessel in a
calm.  It was a matter of some difficulty to get the anchor so evenly
adjusted on the raft that the latter would not turn turtle; but after
some patient manoeuvring Dennis arranged it squarely in the centre, and
when the tide came in the whole floated with a fair appearance of
stability.  Then with a long pole Dennis cautiously punted the raft out
beyond the gully, paying out as he went a stout cable, connecting the
anchor with the windlass.  Some thirty yards beyond the gully, at a
point near enough in shore to be beyond the reach of the current, he
prepared to drop the anchor.  It was too heavy for him even to move;
the only plan that suggested itself was to bring about what he had up
to that moment been most anxious to prevent--the raft must now be
intentionally upset.  One by one he cut away the lashings of the
outermost logs on the seaward side.  At last he felt by the movement of
the raft that only his own weight prevented the crazy structure from
turning over.  He slid from the raft into the sea; the far side sank
and the anchor slipped over and went with a thud to the bottom.  Then
the raft righted itself, and Dennis scrambled aboard.

The rest was easy.  When the tide ebbed it carried the wreck inch by
inch towards the anchor, for with the aid of the windlass Dennis was
able to keep the cable constantly taut, while at the same time he paid
out the rope connecting the vessel with the shore.  A couple of tides
brought him in this way up to the anchor; then, transferring the shore
cable to a stout tree some distance up the gully, he slacked off the
kedge line when the tide was running up, and allowed the wreck to be
carried shorewards.  In this way the _Maid Marian_ floated slowly up
the gully on the flood, and another couple of tides brought her within
a few yards of the pool, which he designed for her permanent harbourage.

Below this there was a narrow bar that threatened to baulk him.  At low
tide, indeed, he had to shovel away a large amount of sand in the
middle of the channel, and once came near losing his temper with
Mirandola, who, with well-meant industry, and a quite innocent
pleasure, set about scooping back the sand as it was dug out.  But the
animal tired of this fatiguing amusement; the difficulty was overcome;
and when at last the vessel rode gently into the little natural harbour
below the hut, Dennis hailed the success of his long toil with a
cheerful "Huzza!" and broached a cask of sack.  Of this indulgence he
partly repented, for the monkey seized upon the empty can when he laid
it down, and drained it greedily.

"No, no, my friend," said Dennis, gravely.  "Wine maketh glad the heart
of man; I do not read that it is anywise a drink for brutes.  And all
your philosophy would not reconcile me to a drunken Mirandola.  'Be not
among wine-bibbers,' says the wisest of kings and men; I bethink me he
says also, 'My son, eat thou honey, for it is good!'  You shall have
honey, my venerable son."




CHAPTER V

The Edge of the Marsh

During his operations about the wreck, Dennis had noticed that the
monkey showed a strange aversion for the sea.  At low tide, when the
vessel was high and dry, he quite cheerfully accompanied his benefactor
on board; but as a rule, when he saw the tide rolling in, he chattered
angrily, swarmed down the side of the vessel, and posted himself at the
nearest point above high-water mark.  Only on the one occasion, when he
mounted the windlass, did he remain on deck when the tide was at flood;
there he seemed to regard himself as out of reach of the waves.  Dennis
wondered whether the dread of the sea was a characteristic of the
monkey tribe, or whether Mirandola had at some time suffered a
sea-change which it was determined not to repeat.

He took endless pleasure in studying the amiable creature; and when,
his work with the ship being finished, he began once more to take
lengthy strolls across the island, he drew a new delight from the
companionship of the monkey.  The friendship being so firmly
established, Mirandola showed off his accomplishments with a freedom he
had not displayed when he regarded this newcomer with distrust and
suspicion.  Dennis laughed to see his antics in the trees.  He would
curl his long tail about a branch, and swing to and fro with manifest
enjoyment.  Sometimes, clutching a banana with one hand, he would pick
another with one foot, and hold a third to his mouth with the second
hand.  Sometimes when he saw Dennis holding his forehead in a brown
study, he would rub his long gaunt arms over his own brow with a
wistful look that brought a smile to the lad's face.  He was amiability
itself, and showed genuine distress when Dennis took occasion to scold
him for some piece of inconvenient prankishness.

Now that his thoughts were no longer engrossed with his salvage work,
Dennis more often speculated on his future.  The prospect was not very
encouraging.  Supposing he could carry out his half-formed purpose of
building a boat, what chance was there of surviving a voyage across the
ocean in a vessel that, untrained as he was in handicraft, must
necessarily be a clumsy thing?  And unless he could risk an ocean
voyage he felt that he had better remain where he was.  No European
nation but the Spaniards and the Portuguese had settlements on the
American coast.  What might be expected at the hands of the Spaniards
he knew full well.  Had he not heard from the lips of one Master John
Merridew fearsome tales of their treachery and cruelty?  John Merridew
had sailed with Captain John Hawkins to the West Indies, with Master
Francis Drake as one of the company.  Forced by foul weather into the
port of St. John de Ulua, the Captain made great account of a certain
Spanish gentleman named Augustine de Villa Nueva, and used him like a
nobleman.  Yet this same Augustine, sitting at dinner one day with the
Captain, would certainly have killed him with a poniard which he had
secretly in his sleeve, had not one John Chamberlain espied the weapon
and prevented the foul deed.  And recalling Merridew's narrative,
Dennis wondered what had become of those hundred poor wretches who,
when victuals ran short, and the ship's company were driven to eat
parrots and monkeys and the very rats that swarmed in the hold,
preferred to shift for themselves on shore, rather than starve on
ship-board.  In imagination he saw that touching scene, when the
General, as Merridew called Captain Hawkins, gave to each man five
yards of cloth, embraced them in turn, counselled them to serve God and
love one another; and thus courteously bade them a sorrowful farewell,
promising, if God sent him safe to England, to do what he could to
bring home such as remained alive.  That Captain Hawkins would fulfil
his promise Dennis believed; but how many of those Englishmen were
still living?  He reflected that he at least had food and present
safety; compared with theirs his lot was a king's.

But he was not to escape misfortune altogether.  One day the storm he
had so long been expecting broke over the island, hurling great seas
into the mouth of the chine, threatening to dash the _Maid Marian_
against the rocks or sweep her out into the ocean.  In the midst of
pelting, blinding rain Dennis strove to ensure her safety.  She
wrenched at her anchor; every moment he feared lest her mooring ropes
should be snapped; he could do little but keep a watch on the
fastenings.  And while he was thus watching, a roaring flood passed
through the gully from the plateau above, swamping his hut, washing
away some of his hardly-won stores; and the fierce blast tore off the
roof of one of his sheds, exposing its contents to all the fury of the
weather.

Next day he did what he could to repair the damage.  Fortunately much
of his perishable goods was contained in stout boxes which he always
kept securely fastened, and the things he lost were those he could best
spare.

In the afternoon of that day, he went across to the opposite side of
the island, as he was wont to do at intervals, to take a look-out from
the high cliff there.  He wondered whether the storm had cast any other
ill-fated vessel upon the shore.  But, scanning the whole horizon, he
saw nothing but league upon league of restless sea.

"Our solitude is not to be disturbed, Mirandola," he said to the
monkey, "for which let us be thankful.  Or ought we to deplore it?  I
wish you could speak, my friend, and tell me something of your history.
Are you the last of your race, I wonder?  Well, so am I.  I have no
kith nor kin; nor, as it appears, have you.  I have a humble estate in
an island--to be sure, somewhat larger than this.  Now I come to think
of it, this island is yours; it is a mark of nobility of soul--or is it
poverty of spirit?  I cannot say--that you do not regard me as a
supplanter.  Good Holles, my steward, would not brook the intrusion of
any adventurer on my lands.  Heigh ho!  How fares the old fellow, I
wonder?  How he shook his old head when I acquainted him with my
purpose to join Sir Martin Blunt in his voyage to the Spanish Main!
'God save you, sir!' said he, and asked whether he should sell my
whippets!  One thing I know, Mirandola: that if it please God to bring
me safe home in season, Holles will give me a faithful account of his
stewardship.  Let me think I am your steward, good my friend.  And now
let us return to our honey-pot."

On the way back, Dennis struck somewhat to the left of his usual path,
to skirt the marsh on its south-western instead of its north-eastern
side.  It was far larger in area than when he had first seen it; its
outlet was too narrow to carry off the surplusage due to the tremendous
rains.  Dennis was picking his way around the oozy edge, letting his
thoughts travel back to the pleasant land of Devon, when suddenly he
was brought up short by the sight of a mark in the soft earth, the
strangeness of which mightily surprised and perplexed him.  Parallel
with his own tracks there ran for a few yards a faint ribbon-like
track--such a track as might be made by a large cart wheel that had
rested very lightly on the surface.  It was a single track: following
its course, he found that it disappeared into the water, just as he had
seen the mark of a cart wheel disappear into a roadside horse-pond at
home.

He looked around.  There was nothing to account for the mark.  He
scouted the idea that it had been actually made by a wheel; a vehicle
must have been drawn by animals, and there were no hoof-marks to match.
With all his puzzling he could find no explanation, and though he
looked warily about him as he went on his way, with some return of his
old feeling of nervousness, he saw no sign to suggest that the island
had been visited.

It was a day or two before he again found himself near the marsh.  He
had been fishing from the base of the high cliff that formed his usual
look-out.  A kind of natural pier of broken rock jutted out from the
cliff seawards, and the deep water on each side was the favourite
resort at high tide of shoals of small fish, which chose it, he
supposed, because the depth was not great enough for the ground sharks
that sometimes made their appearance off the shore, and the little fish
could disport themselves there in security.

Carrying his catch on a string--enough for his own dinner, for
Mirandola would not touch it--he passed again by the brink of the
marsh, and once more was puzzled by the wheel-like track which he had
seen before and been unable to explain.  The marsh had somewhat shrunk
in the interval; the receding water had left more of the track visible:
and the outer soil having been baked hard by the sun, the strange
imprint was clearer and more definite.

It occurred to Dennis now to attempt to trace the mark in the opposite
direction, away from the point where it disappeared in the water.  It
speedily grew fainter as he came to harder soil, and he lost it
altogether where it entered undergrowth which had no doubt been
partially submerged when the marsh was at its highest.  But after some
search he found it again where it emerged from the rank vegetation, and
from that point he traced it with little difficulty, for it kept fairly
close to the margin of the lake.  Its resemblance to the track of a
wheel had now ceased; not even the most rickety of carts, driven by a
drunken tranter on a Devonshire lane, could have made such erratic
movements as must have caused this shallow winding mark on the soil.
Dennis followed its curves with persistent curiosity, not unmixed with
a vague uneasiness.  Mirandola accompanied him, springing lightly from
bough to bough of the trees nearest the edge of the marsh, descending
with extraordinary quickness and loping along the ground where gaps
intervened, or the fringe of the woodland belt took a trend inwards.

At length the tracking came perforce to an end.  Again the trail
disappeared into the water, and Dennis halted, feeling a little vexed
that his patience was, after all, to bear no fruit.  He looked round
for Mirandola.  The monkey had disappeared, exploring, no doubt,
thought Dennis, a close-packed thicket that came within a few yards of
the morass, having apparently crowded out all nobler trees save one
slender cedar which, dominating the undergrowth, seemed taller than it
really was.

Dennis was about to give up the problem as hopeless and go on his way,
when suddenly he heard Mirandola chattering in a manner that was new to
him.  The moment after, the monkey sprang from the thicket into the
tree, and climbed with frantic speed to the very top, where he sat
gibbering and shaking with terror.  Dennis, wondering what had
perturbed him, took a step forward, then started back in a cold shiver.
A huge serpent was rearing itself from the midst of the undergrowth and
winding its coils about the trunk of the tree.

Mirandola on the topmost branch had now ceased his chattering, and
clung, watching the monster with dilated eyes.  The poor creature was
helpless.  To descend from his perch would have been fatal; there was
no other tree at hand to which it might escape.  Indeed, under the
fascination of the serpent's baleful eyes, as it slowly drew its
immense coils up the trunk, the monkey lost all power of motion; and
Dennis himself, even with the thicket between him and the monster, felt
a sort of chill paralysis as he watched its sinister movements.  For
half a minute he stood rooted to the spot; then, making an effort to
throw off this dire oppression, he tried to think of some means of
helping the monkey.  At that moment of danger, he was conscious for the
first time of the strength of his affection for the animal whose
companionship had done so much to relieve the awful solitude of the
island.  Unless he intervened, Mirandola was doomed, and the thought of
losing Mirandola filled him with a fierce longing to slay this monster
that was crawling inch by inch towards its prey.

His first impulse was to run back to his hut for the gun he kept there
ready loaded; but slow as the serpent's progress was, before he could
return to the spot the tragedy would have ended.  Then he remembered
how the reptiles in the woods at home were killed.  A blow on the
vertebrae crippled them; could he cripple this huge creature, which
even yet had not heaved all its length into the tree?  His only weapon
was the sailor's clasp-knife which he always carried at his girdle.  He
opened it impulsively, then hesitated.  If he failed to hit the
vertebrae, and dealt only a flesh wound, he might perchance save the
monkey, but could he then save himself?  He knew nothing of a boa
constrictor's power of movement; yet his instinct told him that, if
once enfolded in those monstrous coils, he must inevitably be crushed
to death.  But he could not stand and see his pet mangled and devoured:
the serpent, moving deliberately, as though aware of its victim's
paralysis, was not yet beyond his reach.  Springing through the
undergrowth, he marked a spot some distance from the reptile's tail.
The serpent heard his approach, and turned its head slowly in his
direction; but a second later Dennis drove his knife with all his force
at the centre of the sleek round mass.

Next moment he was thrown sprawling on the ground, by a flick of the
tail as the upper part of the serpent's body writhed convulsively under
the blow.  He jerked himself to his feet and leapt away through the
undergrowth in panic fear.  A few steps brought him to open ground, and
then, crushing down his nervous terror, he looked back.  The coils were
slipping down the tree, and in a moment it was clear that the serpent's
power was gone; its huge bulk moved uncontrollably: its motor force was
destroyed.  Dennis ventured to enter the thicket again.  When the
serpent reached the ground, it writhed as he had seen injured eels and
earthworms writhe, but its movements were all involuntary; Mirandola
was saved.

[Illustration: "Dennis saves Mirandola."]

The monkey was now chattering volubly, but still clung to his perch.
Clearly he would not venture to descend while his enemy moved.  For
some time Dennis watched it; then, feeling that he must put an end to
its maimed life, he hurried away to fetch his gun.  A bullet in the
head: and the reptile lay motionless.

Even then some little time elapsed before Mirandola yielded to Dennis's
persuasive calls and slid, still somewhat nervously, to the ground.  He
avoided the reptile's body, and scampered away with shrill cries to the
open.  When Dennis overtook him, the monkey sprang upon his shoulder,
and so they returned to the hut.

After this thrilling experience Dennis felt somewhat less at ease in
his peregrinations of the island.  He had come to think that he had
nothing to fear there so long as it was unvisited by men.  But the
thickets that gave hiding to one huge reptile might harbour many more.
Henceforth he walked more warily, and never ventured far from his hut
without a gun.




CHAPTER VI

The Spanish Whip

Dennis had given up the idea of building a boat as a means of escape
from the island; but now that time again hung heavy on his hands, he
reverted to it as a refuge from the tedium of idleness.  It promised to
give him much labour, for, unless he stripped the planking from the
_Maid Marian_, he must needs fell trees for himself, and prepare his
timbers as well as his unskill could devise.  The trees of the island
were for the most part unknown to him; and he was not aware of the
Indian practice of hollowing out a cedar trunk with fire or hatchet.
In his wanderings he now began to take note of the different species,
with a view to selecting one that would best suit his tools.

One day, when he was strolling through the woodland on this errand, he
was amazed, and not a little alarmed, to hear, from some spot far to
his right, what seemed to him to be the ring of axes.  He halted,
incredulous.  The island, he was assured, had no other inhabitant; yet
he could not be mistaken; the sound of tree-felling reminded him of
home, and he felt a sudden deep yearning for the combes and holts of
far-off Devon.  But this feeling was immediately quelled by a sense of
danger.  Who were these woodcutters?  No friends, he was sure; he had
given up hope of finding friends upon these remote coasts.  And if not
friends, discovery by these spelt death to him, or slavery to which
death would be preferable.

He was minded to turn about and seek safety in his hut.  Built upon the
edge of the chine, it could only be discovered by careful exploration
of the woodland, and the chine was all but invisible from the sea.
There he might remain in hiding, with a fair chance that he would not
be found.  But this first impulse passed.  He felt an overmastering
curiosity to see who these visitors were.  Whence had they come, he
wondered?  Why, if they came from the distant mainland, had they
crossed the sea?  He could not suppose that wood was lacking upon the
shores of the great continent.

Slowly, with infinite caution, he began to thread his way towards the
sound.  There were open spaces amid the woodland; these he durst not
cross, but kept always in the shelter of the trees.  He dreaded lest
Mirandola should betray him by a cry; but the monkey leapt from bough
to bough almost noiselessly, as if he too had taken alarm from the
unwonted sound.  A few weeks before, Dennis himself would have found it
difficult to make his way through the woods and the undergrowth without
giving signs of his presence by the snapping of twigs or the rustle of
parting foliage; but the abiding sense of danger which had oppressed
him during his earlier passages across the island had bred in him a
wariness of movement that was now almost as instinctive as in the wild
creatures whose lives depended on their caution.

Guiding himself by the sounds, he was drawn towards a grove of trees
that lay about two hundred yards from the southern beach.  Only a day
or two before he had struck his hatchet into one of them, and concluded
from its soft white sappy rind that it would not provide fit timber for
his boat.  Yet it was clearly these trees upon which the unseen woodmen
were at work.  He stole forward, and coming to a dense fringe of
undergrowth beyond which the grove lay, he edged his way into the
thicket, and very stealthily pressed the foliage aside until he got a
view of what was doing.

The trees grew somewhat far apart, and across a fairly open space he
saw the strangers whose unexpected presence was causing him such
concern.  Five men, stripped to the waist, were hard at work with axes.
Four of them had dusky skins of reddish hue; the fifth, a short,
thickset, brawny man, the muscles of whose arms showed like great
globes, was clearly a white man, though his hands and arms were stained
a bright scarlet quite different from the red duskiness of southern
natives, or the red-brown caused by exposure to sun and wind.  As they
moved, the five men clanked the chains that fettered their ankles to
stout logs of wood.  A little apart stood three men looking on,
laughing and talking together in a tongue strange to Dennis.  They were
big swarthy fellows, with soft wide-brimmed hats, each decked with a
feather, brown leather doublets and hose, and long boots.  Each bore a
caliver and a whip.

The sun was high in the heavens, its beams beating down through the
trees upon the unprotected backs of the toilers.  Sweat was pouring
from them.  The trees were thick, some at least two yards in
circumference; to cut them through needed no slight exertion.  The
white labourer paused to draw his arm across his reeking brow.  Then
one of the watchers strolled across from the tree against which he had
been lolling, and raising his whip, brought the thong with a stinging
cut across the back of the slave who had dared to intermit his labours.
A red streak showed livid on the white skin.  For a moment it seemed to
Dennis, watching the scene, that the victim was about to turn upon his
assailant with the axe, his sole weapon.  An expression of deadly rage
writhed the features of his red, bearded face.  His grip tightened upon
the axe.  But he controlled his impulse with an effort.  The warder
laughed brutally, flung a taunt, and cracked his whip in the air in
challenge and menace.  Sullenly the woodman resumed his task, and his
persecutor, with another laugh, turned and rejoined his companions,
applauded by their grins.

Dennis felt himself stung to anger.  This swarthy ruffian, he doubted
not, was a Spaniard, a subject of King Philip, once the consort of an
English queen.  It was not a pleasant introduction to the race
dominating the Americas.  Apparently Mirandola liked them no better
than he, for at the first sight of the strangers the monkey had fled
away.  Dennis found him a good quarter-mile distant when, taking
advantage of an interval during which the Spaniards ate and drank, and
the flagging toilers rested, he strode away to a banana grove to
refresh himself.

He watched the group till near sundown.  Several trees having been
felled, the men proceeded to hack off the branches and to chip away the
white rind.  Then the strange scarlet colour of their arms and hands
was explained.  The heart of the trees was a brilliant red.  As the
rind was stripped off, the Spaniards drew near and examined the core,
and under their direction the labourers cut and trimmed certain
selected logs.  The work was still unfinished when the sun went down,
and the leader of the Spaniards gave the word for returning to the
shore.  The logs were struck off the slaves' ankles and replaced by
manacles; then they set off.  Dennis followed them at a safe distance,
and when he came within view of the sea, there was a small vessel
riding at anchor some little distance off shore, and the slaves were in
the act of dragging a row boat through the white surf.  In this they
all put off, and darkness covered them up as they regained the ship.

Dennis returned to his hut, joined by the monkey on the way.

"Here is food for thought, Mirandola, my friend," he said.  "No fire
for us to-night!  Are you acquainted with don Spaniards and their ways?
You kept a wide berth: have you too suffered at their hands?  Who is
the poor wretch the ruffian lashed?  By his looks he would pass for an
Englishman: I hope he is not of English breed.  Yet I hope he is: what
do you make of that, Mirandola?  I protest I love your wise and
friendly countenance; but there is something warming to the heart in
the sight of one of my own kind, if such he be.  We must be up betimes,
my friend; maybe the morrow will give us assurance."

Thinking over the incident before he slept, Dennis wondered why the
party had returned to the ship.  If the purpose of their visit was to
obtain any quantity of this strange red wood, doubtless they had
several days' work before them; why had they not camped on shore?
Perhaps they felt that the slaves were safer on board; perhaps, too,
they did not care to weaken the ship's company during the hours of
night.  It was a small vessel; probably there was not a large number of
Spaniards aboard; but doubtless they were all armed like the three who
had come ashore, and their slaves, being fettered, would need but a few
to control them.  Dennis hoped that when they returned next day they
would not make too thorough a search for similar groves elsewhere in
the island, for if they should discover his hut, he had little doubt
they would seek to impress him into the hapless gang.

His sleep was restless.  Many times he woke with a start and sprang up
trembling, feeling that the Spaniards were on his track.  At daybreak
he was on his way towards the western shore, and took up his position
in the same thicket, the leafy screen being almost impenetrable.  The
monkey was with him now; but when his ears caught first the measured
thud of oars, then the clank of chains drawing nearer, Mirandola
chattered angrily, sprang into a tree, and disappeared.

The party came into view: five slaves, three Spaniards.  The former
were, to all appearance, the same as those Dennis had seen on the
previous day; but it seemed to him that their armed guards were
different; probably the men of the ship took it in turns to come
ashore.  But if the individuals were different, their methods were much
the same.  Indeed, before Dennis had been watching the work many
minutes, he had reason to know that the warders of to-day were even
more ingeniously brutal than those of yesterday.  The first thing he
noticed was a change in their manner of rendering their slaves
harmless.  One of them carried a large wooden mallet; the others had
between them iron staples with sharp-pointed ends.  These staples they
drove one by one with the mallet into the boles of the five trees
selected for the day's operations.  Secured to each staple was one end
of a long chain, the other end of which was fastened to the captive's
ankle band.  Thus the hapless woodmen were fettered not merely by the
logs of wood, as on the previous day, but by chains that bound them to
the very trees they were to cut down.  The staples were driven into the
trunks below the line of the cleft to be made; but the chains, though
long, seemed to Dennis scarcely long enough to enable the men to escape
crushing should the trees happen to fall the wrong way.  That was a
chance which evidently did not trouble the guards.

Dennis wondered why this additional precaution had been taken to ensure
the safe custody of the wretched men.  Had they shown signs of mutiny?
It would not be surprising after the treatment of the previous day.
Certainly the ingenious device lightened the task of surveillance, for
the wood-cutters, however exasperated, could not turn upon their guards
until they had forced out the staples with their axes.

The three Spaniards threw themselves down at some distance from the
slaves and lolled negligently against the trees.  The wood-cutters
plied their axes, sturdily, monotonously, never speaking, their faces
expressing nothing but a sullen despair.  Dennis fixed his eyes on the
white man, and felt an eager longing to hear him speak.  One word would
be enough to show whether he was indeed an Englishman.  But the man was
as silent as the rest, and nothing was heard save the ring of the axes
and the voices of the Spaniards conversing.

Five trees lay upon the ground; the warders rose to drive the staples
into others.  It appeared that time hung heavy on their hands.  Some
demon of mischief suggested to one of them a means of obtaining a
little diversion.  His proposal was received with shouts of laughter by
his companions.  Dennis did not understand what was said, but the
meaning was soon made plain.  The three men drew lots with three twigs
of unequal length, and placed themselves by the side of three
slaves--the white man and two Indians--as fate determined.  Again they
drew lots, and proceeded to fasten their men to three new trees.  The
other two Indians were set to strip the trunks already felled.  It was
soon evident that the Spaniards' amusement was to be had at the expense
of the wood-cutters.  They pooled a number of pieces of eight; the
Spaniard whose man first felled his tree was to take the stakes.

The three men set to work, the warders standing over them with their
whips.  The faces of the Indians wore their wonted look of dull apathy;
but Dennis saw the lips of the white man tighten, and a grim scowl
darken his brow.  The sport commenced.  Excited by their gamble, the
Spaniards urged on their men with loud cries.  For some minutes the two
Indians smote the trees with feverish energy; the white man plied his
axe with measured strokes, neither slower nor faster than before.  The
warders became more and more excited, and from cries proceeded to
blows.  One of the Indians flagged, and to stimulate him the Spaniard
behind dealt him a savage blow with his whip, and the poor cowed wretch
laid on with greater vigour.  Hidden in the bush Dennis nervously
clutched his sword and felt the blood surge into his cheeks.  Fine
sport, indeed!  The other Spaniards, not to be outdone, began to
belabour the backs of their men also, and Dennis, seeing great weals
rise on the bare flesh, could scarcely control the impulse to dash at
all costs from his hiding-place to the aid of the suffering men.  He
saw the face of the white man pale beneath the sun-tan and the red
stains; perchance the Spaniard would have had a qualm if he had seen
the fury his features expressed.  But he did not see it; with callous
levity he shouted, and brought his whip down with a sickening crack
upon the broad red-streaked back.

Then, with a suddenness that took Dennis's breath away, the white man's
pent-up rage burst its bounds.  At the end of his endurance, he swung
round with a nimbleness surprising in a man of his bulk, and flung his
axe with unerring aim at his tormentor.  The man fell among the logs.
In a second, before the other Spaniards had time to recover from the
shock of this unheard-of audacity, one of the Indians at work on the
fallen tree hurled his weapon at the warder nearest him, and struck him
headlong to the ground.  The third man had sufficient command of his
wits to take to his heels and scamper away.

The wood-cutters were between him and the shore, and the direction of
his flight was towards the thicket in which Dennis stood, all tingling
with the excitement of this amazing change of scene.  He gripped his
sword; but the Spaniard stopped short within a few yards of the bushes,
uttered a furious oath, and turning about, kindled his match, preparing
to shoot at the slaves, who were hacking with frenzied haste at the
staples that held them to the trees.  The two Indians who were free
were hobbling towards the woodland on the other side, appalled by their
own temerity.  Dennis heard the Spaniard chuckle as he raised his
caliver.  The man knew full well that, even if the woodmen succeeded in
breaking loose, he would have time to shoot them down one by one,
hobbled as they were.

Dennis could no longer remain inactive.  An enemy of the Spaniards,
whatever his colour, was a friend of his.  He could not see the poor
wretches slaughtered.  For an instant he thought of kindling his own
match and firing at the Spaniard, who was within easy range.  Then,
changing his mind, he pushed aside the bushes, sprang into the open,
and leapt over the ground with the lightness of a panther.  The
Spaniard heard his movements and swung round; Dennis saw the startled
look of terror in his eyes.  Taken aback, he had no time to ward off
the musket stock of this assailant who had sprung as it were out of the
earth.  His cry of alarm was stifled in his throat, and under the blow
dealt him with all the force of honest rage he dropped senseless to the
ground.




CHAPTER VII

Amos Turnpenny

Dennis felt his limbs tremble as he stepped round the fallen body and
went forward.  The white man and the biggest of the Indians had already
released themselves, and stood as though rooted to the ground with
amazement.

"I am a friend," cried Dennis, while still separated by some yards from
them.

"My heart, that's a true word!" gasped the white man, and Dennis
thrilled with joy as he heard the broad accent of a south-countryman.
"A friend, true; and a blessed word to Haymoss Turnpenny's ears."

They gripped hands, and looked each other squarely in the face.  There
was a lump in Dennis's throat, and a mist of tears in the elder man's
eyes.  Then Turnpenny glanced over his shoulder with a sudden access of
fear.

"We bean't safe," he muttered, and there was a world of terror in his
gesture and tone.  "They'll find us, and then 'twill be hell-fire.  Can
'ee hide us?"

"Let us first release that black man."

"Ay, sure, fellow creature, although black.  I'll do it, in a trice."

He walked towards the trees where the last man was still struggling to
force out the staple.  At this moment Dennis saw one of the others, who
had released his feet from the hobbling logs, springing past him with
uplifted axe, the fire of fury in his eyes.  Turning, he noticed that
the Spaniard he had felled was moving.  He had but just time to dash
after the man and prevent him from butchering his prostrate enemy.  The
Indian drew back in surprise, and Dennis stood on guard until the
Englishman joined him.

"Bean't he killed dead?  Why didn't 'ee kill him, lad?  T'others be
dead as door nails, and won't trouble you nor me no more."

"We'll let this fellow live; he may be useful to us."

"Why didn't 'ee kill him with your sword or caliver?  He's vermin, as
they be all."

"Well, his back was towards me," said Dennis.  "Besides, a shot would
have alarmed his comrades on the ship."

"The ship!" repeated the man, looking round again with fear in his
eyes.  "The ship!  They'll find us!  We are rats in a trap!  Lord save
us all!"

"Come, we must think of something.  Can you speak to these men?"

"Ay, in some sort.  Not in their own tongue, 'tis monkey-talk to me.
Ah! look at 'em, poor knaves."

The Indians had fallen upon the provisions brought by the Spaniards for
their own consumption, and were devouring them ravenously.  Turnpenny
called to them in a husky whisper, as though fearful of his own voice
reaching the ears of an enemy.  Then, taking the dazed Spaniard with
them, the woodcutters, hobbled by the logs, made off across the island,
led by Dennis to the watercourse at the further end of which his hut
stood.  Within half a mile of that spot he halted, and got the
Englishman to tell the others to remain there until rejoined.  With
Turnpenny he hastened on.

"God be praised I was able to help you," he said.

"Ay, but I fear me 'tis to your own undoing.  They will come ashore,
and catch 'ee, and flay 'ee alive."

"Tell me, how many men are left on the bark?"

"Ten, lad, all armed to the teeth.  Sure they will land when we don't
go aboard at night.  They will hunt us down.  This time to-morrow we'll
be dead men, or worse than dead."

"Pluck up heart," said Dennis.  "There are six of us; I have arms for
all; we can post ourselves at a place of our own choice, and make a
good defence, I warrant you."

"My heart!  But what will be the use?  Say we beat them off, 'twill be
like as if we tried to stem the waves.  With a fair breeze the mainland
is but a day's sail, and there the Spaniards swarm like cockroaches in
a hold.  I tell 'ee, lad, whoever ye be, we be dead men!"

"I've been nearer death," said Dennis quietly.  "Look!  There is my
hut.  I was cast up on this shore from a wreck: I have been here
several weeks, months--I know not: it has pleased God to keep me alive
here, alone on this island, and I believe there is hope for us all."

"Amen! ... My heart!  There's a sheer hulk in the pool yonder."

"Ay, all that's left of the _Maid Marian_.  But I will tell you my
story anon.  Come away into the hut, and let us talk of what we can do
to save ourselves from the Spaniards."

As they entered the hut, the Englishman drew back with a startled cry.
Perched on a cask sat Mirandola.  He chattered angrily at the sight of
a stranger.

"My one friend on the island, and a faithful comrade," said Dennis.  "A
gentle soul; he will do you no harm."

"A friend, say you?  'Tis against nature to be friends with a
spider-monkey.  And I be fair mazed; it do seem all a dream, only in
the offing yonder there be a real ship, and, say what 'ee will, I be
afeard."

"We'll first file off these clogging hobbles.  And what say you to a
mug of beer?  It has come far; I have not broached the cask, and maybe
'tis still drinkable."

"My heart!  I never thought to taste beer or cider again.  'Twill
comfort my nattlens, sure, and I was once a good man at a tankard."

The fetters were soon struck off; a mug of beer was drawn, and drained
at a gulp; but Turnpenny was still ill at ease.  He went to the
entrance of the hut and looked nervously up and down the gully,
listening with head cocked aside.  Dennis could not guess at the
terrible past which had made this stout English mariner as timid as a
child.

"Let us get back to the black men," he said, knowing from his own
experience the value of action in banishing sad thoughts.  "Are they
Indians of America?"

"Maroons, sir, half Injun, half negro; lusty fighters, and faithful
souls when they do love 'ee."

"We'll knock off their chains and give them arms.  What can they use?"

"Not muskets, nor harquebuses, but anything that will dint a blow."

"Half-pikes and swords, then.  For yourself, take your pick."

"Ay, it do give me heart to handle a cutlass again.  Here's a fine
blade, now, and a musket--give me a harquebus; I could shoot once, but
my arm is all of a wamble now.  Lookeedesee!"

He raised the heavy weapon to his shoulder and tried to steady it.

"See!  Shaking like a man with the palsy," he said, his nervousness
returning.  "I be no more good than a bulrush."

"Pish, man!" said Dennis cheerily.  "You are overwrought; your arm is
tired with wielding the axe.  An hour's rest will set you up.  Come,
bring the file and the weapons; we must see that the others are not
scared in our absence."

The four maroons had remained on the spot where they had been left,
keeping guard over the Spaniard, who had now quite recovered from his
blow.  They eyed Dennis with a wide stare, and fell silent when he
approached, seeming scarcely to comprehend the wonderful good fortune
that had befallen them.  The removal of their fetters and the gift of
arms struck them as a crowning mercy; they grovelled upon the ground as
in the act of worship.

"They take 'ee for a magician, sir," said Turnpenny.  "'Tis marvellous
to their simple poor minds.  All the world be full of spirits to them;
a storm at sea be the stirring of witches, and the Spaniards be devils.
My heart!" he exclaimed suddenly, "the fear has took me again!  When
they do miss the sound of the axes they will jealous summat wrong, and
then they'll come and we'll be all dead men."

"Cheer up!" said Dennis.  "'Tis easy to cure that.  Two of the men can
set-to upon the trees again, and one can steal to the shore and keep an
eye on the ship, and acquaint us if he sees any stirring there."

"But what of the Spaniard, lad?  'Tis then only one maroon to watch
him, and 'tis not enough.  If so be the knave be left to himself, he'll
run to the beach and give the alarm."

"We'll stop that, too.  When he has had a portion of food, we will gag
and bind him, and all will be well."

When the Spaniard was secured, the whole party returned to the scene of
the tree-felling, and while one of the men went stealthily forward to
spy upon the ship, two others plied their axes upon the fallen trunks.

Dennis, more alert of mind than the sailor, foresaw that the trick
could have only a temporary success.  When the time came for the
wood-cutting party to return to the vessel, their non-appearance would
awaken suspicion among the Spaniards on board.  Believing the island to
be uninhabited, they would not guess what had happened; it would not
even occur to them as possible that cowed and unarmed slaves would have
courage enough to turn on their masters, much less overcome them.  But
if the party did not return at nightfall, the captain would certainly
send some of his men to discover the cause.  Of all men the Spaniards
were the most superstitious; when they landed, their very superstitions
would put them on their guard.  Their approach would be cautious; they
would probably discover the escaped slaves before these could strike at
them effectively; and then, when the inevitable fight came, the party
of six, of whom only two could use firearms, and one had partially lost
his nerve, would stand a poor chance against men armed cap-a-pie and
doubtless inured to the practice of warfare.  Besides, even if the
landing party could be taken by surprise and routed, the sound of the
combat would alarm the Spaniards still remaining on the ship.  They
would sail away, and in a few days return in overwhelming strength.

Dennis was at first staggered by the difficulties and perils of the
situation, and he dared not consult with Turnpenny until the sailor had
regained his courage.  For the present the important thing was to keep
him employed, so as to turn his thoughts from anything that would feed
his fears.

"We must bury these two knaves," said Dennis, glancing at the bodies of
the Spaniards.  "You and I can do that.  Your name, I bethink me,
is----"

"Turnpenny, by nature, Haymoss by the water o' baptism, sir."

"Haymoss?"

"Ay, sure, a religious good name, sir; a' comes betwixt Joel and
Obydiah somewheres after the holy psa'ms.  Born at Chard, sir, in
Zummerzet, but voyaged to Plimworth when that I was a little tiny boy,
and served 'prentice aboard the _Seamew_--master, John Penworthy."

Dennis had heard only the first sentence of this string of facts.  He
was in the very act of stooping to dig a grave with one of the maroons'
big axes, when there flashed into his mind an idea which set him aglow
with hope.

"Well, friend Amos," he said, so quietly that none could have suspected
his inward eagerness, "think you not we may strip the outer garments
from these knaves before we bury them?  Your back would be the better
for a covering, and this leathern doublet would well beseem you."

"True, sir, but I never donned a stranger's coat yet.  I be English
true blue, and though the Spaniard's doublet might span my back,
'twould irk my feeling mind, sir!"

"To please me, Amos.  I would fain you covered your arms--the red is
too like blood, and we may see enough of that ere we be many hours
older."

To Dennis's gratification the sailor did not again blench at the
suggestion of a fight with the Spaniards.  He laughed.

"My heart!  'Tis easy to see you be a new man in this new world, sir.
The stains of logwood don't worrit me; 'tis a noble dye, you must own,
and many's the noble garment that has been dyed for a Spaniard's madam
out o' the logwood I've cut.  But since it offends your innocent eye,
I'll e'en don the knave's coat afore I put him out o' sight in earth
too good for him."

Overjoyed at the man's recovered spirits, Dennis hastened, as they went
on with their task, to press his advantage.

"You are two enemies the less, Amos--nay, three, counting the knave we
have in pound among the trees yonder.  What say you to our making a
shift to put a few more in the same case?"

"What mean you, sir?"

"Tell me, what people hath the ship yonder, besides the ten Spanish
knaves of whom you spoke?"

"Why, sir, as a true man I answer, a black cook--no maroon, but a swart
fat knave from the Guinea coast; and three maroons, who fell sick, or
rather were well-nigh beat to death, in an island over against the
continent yonder we visited on the same errand."

"And they are gyved, as you were?"

"All but the cook.  He goes free, but, my heart! 'tis little he gains
by it.  He is every man's football and whipping-boy."

"Why then do the Spaniards remain aboard the ship when there are so few
slaves to guard?"

"'Tis first because they be idle knaves, who would never do a hand's
turn save by necessity.  Item, because they be but poor seamen, and
need a dozen to handle a craft, only forty ton burden, that three
true-born Englishmen could sail into the devil's jaws.  Item, because
the spot where she lies at anchor is ill-protected; 'tis rather an open
roadstead than a bay, and if a squall should come up sudden, as 'tis
nature in this meridian, they'd need all the lubbers' work to get a
fair offing."

"So three true-born Englishmen are a match for a dozen base cullies of
Spain?  Is that your thought, Amos?"

"Ay, at musket, pike, or quarter-staff; there's never a doubt on it."

"Think you two, then, are a match for ten?  The balance turns a little
in favour of the Spaniards; by right proportion it should be two to
eight; but mayhap four maroons on t'other scale would even the odds."

Turnpenny desisted from his work, and a shadow of his former fear came
upon his face.  Dennis did not allow time for the fit to lay hold of
him.

"There is advantage to him who strikes first," he went on, quietly.
"If we wait, assuredly we shall have to fight against heavy odds.  But
if we assume a bold part, and jump the risks, we may gain all the
vantage of surprise, and enforce it with that English blood you hold so
high in estimation, to say naught of English thews and sinews.  Why,
man, that stout arm of yours would fell an ox."

"True, sir," said the simple mariner, bending his arm to raise the
muscle, and looking at the knotty protuberance with great complacency;
"I ha' done desperate deeds of strength in my time.  But, heart alive!
do 'ee think to capture the ship?"

"I think of venturing for it; and, unless I be mightily mistaken, Amos
Turnpenny is not the man to turn his back on a venture of that kind."

"Not by nature, sir," said the man, uneasiness struggling with simple
vanity in his mind.  "By nature I be as bold as a lion.  But the lion
in the story was meshed in with ropes, and could do no harm to a silly
mouse; and for four year past, sir, the ropes of mischance have held my
spirit in thrall, wherefore it is that----"

"That you are afraid?  Nonsense!  You are the lion; I am the mouse.
Let us say that I, by good luck, have gnawed those confining ropes
asunder, and now, on this island, you are free of mind as of limb, and
a man of heart and vigour."

Turnpenny flung down his axe and fairly jumped.

"My heart!" he cried, gleefully; "'tis the very marrow of the tale!  I
be free, free!  For four year I have forgot the word.  Sound of limb,
straight of eye, with all my five wits, praise God above!  Speak your
thought, sir; Haymoss Turnpenny is your man."




CHAPTER VIII

Half-Pikes and Machetes

The Spaniards had by this time been buried.  The two maroons were still
hacking at the trees.  Nothing had been reported by the man on the
look-out.  Glancing at the sun, Dennis guessed that it was still two or
three hours from setting.  But for interruptions there would be ample
time to develop his plan.

"Come beneath the shade," he said to Turnpenny.  "There is much to be
said and done.  If perchance a man lands from the ship, we must take
him prisoner.  If several come, we must fight them at the gully.  If
they lie secure, and we are undisturbed, we shall capture their vessel
this night."

"I believe it, sir, partly; I'd believe it more firm if I understood."

"Give me your judgement on my plan.  At sunset we will haul some logs
down to the shore and push off in the boat, as if we were the Spaniards
with their slaves.  You and I will rig ourselves in the doublets and
hose of the two yonder; it will go hard with us if, in the dark, we do
not mislead the Spaniards into security.  We will mount into the
vessel, and if luck favour us we shall be masters of the craft before
the Spaniards have awakened to the danger."

"A noble plan, but fearsome," said Turnpenny, shaking his head.  "We
shall be two short, sir.  We rig up as Spaniards, you and me; granted;
but the knaves on deck will see two Spaniards instead of three, and
they will want to know what has become of Haymoss Turnpenny."

"We will take our prisoner.  Then they will see three Spaniards, and if
they then miss Amos Turnpenny, let them suppose that the sailor man has
turned troublesome, and been left on the island, to bring him to a
reasonable humility."

"Ay, sure, that unties the knot.  But I would not give a groat for my
chance of seeing Plimworth Sound again if the knaves spy the head of
Haymoss sticking out o' the Spanish doublet.  The captain, he be a man
of desperate fight; no miserable dumbledore is he; 'tis a word and a
blow with him; I've seed him kill a man of his own breed for no more
than a wry word."

"We must trust to our disguise, and the dark."

"But the maroons, sir; they'll be of no use 'ithout weapons, and if
they climb aboard with naked steel in their hands, 'tis all over with
us."

"You and I will mount first."

"That would put the knaves on guard at once.  'Tis always us poor
slaves that come over side last into the boat and go first out of it,
so as never to give us no chance of making off.  They need not be
afeard; whither could poor miserable wretches escape away?  But there
it is."

"Well, Amos, we must accept the wonted course, though I would fain go
first, with you at my elbow."

"It is my very own thought, sir.  No white man can trust a black un in
the deadly breach.  But be jowned if I see any ways o' they maroons
getting aboard with arms in their hands."

"Nor I.  Mayhap an idea will enter our conceits anon."

"My heart!  There be another thing I had clean forgot.  We have ta'en
their irons off."

"We must put them on again.  We will not fail for the sake of a clank."

"Ay, but there's the rub, sir.  The maroons will show fight if we
attempt that same.  Poor souls!  Having no language and no intellecks
to speak of, they'll not understand the main of our intent.  They will
suppose 'tis but a change of masters, and I fear me my few words o'
Spanish will not suffice to set their minds at ease."

"You made them understand you a while ago; you must try again.  But a
word more.  I judge the sun is grown far on the west; 'twill soon be
time to put our fortunes to the hazard.  And, lest our dallying here
waken the suspicions of the Spaniards, let us don these articles of
apparel e'en now, and fix on the irons, and then go down to the shore,
the maroons hauling the stripped logs thitherwards.  The ropes are
handy here."

"What, sir, haul logs in the very sight of the knaves?"

"Ay, do we not wish to deceive them?  If they see two Spaniards
marshalling the black men, cracking their whips, moreover, will they
not believe 'tis their comrades, bent on finishing the work this night?
'Tis growing towards dusk; the vessel lies out too far for them to mark
our lineaments; 'twill lull them into a fool's security."

"And so it will.  I will presently go speak to the maroons with my
tongue, and, seeing that the poor mortals lack understanding, with my
fingers and my eyes and my ten toes if the case do require it."

Dennis watched the sailor somewhat anxiously.  It would be a stroke of
rank ill-fortune if they refused to have their manacles replaced.
Everything depended on their docility.  To his joy, after some minutes
of gesticulation, Turnpenny came back, his broad face beaming with
conscious self-esteem.

"Be jowned if I haven't done it easy!" he said.  "I spoke 'em plain,
and to make all clear, I put my two hands together, with one finger
pointing aloft: that stood for yonder vessel.  Then I pointed to this
doublet, and to yours, and set my face to a most wondrous frown, by the
which they understood that you and me pass for Spaniards.  A firk with
my cutlass did signify our warlike intent, a thrust of my arms forth
and back pictured the sweep of oars; and, to make an end o't, they
understand our fixed purpose and are keen set to lend us their aid."

"Admirably contrived!" said Dennis.  "Now, while I bring the Spaniard
to bear us company, do you replace the irons and fasten ropes about the
logs.  Darkness will steal upon us unawares and prevent the first part
of our contriving."

As Dennis returned to the gully to fetch the Spaniard, he saw that
Mirandola was keeping pace with him through the trees.  Since the event
of the morning the monkey had held himself aloof, as if scared by the
presence of so many strange men.  Dennis halted and called to him, but
the animal blinked and made no movement to descend.

"Ah, Mirandola," said Dennis, as he walked on, "even the wisest of us
have our failings.  Jealousy, my friend, is a canker.  I love thee none
the less because I have a new friend.  Will you not believe it?  Is
there not room for both--Turnpenny and Mirandola?  If we succeed in
this enterprise, you and Amos must be made at one."

Some little while later, in the growing dusk, the four maroons were
hauling a heavy log out from the undergrowth that fringed the sea.
Dennis and Turnpenny urged them with rough cries and persistent
cracking of their whips.  As soon as they came within view of the
vessel the ropes were cast off, and they all made their way back.  When
they returned with a second log, there came a faint hail from the
vessel.

"Ay, ay, 'od rot you!" shouted Turnpenny indistinctly in response,
knowing that at the distance his voice could not be recognized.
"Belike 'tis a call to us to embark, sir," he said to Dennis.  "Mark
you, they called us; no man dare say they did not call us; and if they
do not like us when we appear, 'tis not because we are not proper men."

The logs were laid alongside of those brought down the previous day;
then the men released the boat's moorings, and hauled her off the shoal
where she lay into water deep enough to float her.  By this time it was
almost dark, and the number of men who clambered into the boat could
not easily be counted on board the vessel, nor would it be noticed that
the maroons hoisted each a large bundle.  At the last moment Dennis had
decided not to encumber the boat with the captive Spaniard.  He had
thought of using the man to reply in Spanish to any hail from the
vessel during the passage from the shore; but this might be attended
with danger if the Spaniard should have courage enough to risk the
inevitable penalty should he raise his voice to warn his comrades.
Accordingly he was left on shore, gagged and bound, in a spot where he
might easily be discovered by the Spaniards next day if the enterprise
failed.  There were no wild beasts to molest him, and the place chosen
was remote from the haunts of the boa constrictor.

The maroons pulled steadily towards the silent vessel, lying low in the
water some two hundred yards off shore.  Already a lamp had been lit
aboard.  Every member of the little party in the boat was tense with
anticipation.  Not a word was spoken.  The silence would cause no
wonderment among the Spaniards on the vessel; a party of free negroes
might have filled the air with their babblement; but the maroons
partook of the reserve of the Indian race, and, living, as they did, in
a state of deadly feud with the Spaniards, they nourished a deep silent
longing for vengeance in their hearts.  Besides, these men were cowed
slaves, and, after the hard day's toil they were supposed to have
undergone, no one would have expected them to be talkative or merry.

Stroke by stroke the boat drew nearer to the ship.  At length a voice
hailed it, and a flare was kindled in the waist of the vessel for its
guidance.

"Why do you return so late?" came the question in Spanish.

Turnpenny answered in passable Spanish, but in a muffled tone--

"Wait till we come aboard."

A few seconds later the boat came beneath the vessel's side and was
made fast.  The biggest of the maroons--he who had flung his axe at the
Spaniard--got up and clambered aboard.  On his back he bore a huge load
of bananas.  Close to his clanking heels swarmed a second man; before
the first was well over the bulwarks a third was beginning the ascent,
each carrying a similar bundle.  The fourth man had but just set his
foot on the rope ladder that hung over the side when there came to the
ears of Dennis and the sailor, nervously awaiting their turn, the sound
of altercation above.  One of the Spaniards had bestowed a kick upon
the foremost of the slaves, and, laughing loud, grabbed at the load of
fruit upon his back.  The maroon, instead of dropping his burden and
cowering away, as was the wont of slaves, held firmly to it, and
stepped back to avoid the Spaniard's clutch.

"You hound!" cried the man, with an oath, and snatched a knife from his
belt.

Then, to his utter amazement, the maroon let his load fall indeed,
contriving as he did so to rip out of it a shortened half-pike which
was cunningly concealed there.  The light of the torch fell on the
naked steel.  With a loud cry of rage the Spaniards who had been
lolling on the vessel's side sprang towards the slave, cursing his
audacity, shouting to their supposed comrades in the boat below to ask
the meaning of this unheard-of act of mutiny.  But he stood his ground,
glaring upon them, holding his weapon to ward them off.  And now at his
side his three fellow-slaves were ranged, their bundles lying at their
feet, glistening half-pikes in their hands.  Yelling with fury the
Spaniards, armed at the moment only with their knives, pressed forward
to teach these mutineers a lesson.  What access of madness had seized
them?  Where was the abject look of terror with which they usually
shrank from their masters?  What could the men in charge have been
about?  The Spaniards rushed to the fray with the violence of wrath and
outraged bewilderment.

At this first moment the fight was not unequal.  The six Spaniards who
had been on deck found that with their knives they could not come to
close quarters with the four stalwart maroons wielding half-pikes.  The
latter, moreover, had kicked off the fetters loosely set about their
ankles, and moved with freedom.  And while the Spaniards were shouting
for their comrades in the cabin and, as they supposed, in the boat
below to come to their aid, the numbers of the mutineers were suddenly
augmented.  At the first sound of the scuffle, Dennis and Turnpenny,
each armed with a cutlass, had sprung on to the ship, the former by the
ladder behind the last maroon, the latter, with a sailor's agility,
leaping up to the gunwale and hauling himself over.  When they reached
the deck they found the Spaniards dancing round the little group of
slaves, who were keeping them at bay with valorous lunges of their
weapons.

No sooner had the two Englishmen joined the combatants than they found
that they had now the whole ship's company to reckon with.  A huge
Spaniard rushed from the main cabin behind the maroon, a machete in one
hand, a pistol in the other.  There was a flash, a sharp barking sound;
one of the slaves staggered and fell.  Other Spaniards came headlong
out, in their haste not pausing to bring fire-arms.  From the
forecastle ran one of the sick maroons.  The instant his eyes took in
the scene, he snatched up a belaying pin from the deck and, weak as he
was, threw himself into the melee.  Now had come the chance for which
he had so long hungered, and his black blood seethed as he rushed to
pay off old scores.

There was hot work then amidships that narrow vessel.  Cutlass and pike
were matched, not for the first time, against the long Spanish knife.
Under the disadvantage of surprise the Spaniards, though they
outnumbered their assailants, were not so effectively armed for the
fray.  The maroons laid about them doughtily; they knew how terrible a
weapon was the knife at close quarters, and their whole purpose was to
hold their masters off and cripple them if they could.

The big Spaniard who had rushed first from the cabin and fired at the
maroon found himself immediately afterwards engaged with a lithe young
man who, though clad in a Spanish doublet, was certainly not a
fellow-countryman of his.  Instinctively, as it seemed, captain singled
out captain.  Dennis made a vigorous cut at him, but the blade was
fouled by the shrouds above his head, and the blow, losing half its
force, was easily warded off by the Spaniard's machete.  He sprang
back; if his opponent had been a little nimbler Dennis would have been
at his mercy; but the Spaniard was gross with idleness and good living;
heavy of movement he failed to seize his advantage, though in the lunge
his knife cut the lad's doublet, and gashed his sword arm in the
recovery.

[Illustration: "Captain singled out Captain."]

Dennis was scarcely conscious of his wound.  At this fierce moment his
practice on the deck of the _Maid Marian_ served him well.  To attempt
a second cut would have been to give another opening.  He shortened his
arm and gave point.  The Spaniard was no tyro.  With a turn of the
wrist he parried the thrust, which was aimed low, but could not prevent
the blade from entering his shoulder.  He staggered and reeled back
towards the doorway of the cabin, and the two men immediately behind
him rushed into the fight.  Turnpenny meanwhile had been engaged in a
similar duel, and by the sheer force of his bulk had borne his opponent
to the deck.  Side by side Dennis and he faced their new assailants.
One of these, a long sinewy fellow, had an amazing dexterity with his
knife, and a most perplexing nimbleness of movement.  Dennis kept him
at bay only by the length of his cutlass.  For a few moments there was
brisk work around the mast.  Making a sweeping cut, Dennis somewhat
overreached himself, and it would have gone ill with him had not
Turnpenny, who had run a second man through, perceived his danger in
the nick of time.  Springing forward, he pierced the fellow to the
heart.

Three of the Spaniards had now fallen.  The rest, who had barely held
their own against the maroons, were stricken with fear when they saw
their comrades' fate.  Two of them sprang overboard; the remaining
four, finding the three maroons now reinforced by the Englishmen,
rushed back after their captain into the cabin, and, before they could
be overtaken, slammed-to the door and shot the bolt.  Dennis snatched
up a belaying pin and brought it with all his force against the door,
but made no impression on its stout timbers.  There was a roar and a
flash close to his ear; he felt his cheek singed; one of the Spaniards
had fired through a loophole in the cabin wall.  The moment after,
there was another flash from a loophole on the other side, and one of
the maroons uttered a cry of pain.  In the open waist of the vessel the
little party had no protection from musket fire; the loopholes had
doubtless been pierced against the contingency of such an assault as
this, and nothing but the darkness could prevent the Spaniards in the
cabin from bringing down a man at every discharge.  They had the whole
armoury of the ship to draw upon; there was no means of checking their
fire; and realizing the situation Dennis called on Turnpenny and the
rest to seek cover.  Some found shelter just forward of the mainmast;
two swarmed on to the poop, and, climbing to the edge of its break,
held themselves ready with their half-pikes to attack any one
attempting a sortie from the cabin.  Dennis and the sailor, picking up
the calivers they had laid down when they boarded the vessel, dropped
down behind a coil of rope towards the forecastle.

"My heart!" exclaimed Turnpenny, as he primed his weapon.  "'Twas brisk
work, and not the end neither."

"They are run to earth, Amos, 'tis true, got away like foxes.  Our case
is not too good.  We are baulked, my friend."

"Ay, sir.  With all the victuals and munitions abaft, the knaves have
the better of us.  We cannot get at them; say we made endeavour to
scuttle the ship, they could shoot us afore we got away."

"And there are sick maroons in the forecastle, I bethink me you said.
I would fain save them alive.  We must do something to bring the knaves
to an engagement.  There are five of them now.  With time to recover
themselves somewhat, and fortify themselves with food, they can if it
so please them lie low till morning light, then sally out upon us with
arms loaded, several pistols apiece, and we, fasting, would be of a
surety overmatched."

"Ay, and we cannot feed ourselves even on that noble store of bananas,
for they lie athwart the very course of bullets from the cabin."

"Could we smoke them out?  Could we blow the door in?"

"With a sufficiency of powder, but the magazine is beneath the cabin."

"Is there none elsewhere?"

"Why, now I do mind me, the boatswain hath a vast relish for wild fowl,
and is never loath to go a-shooting on shore.  'Tis like he hath a
little secret store."

"Then I will go rummage the forecastle.  Do you bide here, Amos, and
keep ward over my caliver until I return."

When the party boarded the vessel, there had been a dim light in the
forecastle.  It was now extinguished.  Dennis went in through the open
entrance; then, feeling safe from the enemy's bullets, he took a candle
from his pouch and having lit it, held it above his head.  He shrank
back, startled for the moment.  The pale flame had fallen full on the
face of a big negro, crouching in the corner of an upper bunk.  A
second glance assured him that he had nothing to fear; the black face
was sickly with terror.  In a flash Dennis remembered the negro cook of
whom Amos had spoken.  As cook, being allowed a certain freedom of
movement about the vessel, the man would probably know where the
boatswain kept his powder, and search might be unnecessary.  Dennis
called to him; the negro only showed more of the whites of his eyes.
Dennis beckoned him with his finger; he only cowered and groaned.

"'Tis to be main force then, you white-livered rascal!" cried Dennis,
and, setting down his candle, caught the man by his waist-band and
began to haul his oily mass out of the bunk.  "You gibber more
brutishly than Mirandola; come, or I'll shake your fat bulk to a jelly."

Not without labour he lugged the negro forth, and dragged him aft to
the place where Amos was crouching.

"Here's a fat knave that's like to dissolve with fright," he said.  "I
do not understand his monkey-talk; speak to him, Amos.  Ask of him what
we need to know, and tell him we intend him no harm, and will certainly
not expect such a craven to fight."

"Ay, sir, 'tis Baltizar the cook, and a very whey-blooded knave.  I'll
ferret it out of him, trust me."

He took some minutes in his scraps of Spanish to make the man
understand what was required of him.  When he understood, the negro
became very voluble.  He said that the boatswain did indeed keep a
small jar of powder in his sea-chest, but there was a much larger
quantity concealed among the ship's stores under hatches.  It had been
placed there by the mate--"the long knave I spitted," Amos
explained--who was accustomed to do a little private trading with the
natives of the mainland, and had destined the powder as a bribe for
certain pearl-fishers of the coast.

"Is it in the fore-peak?" asked Dennis, remembering where he had found
powder on the _Maid Marian_.

"No, worse luck!" replied Turnpenny, after questioning the man.  "'Tis
in the lazaretto, and the hatchway being but a few feet from the break
of the poop, we cannot come at it 'ithout running the hazard of a shot
from the cabin."

"'Tis darker now; could I not risk the deed?"

"The knaves med not see you, 'tis true; but you could not knock out the
battens 'ithout raising a din, and they would know your whereabouts,
and not all on 'em would miss your carcase.  Be jowned if I'd like to
see 'ee make the venture."

Releasing the negro, Dennis crouched again behind the coil of rope.

"We must find a way to get that powder," he said.  "A mariner like you,
Amos, ought to be fertile in devices.  Come, set your brains on the
rack."

"I be afeard they be soft wi' four years' misery, but I'll rouse 'em.
If I had but the second sight, now, like the old witch as lived within
a cable-length o' my grandad's hut on the moors!"

But Amos had done his brains an injustice.  He had not pondered many
minutes before he exclaimed--

"My heart!  We have them on the hip!  We'll e'en shin up the shrouds
and lower the mainsail.  She's furled on the yards, but we can unreeve
her 'ithout noise, and when she's down, she'll be a barricade betwixt
the mainmast and the break o' the poop, and not a knave of them can see
what is toward in the waist."

Dennis applauded the notion, and the two instantly set about their
task.  Crawling to the starboard side, they crept along by the rope
netting that replaced in the waist the wooden bulwarks which bounded
the decks, and reached the shrouds of the mainmast unperceived by the
enemy in the cabin.  To swarm up was the work of a few moments to
Turnpenny, and Dennis was little less expert, having practised himself
on the _Maid Marian_ in many details of the mariners' duties.  Gaining
the yards, they cast off the robands, made the buntlines fast, then,
easing the earings, lowered away by the buntlines and the clew-garnets.
Scarcely five minutes after they had left the shelter of the rope-coil,
a wall of canvas shut the waist from the view of the Spaniards.

They had barely finished their task when two musket-shots rang out, and
two holes were cut in the sail.  Clearly the enemy was on the alert.
There was no time to be lost.  Turnpenny knocked out the battens as
quickly as possible, and lifting the hatch, disclosed a small ladder
leading down into the lazaretto.

"I will go down," said Dennis, "being of less bulk than you, Amos."

He climbed nimbly down, struck a light, and after a little search
discovered a jar of powder among a miscellaneous collection of ship's
stores.  Hoisting the jar up, he gave it into the hands of Turnpenny,
climbed up again, and returned with the sailor to the coil of rope, to
be out of harm's way while they went on with their preparations.

"If we fire the whole jar we shall of a surety sink the ship," said
Dennis; "and that I am loath to do.  We must needs make a petard; but
how?"

"That cook knave shall find us a tin vessel, or I'll firk him," said
Turnpenny.

He went into the forecastle.  Dennis heard a brisk exchange of bad
Spanish; then the sailor returned, with a small canister out of which
he poured a heap of peppercorns.

"Most admirable!" said Dennis, who had meanwhile forced off the top of
the jar.  Making a hole in the rim of the canister near the lid, he
filled the vessel with powder and firmly closed it.

"There's our petard, Amos.  Now to place it."

"That be my job, sir."

"No, no, we go shares in this work.  'Twas your idea to lower the sail.
I carry less flesh than you, and therefore can go more lightly."

"But mayhap I be surer footed on the plank, being a mariner of forty
year."

"I doubt it not, yet the deed shall be mine."

Carrying the canister, and in the pouch slung at his neck a handful of
powder for the train, he crept to the side of the vessel, ran lightly
along the gangway by the rope netting, and lifting a corner of the
sail, stood between it and the wall of the cabin.  Then he dropped on
hands and knees, and wormed his way forward until he touched the wall,
following it along until he reached the door.  Being beneath the line
of loopholes, he was in no danger so long as he moved quietly; but at
the slightest sound the enemy would fling open the door and give him
his quietus before help could reach him from beyond the barricade.  He
might have felt still more confident had he known that Turnpenny had
crept along after him, and was waiting at the corner of the sail, ready
to spring to his aid in case of need.

Feeling with his hand for the middle panel of the door, Dennis laid the
canister down close against it.  To ensure that the hole he had made in
it, to connect with the train of powder, should rest upon the planks
and not turn over, he pressed a slight dent in the rim.  Then he crept
backwards the way he had come, laying close to the cabin wall a train
of powder from his pouch, not stinting the quantity, so that there
might be no gaps in the line.  He drew a breath of relief when he came
once more to the further side of the canvas and stood erect.  There was
not a gust of air stirring; the confined space between the sail and the
cabin was hot and stuffy; and what with holding his breath during the
minutes his task had occupied, and the strain upon his nerves, he had
felt almost suffocated.

He said not a word when he found Turnpenny awaiting him, but placed his
finger on his lips and motioned the man to return.  The charge having
been laid in safety, it remained to arrange a course of action when the
door should be blown in.  While the sail was still lowered it would be
impossible to dash forward into the cabin.  The screen was no longer
required now that there was no further need for the open hatchway; to
remove it might indeed put the enemy on their guard, but they could not
know what to expect, and there would be no time after the explosion to
hoist the sail, even if it were possible to spare men for the task.  So
Turnpenny volunteered to replace the hatch and hoist and bend the sail,
work which he would do more quickly and expertly than Dennis.  It was
then necessary to communicate with the maroons, for to attack the cabin
in less than full strength, against superior weapons, would be to court
disaster.  A loud whisper reached the men who had taken shelter behind
some tackle forward of the mainmast, and brought them crawling to their
leaders.  It was not so easy to attract the attention of the two men
who had shinned up the poop, and to whom, though they had probably seen
Dennis as he crawled beneath the sail, he had not dared to make a sign.
The difficulty was removed by a word from Turnpenny to one of the
maroons.  The man made a strange clicking in his throat, and within a
couple of minutes his comrades had crept noiselessly along the port
side of the vessel, and the party was complete.

With great solemnity and many repetitions the sailor exhausted his
small stock of Spanish in explaining what was required of them.  They
were all to charge together the instant after the petard had done its
work.  If the force of the explosion proved sufficient to blow in the
door, they would dash through into the cabin and engage the enemy hand
to hand.  If, on the other hand, the door should be only partially
shattered--as Turnpenny pointed out, there was no calculating on the
precise effect of a charge of gunpowder--two men were to break it in
with a short spar unrigged for a battering ram.  Dennis counted on
gaining a few moments while the Spaniards recovered from the surprise
and shock of the explosion.  In that brief interval it might be
possible for him and Turnpenny to find the loopholes in the cabin wall
and thrust the muzzles of their calivers through.  By the time they had
fired the door would be burst in, and then it would be a fight to the
death.

If the occupants of the cabin had felt any wonder or misgiving at the
manipulation of the sail, there was nothing during the pause to give
them either explanation or reassurance.  They might have suspected that
the intention of lowering the sail was to screen an approach to the
hatchway; but as, according to Baltizar the cook, the jar of powder had
been appropriated by the mate secretly, and he was now dead, it would
never have occurred to them that their enemy would seek there anything
but food.  Otherwise they would assuredly have made some effort, beyond
the firing of two random shots, to avert their fate.

There was absolute silence when Turnpenny had concluded his whispered
instructions to the maroons.  The vessel rocked gently, almost
imperceptibly; the tide was on the turn.  Dennis crept once more to the
gangway by the rope netting, stole along on bare feet, and stooped with
a beating heart to apply the match which Turnpenny had made for him.
It had an inch or two to burn before it reached the train of powder;
and he stood back against the side, out of danger from the explosion,
ready to rush across to the nearest loophole when the moment came.

Suddenly a line of flame shot like a lightning flash across the planks.
In an instant there was a deafening crash, and though each man of the
attacking party knew what was coming, and was beyond reach of actual
harm, they were all somewhat dazed by the explosion.  But it was only
for the fraction of a second.  Then Dennis and Turnpenny sprang
forward, one on each side of the cabin entrance, towards the loopholes
whose position they had marked in the previous fight.  For a few
moments they were baffled by the blinding smoke, but finding the holes
almost simultaneously, they thrust in the muzzles of their weapons, and
fired at random into the cabin.  A muffled cry from within announced
that one or other of the shots had taken effect, but the next instant
there was a roar as the Spaniards discharged their muskets together at
the gaps rent in the door by the explosion.  At the time the Englishmen
knew not whether any man was hit, for, dropping their calivers, they
seized their cutlasses, and, just as the spar carried by two lusty
maroons levelled the shattered door, they dashed at the opening.

The light from a horn lantern hanging in its gimbals struggled with the
smoke that filled the room.  Dennis stumbled over a body that lay
across the entrance.  He had barely recovered his footing when he was
amazed to hear a frenzied shriek from the further end of the cabin, and
two men rushed forward with uplifted hands, shouting again and again a
single word which, being Spanish, he did not understand.

"My heart! they cry for quarter!" cried Turnpenny, as much amazed as
Dennis.

One of the maroons who had carried the spar, either not understanding
or not heeding the wild despairing cry, thrust at the foremost Spaniard
with a half-pike, and the wretch fell forward, hurling Dennis to the
floor and doubly blocking the entrance.  Dennis threw the man off and
scrambled to his feet; but before he could take a step forward there
was a second explosion, louder and more shattering than the first, and
when he recovered his dazed senses he found himself lying at the fore
end of the waist, twenty feet away from the cabin.




CHAPTER IX

Amos Tells his Story

"Body o' me!  Will 'ee squall like babbies?  Make for the boat, you
howling knaves!"

And then Turnpenny launched into a tirade of Spanish abuse, which came
somewhat more trippingly from his lips than sentences of sound
instruction.  Dennis rose, and staggered towards the sailor.

"God be praised!  I feared you were dead, sir.  The knave has blowed up
the powder magazine, and in five minutes by the clock the ship will
tottle down by the stern.  These black rascals were howling like souls
in bale, in the stead of swinging overboard into the boat while there
is time.  Come away, sir; the craft will sink to the bottom or ever we
gain the island."

Bruised and sore, dropping blood from his untended wound, Dennis
hastened with Amos to the side, and was in the act of following the
maroons into the boat when he suddenly remembered the two sick men in
the forecastle.

"I'll be with you anon," he cried, hurrying across the waist.

"What a murrain!" muttered Amos, scrambling back and running after him.
"Shall we drown for a brace of savages!  Wilful!  Wilful!"

He reached the forecastle in time to see Dennis hauling from his bunk
the fat negro, who lay there huddled and shivering with terror.

"Make the fat fool understand!" cried Dennis, shoving the cook into
Amos's arms.  Then he hurried to the further end, where the maroons lay
in a stupor of fright.  Having no words to acquaint them with their
peril, he sought to move them by signs; but the men gazed at him in
fear, regarding him doubtless as a new oppressor.

"Amos, leave that lump of jelly and come hither," he shouted.  The
sailor bawled a word or two in Spanish, and sped the negro towards the
side with a kick.  Then he made haste to join Dennis.

"The wretches are helpless," said the boy.  "We must carry them--fair
and softly, Amos."

"Ay, sir, an you will; but our case is parlous; I fear me our leisure
will not serve."

"No delay, then.  Hoist this fellow upon my back; do you bring the
other.  We cannot suffer the knaves to drown."

They staggered forth with their burdens, Dennis foremost.  As he
stumbled towards the side he caught sight of a man crawling slowly from
the direction of the cabin.  The man called to him feebly, but Dennis
did not pause until he had reached the gangway by the netting, where he
laid the maroon down.

"Call to his fellows below there to assist him into the boat," he cried
to Amos.  "There is a man yet alive; we must save him."

"Beseech you let the knave drown," returned the sailor.  "'Tis a
pestilent Spaniard--a meal for sharks.  Be jowned if the lad be not a
mere dunderpate," he grumbled, as he lowered his burden into the hands
of the men below.

Meanwhile Dennis had hastened to meet the wounded man, who groaned
miserably as he dragged his limbs along.  Half supporting, half
carrying him, Dennis brought him to the side just as the second maroon
had been bestowed safely in the boat.  Turnpenny, still growling under
his breath, helped to lift the Spaniard down.  Then the boat was cast
off, and the men rowed for the shore.

"Canst see any sign of the knaves that leapt overboard?" said Dennis,
looking around.

"Never a hair," replied Turnpenny, "Sure they be swallowed quick by the
sharks, and there's an end."

Dennis shuddered.  It was his first acquaintance with the tragedy of
adventure on the Spanish Main, and his unschooled heart turned sick at
the thought of the terrible fruit his scheme had borne.  He gazed at
the dark form of the vessel that was gradually fading into the night.
The poop was already under water.  He had not foreseen this end to his
enterprise; the rapid sequence of events had bewildered him.  What had
caused the second explosion?  Had the magazine been fired by accident?
What a mercy it was that he and all his party had not been blown to
atoms!  He could not but feel a poignant pity for the poor wretches who
had thus suddenly met their doom.

The boat grounded on the shoals.  He sprang into the water and assisted
Turnpenny and the maroons to carry the helpless men to the fringe of
grass, and to haul the boat up the beach.  Then he turned once more to
look at the vessel.  No longer was her dark form outlined against the
starlit sky; she had gone down, leaving no trace.

Joining the men on the stretch of greensward where they were assembled,
he suddenly heard the shrill voice of Mirandola close at hand, and next
moment felt the touch of the animal's paw upon his arm.  The monkey had
followed the party at a distance when they came down to the shore in
the dusk, and sat forlorn on the grass, watching the boat that carried
his master away.  Could the poor beast think human thoughts, Dennis
wondered, as he felt its body trembling against his?  Had it believed
that it was deserted by the being who had treated it with kindness?
Certainly it showed clear signs of gladness now, and its joy at
recovering its one friend had vanquished its dislike and suspicion of
the rest.

"Here we be, sir, ten martal souls," said Turnpenny, "reckoning
Baltizar, who in sooth is more like a jellyfish than a man.  What be us
to do?"

"We cannot tramp across the island in the dark, Amos.  What say you to
camping in the logwood grove?  'Tis nigh at hand, and we can lie there
with fair comfort until the dawn."

"With all my heart.  'Twill be a drier bed than those villanous knaves
yonder can boast."

"Poor wretches!  How came it that the magazine blew up, think you?"

"I know not, sir.  I will ask the knave you brought last from the
vessel--a deed of merciful madness."

He spoke a few words to the wounded prisoner, while the maroons who had
formed the wood-cutting party conveyed their sick comrades to the
grove.  The man replied in feeble accents.

"This was the manner of it, sir," said Amos, after a minute or two.
"The captain being sore wounded, and two killed outright, the other
knaves, seeing how that they stood in danger of being sliced by our
bilbos, did incontinently call upon him to render up the vessel, hoping
thereby to come off with their lives.  But the captain, a tall man and
of a good spirit, did resolutely refuse to yield to their entreaties,
swearing that he would with his own hand blow up the vessel rather than
deliver it to heretics and dogs of English.  Straightway he passed into
his own cabin, and made fast the door; which seeing, and knowing that
what he had said, that would he perform, the knaves began to whoop and
hallo for quarter.  Then did the captain, as 'tis to be supposed, make
into the after cabin and fire his pistol into the magazine, and so
dealt the ship that mighty blow."

"And this man--who is he?"

"A man of Portingale, sir, not of Spain, and so somewhat nearer grace.
He thanks you and all the saints that he remains alive, though his
limbs be maimed withal."

"Let us convey him softly to the grove; on the morrow we will look to
his wounds and bind them up with balsam and other salves from the
wreck."

"Marry, you use him too gently.  'Tis like warming a snake in your
bosom; and, since charity begins at home, we will look to our own hurts
first."

When the party was settled as comfortably as possible in the grove,
Dennis and the sailor disposed themselves side by side to sleep.  But
both were wakeful, for all their fatigue.  They lay for a time in
silence, each fearful of disturbing the other; but Dennis, hearing at
last a long pent-up groan from his companion, asked what ailed him.

"Thinking, sir--old thoughts of home."

"I have been minded to ask you of your history, Amos, but we have had
other matters to speak of.  How came you to be a prisoner of the
Spaniards?"

"'Tis a tale long in the telling, sir, but I will give 'ee the drift of
it.  I were a young cockerel of twelve when I ran away to sea.  It kept
a-calling me; night and day I heard the sound; and when I could no
longer endure it, I went and joined myself ship-boy to a worthy mariner
o' Plimworth.  Afterwards he made me his prentice, and so a mariner I
have been from that day to this.  Ay, 'twas a brave life for a man, in
the days of King Hal, lad.  I mind me I were but rising seventeen when
the French king took a conceit to invade England.  My heart! he had
reason enough, for King Hal had before sent a power to capture
Boolonny, on the French coast, which they did, and burnt it with fire.
The French king would have his tit for tat, and he gathered a great
power and a mighty fleet to strike at Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight.

"I was rising seventeen, as I said, and gunner's mate aboard the _Anne
Gallant_, a noble galleass.  The fleet made a brave show, lying off
Spithead, and I was hot to show my mettle; 'twas my first fight, by the
token, and sure 'twas a famous fight.  The _Anne Gallant_ and others of
her sort, with the shallops and rowing-pieces, did so handle the French
galleys that our great ships in a manner had little to do.  The only
hurt we suffered was the breaking of a few oars.  We anchored for the
night, as did the French fleet, we hoping to come at them in the
morning; but when daylight broke, hang me if the French were anywhere
to be seen, and though we gave chase they got away and ran into their
ports.  But a little after, the _Anne Gallant_, with three other
galleasses and four pinnaces, was set upon off Ambletoosy by eight
great galleys.  There was great shooting betwixt us; we drew alongside
of the _Blancherd_ galley in the smoke, and leaping aboard her, we took
her captive, with two hundred and thirty pikemen and musketeers, and a
hundred and forty rowers.  Master King Francis got the wrong pig by the
ear when he tackled King Harry.

"Ah me and well-away!  That was over twenty-five year ago.  I served
many years on merchantmen, under many a master, good and bad.  I made
one voyage to the Guinea coast with Master Hawkins, and five year ago,
being about to set sail to the Indies for to trade slaves with the
Spaniards, he sent for me and made me boatswain aboard his own great
ship, the _Jesus of Lubeck_, of 700 tons.  Marry, 'twas a goodly
squadron that sailed out of Plimworth Sound.  Besides the _Jesus_,
there was the _Minion_ of Captain Hampton, the _William_ and _John_,
all great ships, and three smaller vessels, of the which Master Francis
Drake commanded the _Judith_.  Hast ever set eyes on Master Francis?"

"Ay, indeed, once only--this very year, in Plymouth, some months before
I sailed."

"And I warrant he was stout and brave, and as 'twere a raging fire
against the Spaniards, making ready to chastise the villanous traitors
and promise-breakers: was it not so, good-now?"

"Well, to say sooth, when I saw him he seemed to have no thought of
Spaniards: his whole mind was set on a game at the bowls, and he was
some little put out when he failed of winning."

"Master Francis put out over such a trifle?  Why, believe me, with
these very eyes I saw him warp his bark clear when beset by Spanish
fire-ships and battered by Spanish guns, with as serene a countenance
as he were sailing a shallop for pleasure on the Plym.  Master Francis
put out for losing at the bowls!  Tush, lad!"

"Nevertheless 'tis true, for I was there present, and saw and heard it."

"God-a-mercy!" ejaculated Turnpenny.  "And what was the manner of it?"

"Why, Master Drake came to two gentlemen bowling on the Hoe, and one of
them, being summoned away, left the other to play out the game with the
Captain.  He was beat, as I said, and being well conceited of his
skill, he was for a moment vexed.  Then he laughed, and clapped his
hand on the shoulder of the other--a stripling he was--and said: 'A rub
for me, my lad; 'twas a rare game, and I thank thee.'"

"Ay, that was true Master Francis: he is ever gall and honey mingled.
Art then of Plimworth, sir?  As you love me, your name?"

"Dennis Hazelrig, of Shaston."

"Of Shaston?  I was never there.  I will mind of your name.  You be
gentle, I know by your speech, and Dennis Hazelrig do sound richer to
the ear than plain Haymoss Turnpenny, but----"

"Come, man, to your story," interrupted Dennis.

"Ay, sir, then I must make a tack.  I was at Plimworth, a' b'lieve,
when the name of Master Drake set me out o' my true course.  Well, the
ships I named, great and small, sailed right merrily out o' the Sound
o' Plimworth; 'twas a day of October, I mind me, the very season o'
gales.  We had a deal of buffeting afore we made the coast of Guinea,
and a deal of hard knocks afore we took on board our store o' negroes
for to sell to the Spaniards of the Main."

"To sell?"

"Why yes, sir; that is Captain Hawkins his trade; and knowing now
myself what it is to be a slave, I have a fellow feeling for the poor
knaves, black as they be, and bought and sold like cattle.  Well, 'twas
near six month afore we came to the Indies and did some traffic among
the islands.  Then by ill hap, as we sailed for Cartagena, we were
caught in a most violent and terrible storm, the which battered us
mightily for the space of four days; in sooth, we feared we should go
to the bottom.  The _Jesus_ was dealt with most sorely, her rudder
shaken, and all her seams agape.  Then, coasting along Florida, we ran
into the jaws of another tempest, the which drave us into the bay of
Mexico.  There we sought a haven, and moored our ships in the port
called St. John d'Ulua, where we landed, and our General made proposals
of traffic.

"The next day did we discover a fleet of thirteen ships open of the
haven, and soon we spied a pinnace making towards us.  There was in her
a man bearing a flag of truce, and he came aboard the _Jesus_,
demanding of what country we were.  I mind we laughed at the knave; he
swelled himself out like a turkey-cock.  Our General made answer that
we were the Queen of England her ships, come for victuals for our
money, and that if the Spanish General would enter, he should give us
victuals and other necessaries and we would go out on the one side of
the port, the while the Spaniards should come in on the other.  But it
had so fell out that with their fleet there came a new viceroy of the
Spanish king, and he was mightily put out by our General's reply,
thinking it something saucy from an Englishman with so small a fleet.
The proud knave returned for answer that he was a viceroy with a
thousand men, and would ask no man's leave to enter.  Our General
laughed, and set us laughing too when he said: 'A viceroy he may be,
but so am I.  I represent my Queen, and am as good a viceroy as he; and
as for his thousand men, I have good powder and shot, and they will
take the better place, I warrant him.'"

"A right proper answer," said Dennis.  "And what then?"

"Why, Master Viceroy gave in, and swore by king and crown he would
faithfully perform what our General demanded, and thereupon hostages
were given on both sides.  The villanous knave!  Our General chose out
five proper gentlemen and sent them aboard the Spanish admiral; but the
viceroy, stuffed with fraud and deceit, rigged up five base swabbers in
costly apparel and sent them to our General, as if they were the finest
gentlemen of Spain.  Yet did we use them right royally, deeming it to
be an act of courtesy and good troth.

"Then their ships came with great bravery into the port, and there was
great waste of powder in firing salutes, as the manner is at sea.  But
'twas not long afore our General became doubtful of their dealings.  So
did we all, for with my own eyes I saw them, when they moored their
ships nigh ours, cut out new ports in the sides, and plant their
ordnance towards us.  'So ho!' says I, 'there be trickery and
hugger-mugger in brew.'  Our master, one Bob Barrett, chanced to be
well skilled in the Spanish tongue, and him our General sent aboard
their admiral to know the meaning of these same doings.  The base
villains set poor Bob under guard in the bilbows, and we had scarce
seen that mark of their knavery when they sounded a trumpet, and
therewith three hundred of them sprang aboard the _Minion_ from the
hulk alongside.  My heart!  Many a time afore had I seen the blazing of
our General's wrath, but never so fierce as it blazed then.  His eyne
were like two coals of fire as he called to us in a loud voice.  I mind
his very words.  'God and St. George!' cried he.  'Upon those
traitorous villains, my hearts, and rescue the _Minion_; and I trust in
God the day shall be ours.'  And with that, with a great shout we leapt
out of the _Jesus_ into the _Minion_, and laid on those deceitful
knaves, and beat them out; and a shot out of the _Jesus_ fell plump
into the poop of the Spanish vice-admiral, and the most part of three
hundred of the villanous knaves were blown overboard with powder.

"It was a good sight to see Captain Hampton of the _Minion_ cut his
cables and haul clear by his stern-fasts, the while his gunners poured
round shot into the vice-admiral that rode ablaze.  But there was but
four of us to their thirteen.  The Spaniards came about us on every
side, and began to fire on us with brass ordnance from the land.  My
heart!  'Twas hot work for us when we scrambled back on to the _Jesus_
as the _Minion_ sheered away.  Being so tall a ship we could not haul
her clear.  She had five shot through her mainmast; her foremast was
struck in sunder with a chain-shot, and her hull moreover was
wonderfully pierced.  Our General gave orders that we should lay her
alongside of the _Minion_ till dark, and then take out her victuals and
treasure and leave that noble vessel.  A right true man is Captain
Hawkins.  In the midst of that noise and smoke he called to Samuel his
page for a cup of beer, and it was brought to him in a silver cup; and
he drank to us all and called to the gunners to stand by their ordnance
lustily like men.  He had no sooner set the cup out of his hand but a
demi-culverin shot struck away the cup, and a cooper's plane that stood
by the mainmast, and ran out on the other side of the ship; the which
nothing dismayed our General, for he ceased not to encourage and cheer
us.  I hear his voice in my ears now.  'Fear nothing!' he cries, 'for
God, who hath preserved me from this shot, will also deliver us from
these traitors and villains.'

"But on a sudden we perceived that the Spaniards had loosed two
fireships against us.  The men of the _Minion_ were in such a taking
with fear of those monsters that they bided not the outcome, nor did
they heed their captain's commands, but in a mighty haste made sail.
The _Jesus_ being then alone,--for the _Angel_ was sunk and the
_Swallow_ taken, and Master Drake had warped the little _Judith_
clear--our General cried to us to spring upon the _Minion_ ere her
sails could draw, which he himself did.  As I made to do his bidding,
my heart! there came toppling on my head a portion of the main topsail
cross-tree, and struck me senseless withal.  When something of my wits
returned to me, there was I, amid a score of wounded and captive
fellows, on the deck of the noble _Jesus_, and a mob of Spaniards
around; sure she must have been built under an evil star."

"And what befell you then?" asked Dennis, eagerly, for Turnpenny had
fallen silent.

"God-a-mercy, sir, the fear takes me when I think on't!  They hauled me
ashore, with certain others of our men, and hanged us up by the arms
upon high posts, until the blood gushed out at our finger-ends.  'Tis
by the merciful providence of God alone I am yet alive, carrying about
with me (and shall to my grave) the marks and tokens of their barbarous
cruel dealings.  'Tis by the same wondrous grace I 'scaped handling by
the Inquisition, that hath devoured many of my poor comrades.  My heart
and my reins cry and groan for the terror and pain of their sufferings.
God have mercy on us all!"

Overcome by the recollection of what ensued upon his capture by the
Spaniards, Turnpenny went by turns hot and cold and was unable to
continue his story.  Many times during the night Dennis was woke from
his own troubled slumbers by a cry from his companion, upon whom, now
that the time of action had ceased, his former sickly terror seemed to
have returned with double force.  Both were heartily glad when morning
came, and with the new day the necessity of facing their new situation.




CHAPTER X

The Maroons Build a Canoe

The events of twenty-four hours had wrought a surprising change in
Dennis's circumstances.  The solitude of the island had suddenly become
peopled.  No longer would Mirandola be his sole comrade and confidant.
He was inexpressibly glad of the company of a fellow-countryman; the
presence of a group of men of strange races was somewhat embarrassing.
Besides Turnpenny, there were now on the island the Spaniard who had
been left pinioned on the shore, and the wounded Portuguese rescued
from the sinking ship, three survivors of the wood-cutting party, three
sick comrades, and the fat negro cook; in all a community of eleven.
Small as it was, after his loneliness Dennis felt it to be a crowd.

His first care on waking in the morning was to liberate the bound
Spaniard, and to bring salves from his store for dressing the wounds of
the Portuguese, and of his party; his own wounds proved to be slight.
While absent on this errand he left Turnpenny in charge of the rest,
and found when he returned that the sailor had already spread a
delectable breakfast, having set the maroons to gather from the trees
not merely bananas, but several other fruits which Dennis himself, in
his dread of eating something poisonous, had not yet ventured to taste.
When the wounded man and the sick maroons, who were still bewildered by
their good fortune, had been attended to, he held a consultation with
Turnpenny.  As a result of this he decided to keep the whereabouts of
his hut and the existence of the stores a secret from the white men.

"They be all villains and traitors," said Turnpenny; "we must e'en keep
them prisoners, and give them into the ward of the maroons.  Wherefore
I say, let the maroons build them a hut a mile or more away from your
dwelling.  They are idle knaves, and having been so long time slaves,
they will be well content to do nothing but keep watch and ward over
those that once were their masters.  And as for their food, there is
enough on the island for a whole city."

"And what of us, my friend?"

"Why, sir, here we be, two Englishmen, a thousand leagues or more away
from home, but a few leagues from the mainland, where Spaniards rule
the roast, and like to be discovered any day if another logwood party
come ashore.  'Tis not in reason we could do with them what, by the
mercy of God and your own ready wit, sir, we did with the knaves
yesternight; and if we be found, there's naught afore us but death or
chains; and for myself, I'd liever die than endure such things as I
have suffered since the fight at St. John d'Ulua."

"Why then, good Amos," said Dennis with a smile, "it does seem we must
cast lots who shall be king of this island, and the other shall be
chancellor, and we will put in practice in our governance the ideas of
the incomparable Sir Thomas More, who, though a Papist, did set forth
in his _Utopia_ most worthy and admirable schemes of ruling a society
of men."

"I know naught of Sir Thomas More or what you call Utopia; and as for
king and chancellor, I am but poor Haymoss Turnpenny, that cannot read
nor write and have never had the ruling of more than a crew of
mariners.  Call yourself king an 'ee please, sir; but methinks 'twould
be more fit and commendable if we seized upon this island in the name
of our sovereign lady Queen Bess."

"A right loyal notion, and one that we will put in act.  But then we
must give it a name."

"Ay, sure, and what better name than Maiden Isle, after that same
gracious lady?"

"So it shall be, and I here proclaim Elizabeth, by the grace of God
queen of England, France, and Ireland, queen of Maiden Isle on the
Spanish Main.  But this is idle mockery, Amos.  We are not builders of
empires, but poor castaways, doomed to linger out our lives in what is
after all a desert, or else in painful servitude.  There is nothing for
laughter here."

And then they fell to talking of their chances of one day escaping from
the island and seeing the fair shores of England again.  It could only
be by being taken off by an English ship, or by setting off themselves
and risking the perilous voyage across the Atlantic.  The latter
alternative seemed beyond the bounds of possibility.  The _Maid
Marian_, even if they could make her hull seaworthy and repair her
shattered spars and rigging, would need a crew to navigate her, and the
maroons were not sailor men.  To build a smaller craft capable of the
long voyage was an enterprise beyond their powers.  Turnpenny could
make a shift to navigate a vessel, but he had no practical skill in
ship-building.

The other alternative seemed equally unlikely, Dennis learnt from the
sailor that the island on which they had so strangely met was situated
deep in the Sound of Darien.  It was less than a hundred and fifty
miles from Cartagena, the capital of the Spanish Main, to the east, and
about the same distance from Nombre de Dios to the west; but the trend
of the coast caused vessels to stand out some distance to sea in
passing, and thus the island was little likely to be touched at by
chance visitors.

One other course occurred to Dennis, only to be dismissed when he
mentioned it to Turnpenny.  It was to build a boat capable of conveying
them to the mainland, and to take refuge among the Indians or the mixed
race of Cimaroons or maroons who had settlements at various parts of
the coast.  But Turnpenny pointed out that this would expose them to
the risk of being caught by the Spaniards, who were constantly at war
with the natives, and would at the same time quite ruin the chances of
getting into touch with an English vessel.  While they remained on the
island there was always the bare possibility of some English or
Huguenot adventurer coming within reach.

Faced by the prospect of an indefinite sojourn on the island, they had
only to make the best of it.  Turnpenny explained to the maroons the
plan arranged for them, and they accepted it without demur.  The
prisoners were sullen and resentful, perforce submissive, not a little
distrustful of their guards, from whom they had deserved no kindness.
Baltizar the fat negro was given the task of supplying the party with
food, partly from the natural resources of the island, partly from the
stores of the _Maid Marian_, which Dennis resolved to share,
economically, with the rest.

A spot about a mile from the chine was chosen as the site of the
shelters for the maroons and their prisoners.  Having set the men at
work, Dennis returned with Turnpenny to his own hut.  Mirandola no
longer showed any jealousy of the presence of a third party; apparently
he had been cured of it by fright at the prospect of being deserted.
Turnpenny, on his part, before the day was out was so much amused at
the animal's antics that he lost his first disgust.

"My heart!" he exclaimed, when, work for the day being over, the monkey
sat on a tub, happily feasting on biscuits and honey: "if 'tis wise
looks do make a chancellor, sure the beast be the properest chancellor
to your king, sir."

"You look pretty wise yourself, Amos," said Dennis, laughing.  "We had
resolved that the sovereignty of this island belongs to our lady Queen
Bess; say then that I am her viceroy, and you my chamberlain; and for
Mirandola, why, let us make him our jester."

Day followed day uneventfully.  Dennis made a still more thorough
exploration of the island in Turnpenny's company, and had his eyes
opened to many things which had formerly escaped him.  Passing the spot
where he had saved Mirandola from the boa constrictor, he mentioned the
incident, and remarked that he had seen no other reptiles in the course
of his wanderings.

"'Tis because you knew not where to look," said Turnpenny.  "The snakes
in this new world be cunning; 'wise as serpents,' says the Scripture,
and a true word.  They dress their skins so as to look like the trees
they live in; 'twould puzzle Solomon himself in all his wisdom and
glory to say which is tree and which is the coil of a snake."

And as they passed through the thickest woods, which Dennis had
prudently refrained from entering, the sailor drew his attention more
than once to snakes of various kinds whose coils were almost
indistinguishable from the trunks of trees.

Once he plucked some fruit from a kind of palm, and, pressing it,
squeezed out a juice as black as ink.

"That is a good sight," cried Dennis gladly.  "I found in the cabin of
the _Maid Marian_ a store of paper and quills, but the ink was all
spilled, and I had nothing wherewithal to write.  So I have lost count
of the days, and know not whether I have been on this isle weeks or
months.  Now I can make a journal."

"Not so neither!  This juice is good to write withal, but the marks
disappear within the ninth day, and the paper is as white as if it had
never been written on.  'Tis no matter, indeed; we should be none the
happier for seeing the tale of our days."

One day Dennis showed Turnpenny the cave in the cliff, which hitherto
he had refrained from revealing.  The sailor attentively examined the
trinkets which Dennis had found on the floor beside the skeleton and
carefully collected.  He pronounced them to be such ornaments as were
worn by the natives of the mainland, and made no doubt that the
skeleton was that of some Indian or maroon done to death by brutal
persecutors.

Dennis got him to continue the story of his life, never yet resumed
since his first night on the island.  He had been sent, he said, among
a gang of prisoners from St. John d'Ulua to Cartagena and thence to a
place on the coast somewhat south of Cartagena, where the governor had
a pearl fishery.  It was defended by a fort, garrisoned by some fifty
Spaniards.  Expecting reprisals from Hawkins for the treacherous
treatment he had received, the governor had ordered the fort to be
strengthened, and dispatched several of his able-bodied prisoners to
assist in the work.

"And I think of my dear comrades rotting in the dungeons of Porto
Aguila--for so 'tis named.  There was Ned Whiddon, and Hugh Curder, and
Tom Copstone, and a dozen more, and for all I know they are there even
now, toiling all day, with many stripes from the villanous whips, and
groaning all night in most foul and noisome dungeons.  Ah! the tales I
could tell would make your skin creep and your hair to stand on end.
Why, what think 'ee they do if the tale of work seem to them not
sufficient?  They tie the poor wretch to a tree, and take thorns of the
prickle palm, and put them into little pellets of cotton dipped in oil,
and stick them in the side of the miserable captive, as thick as the
bristles of a hedgehog.  This alone causes a most fierce torment, but
they are not content therewith.  They set the oiled cotton afire, and
call on the poor wretch, with loud despitous laughs, to sing in the
midst of his torment, and if he cries out in the agony of pain they out
upon him for a base miserable coward and villain.  With my own eyes I
have seen the foul deed, and many more which it is shame to tell of."

"How came it that you got aloose?" asked Dennis.

"Why, it happened in this wise.  The treasure of pearls fished up from
the sea-bottom at that place was wont to be conveyed to Cartagena every
month by ship.  One day the vessel sent with this intent came into the
port wonderfully battered by a storm, the which had nigh stripped her
of all rigging and had moreover washed half her crew overboard.  The
garrison at the fort being soldiers, and there being no other mariners
at hand, the Spanish captain moreover being fearful of the governor's
wrath if the treasure should be delayed, he sent half a dozen or more
of his slaves, French and English, aboard that vessel to work her back
to the capital city.  My heart!  I well nigh wept for joy when I heard
what was in store, for I bethought myself that of a surety we mariners,
French and English, might seize upon that vessel on the voyage and sail
her at our pleasure.  But it was as if the knave had seen to the very
heart of my intent, for when we mounted on ship-board, there were
Spanish soldiers set over us, two for one, and with the Spanish crew
they were as three to one, and they armed.  My device was come to
naught.  We did each man his best to lengthen out that voyage, if
perchance we might fall in with an English vessel and acquaint them
with our case; but never a sail did we see till we made the harbour of
Cartagena, and all our hopes were dashed.

"Then it came to pass that, being a handy man and a stout, I was sold
for money to the master and owner of a ship employed in the traffic of
timber--that same vessel that lies a fathom deep yonder.  At sea I was
a mariner; ashore, being stout of the arms, I was made to ply an axe on
the trees, as you yourself saw.  'Tis three year or more since I fell
prisoner at St. John d'Ulua, and six months since I last set eyes on my
comrades at Porto Aguila, and I fear me I shall never see them more."

"Why think you they be even now there?"

"Why, sir, because the Spaniards be all knaves, and there is no truth
nor faithfulness in them, not one.  The Captain of that place was the
Governor of Cartagena his own son.  A son, one med think, would be
loving and obedient unto his father, but 'tis not so among these dogs
of Spain.  Why, body o' me! in the stead of doing diligently the thing
his father commanded, this young roisterer must needs build him a
house, and thereto he used the labourers sent him with intent to
strengthen the fort, and when I came from that place the house was got
but a little above the ground, and was not like to be finished for a
full year."

"Might not other labourers be hired from Cartagena?"

"I trow not.  The Spaniards are so scared and daunted by the descents
of venturers' ships upon their coasts that they are looking to their
fortresses throughout the Spanish Main.  By long and large 'tis more
like the prisoners will be conveyed back to Cartagena for to build new
forts there.  But this will not be yet, for the Governor of Cartagena
holds the pearl-fishery in dear affection, and he will not bring the
men thence until he has assurance that all is done as he commanded.
No, truly, I believe they be still at Porto Aguila, my dear
mate-fellows, and though I praise God for His infinite goodness and
mercy in bringing me safe into this haven and out of the hands of those
wicked men, I mourn in my heart for Hugh Curder, and Tom Copstone, and
Ned Whiddon, and other my comrades; God save them!"

Many a time in the succeeding days did Amos relate incidents in the
life of the prisoners at Porto Aguila that made Dennis's blood run
cold.  He now began to understand the deep and fierce hatred of the
Spaniards that filled the hearts of adventurers who had returned from
expeditions to the American coast.  The same consuming desire for
humbling and punishing the proud Spaniards burnt in his veins, and he
chafed at the idleness to which he was enforced on this remote island.

Meanwhile the other inhabitants of Maiden Isle were living what
appeared to be a contented life.  With abundance of food, and nothing
to do, the maroons enjoyed, as Dennis thought, conditions that answered
to their idea of bliss.  He was therefore a little surprised one day to
hear the unwonted sound of wood-felling, and to find, when he came to
the spot, four of the men plying their axes lustily upon a huge cedar.
They desisted when he approached, with something of a guilty air that
puzzled him.  They had shown themselves very amiable companions,
grateful for their rescue from their taskmasters.  He could only
suppose that even they had begun to weary of idleness, and had resorted
to their former occupation of log-cutting from no other motive than the
desire to kill time.

But Turnpenny shook his head when Dennis suggested this explanation.

"It do seem to me there be another meaning in it, sir.  'Tis their
intent, a' b'lieve, to make unto themselves a canow."

"But they have no skill to do it, nor fit implements, Amos."

"Bless your eyes, sir, you do not know them.  Wait a while, and if that
be not their purpose, never trust Haymoss Turnpenny."

Letting a few days pass, Dennis went again one morning with the sailor
to the scene of the tree-felling.  The huge trunk had already begun to
take shape as a canoe at least twenty-five feet long.  The men were
diligently working at it, some with axes, others with fire.  Its
interior had been partly hollowed out, the wood and pith burnt away,
and the charred sides scraped with the hatchets.  It was clear that
within a few days the tree would become a vessel which, whether
navigable or not, would certainly float.

"'Tis a pretty piece of work," said Dennis to Turnpenny.  "Ask them
whereto they design it."

Turnpenny spoke a few words in Spanish.  The answer was surprising.
One of the maroons, a man whom the others seemed to have elected as
their leader, threw down his hatchet and fell on his knees.  Then, in a
strange jargon which the sailor had much ado to understand, he gave
voice to the sentiments and aspirations of himself and his comrades.
They were sick of solitude.  They had homes upon the mainland; and
yearned to see again their relatives and comrades, to return to their
settlement, to share in its life, to seek opportunities of revenging
themselves on their oppressors.  And so they were making this canoe, in
which they would sail over the sea.  They were not ungrateful for the
kindnesses showered upon them by the white men; indeed, to show their
gratitude, they would take them with them, having first killed the two
prisoners.  Their spokesman on his knees besought the white men to
yield to their desire, and come with them.  They would supply all their
needs, and follow them with all obedience, if they would lead them
against the Spaniards.

"Tell him to get up," said Dennis.  "This is a matter we must think
upon."

Dennis and Turnpenny held by and by a serious consultation.  They felt
that they were in a somewhat awkward predicament.  The maroons' desire
to regain their friends was natural and reasonable, but their departure
would deprive the white men of valuable allies.  And what of the two
prisoners?  Turnpenny would not have hesitated to kill them, but Dennis
shrank from that course.  They might allow the maroons to carry them
off; but then the Spaniards would either be butchered as soon as the
canoe was out of reach, or they would probably be held as hostages and
exchanged for natives held captive by the Spaniards on the mainland.
In that case they would certainly report the presence of two white men
on the island and the assault upon the lumber boat; a search party
would be the result, and Dennis and his companion would be slaughtered
or carried away into slavery.  On the other hand, if the maroons were
allowed to depart, leaving the prisoners on the island, the burden of
keeping watch over them would prove a constant source of anxiety.

"The canoe is all but finished," said Dennis.  "We must let them finish
it.  To forbid them, poor knaves, would be cruel."

"And vain, to boot," said Turnpenny, "for if we took their axes from
them, they would use bits of sharp rock.  The Indians have hollowed out
such canows with instruments of flint from the beginning of the world."

"We must let them go, then.  For ourselves, I see not at present our
course; but we can provide against the worst hap by conveying our
stores, secretly and by night, to Skeleton Cave; 'tis a good
hiding-place, not like to be easily discovered, and we know not what
necessity may drive us to make it our habitation."

The transfer of the stores occupied two nights.  Mirandola accompanied
the two men as they went to and fro between the sheds and the cave,
clinging so closely to them that it seemed as if he had some intuition
of changes to come.

"By my soul," said Turnpenny with a laugh, "he be as faithful as a dog."

"And whatever may chance, we will not leave you, Mirandola," said
Dennis.  "Shall I forget the days when you were the only friend of my
solitude?  Would you could speak, for assuredly I would ask your
counsel on this pass to which we are come."

They went daily to the clearing to watch the progress of the canoe.  As
yet they had given no answer to the maroons; but these were working
very diligently at the task, having apparently inferred from the
silence of the white men that at least nothing would be done to prevent
their making use of the vessel.  Dennis and Turnpenny talked over the
situation again and again; but their thoughts followed the same weary
round.  At one moment they were almost resolved to throw in their lot
with the maroons and voyage with them to the mainland; the next they
shrank from this course as throwing away what seemed their only chance
of ultimate rescue--the chance of being found some day by an English
vessel.

The problem weighed more heavily on Dennis than on Turnpenny.  Compared
with his former sufferings, it was to the sailor a slight matter.
Dennis, lying sleepless at night, envied his friend the soundness of
his slumbers.  The mariner snored as peacefully on his canvas couch in
the corner of the hut as though he were on a feather bed at home.  To
Dennis the hours of darkness passed wearisomely.  He thought of all
that had happened since he sailed with light heart from Plymouth Sound,
and wondered sometimes whether his comrades had not perchance been
happier in meeting swift death in the storm.  Then he upbraided himself
for his ingratitude to the Providence which had preserved his life and
health, and given him the companionship of a fellow countryman.  He
contrasted, too, his lot with that of Turnpenny's mates on the
mainland, dragging out a miserable existence of slavish toil.  He
recalled the sailor's stories of the tortures they endured--and then
suddenly, one night, there flashed upon his mind a possibility which,
in his preoccupation with his own plight, had never yet occurred to
him.  The maroons would shortly leave the island; had Providence
arranged this as an opportunity for helping the hapless Englishmen in
the Spaniards' power?  If Turnpenny and he should accompany the black
men, might they not find, at some time or other, a means of rescuing
the prisoners--Ned Whiddon, Hugh Curder, Tom Copstone, and the rest?

The idea set Dennis throbbing with a new hope, a new aim.  Slaves
sometimes escaped; the maroons themselves were the offspring of negroes
who had made off from the Spanish settlements and formed alliances with
the native Indians of the woods.  Their communities were constantly
being recruited: what if the sailor and he should cast in their lot
temporarily with the men about to embark, and watch for opportunities
of communicating with the distressed Englishmen!  Even if they never
found a means of reaching home, it would still be something to the good
if their comrades were got out of the hands of their oppressors.  At
the worst they might form a settlement of their own, and live free,
though in exile.

The idea took complete possession of Dennis.  He felt no desire to
sleep.  For a moment he was tempted to wake Turnpenny and put the
question to him; instead, he got up, and stole quietly from the hut, to
think it over more fully under the open sky.  He walked down to the
shore, and, sitting on a rock, looked over the sea and pondered the
matter to the soft accompaniment of the washing tide.

It was clear that the Spaniards of the mainland had no suspicion that
the island was inhabited, or they would long since have visited it.
They might be off their guard.  From what Turnpenny had told him he
knew the indolence of their temperament--the unlikelihood of their
taking precautions against problematical dangers.  Unless directly
threatened by the vessels of adventurers like Hawkins and Drake, they
might be expected to ply their trade--manage their pearl fisheries,
work their mines--without great vigilance.  True, they had recently set
about strengthening their defences; but probably the season of panic
had passed; it was years since Hawkins had troubled them.  It had
already been proved what a determined few could do; if he, with
Turnpenny and the six maroons, could safely reach the mainland, might
they not bide their time until, Fortune assisting them, they found some
means of bringing off the prisoners, or at least of striking a blow in
their cause?  Surely it was better to make the attempt than to rust in
idleness on the island, waiting on a chance that might perhaps never
come, and always exposed to the risk of discovery by the Spaniards.
The more Dennis thought, the more his imagination was captivated by the
idea, and when he at last returned to the hut he was resolved to broach
the subject to Turnpenny as soon as he should wake.

As he came to the entrance the sailor's voice hailed him.

"Be that you, sir?"

"Yes.  I could not sleep, and went for a walk on the shore."

"I had but just waked, all of a sweat, and shaking like a leaf."

"Why, what ailed you?"

"A dream, sir.  Do 'ee believe as dreams come true?  My old grandam was
wont to say they go by contraries; dream of a weddin', she would say,
sure there would be a funeral.  And she was a wise woman; ay, sure."

"I know not, Amos.  We read in Scripture of dreams that most wondrously
came true.  'Twas in a dream that Solomon asked of God an understanding
heart, the which was promised to him with riches, and honour, and
length of days; and Solomon lived long in the land, and became the
richest and wisest of kings.  Scripture was written for our
instruction, Amos, and I would liever believe in Holy Writ than in the
old wives' tales of a score of grandams.  But what then was your dream?"

"Why, sir, if it be not sin to speak it, I was standing alone in a
waste place, and on a sudden the voice of Tom Copstone spoke out of the
air, and said, 'You and me, Haymoss; you and me, my heart!'  And while
I was wondering in my simple mind what those words might mean, there
was a thick smoke, and a roar as of thunder, and I stood dazed, and the
fear came upon me.  And then the smoke lifted, and I saw old Tom with
's head all bloody, and Hugh Curder behind him, and behind him again I
saw you, sir, and Ned Whiddon, and, God a-mercy! my very own self, as I
ha' seen myself time and again in the glass, but sore battered and
misused.  And I thought sure 'twas my ghost, and the fear of it woke me
up, and I rose all panting and trembling, and cried to 'ee, and when
there was no answer I broke into a sweat, remembering my grandam's
words."

"Well, 'tis all safe.  I also have had a dream, Amos, and yet I did not
sleep.  And 'tis to tell you my dream I am here now.  Mayhap it will
fit yours; God in His mercy send that both yours and mine come true!"




CHAPTER XI

The Main

The dawn of day found Dennis and Turnpenny discussing the scheme which
was born of the night's meditation.  Remembering his bitter experience
of bondage among the Spaniards, and oppressed by his superstitious fear
that his dream portended some calamity, the sailor at first refused
point-blank to consider Dennis's suggestion.  But by and by, when
Dennis had shown him how light had been his sufferings, after all, by
comparison with those of his comrades, and had declared his belief that
the strange coincidence of the dream with his own imaginings was an
augury of good, Turnpenny's better feelings got the upper hand of his
timorousness, and he threw himself with ardour into a consideration of
the project.

As soon as it was light, he asked Dennis to lead him to the very spot
where the idea had occurred to him.  And there, in the little bay
beneath the chine, he became the bold-hearted English sailor again.

"My heart! we're a-going to do it," he said.  "See here, sir."  He
began with the end of a half-pike to mark out a rough plan on the dry
sand.  "Here be the fort.  Here be the don Captain's new house; the
foundations were no more than laid when I was hauled away on ship
board.  Here, at this angle, be the rooms of the guard; in the cellars
beneath my poor comrades lie and groan o' nights.  In this quarter be
the pearl-fishers, penned up like cattle when their work is done.  And
here, under the guns of the fort, be the little harbour, with a quay of
planking.  Nor'ard, a mile or more, is the fishery, where the black
knaves have to dive for the baubles, and woe betide 'em if they do not
bring up enough to please their masters."

"And think you you could pilot us to the place, Amos?"

"I've never a doubt of it.  Twice have I sailed to it in direct course
from Cartagena, and many's the time I have passed it in the lumber
ship.  'Tis true I am not so skilled in the landmarks from this side as
from the side of Cartagena; nathless I be a ninny, not worth the name
of mariner, an I be not able to lay a course thitherwards without
losing my bearings."

"What is the country thereabout?"

"Why, sir, for the most flat and forest clad.  Behind the fort there is
a hill, fairish high.  Once on a time 'twas covered with trees, but a
great stretch of the forest was of late burned black by a fire; I mind
it well, for the shape of the black patch is like to a monstrous
cayman, upwards of a mile long.  'Tis a famous landmark, and clear to
the eyes a great way off at sea.  Let me but spy that, and I warrant I
will steer any bark to it on a straight furrow."

"Well, then, Amos, it does seem that with good luck we can make a
landing somewhere on the coast, and then it shall go hard with us but
we can, by taking thought, devise some plan whereby we may release your
comrades from their chains.  But we cannot do it without help from the
maroons; think you they would be willing to lend us aid?"

"My heart!  Do but promise them a share of the Spaniards' treasure, and
they will be hot to have at them."

"But the fishery belongs to the Governor of Cartagena, you said.
Imprimis, we are not pirates; nor indeed is there like to be a great
hoard of pearls at Porto Aguila, for they will be sent, no doubt, for
safety to Cartagena."

"Bless your bones, sir, I warrant there be more kept at Porto Aguila
than be sent to Cartagena.  The Captain, truly, is the Governor's son;
but every Spaniard is a shark, and would rob his grandam's grave were
he not afeard of ghosts.  And as for being pirates, when 'tis Spaniards
in question I would be a pirate without the tenth part of a scruple,
for 'tis certain the fishery was filched from the Indians; they be the
Spaniards' jackals."

"Well, let us go to the maroons and put the case to them."

Dennis need have had no doubt as to the men's reception of his
proposal.  To begin with, they were frankly delighted that the white
men would accompany them.  They had often talked among themselves about
the young lord, as they called him, who had led the attack on the
Spaniards' vessel, and they were agreed that his presence in the canoe
would serve them as a talisman.  Then, even without the prospect of
plunder from the Spaniards' treasure-house, they nourished a bitter
resentment against their old oppressors, and were ready to embrace any
opportunity of striking a blow at them.

"We are the servants of the young lord," said their spokesman to
Turnpenny, "we will do whatever he bids."

"Ask them if they know the region."

The reply was in the negative.  None of them had ever been engaged in
the pearl fishery; most of them hailed from the neighbourhood of Nombre
de Dios.

"Then our whole dependence is on you, Amos," said Dennis.

"Ay, sir, and it do daunt me somewhat.  In a bark, or a shallop, or
e'en a longboat, I could have great comfort; but a canow, sir--a mere
tree-trunk hollowed out, wi' no ribs nor planks, no spars nor other
gear; 'tis a fearsome and wonderful craft, with a crazy look."

"But the maroons are wont to handle such craft, you told me.  They will
navigate her; you will but have to cry the course."

"True, sir, but no master mariner that hath any manhood in him will be
content to govern a craft being ignorant of its true nature.  Yonder
monkey would be as fit."

"Ah!  We must take Mirandola.  The poor beast would, I verily believe,
break his poor heart did we leave him here in loneliness again."

"Leave the knave prisoners to bear him company, sir."

"No, no.  Besides that it would be a poor compliment to Mirandola
himself, it would have some spice of danger for us.  Left to themselves
in freedom, the men would of a surety signal to any passing ship, the
which being in all likelihood Spanish, the report of our doings would
soon be spread abroad through all the coast, and a hue and cry would be
raised after us.  We must bring them along with us.  Trust me, they
shall have no chance then of giving the alarm to the enemy, and 'tis
not unlike, indeed, they may serve us as hostages."

"I fear me they'll be the Jonahs in our marvellous craft."

"An ill comparison, Amos.  Jonah fled from his duty, and by reason of
his wrongdoing peril came upon the mariners.  The similitude does not
hold."

"That be a great comfort, sir, in especial for that there be no whales
as I know on in these waters, but only sharks."

In answer to a question from Turnpenny, the head man of the maroons
said that the canoe would be ready to take the water within a week.
But he added that since the young lord had agreed to make the voyage
with them, they were willing to remain a little longer on the island,
in order to give careful finishing touches to the craft and ensure its
thorough seaworthiness.  Dennis thanked them, through the sailor, for
this mark of consideration, and resolved to use the interval in
teaching them the use of the caliver.  He could not foresee what might
ensue upon their landing; they would be at a disadvantage if they had
no other arms with which to meet the Spaniards than axes and pikes.

Accordingly, he presented each of them with a caliver from the stores
he had placed in Skeleton Cave, and for a certain portion of each day
Turnpenny and he instructed them in marksmanship, choosing for their
practice ground the deepest part of the chine, whence the noise of
firing was least likely to be heard out at sea.  The first experiments
were disheartening, and at the same time amusing.  At the kick of the
cumbrous weapons the men flung them down in alarm, crying out that they
were possessed with evil spirits.  But their timidity was by degrees
overcome; and when Dennis, in addition to practising them at fixed
targets, rigged up a canvas figure which he suspended on two parallel
ropes across the chine and ran from side to side by means of pulleys,
they entered with some zest into the sport.  At first the figure made
many journeys to and fro without receiving a single hit; but within a
week the marksmanship had improved astonishingly, and there was not a
man of them but might be trusted to hit a moving object at fairly short
range.

Meanwhile Amos, not content to trust the navigation of the canoe
entirely to the maroons and their paddles, had busied himself in
rigging up a mast with small sails taken out of the _Maid Marian_.
When he at last pronounced the vessel ready, several kegs of water and
boxes of biscuits were rolled down to the beach near at hand, and the
party awaited only a favourable wind to launch their craft.

For some days there had been a dead calm, and when at length a light
breeze sprang up it blew in shore.  The natives grew impatient, and
begged to be allowed to proceed with their paddles alone.  But this
Turnpenny stoutly refused.  With a voyage of thirty or forty miles
before them it was needful to spare the men as much as possible, lest
when they reached the mainland they should be worn out, and unfit to
cope with the labours and perhaps the struggles that awaited them.
Turnpenny scanned the sky with a seaman's eye, in some fear lest the
wind when it came should prove too boisterous for this strange craft,
which he still looked on with distrust.  One morning, however, he
announced that a fresh breeze had sprung up from the north-west,
promising to increase in force as the day wore on.  No time was lost.
The canoe was carried down to the beach and moored in shallow water;
the stores were lifted aboard; then the two prisoners, pale with
apprehension, and Baltizar the cook, were conveyed to the vessel on the
backs of three stalwart maroons, and last of all Dennis and Turnpenny
prepared to wade out.

During the proceedings at the beach the monkey had remained perched in
a tree, watching everything with many signs of excitement.  At the last
moment Dennis turned and called to the animal; but it merely gibbered
and blinked.

"Come, Mirandola," said Dennis, coaxingly, "we cannot go without you.
I fear me you feel a declension from your high estate, when you were
the sole partner of my solitude; but believe me, I still hold you in
dear affection.  Come then, and let your grave and reverend presence
dignify this our enterprise."

But the monkey refused to budge, and Dennis remembered the aversion he
had always shown to the sea.  He walked towards the tree in which the
animal sat, holding forth his hand, using every blandishment; then,
when all was of no avail, and Turnpenny called to him from the canoe to
leave the unnatural creature, he turned and stepped into the water.  He
had just laid his hand on the side of the canoe, preparing to leap in,
when he heard a shrill cry, and saw the monkey spring down with amazing
celerity and run on all fours towards him across the sand, uttering
sounds of entreaty.  It was as if Mirandola had to the last refused to
believe that his master was leaving him, and now that he could doubt no
longer, had overcome his horror of the sea and resolved to brave the
discomforts of the voyage.  He reached the brink of the water and
scampered up and down, as though seeking a dry path to the boat.  It
was impossible to resist his pleading cries.  Dennis returned; the
monkey with a squeal of delight sprang upon his shoulder; and so
entered the canoe, a trembling passenger.

The maroons shoved off; Turnpenny ran up his sail; and the craft moved
into deep water.  For some minutes the natives kept their paddles
busily employed, until, drawing out of the lee of the island, the
vessel felt the full force of the breeze and began to scud merrily over
the rippling sea.

"My heart!" cried Turnpenny, "'tis a wondrous neat little craft.  I was
wrong; I own it free; and if the wind holds she will make good sailing
and bring us ere many hours are gone to the coast where we desire to
be."

"Too soon, if I mistake not," said Dennis.  "It will not be well for us
to make the shore before dark; we may be spied from the land.  In
truth, we run a great risk, Amos.  Our sail will not escape the eyes of
the look-out of any vessel whose track we may chance to cross."

"True, sir, there be risks great and manifold.  But we must e'en hope
for the best.  The maroons have rare good eyes; and if perchance they
catch sight of a vessel, I will run down the sail afore they can spy
us, and we will lie snug until the coast be clear."

After two hours' sailing the coast hove into sight as a long blue bar
upon the horizon.  At midday Turnpenny lowered the sail, for it was
clear that at the rate the vessel was going she would run into view
from the shore long before it would be safe to attempt a landing.
While the crew were eating their dinner of fruit and biscuits one of
the men cried out that he saw a sail.  Turnpenny took a long look in
the direction the man pointed out, Dennis watching his face in keen
anxiety.

"All's well, sir," said the sailor at length.  "She be coasting along
towards Cartagena; in an hour she will be clean out of sight, and we're
so low in the water that no natural eye will see us, the sail being
down."

They lay gently rocked by the waves until, after a good look round, he
judged it safe once more to hoist the sail.  An hour afterwards he
declared that he recognized a headland which was no more than three
leagues from Porto Aguila.  The vessel's head was pointed direct for
the land, but the wind dropping somewhat, they were still a long way
from shore when the sun went down and the swift darkness of the tropics
descended upon them.

"We dursn't try to land in the dark," growled Turnpenny.  "This craft
of ours is only fit for fair weather and easy harbourage, and not
knowing the little crinkles o' the coast, t'ud be nowt but a miracle if
we 'scaped being stove in."

"But there will be a moon to-night, I think?" replied Dennis.

"True, a little tiny one, like the horn of a cow.  Maybe she will give
light enough to guide us to a creek.  We must e'en wait for her rising."

They had no means of telling the time, and the maroons grew so restless
that, while it was still dark, Turnpenny ordered them to paddle
cautiously along the shore.

"'Tis a creek I be looking for," he said to Dennis, "where we can run
the canow with a fair chance of hiding it when day breaks."

"How far are we from the fort?"

"I cannot tell.  I fear me I have overshot the mark with being over
cautious."

"That is impossible, Amos.  At least it is an error on safety's
side.--Hist! what was that?"

His ears had caught a slight splash at no great distance shorewards.

"Nowt to make 'ee uneasy, sir," replied Turnpenny.  "'Twas without
doubt a cayman slipping off into deep water; and by the token, 'tis a
guide for us, for the reptile haunts the banks of rivers, and sure the
very creek we be looking for will be somewheres anigh here."

The men drove the canoe a little nearer in shore, and in a few minutes
Turnpenny, who was in the bows peering intently ahead, whispered that
he did indeed see the opening of a creek.  Soon the canoe entered a
fairly wide water-way, much obstructed with reeds, and darkened by the
dense and high vegetation on either bank.  Now and again, through a gap
in the foliage, the late rising moon shed a wan mysterious light upon
their course.  As the canoe moved slowly and stealthily up the creek,
Dennis was conscious of a strange home-sickness.  How many times had he
rowed by night on little tree-shaded creeks and river-mouths in far-off
Devon!  The deep shadows, the narrow paths of ghostly light, the
silence, rendered only the more intense by the incessant croaking of
frogs, lent a charm to the adventure that almost eclipsed its peril.

The creek made several curves within a short distance, and Turnpenny,
speaking in a whisper, said that they had now come far enough to escape
notice from the sea.

"'Tis well, my friend; and now, say: shall we land, or shall we rather
remain in the canoe for the rest of the night?  I give my voice for
landing.  We are packed here as close as biscuits, and I would fain
stretch my limbs, and moreover get a little to windward of some of
these our companions."

"I warrant the maroons would liever stay in the canow, sir; and I own I
myself am somewhat chary of landing in the dark.  I know summat o'
these forest lands, and there be fearsome wild creatures in 'em, the
like of which you never saw in Maiden Isle yonder.  There be wild hogs,
of a surety, and monstrous wild cats that climb like monkeys, and see
in the dark, and will pounce on a man and carry him off afore he can
twink an eyelid.  And as for these our bedfellows, my heart! there be
worse ashore--muskeeties, and sandflies, and ants in armies, that crawl
aneath your clothes, and nip your arms and neck, and make themselves
most pestilent ill neighbours.  And we cannot light a fire to scare
them away, for savage as they be, whether four foot or six foot, they
be gentle and mild by comparison with the two-footed enemies the fire
would bring on our tracks."

"We will lie by till morning, then, and pray the night be not
disturbed."

The maroons were unmistakably glad when this decision was communicated
to them.  To their minds the mere darkness was awful, and when to this
were added the manifold dangers of the forest, they would rather have
faced an army of Spaniards than camp unprotected among the trees.

The party spent a restless, uncomfortable night in their cramped
quarters.  Yet in his wakeful moments Dennis found some pleasure in
watching the fire-flies darting hither and thither on the shore, and in
listening to the continuous drone of insects, that seemed to his ears a
pleasant lullaby.  Once a goat-sucker clattered heavily past, uttering
its weird cry; now and again he was amused by the question, "Who are
you?" shouted from the trees, and recognized it as the cry of some
nameless bird.  As morning drew on, these sounds were replaced by
others.  Macaws screeched from the tree-tops, toucans barked like
puppies, tree-frogs whistled and boomed, and at intervals the whole
neighbourhood reverberated with long howls which Turnpenny said were
the morning song of red howler monkeys.  As morning began to dawn, and
these signs of forest life multiplied, Dennis noticed that Mirandola
was becoming much excited; and when the canoe was run ashore under a
towering mora tree, the monkey sprang nimbly to land, chattering with
delight, and in an instant was springing up into the foliage.

"Poor knave!" said Dennis.  "It seems we have brought him home, Amos.
Would that we too were restored, whole and happy, to our friends!"

"God-a-mercy, do 'ee forget Hugh Curder, and Tom Copstone, and Ned
Whiddon, poor souls?  Do 'ee have more respect for the feelings of a
heathen monkey?"

"Nay, nay, you mistake me," said Dennis, smiling at the sailor's honest
indignation.  "I do not forget them.  By God's mercy we are here in
safety, and ere long I hope to have all your friends to join our little
company.  Now, master mariner, what is to be our course?"

"Why, sir, we must first go and spy out the land."

"Through the forest?  How shall we find our way?"

"Imprimis, this creek runs eastward of the bluff I steered by.
Wherefore 'tis our first business to lay our course westward and cut
off that headland, as you might say."

"But can you be sure of setting your course aright?"

"There's the sun above us, and we may catch a glimpse of him here and
there among the trees.  And 'tis certain we shall encounter brooks
wandering like lost children in the forest; only though they do seem
lost, we know, being men, and in our right minds, that they be running
all the while to the sea.  By this and by that we'll come at the place
we steer for."

"And who shall go on this inland voyage of discovery?"

"Why, you and me, sir.  God-a-mercy, the very words of my dream!  'You
and me, Haymoss, you and me!'  'Tis a good sign, for sure.  The maroons
shall lie hid in the creek, and keep ward over the prisoners."

"But can we trust them?  Will they not, having arrived on the mainland,
act after their own devices and depart?"

"'Tis a risk, in truth; but I will speak to them with all gravity, and
bring to their mind the Spaniards' treasure, and the stripes they
suffered in bondage.  We will see if there be faith in their black
blood."

After a conversation with the maroons, Turnpenny announced that they
had agreed to remain in the creek until nightfall.  If the white men
had not returned then, they would hold themselves free to act as they
pleased.  Then Dennis and the sailor set off on their scouting
expedition.

At the edge of the forest the trees grew fairly wide apart, and the
canopy above admitted a few rays which lay as bright spots on the floor
of dead leaves.  But as the two adventurers proceeded the forest became
thicker and thicker, until they walked in a dim twilight.  Well covered
with vegetation as Maiden Isle had been, Dennis had never imagined
anything like the dense woodland through which he was now slowly making
his way.  It steamed with moisture; the din of early morning had given
place to a mysterious stillness; birds and animals were quiet or
asleep; and if the silence was broken at rare moments by the long howl
of a monkey, the melancholy sound did but enhance the impression of
utter solitude.  Turnpenny led the way with great wariness; his former
experiences of forest life warned him of dangers that might lie in
wait--a slumbering jaguar which their footfall might disturb, a snake
so cunningly marked that it was indistinguishable from the tree about
which it was coiled.  Several times he halted, in doubt of his
bearings.  Once, when he confessed himself beaten, he climbed with a
mariner's agility a towering trunk, and declared when he descended that
from its top he had caught a glimpse of the open sea and so learnt the
general direction in which to go.

They came at length to a narrow open space, where apparently trees had
been felled at no very distant date.  Turnpenny was pointing out a
hairy sloth hanging under a branch like a nest of termites, when Dennis
touched him on the arm and bade him look across the glade.

"What is it?" he whispered.

"Methinks the figure of a man, moving among the trees."

Though he had spoken under his breath, it almost seemed that his words
had been overheard, for the figure halted, then instantly turned
sideways and vanished from their sight.

"We must after him," said Turnpenny.

"Ay, and catch him, or there is an end to our venture and us.  He is
alone, for he made no sound, and if he had companions near by he would
surely have summoned them."

Without further pause Dennis ran across the glade, and plunged into the
forest on the other side, taking the southerly direction in which he
had seen the figure disappear.  He had not gone far before he heard the
rustle and crash of some one forcing his way through the undergrowth;
clearly the fugitive was not a good runner, or he would have been out
of earshot before this.  Dennis quickened his step, guided always by
the sound, ever increasing in loudness.  At length he again caught a
glimpse of the man, labouring ahead; he gained on him, and was within a
few yards when the runaway suddenly turned, and Dennis halted and
swerved aside just in time to evade a spear hurled straight at him.  It
whizzed through the air, flew harmlessly by, and struck with a twang a
tree trunk, where it hung quivering.

Next moment Dennis sprang forward and closed with the man.  He had no
time to take note of him, save that he was more than common tall.  But
it struck him with surprise that he met with no real resistance.  The
man staggered under the impact; the two rolled on the leaf-strewn
ground; and in an instant Dennis was uppermost.  He scarcely needed the
Devonian trick of wrestling to maintain his advantage; his opponent was
already spent.  Holding him down, Dennis raised himself at arm's length
to recover breath and take stock of the fugitive.  He was struck by the
glare of inextinguishable hate in the man's haggard eyes.  Helpless as
he was, there was no yielding in his mien; it was weakness, not fear or
cowardice, that had made him such an easy captive.

In a few moments Turnpenny came up breathless.  Seeing that Dennis held
the man firmly down, he did not offer to assist, but halted and threw a
keen glance at the prisoner.

"God-a-mercy!" he exclaimed, suddenly.  "'You and me, Haymoss!'  'Tis
the dream come true.  'Tis Tom Copstone, 'tis very Tom!  Sir, let him
up; 'tis my dear comrade, my messmate in the _Jesus_.  Oh, Tom, what a
piece of work is this!"

Dennis was amazed at the alteration in the man's expression.  The
fierce blaze of his blood-shot eyes was quenched in a mist of tears.

"Haymoss! dear Haymoss!" he murmured, and seemed like to swoon away.

Turnpenny was by this on his knees beside his old comrade.

"Oh, Tom, to see thee in this sorry plight!" he exclaimed, pitifully.

He raised the prostrate figure.  Copstone did indeed present a sorry
spectacle.  His clothes were completely in tatters, he was emaciated
almost to a skeleton; his hair and beard hung long, straggling and
matted.

"Tell me, Tom, me and this true friend, what has brought 'ee to this
fearsome pass."

"I ran away; 'tis three months since.  Three, I say, but I cannot tell;
maybe 'tis four or five.  I ran away from those devils; 'twas more than
flesh and blood could endure."

"But whither, whither, Tom?"

"I had hope to fall in with a friendly folk--maroons or Indians; for
such hate the Spaniards, and whoso hates the Spaniards must be a friend
to me.  But I found none, and I had perforce to take to the forest, and
here I made shift to keep body and soul together with the fruits of the
earth.  Then I was stricken with the forest fever, and lay for nights
and days shivering and burning by turns."

"Take time, dear Tom," said Turnpenny, noticing the other's gasps.  "We
be true friends."

"And here is wine from my store," said Dennis, producing a flask.  "It
will refresh you."

The man drank gratefully.

"And I marvel," added Turnpenny, "that 'ee be still alive in this
fearsome place of wild beasts.  Verily the Almighty has kept a guard
over you, even as He defended Daniel in the den of lions."

"'Tis true; yet I did what I could for myself.  Come and see."

He led them through the forest, winding in and out among the trees in a
manner that seemed to the others nothing short of marvellous, until he
came to a great trunk in which there were notches cut, from a point
near the base to the lowest branch.  By these notches he climbed up,
Dennis and Turnpenny following in turn.  The steps ceased when the
bough was reached; then he ascended some twenty feet through foliage
until he arrived at a little hut, formed of branches cunningly
intertwined, with a roofing of thatch.

"My heart, 'tis a pleasant and delectable mansion!" said Turnpenny,
looking admiringly at the leafy structure.  "And did 'ee fashion it
with your own hands, Tom?"

"No," replied the man, with a smile.  "Here I found it, as it is.  It
was made, I doubt not, by Indians, in the time before the Spaniards set
foot on these shores.  'Twas here I lay when the fever was heavy upon
me, and I thought to die.  Oh! how good it is to see your face,
Haymoss; but what brings 'ee, old friend, to this dreadful place, and
how got you free from the hands of the oppressor?"

"'Twas the deed of this gentleman, a man of Devon, Tom, that was cast
on an island yonder in the Main, and by wit and courage loosed me from
bondage."

He told the whole story, to the great wonderment of his friend.

"And now we be here to help Ned Whiddon and Hugh Curder and others of
our messmates in the fort," he said, in conclusion.  "By God's mercy we
will snatch them, too, from the house of bondage, and make them free
men once more."

"Ay, and I will help.  The sight of 'ee has done me a world of good;
the Lord has put a new song in my mouth.  I will lead you.  I know this
forest in and out, Haymoss, for though I be by rights but a simple
mariner, I am made now into a woodsman.  For why?  'Cos otherwise I
should have been a dead man.  The spear I threw but now,--God be
praised it failed of its mark, sir! and I bethink me 'tis still
sticking in the tree--has served me in good stead many a time and oft.
'Twas the only thing I brought away with me, and without it long ere
this the birds would ha' picked my bones."

"Think 'ee thou'rt strong enough to lead us to the fort, Tom?" asked
Turnpenny.

"Ay, sure, and 'tis a good time, i' the heat o' the day, when the
Spaniards be mostly asleep.  We'll e'en go at once.  What be the name
of this true friend?"

"'Tis Master Dennis Hazelrig, Tom, and a' come from Shaston, and has
changed a word with Master Drake."

"Ah, Master Drake be a rare fine man and mariner.  I warrant he hath
not forgot the base dealings o' the knaves at St. John d'Ulua, and in
my bondage I looked for the day when he should come with a mighty power
and do unto them what they had done to us, and more also.  But I could
not wait, Haymoss, I could not wait; and now we be met, and Master
Hazelrig, and you and me, Haymoss----"

"My heart, the very words of my dream!  Ay, Tom, you and me and Master
Hazelrig, we three, will do what men may do to succour Hugh Curder and
Ned Whiddon, and other our dear comrades in distress."




CHAPTER XII

Beneath the Walls

Tom Copstone leading, the party of three swiftly made their way through
the woodland.  Their mark was the south-western angle of the fort; that
was the quarter, said Copstone, whence it might be most safely
reconnoitred.  The ground rose gradually as they proceeded, and after
walking for what must have been several miles they came upon a large
open space which had evidently been cleared by fire.

"'Tis the black cayman on the hill above the fort," whispered Turnpenny
to Dennis.  "You mind, sir?"

"Ay, the landmark of which you made mention."

Skirting the upper side of the clearing for a few hundred yards, being
careful to remain slightly within the edge of the forest, they arrived
at a spot where, while themselves concealed, they had an uninterrupted
view of the country before them.  There was a thin belt of woodland
beyond the clearing, but the hill then dipped somewhat steeply, and
through this dip they saw the fort which held so many bitter memories
for the sailors, and the sea stretching out beneath it, a vast
shimmering plain.

"'Tis bigger than I deemed likely," said Dennis, "the garrison being
but fifty, if I remember right."

"True, sir," said Copstone, "there be but fifty Spaniards, but there be
Indians and maroons within the walls as well, the slaves and
pearl-fishers to wit.  Aforetime, as I have heard tell, the fishers
lived in huts around; but about six year ago a French vessel bore
suddenly down upon the place.  The Spaniards, some twenty or thirty
then, had no warning, and the Frenchmen had an easy job to carry off
all the treasure that the captain had stored up, and in the tumult a
great part of the fishers made off and were never seen more.
Thereafter the Governor of Cartagena gave command that the fort should
be strengthened and the workers lodged within: you can see the huts
ranged along inside by the wall."

"'Twas shutting the door after the steed was stolen," said Dennis, with
a smile.  "Now let me print the lines of the settlement upon my memory."

The fort was a rough square in shape, with a round tower at each
corner.  In the centre of the enclosure was a long low house, with a
veranda, which Copstone explained was the Commandant's new house, but
lately finished.  Close by was a smaller house, occupied by the captain
of the garrison, and beyond this a row of still smaller buildings,
devoted to the Spanish troops.  From their elevated position they could
see that on the eastern side the fort was bounded by a stream which
appeared to wash the wall; but Copstone said that between the wall and
the stream was a level walk, about twelve feet wide, where the officers
were accustomed to promenade in the cool of the evening.  The one gate
of the fort was cut in the eastern wall, and it led immediately to a
narrow pier running into the river, where the vessels were loaded and
unloaded.  Between the pier and the mouth of the stream a small
two-masted bark now lay at anchor; there was safe harbourage, and this
vessel probably awaited its cargo of pearls to be conveyed to
Cartagena, having brought provisions thence.

The northern wall, Copstone said, was built on a rocky cliff about
thirty feet high, washed at high tide by the sea, which swept round the
north-eastern angle, and formed, with a series of broken rocks and
boulders, an effective defence to a great part of the western wall.
The southern face of the fort was hidden from the spectators by the
intervening trees, but between it and this belt of woodland was an open
space some two hundred and fifty yards wide, cleared with the object of
depriving possible assailants of cover.  About a mile to the right was
the scene of the pearl-fishing, and the fishers were at that moment to
be seen at work, diving from canoes, in each of which, said Copstone,
were two Spaniards fully armed.

"And where be our dear comrades, Torn?" asked Turnpenny.  "In my time
they were lodged in underground dungeons hewn out of the rock beneath
the south-east tower yonder."

"And there they be still, poor souls," said Copstone.  "Ah! many's the
hour I've spent in the selfsame dungeons, groaning with the pain of the
stripes made by their whips on my bare back."

"And 'twas thence 'ee fled, Tom?  I marvel how 'ee broke out o' that
strong-fast place."

"Nay, never a soul has broken out of they dungeons.  It was in this
wise with me.  One day a fearsome storm blew up without a minute's
warning.  The harbour yonder, that is wont to be safe, was a seething
whirlpool then, and a bark that lay beside the pier, laden with a
treasure of pearls in readiness for the voyage, was dashed hither and
thither by the fury of the waves until she was like to be battered into
splinters.  There was a cry for all hands to save her, and we were
driven out of the gate to do what we could.  The sky was black as
pitch, though 'twas an hour or two from sunset; and in the midst of
that coil, covered by the darkness, I dropped down over the embankment
wall, clinging on with my hands, and so worked myself along till I came
to the extremity of the walk, fearing every moment lest a wave should
come and sweep me away.  But by the mercy of God I came safe to the end
of the walk, where the round tower juts out--you mind, Haymoss?--its
foundations being struck into jagged rocks, with many a cleft in
between.  There I refuged myself till the night came, beat upon by the
waves till the breath was well-nigh battered out of my body.  But
there, a drenched mortal, I clung until the tempest fell to a calm, and
in the darkness I got me away to the woods."

"My heart! 'twas a deed of daring and peril," said Turnpenny.  "But
list!  What be adoing down yonder?"

The silence below was suddenly broken by the ringing sound of picks.
Men were apparently at work on the face of the fort nearest the
observers.  The labourers were out of sight, and Copstone confessed
himself unable to guess what their task might be.  The fort seemed
complete; for a month before Copstone's escape the work had indeed been
hurried on in response to urgent orders from Cartagena, where the
Governor desired more men to assist in his own defences.  His commands
resulted in the prisoners being treated with increased brutality, and
Copstone said that it was a stock joke with the Spanish garrison that
by the time they had done with the captives at Porto Aguila there would
be little work left in them.

For an hour or more the three men stood scanning the fort and its
surroundings, until Dennis felt that every detail was firmly graven
upon his mind.  Then, as they had a long journey back to the boat, and
it was desirable that they should reach their companions before the
fall of night, they set off to return to the creek.  Copstone knew it
well; under his guidance the others took a short cut through the
forest, that saved them, he said, more than a mile, and the short
tropical twilight had only just begun when they arrived at the canoe.
The maroons had not been disturbed during their absence.  One of the
Spaniards, who recognized the creek, had tried to persuade the natives
to set them at liberty, promising them a rich reward.  But they had no
faith in him or any of his race, and their answer was to make his bonds
more secure.

Knowing that they were several leagues from the fort, with a long
wooded hill between them, the sailors agreed that it would be safe to
kindle a fire on shore, beside which they might camp for the night
without molestation by insects.  But they had little sleep.  The three
sat long over the fire, Copstone relating incidents in his prison life
that made the blood of his hearers boil with rage and indignation.
With the good food given him from the stock they had brought, and the
companionship of his countrymen, he had already become a very different
being from the famished solitary creature they had met in the forest;
and when, fired with passionate hatred of the Spanish oppressors and
with pity for their hapless prisoners, Dennis and Turnpenny vowed that
they would go through with their enterprise, no matter at what cost,
Copstone declared himself heart and soul with them, and only longed for
the moment of action to come.

But it was not enough to be full of zeal.  The greatest courage and
determination would not suffice alone to achieve their object.

"We are but ten against fifty," said Dennis, "and one of the ten a fat
negro whom the sight of a bare blade would cause to shake like a jelly."

"Leave him out, sir," said Turnpenny.  "He would squeal like a stuck
pig if his finger were pinched."

"There are but nine of us, then, and what can nine do against fifty?"

"If all the nine were men of Devon like Tom Copstone and me," said
Turnpenny, "we would face fifty don Spaniards and beat 'em too.  But
you can't make a silk purse out of a sow's ear, as the saying is, and
you can't turn a negro or maroon into a true fighting man that will
never say die.  Men of their sort cannot play a losing game, though
they be full of courage if things go well with them."

"I fear me even nine men of Devon could not fight a pitched battle
against five times their number, whether Spaniards or other.  But 'tis
not my purpose to approach the walls with a trumpet and deliver a
defiance.  Our only chance is by surprising the fort in the darkness,
and so taking them at a disadvantage.  How stands it then, Amos?"

"Why, sir, it stands clean topsy-versy, which is to say it is by no
means possible.  The walls, as you did yourself see, be too high to
leap over, and the gate be shut and bolted and barricadoed by night."

"But is it watched?"

"That I know not.  Do 'ee know, Tom?"

"Nay; afore dark all the prisoners be thrust into the dungeons, and
kept fast in ward until morning light."

"And do they set a guard over the dungeons?"

"Not as I know, sir.  What would be the good?  The doors be strong and
clamped with iron; the guard house be just above; and we was all so
worn with toil and so sick at heart that nary one of us ever had the
spirit to attempt a sally.  When they had us fast in the dungeons,
there they might leave us, with never a fear but we would be safe
bound."

"Methinks that same security would forbid them to keep a watch
seawards.  The sea washes the north side of the fort, you said?"

"Ay, sir, and even at high tide there is no draught for a vessel of
more than twenty tons burden, so they need fear no attack thence.
True, they might keep a watch on the harbour when a vessel lies there;
but 'tis years since any enemy has appeared, and with the dons 'tis out
of sight, out of mind, I trow."

"Well, does not that favour us?  Grant we cannot scale the walls, nor
force the gate, we may still approach the fort from the sea by night,
without risk of being discovered, and that is the very thing that we
must do.  This night is too far spent for us to make any attempt in
that quarter.  We must possess our souls in patience for yet another
day, and truly that is not amiss, for it will give us leisure to spy
once more upon the fort.  Think you 'tis possible to come where we may
view the north side?"

"There is but one way; to make a circuit as we lately did, and go
further through the woods, and creep down at dusk to the rocks, when
the work for the day is over and we are not like to be seen by the
Spaniards who keep ward over the fishers."

"That is what we will do, then.  And now, since we know not what the
day may bring forth to try our strength, let us get what sleep we can,
and so fortify ourselves."

But for many hours Dennis lay awake, thinking over the next day's
doings.  Up with the dawn, he set the maroons to cut from the trees a
number of light tough poles, and these Copstone and Turnpenny, with
seamen's skill, quickly fashioned into a rough but serviceable ladder.
It was made to taper from bottom to top in three sections, the first
seven feet long, the second five feet, and the last, four.  The first
and second were lashed together with some spare rope brought in the
canoe, but the supply gave out when this was done, and Dennis was at a
loss for material to fasten the second and third sections together.
The headman of the maroons speedily made good the deficiency.  Going
into the forest, he soon returned with long pliable tendrils of a
creeper called bejuca that grew plentifully among the undergrowth, and
these, when cut into short lengths, formed lashings as strong as could
be desired.

The greater part of the morning was spent in constructing and testing
the ladder.  After the midday meal Dennis and the sailors again made
their way through the forest to their former place of espial, waited
until they saw the canoes return with the pearl fishers, and then, in
the late afternoon, crept down the hillside westward of the fort until
they came to the rocks on the shore.  From their new position they were
able to glance along the northern wall of the fort.  The tide was on
the turn, and it was clear from the masses of seaweed and the waterworn
appearance of the rocks on which the wall was built that at high water
the base of the escarpment would be washed by the waves, as Copstone
had said.  Having formed a careful mental picture of the place, Dennis
gave the word for return, and they reached their camping ground just
before dark, as on the previous evening.

Arrangements were at once made for their expedition.  Turnpenny
estimated that the distance by water from the mouth of the creek to the
fort was about ten miles.  It was desirable to start early if the
paddlers were not to be overtired when the serious work of the night
began.  Dennis was in some doubt what to do with the prisoners, but
after consultation with the sailors he decided to leave them behind in
the charge of the cook and one of the maroons.  He deplored the
necessity of thus diminishing his little party, but it was clearly
impossible to trust the guardianship of the prisoners to Baltizar
alone.  That flabby and chicken-hearted negro was desperately afraid of
being left.  He feared the prisoners, although they were securely
pinioned; still more he feared the wild beasts of the forest.
Turnpenny "gave him a piece of his mind," as he said, and his language
was none the less forcible because he eked out his scanty vocabulary of
Spanish with racy expressions in his own vernacular.  He called
Baltizar a slack-twisted nollypate, a wambling dumbledore, an
ell-and-a-half of moidered dough, mingling with his expletives an
instruction to keep up the fire if he wished to scare the beasts away,
and a warning that the Spaniards, if they were allowed to escape, would
certainly kill him first.  And to guard against the danger that the
prisoners might work upon his fears and persuade him to loose their
bonds, the maroon chosen to remain with him was told, in his hearing,
that if he had any conversation with the two men he was instantly to be
knocked on the head.  Watching the negro's expression, Dennis felt
pretty sure that he would prove a most zealous jailor.

The night was still young, the moon had not yet risen, when the canoe
floated silently seawards down the creek.  The little party of three
white men and five maroons was not hilarious; every man knew that he
had taken his life in his hands.  But neither were they down-hearted,
for seven of them had the recollection of a night adventure which had
wonderfully succeeded against great odds; and though the odds this time
were immeasurably in favour of the enemy, and the task was infinitely
more difficult, the very magnitude of what they had set themselves to
do fired them with eagerness and hope.

The sections of the ladder had been unlashed, and were safely bestowed,
with the rope and the tendrils, in the sides of the canoe.  In his
ignorance of the coast, Dennis ordered the paddlers to put some
distance out to sea before heading the canoe westward, so as to avoid
any rocks or shoals that might lie in wait for the frail craft.  The
wind was north-east, and as there was only the faint illumination of
the stars, the sail was run up during the first part of the voyage.
But when they rounded the headland that lay between the creek and the
fort, Turnpenny took in the sail, lest by some unlucky chance it should
be observed from the shore, and bade the maroons paddle slowly, for
they wished to arrive at the fort when the tide was high, a little
before dawn.

Slowly as they paddled, however, the fort loomed up on the shore a good
hour before they had intended to draw in.  None of the party had any
means of telling the time; but Turnpenny, experienced in reading the
heavens on many a silent night on the deep, guessed it pretty
accurately by the horn of the moon just peering above the horizon.  To
delay their arrival a little, Dennis ordered the men to rest on their
oars, and for an hour the canoe rocked gently on the swelling tide.
The pause would have been even longer had not Dennis perceived that the
inaction bred a certain nervous restlessness in the maroons--an ill
mood in which to face the coming ordeal.

At last, shortly after four in the morning, the nose of the canoe was
turned towards the fort, and the vessel crept in dead silence towards
the line of white foam that showed where the tide was lapping the wall.
It was still half a musket-shot distant when its progress was arrested
with a suddenness that threw the paddlers heavily forward.  Recovering
themselves, they backed water lustily, but without avail; the canoe was
fast on a rock.  Instantly three of the men slipped gently overboard to
lighten the vessel, kicking their legs busily to ward off any ground
sharks that might be adventuring in the neighbourhood.  In a few
moments the canoe slid off the rock, the men clambered back to their
places, and the paddling was resumed.  But it was soon discovered that
the shock had torn a hole in the vessel's side; she was filling fast;
and by the time she came beneath the wall of the fort she was wellnigh
waterlogged.  Not a man of the party ventured to speak a word; but from
the glances they gave one another it was clear that they realized what
the accident meant for them.  Nothing but complete success could now
save them, for if the attempt on the fort failed, it would certainly be
impossible to escape on this leaking vessel, and they must fall an easy
prey to their enemies.

One after another they quietly left the canoe, carrying the climbing
apparatus, and their calivers and ammunition, which had fortunately
lain on the raised stern of the vessel and had escaped a wetting.  They
found themselves on the rocks, in two or three feet of water.
Turnpenny and Copstone gave their weapons into the charge of two of the
maroons while they carefully lashed the two longer sections of the
ladder together.  Meanwhile Dennis was scanning the wall above him with
the object of finding a suitable spot against which to plant the
ladder.  In spite of Copstone's belief that the fort was not
sentinelled, Dennis had taken the precaution to land a little to the
west of the tower at the angle, thinking that the sentry, if one were
posted there, would probably be taking shelter under the eastern
parapet.  But so far as he could see in the dim light the line of the
wall was unbroken.

At the top, however, a battlement slightly overhung it.  To Dennis,
gazing up, this battlement seemed terribly far off, and his heart sank
as he felt that the ladder would certainly not be long enough.  But it
was possible that the apparent height was deceptive; at any rate the
attempt must be made.  Accordingly, Turnpenny and Copstone, as he had
previously arranged with them, planted the ladder beneath the wall
while he mounted.  The first steps were easy, but when he came near the
top he was seized with a momentary dizziness and had to pause before he
ventured to take another upward step.  He climbed very slowly: he was
now close against the wall, with nothing to cling to, and he maintained
his balance only by pressing forward until he was almost flat against
the smooth surface.  He reached the last rung; it was impossible to
ascend another inch; and the top of the wall was still, it appeared, at
least twelve feet above him.  Even if the third section of the ladder
was added, the coping would be still utterly beyond his reach.

It was a position in which many a bold fellow might have despaired,
and, for a little, Dennis did feel dismay and a touch of compunction
for having brought the men below into what appeared to be a hopeless
case.  But it is such moments as these that prove the grit of a man's
character.  Dennis was no weakling; and as he stood and leant against
that wall, shrouded by the night, he set his teeth and vowed that by
hook or crook he would ere long be upon the other side.

He looked up and around, to see if there were any notches or seams by
means of which he could scale the wall.  The moon was creeping round
the sky, and now threw a little more light on the scene.  Letting his
eye travel slowly over every foot of the surface from left to right, he
suddenly caught sight of what seemed to be a hole in the wall, some
distance to his right, several feet above him, and a yard or so below
the parapet.  It flashed upon him that this must be a gun embrasure;
was it possible, he wondered, to make his way in by that?  Carefully
descending the ladder, he told the sailors in a whisper what he
proposed; they quickly lashed on the last section, and shifted the
ladder until it stood immediately below the dark patch which at this
distance the embrasure appeared to be.  Then Dennis mounted again.

Once more he was disappointed.  At the imminent risk of falling
backwards he crept up to the highest point, but even then he found he
could but just touch the lower edge of the hole.  He had not sufficient
grip on the smooth sill of it to pull himself up: he could not raise
himself high enough to peep through.  He wondered whether Copstone, who
stood nearly a head taller, would have better success; but remembering
the man's privations he thought it scarcely possible that he would have
nerve enough to mount on this frail ladder, which bent dangerously
beneath his weight now that the last section was added, without
becoming dizzy and toppling down.  Was there any conceivable manner in
which the ladder could be still further lengthened?

Down he crept again and held another whispered consultation with the
two men.  At first neither was able to make a suggestion.  They stood
looking at one another in perplexity.  Then suddenly Turnpenny,
forgetting himself in his excitement, uttered an exclamation in a tone
which sent a shiver down Dennis's back.

"Hush, man!" said Dennis in a warning whisper.  "What is it?"

"Ah, I must talk gentle," said Turnpenny.  "Of a sudden I thought of
muscles and sinews, and the power of a strong back.  Me and the headman
of the maroons--not so strong as me, to be sure, but yet with mighty
shoulders of his own--me and him betwixt us can raise the ladder aloft,
and hold it firm while you mount, and then without doubt you'll be high
enough to peep through the port-hole and see all that may be seen."

"Art sure you can do it, Amos?" asked Dennis, eagerly.

"Why, sir, look at this!" he returned, bending his arm until the muscle
showed like a globe of iron.

Without more ado, Turnpenny and the maroon hoisted the ladder, and, one
on either side of it, supported it with their shoulders.  Then Dennis
climbed on to Copstone's back, thence to the ladder, and began the
ascent.  The ladder was more tremulous than ever, and Dennis felt a
flutter at the heart as he came nearer and nearer to the top.  But the
stalwarts below did not yield an inch, and Dennis crawled up and up
until at length his head came to the level of the embrasure, and with
one more step he found himself able to rest his arms in it.  To his joy
the embrasure was empty: the gun had evidently been withdrawn; and
taking this as a good omen--surely it indicated great security on the
part of the garrison!--he hoisted himself up and wriggled into the
aperture.  Then, breathless, with a hurrying pulse, he crouched to
consider his next move.




CHAPTER XIII

The Taking of Fort Aguila

During the morning, while the ladder was being made, Dennis had talked
over with the sailors the plan of action he proposed to adopt should
they succeed in entering the fort undetected.  The first thing was to
silence the sentry, if sentry there was.  It was quite clear, from the
fact of having been undisturbed hitherto, that no careful look-out was
kept; but Dennis did not forget Copstone's suggestion that a sentry
might be napping behind the parapet, and it must be his first business
to assure himself on this point before giving the signal for his
companions to make the ascent.

He crouched motionless in the embrasure, listening.  It had been
pierced for only a short gun--a minion or falconet perhaps; and
doubtless within three feet of him was a stone walk extending for the
whole length of the wall.  All was still; there was not a sound to show
that, within the enclosure, a hundred human beings were crowded,
masters and slaves.  But looking through the embrasure Dennis saw a few
lights twinkling in the centre of the fort, and he guessed that some at
least of the enemy were awake.  However great their security, it had
seemed incredible to him that the place should be left wholly
unguarded, even if only to provide against turbulence on the part of
the slaves.

After a few moments Dennis ventured to crawl towards the inner end of
the embrasure, where he might get a view of the whole enclosure.  The
thin light of the moon fell on the brightly painted walls of the
commandant's house in the centre; there was no light in the windows; no
doubt the senor capitan was fast asleep.  But a beam of light came from
a building somewhat to the right; this was presumably the officers'
quarters.  The huts along the western wall, in which the slaves slept,
were all in darkness.  On the farther side of the enclosure, in the
round tower beneath which the prisoners were confined, another light
shone forth; somebody was awake there.  But not a sound stirred the
heavy moist air of the tropical night.  If there were sentries upon the
walls, they were certainly not pacing up and down.

Waiting another minute or two, Dennis ventured to peep round the corner
of the embrasure.  He could scan the whole length of the walk from
tower to tower; no sentry was in sight, but he saw the gun below him a
little to his right.  Taking courage from the silence, he slipped out
of the hole, and groped his way on bare feet toward the tower at the
north-east angle.  Every now and again he paused to listen, and at
last, when he came within a few yards of the tower, he heard a sound of
deep regular breathing hard by.  Evidently some one was asleep.  He
stole along by the parapet in the deep shadow cast by the moon, until
he saw, huddled in the corner between the tower and the wall, the form
of a man.  He halted to consider.  Should he go forward and pounce on
the sentry, risking the sound of a struggle if he attempted to gag him,
or a cry if he struck at him with his sword and failed to kill him
outright?  It went against the grain to slay a sleeping man, and the
sentry was apparently so fast asleep that it seemed possible for the
rest of the party to climb up without disturbing him.

But there might be a sentry at the other end.  Leaving the man in
peace, Dennis stole back again, went on hands and knees where the gun
necessitated his coming for a moment into the moonlight, then rose and
groped his way along beneath the parapet as before.  There was no
sentinel, asleep or awake, in this direction.  With more confidence now
in the chances of a safe ascent he returned once more to the embrasure,
and, taking from his pocket a thin piece of creeper, he paid this out
through the aperture.  He soon felt a slight tug from below.  He waited
until he felt a second tug, then gently pulled the creeper towards him.
To the end of it a stout line was attached--a part of his salvage from
the wreck of the _Maid Marian_.  This he quickly secured to the heavy
gun, and having strained on the rope to convince himself that the
fastening would hold, he gave the signal by another tug to his comrades
below.

Then he crawled into the embrasure, and, leaning out, saw Amos swarming
with a seaman's nimbleness up the rope.  Giving him a hand when he came
within reach, Dennis helped to haul him into the embrasure.

"What about the calivers?" he whispered, for the sailor had come up
unarmed, lest a clank of steel against the wall should attract
attention.

"We've tied 'em up in our shirts, sir.  Haul on the rope and we'll have
'em up in a trice."

The bundle was quickly raised and brought into the embrasure without a
sound.

"There's a sentry asleep by the tower yonder," whispered Dennis.

"Did 'ee not kill him?"

"No, you could not kill a sleeping man, Amos?"

"I warrant I could, though I'd liever not.  But we must do summat with
the knave."

"He sleeps sound."

"Maybe, but any moment he might waken, and then t'ud be all over with
us.  A sailor's knot and a mouthful of shirt will make all snug."

"Very well.  We must go quietly."

Soft-footed as cats they stole to the careless sentinel, still drawing
the long regular breath of placid slumber.  Suddenly the sound changed
to a low choking gurgle: Turnpenny had nimbly slipped a strip of his
shirt into the man's open mouth.  In two minutes he lay straight on his
back, his arms and legs firmly bound with lengths of the flexible
tendril.  Then the two intruders moved swiftly back to the embrasure,
and signalled to the waiting men that it was safe for them to ascend.

Tom Copstone and two of the maroons came up in turn.  Then there was a
hitch.  The remaining three men stood helpless on the rocks, afraid to
attempt a feat which had never come within their experience.  There was
a moment's delay: then Turnpenny slipped down the rope, hitched a loop
around one of the men, abusing him under his breath as a
good-for-nothing land-lubber, and signalled to the others to haul him
up.  The two others were brought up in the same way, not without some
bumps against the wall; then Turnpenny again came up hand over hand,
and the little party of eight stood complete beside the gun.

"My heart! 'tis a famous doing!" said Turnpenny mopping his sweating
brow.  "'You and me, Haymoss,' as I heard in my dream."

The next step also had been pre-arranged.  Copstone, as the man most
familiar with the fort enclosure, was to lead four of the maroons to
the quarters of the garrison, dash into the outer room where the
fire-arms would probably be kept, and hold the Spaniards in play while
Dennis and his companions made a rush for the round tower beneath which
were the dungeons.  The Spaniards would no doubt be asleep in the inner
room, and, suddenly disturbed from their slumbers, they might be
expected to hesitate before attacking five well-armed men who stood
guard over their muskets.  It was scarcely likely that more than one or
two would at this dead hour of night be in the outer room where the
light was, and Copstone and his men might be safely trusted to account
for them.

"You must give us a minute, Tom," said Amos, "seeing that we have the
greater way to go."

"Ay, indeed," said Dennis, "our entrances should fall together.  You
know the way, Amos?"

"Ay, sure, and have good reason to."

"Well, then, Copstone will wait until we have had time to reach the
tower, then he will perform his part."

This conversation had passed in whispers.  All having been arranged,
they crept down the steps from the battlement to the courtyard, and
while Copstone and his four dusky companions stood in the shadow of the
stairway, the other three, with rapid, noiseless steps, ran towards the
light in the farther corner.  The courtyard was covered with grass,
except for a small stone-paved space around the buildings in the
centre; and Turnpenny, who was leading, kept to the grass, even though
their bare feet might make no sound on the stones.

But they had covered little more than a third of the distance, and had,
indeed, not yet come level with the buildings, when all three were
suddenly startled by a low deep growl on the right, from the
neighbourhood of the commandant's house.

"Crymaces!  I had forgot the Captain's dog!" whispered Turnpenny.

They had instinctively halted and turned in the direction of the sound.
A dark form, still growling, was rushing over the stone court towards
them.  It made direct for Turnpenny.  The sailor threw up his left hand
to ward off the attack, but the beast was so large, and came against
him with such momentum, that he reeled under the impact, and the sword
he held raised in his right hand was almost wrenched from his grasp.
Dennis was swinging forward to his comrade's assistance when he saw
that no help was needed.  The hound had impaled itself on Turnpenny's
sword.  Amos gasped with relief as he shook himself free; then,
whispering "They'll have heard the beast's growls," he set off at full
speed for the round house, the two others following close at his heels.

[Illustration: "The sailor threw up his left hand to ward off the
attack."]

They dashed straight for the doorway, which was faintly lit by a light
in the guard-room to the right of the passage.  In a quarter-minute
they were inside; five seconds more brought them to the door of the
room, which they reached just as three Spaniards were leaving the table
at which they had been dicing, curious, no doubt, to discover the cause
of the dog's uneasiness.  They were unarmed; their weapons indeed lay
on a bench at the further end of the room; clearly the dog's growls had
caused them no real alarm, and no other sounds could have reached them.
Consequently they stood stock-still, petrified with amazement, when
they saw two white men and a maroon with naked swords rush almost
noiselessly into the room.

"Surrender, villains!" cried Amos, pointing his sword full at the first
man's throat.

His tone, backed by the sight of the three blades, helped to clear
their scattered wits.  With fine presence of mind, the man farthest
from the door snatched a goblet from the table and hurled it straight
at Turnpenny, stooping then to seize his sword that lay on the bench
behind.  But he had taken only a single step when the maroon, with a
cry of fury, flung himself clean across the table, and drove his weapon
through the man's body.  The other two, less quick-witted and less
courageous than their hapless comrade, shrank back and held up their
hands, crying aloud for mercy.

"Down on your knees, dogs!" shouted Turnpenny.  "To the passage, Juan!"
he said to the maroon.  "Stand by the door opposite."

While Amos unstrung his caliver and lit his match, Dennis swept the
Spaniards' weapons from the bench out of their reach.  Scarcely had
this been done when the door on the opposite side of the passage
opened, showing a room dimly lighted by a candle-lamp, and eight or ten
Spaniards who had been roused from sleep by the noise.

"What is this?" cried one of them, fumbling with his sword as he came
to the door.

Juan, the maroon, stood on no ceremony, but promptly transfixed him,
and he fell like a log across the doorway.  His comrades immediately
behind recoiled in panic; but were pushed forward by the men in the
rear, who had not seen what had happened.

"Stand, you villains!" called Turnpenny, from the opposite doorway.  "I
will shoot any man of you that lifts a finger."

"Shut the door!" cried one of the men behind.

But this was impossible; the door opened outwards, and none could reach
it without stepping over the body of the man whom the maroon had
killed.  They well knew that the first who ventured across the
threshold would meet with the same fate, and every man of them shrank
from the risk.  Dim as the light was, Turnpenny recognized the features
of men under whose whips he had many times writhed.

"Fling down your sword, Hernando," he cried to the foremost of them.
The man hesitated.  "Down with it, or you are a dead man," roared the
seaman, and there was an accent in his voice that boded ill for the
Spaniard if he should delay.  His sword fell with a clatter on the
stone floor.

"Now yours, Fernan, and yours, Manuel," and as these obeyed the curt
command the rest waited no bidding, but cast their weapons from them
and cried for quarter.

"Out with you, into the guard-room," shouted Turnpenny.  "Have a care,
Juan; let none escape."

The big maroon stood in the passage with his back towards the outer
gate, and the sight of his ferocious look and his formidable sword was
enough.  The Spaniards tumbled over each other like a flock of sheep as
they surged into the room, where Dennis stood ready to cut down any who
attempted resistance.

"Ah, 'tis you, Jose," cried Turnpenny, following the last into the
room.  "Where are your keys?"

The warder edged away, seeking to hide behind his comrades.  At a sign
from Turnpenny the maroon sprang after him and hauled him back.

"Your keys, rascal!" cried Turnpenny, and the cold barrel of the
caliver within an inch of his ear jogged his memory.

"Mercy!  I will fetch them," he said, hastily.  The maroon followed him
as he ran back into the room opposite, and in a few seconds he returned
with his heavy bunch.

"Lock 'em in, sir," said Turnpenny, handing his weapon to Juan.  "I be
going with this villain to loose the prisoners."

He caught the terrified warder by the shoulder and pushed him into the
passage, where he turned to the right towards the stairway leading to
the dungeons.  Down he bundled him, neck and crop, and forced him to
find the key among his bunch and throw open the door.

"'Tis me, comrades," he cried jubilantly into the dark space, "'tis me,
your old comrade, Haymoss Turnpenny, come to free 'ee from this cursed
hole.  Be you there, Ned Whiddon?"

"Ay, ay," came the amazed answer.

"And you, Hugh Curder?"

"Ay, Haymoss, here I be."

"Come out, my hearts.  Ah, I hear the chains clanking on your poor
legs.  'Tis not for long, dear comrades.  Come out; this villain warder
will ungyve ye; then do the same with the rest of the comrades and
follow up aloft.  We have arms for 'ee there, dear hearts.  God be
praised you be alive!  Jose, you villain, loose their fetters.  Ned, I
will leave him with 'ee; keep an eye on him."

Leaving the cowed Spaniard in the safe hands of Whiddon and Curder,
Turnpenny hastened back to rejoin Dennis, who had locked the door upon
the others, and piled their arms against the wall of the passage.  Then
the three rushed out into the open, and raced at breakneck pace across
the courtyard to the main buildings, whence came the sounds of
desperate conflict--shots, cries, and the clash of steel.


Copstone, waiting impatiently with the four maroons at the foot of the
wall until the others should have reached the far corner of the
enclosure, heard the growl of the commandant's dog, and guessed, from
the sudden silence that followed, what had happened.  Instantly he led
his men with a rush towards the main building, where the light
indicated that some at least of the garrison were awake.  They reached
the spot just as the door was thrown open and a man stepped across the
threshold, whistling for the dog.  Copstone sprang upon him, and
toppled him over, and was then dashing past him into the house when he
perceived that a group of at least half a dozen Spaniards were coming
towards the door, alarmed by the sound of the scuffle.  Copstone darted
back; the maroons fired their calivers into the doorway; groans
proclaimed that some of the shots had told.  But there were resolute
spirits among the garrison; in a few seconds they came pouring out,
and, catching sight of the maroons, evidently believed that they had
nothing worse than an outbreak of the native labourers to contend with.
Shouting with fury, they pressed forward, slashing with their swords,
and forced the assailants into the narrow space between the wall of
heir quarters and the commandant's house.

When Dennis and his comrades came breathless upon the scene, Copstone
and his party were hemmed in by a crowd of infuriated Spaniards
outnumbering them by seven to one.  The Spaniards had had no time to
light the matches for their muskets; the maroons had had no time to
reload; and both attacked and attackers were laying about them
doughtily with their swords.  Whatever the timidity of the maroons in
captivity, there was no doubt about their courage when fighting for
their lives against odds.  Aided somewhat by the darkness, which made
it difficult to distinguish foe from friend, they were cutting and
thrusting vigorously with their backs against the wall, encouraged by
the voice of Copstone, who mingled with English words of cheer a few
Spanish exclamations he had picked up during his imprisonment.

But steadily as they fought, it would have gone ill with them had not
the arrival of Dennis and the others caused a momentary relaxation of
the pressure upon them.  The three dashed with a resounding cheer upon
the rear of the Spaniards.

"Stand to it, my hearts!" bellowed Turnpenny.  "You and me, Tom
Copstone, you and me!"

Three Spaniards fell at the first onset.  Before the rest had recovered
from their surprise, before they had any idea of how small the
reinforcement was, three more suffered the same fate.  In the
confusion, Dennis and his men dashed right through the cordon and
ranged themselves alongside the doughty five.  Then the Spaniards,
finding that their rear was no longer attacked, realized that their
enemy had received but a slight accession of strength, and returned to
the fight with redoubled energy.  For some time it was cut and thrust
almost at random, and many shrewd blows were dealt on both sides.  So
sudden and surprising had the attack been that the Spaniards had had no
time to collect their wits and resort to strategy.  It had not occurred
to them to get at the rear of their enemy over the wall.  Again and
again they rushed headlong upon the little party; but the maroons and
Copstone had taken new courage from the presence of Dennis and the
others.  Turnpenny was in the centre of the line, Dennis at the extreme
right, Juan the maroon at the left next to Copstone.  Again and again
they flung back the furious assault, and ever and anon above the din of
the combat rose the inspiriting battle-cry of Turnpenny, "You and me,
Tom Copstone, you and me!" and the answering shout, "You and me,
Haymoss; good cheer, my heart!"

But eight men, however bold and stout-hearted, could not long contend
with an enemy at least four times their number.  Scarce a man of them
but was bleeding from several wounds.  The exertions and excitements of
the night had made inroads upon their strength even before the fight
began, while the Spaniards were at no such disadvantage; some of them,
indeed, had risen fresh from sleep.  Gradually the blows of the lesser
force weakened.  The Spaniards could not all attack them at the same
time, so confined was the area of conflict; but when any of their
number fell out, from wounds or fatigue, there were new men to take
their places.  For the others there was no such relief.  Each one of
them had to meet a succession of Spaniards.  Dennis felt his strength
giving way.  He was not conscious of having been wounded, but he could
now scarcely hold his sword from sheer weariness.  And he felt that
things were going badly with his comrades.  Two of the maroons at his
left had fallen, whether killed or merely wounded he could not tell.
He still heard the ringing voice of Turnpenny, but his heart sank as he
realized that in a few more minutes he, at any rate, would no longer
have the force to respond.

At last, when he felt with a kind of frenzied despair that it was
impossible he should strike another blow, there fell upon his ears a
new sound from the front--from some point beyond the crowd of
Spaniards.  Surely there was an English ring in those cheers; it was no
mere Spanish yell.  It was coming nearer, swelling into a roar.  A few
seconds later, the ring of steel by which the little party was
encircled seemed to be burst asunder; then the Spaniards broke and
scattered in all directions, fleeing helter-skelter before knives and
swords wielded with the terrible might of vengeance by the hands of a
score of men who had but lately lain cowed and crushed in their
dungeons.  Little mercy they deserved; little they found.  Ned Whiddon,
Hugh Curder, and many another hunted them into the four corners of the
courtyard; the tables were turned, and the freed prisoners smote and
spared not.




CHAPTER XIV

Vae Victis

The intention of Dennis had been to release the prisoners and then make
for the bark that lay alongside the quay.  She was only of some fifty
tons burden; her crew would not be a large one; and it ought to be a
comparatively easy matter to overpower the men on board and warp the
vessel clear before the discomfited Spaniards could recover from their
confusion and make an organized attack.

But he had not reckoned on the rapidity with which events had moved,
and the impossibility of communicating his design to the men who had
been released.  They had scattered in all directions in pursuit of the
Spaniards; Copstone and the maroons were carried away by the lust of
vengeance, and, wounded as they were, had rushed away with the rest;
and Dennis found that only Turnpenny was left at his side.

There were elements of peril in the situation.  Some of the Spaniards
had swarmed over the wall of the officers' quarters.  If they found
efficient leadership they might yet rally and prove a very formidable
enemy.  Dennis and the seaman held a hurried consultation.  They were
unarmed save for their swords; they had left their calivers in the
passage of the round tower, and the weapons were no doubt now in the
hands of two of the released prisoners.  Adventurous as they both were,
it seemed the height of folly and rashness to attempt, they two alone,
to cope with unknown numbers beyond the wall.  While they were still
perplexed as to the best course to follow, they heard a roar and a
crash from the direction of the commandant's house, followed by a babel
of cries.  Running round, they found that the maroons, headed by
Copstone, had blown open the door of the house, and were hunting
through it in the darkness for the man under whose authority they had
suffered so many grievous wrongs.  There were only four rooms; it was
the work of a few minutes to ransack them thoroughly; not a trace of
the commandant or his household could be discovered.

"Be jowned if they bean't stolen a march on us," cried Turnpenny, "and
made for the harbour first!"

"Let us after them at once, then.  If they get away ours will be a bad
case indeed."

Calling to the half-dozen men who were at hand, Turnpenny led the way
at a great pace to the gate in the eastern wall of the fort.  It was
locked.  Almost beside himself with baffled rage, the seaman threw his
great bulk against the timbers; but they were stout, and even his
weight failed to force the lock.

"Is there no other way out?" asked Dennis.

"Not as I knows on.  Where be Tom Copstone?  Hey, my heart, be there
any other way out o' this yard?"

"Ay, there be a postern in the nor'-east tower."

The words were scarcely out of his mouth before Dennis dashed towards
the tower, the others following him with a rush.  The door at the foot
of the tower was open; he sprang up the spiral stairway three steps at
a time, and almost broke his head against the postern door, that opened
inwards and blocked the way.  The dawn was bursting in the eastern sky,
and Dennis looked eagerly out.  The postern faced the sea, and the
harbour and quay were hidden from him by the circumference of the
tower; but he spied a rope ladder dangling from the opening to the
narrow footway below.  It was clear that the commandant and his party,
while the combat was at its height, had slipped out of the house and
made their escape by this exit.

By this time Turnpenny and half a dozen others were crowding the narrow
staircase.

"They have made for the bark," cried the seaman, "and if there be true
mariners aboard she'll be warped clear and out to sea."

"She is not there yet.  We have one chance.  Copstone, run back to the
gate; blow up the lock and lead as many of your comrades as you can
find hot foot along the quay, in case it be still possible to seize the
vessel.  Amos, can we train the fort guns on the mouth of the harbour?"

"Ay, sure, and I'll do it, being once gunner's mate aboard the _Anne
Gallant_."

"And I can aid you; God be praised that Sir Martin practised us
venturers in the usage of ordnance in the _Maid Marian_."

He slammed-to the postern door, freeing the stairway, and rushed up to
the narrow open archway leading on to the battlements, stumbling in the
dim light over the prostrate body of the gagged sentry as he leapt
through.  Vaulting on to the parapet, he looked down at the quay to see
how the men were faring.  A cry of bitter mortification burst from his
lips as he saw the bark slowly moving towards the sea.  Her sails were
hoisted on the mainmast, and filling with the light westerly breeze; a
group of officers, among whom the commandant was easily distinguished,
crowded her deck, in addition to the crew; and there was not one of
Dennis's party or the prisoners in sight.

But at that moment there was a loud explosion; the gate fell with a
crash; and a crowd of men, white and black, headed by Copstone, rushed
out on to the quay.  They roared with fury when they saw that they were
too late.  Those of them who had loaded calivers ran along the quay,
firing ineffectually at the moving vessel.  They were answered with a
volley from her decks, and two maroons fell, shouts from the Spaniards
acclaiming the lucky shots.

But Turnpenny had now taken his post at the nearest gun.

"Body o' me, sure 'tis a saker taken from the Jesus herself!" he cried
joyfully.  "And here be powder and round shot and stone shot, and a
half circle for the sighting.  Haymoss Turnpenny be no true man an he
do not send a good un plump into the midst of the knaves."

But none knew better than Turnpenny that, at any considerable distance,
it was easier to miss than to hit.  Seeing that it was impossible to
depress the gun so as to get a shot at the vessel until she had drawn
clear of the harbour, he ran to the ordnance on the northern wall, and
loaded them in readiness in case his first shot missed.  Meanwhile
Dennis had spied the muzzle of a demi-culverin projecting from the roof
of the round tower, and summoning to his assistance a white man who was
among his party, he ran up and began with all haste to load the gun.

Before he had finished, there was a flash and a roar from Turnpenny's
saker just below.  The Spaniards on deck, who the moment before had
been laughing at the futile shots from the men on the quay, skipped
down the companion way with exceeding nimbleness.  Dennis looked
eagerly for the result of the shot.  That something had been carried
away was clear from the clattering noise on board and the rush of the
crew towards the stern-works; but neither the fore nor the mainmast had
been hit, and the vessel still glided seawards.  Turnpenny growled with
rage, and ran to the next gun, from which, however, it would be useless
to fire until the bark had come quite out from the harbour mouth.

Dennis's heart leapt within him as he saw that the course of the vessel
would bring her in a few seconds within range of his gun.  Now was his
chance of showing how he had profited by Sir Martin's lessons in
gunnery.  How ardently he hoped that the bore was true and the windage
not too great to spoil his aim!  He waited with lighted match until,
sighting with the gunner's half-circle--the quadrant with which every
piece of ordnance was equipped--he knew that the Spaniard was well
within range.  He applied the match and sprang forward to the very edge
of the parapet to watch the effect of his shot.  There was a sound of
rending and splitting from the deck; and through the smoke he saw the
mainmast collapse with all its rigging.  A great shout from the
battlements and from the crowd below acclaimed the famous shot.  There
had been no time to run up a sail on the foremast; the vessel lost way;
and the crew, having been deserted by the officers, huddled into the
forecastle, leaving several of their number prone upon the deck.

When the motion of the vessel ceased, two of the Spaniards rushed up
the companion-way and called on the crew frantically to hoist the
foresail.  But in vain.  The men were helpless with terror.  And while
the Spaniards were storming and gesticulating, Turnpenny, exerting his
immense strength, hauled round the eight-foot minion which had been
removed from the embrasure by which the intruders had entered the fort,
and next moment a carcass crammed with case-shot plumped amidships of
the hapless bark, and the Spaniards, cowering from the flying
splinters, scuttled down the companion-way--all but one fellow, bolder
than the rest.  The vessel had swung round a little, so that her
stern-chaser, a culverin twelve feet long, pointed full at the fort.
It was already loaded.  The Spaniard, with a shout of defiance, altered
the elevation of the gun, lit a match, and applied it to the
touch-hole.  A round shot crashed through the embrasure from which
Turnpenny had fired, scattering a shower of stone-chips around, and
dealing wounds among the group who were watching and assisting the
seaman to reload.  The crashing sound brought the Spaniards again from
below, and they began feverishly to clean out and reload the piece.
But another shot from Dennis's gun fell plump into the round-house on
the half-deck; and now the Spanish commandant, perceiving that the men
on the quay had sprung into the fishers' canoes that lay alongside, and
were making direct to board his vessel, saw that the game was up, and,
raising his arms aloft, shouted that he surrendered.

"Go and board her," cried Dennis to Turnpenny.  "I'll stay by the guns
in case he meditates treachery."

The seaman hurried away with a mixed crowd of maroons and white men.
In a few minutes he was pulling lustily for the vessel.  Dennis, with
gun loaded, watched him climb the side and receive the Spaniard's
sword.  Then a hawser was fixed to the headboards, and the vessel was
towed back to the quay side.

Dennis hastened down.  The crestfallen commandant with all his men was
brought ashore and escorted to his house, where they were left under
guard.  Hugh Curder, with three other seamen, was placed in charge of
the vessel, and then Dennis re-entered the fort-enclosure with
Turnpenny and the rest, eager to see, now that day had fully dawned,
what had happened during his absence.

He could not repress a shudder as he saw the ground strewn with dead
and wounded men; and he was horrified to observe that some of the
slave-fishers had broken out of their huts, and were moving about the
court-yard, giving the finishing stroke to the wounded of their late
masters who were yet alive.  Dennis sent Ned Whiddon among them to put
a stop to this ruthless butchery; then his intervention was called for
at the round tower from which the prisoners had been released.  A group
of them, headed by a big ruffianly seaman, had burst open the door of
the room in which the unarmed Spanish guards had been locked, and were
beginning a work of butchery there when Dennis, with Turnpenny and a
few others, rushed to the scene.  Dashing into the room, Dennis sprang
at the ringleader just as he was thrusting at a Spaniard who had thrown
himself down on his knees and was pleading for mercy.

"Hold, knave!" he cried, hauling the man away.

"Zounds! and who be you?" shouted the fellow, recovering himself and
lunging furiously at Dennis.

"I'll teach 'ee, Jan Biddle!" roared Turnpenny.  Seizing the man, he
lifted him as though he were a child and hurled him over his head in
true Devonian style.  Biddle's head struck the floor with a loud thud,
and he lay as one killed.

"Souse him, my hearts!" cried Turnpenny.  "The saucy knave!"

And in a few minutes a plentiful drenching from a water-butt at the
door brought some glimmering of sense into the man's bruised noddle.

Meanwhile the Spaniards who had survived the fight and escaped from
their pursuers, had barricaded themselves in the officers' quarters,
where they were unmolested while the majority of their late prisoners
were on the quay.  The victory could not be considered complete while
they remained shut up, for they no doubt had arms and ammunition at
their disposal.  Some of the victors were for blowing up the house and
all in it; but Dennis and Turnpenny dissuaded them from this, and
declared for insisting on unconditional surrender.  To obtain this they
made use of the captive commandant.  At Dennis's suggestion, Turnpenny
put the case to him, pointing out how hopeless was the position of his
men, and promising to spare their lives if they surrendered at once.
The commandant was then led to the officers' house between two men with
drawn swords, and after a few minutes' colloquy the men agreed to hand
over their weapons.

Dennis meanwhile collected his whole party.  They were a very ragged
regiment.  None was quite so tattered as Tom Copstone, but all were
dirty, unkempt, unshorn, bearing many marks of toil and suffering, as
well as the more recent marks of fight.  Of the five maroons who had
scaled the fort wall two were dead; the rest were all wounded.  Not one
of the little band had escaped unhurt.  Dennis had several gashes in
his arms.  Turnpenny's big face was disfigured with cuts and bruises,
while Copstone, who had fought with utter recklessness, seemed to have
borne a charmed life, so many were his wounds.  The released prisoners
had come off best.  With the exception of the two men shot down from
the vessel, one being killed and the other badly wounded, they had
escaped with a few scratches.  They were a wild, rough lot, and Dennis
wondered, as he looked them over, whether they would show themselves
amenable to discipline.

The Spaniards having been disarmed and locked in the house, Turnpenny
constituted himself master of the ceremonies.  After a brief talk with
Ned Whiddon and Hugh Curder, his special friends, he said to Dennis--

"Here we be, sir, masters of the fort, twenty-two all told, five being
French.  We must needs have a captain, and that be you, for 'tis all
owed to your wit, and we pay you our humble duty."

"Thank 'ee, Amos, but I will not be captain save by the wish of all.
Methinks 'tis an office for one older in years."

"Be jowned if it be, sir.  Comrades, list while I tell the tale of
these rare doings."

He related to the crowd the story of his rescue from the Spaniards on
the island, the capture of the lumber-ship, the voyage in the maroons'
canoe, and all that had happened since.

"And now, comrades," he concluded, "I ax 'ee, who so fit to be our
captain as Master Dennis Hazelrig, of Shaston in Devon?  We owe our
lives to him, and there be many a thing to face afore we get across the
thousand leagues to home.  Who but him shall be our captain?"

The election was ratified with a great shout.

"Thank 'ee, comrades," said Dennis.  "'Tis not a post I covet;
willingly would I serve under an older man, my good friend Amos, to
wit.  But I accept your choice.  One thing I say.  There may be more
fighting before us; if we fight, let us fight like Englishmen, not like
savages, and treat our enemies according to the manner of civilized
nations.  Do you agree to that?"

"Ay, ay!" shouted the men,--all but Jan Biddle, whose growling protests
were howled down by the rest.

"Then it is mine to choose my lieutenant.  You are all good men and
true, but 'tis my misfortune I am not so well acquainted with you as I
hope to be.  But I know Amos Turnpenny, and you know him also; and----"

"I crave your pardon, sir," said Amos, interrupting; "I was gunner's
mate twenty-five year ago on the noble _Anne Gallant_, and four year
ago boatswain on Captain Hawkins his _Jesus_, and methinks the rank of
boatswain befits my stature and my fancy both; and if I may be so bold,
I say let these our comrades, good men and true, as you yourself did
say, choose among themselves two to serve as mates aboard the vessel."

"A wise speech," said Jan Biddle.  "There be good mariners among us;
ay, and some of us are skilled in the manage of greater vessels than
the poor bark yonder.  Let us then do as Amos says, and choose who
shall come next to our noble captain."

"So be it," said Dennis, with a glance at Amos.  "Choose then, and we
will abide the choice."

It was clear that Jan Biddle expected the election to one of the posts
to fall upon himself.  He could not hide his chagrin when by general
consent Ned Whiddon and a man of quiet appearance named Gabriel Batten
were selected.  Dennis on his part was glad that Biddle was to remain a
simple member of the crew; he disliked the man's overbearing manner and
the shifty look in his eyes.

These matters having been settled, he explained that his purpose was to
sail away as soon as the vessel could be got ready, and steer a course
for England.  It was needful to make haste, for the sound of the firing
might have been heard on Spanish ships at sea, and even now an enemy
might be making for the spot.  The first thing was to inspect the
vessel at the quay and see what damage had been done.  He asked the two
mates and Turnpenny to accompany him to the ship for this purpose.
Meanwhile he suggested that the others, with the assistance of the
natives, should give those who had been killed burial in the sea, and
he dispatched two of the maroons to the creek where they had left
Baltizar and one of their comrades in charge of the two prisoners, to
acquaint them with what had happened and bring them to the fort.

Boarding the Spanish vessel, he found that the mainmast was a complete
ruin; it would be necessary to replace it.  This Ned Whiddon said would
be no difficult matter.  A couple of men could soon fell a tall and
slender cedar in the woods, and though it was not advisable to spend
much time in trimming it, a few hours' work would suffice to fit it for
its use.  Luckily the step was uninjured, and there was plenty of sound
rope on board from which to form new stays.

The deck had been a good deal knocked about by the shots from the fort,
but the damage done was not such as to render the vessel unnavigable as
soon as the mast should be stepped and the rigging repaired.  Ned
Whiddon undertook to carry out the necessary work with the assistance
of men of his choice, and went back to the fort with Batten to make a
beginning.

Dennis and Turnpenny examined the vessel from stem to stern above and
below decks.  In the captain's cabin they found a number of small bags
which on being opened they discovered to be full of pearls.  The
commandant had evidently not come empty-handed from the fort.  There
were also several chests containing pieces of eight, and in the hold
were twenty odd jars filled with gunpowder, and more than a hundred
jars of wine.

"'Tis my counsel to fling 'em overboard as soon as it be dark," said
Amos.  "'Tis a goodish time since my comrades have tasted strong
liquor, and I fear me with such plenty they might drink until they were
drunken and fit for nought.  And Jan Biddle with wine in him would be
no less than a madman."

"Ay.  Tell me, Amos, what know you of that same loud-tongued mariner?"

"Why, sir, I know little.  He do say he be an Englishman, and one time
second mate on a Dutch privateer; but what be the truth of it none can
say.  He speaks the French and Dutch tongues as readily as English, and
has suffered at the hands of the Spaniards even more than most, by
reason of his unruly tongue.  He is loved by none, but hath a certain
power over men; and I rejoice that he is not chosen for mate aboard
this vessel."

"I like not his looks.  Your comrades have done wisely, I trow, in
rejecting him.  And now, what think you of the chances of our purposed
voyage, Amos?"

"My heart!  I warrant we can sail her merrily across the great ocean,
and with favouring winds may hope to see the blessed shores of England
in a matter of two months.  And my soul hungers for the sight of the
old cliffs.  By the mercy of God, who hath marvellously prospered our
doings, we will yet again come to haven in our dear native land."

"We will new christen her for luck, Amos.  Her present name--I cannot
say the words--"

"_Nuestra Senora del Baria_--a papist name, sir, 'Our Lady of'--I know
not what.  What name shall we give her?"

"What say you to _Mirandola_?  Our comrade the monkey has without doubt
gotten him away to the woods, and there, mayhap, found old friends of
his kind.  I hold the beast in affection, Amos, and would fain keep him
in remembrance."

"The _Mirandola_ it shall be, sir; 'tis a fair sounding name, and, if I
may speak my mind, befits a tight little craft somewhat better than a
heathen monkey.  Though i' fecks, I'd liever call her by a plainer
name; yet it shall be as you say."

"And now, a matter that troubles me, Amos: what shall we do with the
Spaniards our captives?"

"Be jowned if I would let the knaves trouble me.  Let 'em loose afore
we sail.  There is much food, I doubt not, in the fort, and abundance
in the woods around.  The knaves will not starve; t'ud be no great loss
if they did; and belike a vessel will come to this place ere many days
be past, and then they can tell the tale, with raging and cursing that
will harm us not a jot."

"It shall be done.  And it will be well, I trow, to raze the fort to
the ground.  It has been built with the blood and sweat of our
comrades; to destroy it will be a just reprisal."

"Ay, and make the knaves to dismantle it with their own hands.  I would
fain scourge their naked backs as they have scourged mine, many's the
time."

"And the ordnance?"

"Burst it asunder.  Why should we leave it sound to belch its shot,
mayhap, on English craft some day?  God-a-mercy, 'twas a famous shot of
yours, sir, that sent the mainmast by the board, and I don't grudge it
'ee that your aim was truer than mine.  'Tis twenty-five year since I
served the ordnance on the _Anne Gallant_."

"And I had good practice on the _Maid Marian_.  But you have not forgot
your cunning, Amos, and I warrant if we have occasion to use the piece
here in the stern you will make good firing.  Now 'tis time to return
to the fort; I would not that Jan Biddle should stir up the rage of our
people against those unhappy Spaniards, and 'tis not unlike, we being
absent, he may do so."

"Ay, 'tis meet we trust not Jan Biddle overmuch.  Let us go, sir."

They found on returning that Ned Whiddon had already gone into the
forest with two or three men to fell a tree for the mast.  While he was
absent on this errand Dennis set part of his company to collect all the
Spaniards' small arms and pile them in readiness for conveyance to the
vessel, others to ram excessive charges of powder into the guns, and a
third gang to superintend the Spaniards in their enforced task of
dismantling the fort.  Great charges of powder, of which there was an
ample store, were placed in barrels in each of the round towers, to be
fired at the last moment, for Dennis did not wish to risk an explosion,
which must be heard many miles away, until he was on the point of
sailing out on the _Mirandola_.

The work of preparation was continued throughout the day, with brief
pauses for meals.  Ned Whiddon and his party toiled with such right
good will that he was able to announce, at nightfall, that after a
little more work in the morning the new mast would be ready for
stepping.  This was especially good news, for in view of the possible
arrival of a Spanish vessel Dennis could not feel secure until the
_Mirandola_ was fairly out at sea.  As soon as it was dark, Turnpenny
and Copstone went down to the vessel, and flung overboard the whole
store of wine save a few jars which they kept for emergencies.  The
Spaniards, of whom about thirty had survived the fight, were again shut
up in the houses of the commandant and the officers, and Dennis
arranged that a careful watch should be kept through the night.  Then,
tired out with his long labours, he gladly threw himself upon a couch
in one of the towers, and slept soundly until the dawn.

In the morning, as he went round the battlements with Turnpenny to see
that the guns had all been crammed with bursting charges, he was seized
with a whim to preserve two of them and carry them home to England.

"Me thinks they would make rare trophies for our folks to marvel at,"
he said to Amos with a smile.  "What say you, Amos?  Would not one look
exceeding well on the Hoe at Plymouth?  And I think not Holles, my
steward, who is keeping my little place at Shaston warm for me till I
attain to man's estate,--I think not even he, puritan as he is, would
find cause why one should not stand at my gates."

"A rare conceit, sir.  Pray you one be the saker stolen by the knaves
from the _Jesus_; t'other might be the demi-culverin you fired so
famously.  They'd be good ballast aboard, moreover; pearls are of
greater price than weight; and there be room enough and to spare in the
hold."

With some trouble the two pieces were lowered over the battlements to
the quay and hoisted aboard the vessel, where Ned Whiddon and his crew
were already at work stepping the mast and overhauling the rigging.  By
midday Whiddon declared with pride that the _Mirandola_ was ready for
sea.  A great cheer greeted the announcement.  No time was lost in
carrying stores, water, arms, and ammunition on board.  When all was
safely stowed, Dennis, with Turnpenny as interpreter, had a final
interview with the commandant, to whom he made known his intention of
blowing up the towers of the fort, but leaving the buildings in the
centre of the enclosure intact.  He said also that the native
pearl-fishers, with the maroons, had elected to coast along the shore
in their canoes until they reached a settlement of their own people.
Being well provided with arms, they could defend themselves against
pursuit even if there should be any disposition on the part of the
Spaniards to attempt to capture them.

Then, one after another, the guns were fired and burst to atoms by
means of long trains of powder.  Last of all the charges in the towers
were exploded, and as the masonry toppled and fell after each
thunderous roar, the little company greeted the destruction with a
storm of cheers.  When Dennis and his comrades turned their backs on
the place and went aboard the _Mirandola_, they left the once
stronghold a heap of ruins, amid which the Spaniards were already
moving about in desolation and despair.




CHAPTER XV

A Long Chase

The _Mirandola_ was towed out of the little harbour by maroons and
Indians in their canoes, and beat out to sea against a
nor'-nor'-easterly wind.  Thanks to Ned Whiddon and his comrades the
bark was in capital trim, and the crew, now after many days free men
afloat, were at the top of cheerfulness and jollity.  The long voyage
home had no terrors for them.  They were all sturdy mariners,
accustomed to adventure their lives on the deep.  They had hardly
weathered the headland to the east and stood away for the mouth of the
gulf before Hugh Curder began to troll a ditty:

  "Lustily, lustily, let us sail forth;
  The wind trim doth serve us, it blows from the north,
  All things we have ready, and nothing we want,
    To furnish our ship that rideth hereby;
  Victuals and weapons they be nothing scant,
    Like worthy mariners ourselves we will try.
          Lustily, oh lustily!"


"Oh, 'tis good to hear to 'ee, Hugh!" cried Turnpenny.  "And I do wish
we had a crowdy-kit aboard, for I mind me Tom Copstone can ply the bow,
and a merry tune would set our feet a-jog.  To it again, Hugh; open
your thropple, man, and we'll bear our burden, every man of us."

And Hugh Curder, after "hawking and spitting," as he said, because his
"wynd-pipe" was "summat scrannied for want o' use," struck up again:

  "Her flags be new trimmed, set flaunting aloft----"


"Not so," interrupted Ned Whiddon.  "We bean't got no flags."

"Pegs! 'tis in the ditty, Ned," cried Turnpenny.  "None but a
ninny-hammer would look for sober truth in a ditty.  Heed him not,
Hugh; to it again."

  "Her flags be new trimmed, set flaunting aloft,
    Our ship for swift swimming, oh she doth excel;
  We fear no enemies, we've escaped them oft;
    Of all ships that swimmeth she beareth the bell.
          Lustily, oh lustily.

  "And here is a master excelleth in skill,
    And our master's mate he is not to seek;
  And here is a boatswain will do his good will,
  And here is a ship-boy, we never had leak."
          Lustily, oh lustily."


"You be the ship-boy, Hugh, seeing you be the youngest of us," said
Whiddon.  "And you've a proper breast for a singing-boy."

"Now the last stanzo, Hugh," cried Turnpenny.  "'If fortune then fail
not,'--but my scrimpy voice murders it.  Sing up, man."

  "If fortune then fail not, and our next voyage prove,
    We will return merrily and make good cheer,
  And hold all together as friends linked in love,
    The cans shall be filled with wine, ale, and beer,
          Lustily, oh lustily."


"'Tis not worth a crim," growled Jan Biddle, when the song was ended.
"'Wine, ale, and beer'--where is it?  I'd give a week o' life for a
gallon o' home-brewed."

"Ay, and what then!" said Gabriel Batten.  "Sing the song of ale, Hugh."

  "Back and side go bare, go bare,
  Both foot and hand go cold----"


"Nay, not that one; 'tis over long, and 'll make us too drouthy.
Seeing we have no ale, 't'ud be cruel to sing the praises of it so
feelingly.  Nay, sing the ditty that serves for warning; 'twill better
fit our case."

Hugh Curder began:

  "Ale makes many a man to make his head have knocks;
  And ale makes many a man to sit in the stocks;
  And ale makes many a man to hang upon the gallows--"


"Oh, shut his mouth!" cried Biddle testily.  "We'll all be glumping if
we list to such trash.  Hallo for the wind to change, for with this
nor'-easter blowing we'll never get clear of the coast."

The vessel was indeed making slow progress, beating out against the
strong wind.  Dennis, though elected Captain, had little to do with the
actual handling of the ship: in those days the captain was not always a
navigator.  But the _Mirandola_ was in good hands.  Both Whiddon and
Batten were practised seamen, and in seamanship, as distinguished from
navigation, Turnpenny was incomparable.  They had found in the cabin a
chart of the coast and the neighbouring sea, by means of which they
avoided the shoals and made without mishap towards the mouth of the
gulf.  Dennis and Turnpenny examined the chart carefully to see if they
could distinguish the island they had named Maiden Isle.  Several small
islands were marked on it as mere dots without names, and they could
not for a long time decide which of them was Maiden Isle; but Turnpenny
at last fixed on one of them, and his conjecture was proved to be
correct in the evening.  Whiddon had set the course by Turnpenny's
suggestion, and just before dark the vessel skirted the south-eastern
corner of the island where he and Dennis had met so strangely.

Looking at the chart, Dennis wondered how the _Maid Marian_ had escaped
wrecking a dozen times during the hurricane that finally cast her up on
the western shore.  There was marked a good open channel for vessels of
any draught south and south-east of the island, but, as he had guessed,
the sea to the north and west was practically unnavigable except by
small craft.  The _Mirandola_ gave the island a wide berth in passing;
the wind was freshening, and there were signs of heavy weather.  Dennis
felt a little regret at leaving the island unvisited, and abandoning
the relics of his friends which he had saved from the wreck; but, like
every member of his party, he was eager to lose sight of this hostile
coast, and to gain the wide ocean where, given good luck, they would be
secure from Spanish molestation and have nothing to fear but the
ordinary chances of a long voyage.

They made little headway that night.  Anxious as they were to run out
of the main track of Spanish commerce, they felt the necessity of
choosing a safe rather than a short course, and especially of avoiding
the network of reefs and islands to leeward.  In the blackest hours of
the night, indeed, they lay to, Turnpenny remarking that it was better
to lose a little time than to run the risk of losing the vessel by a
too bold navigation of unfamiliar seas.

This caution proved to be justified, for the wind shifted in the night;
and when at break of day the _Mirandola_ again got under way they found
that she had drifted dangerously near an island which, being very
small, was not marked on the chart.  A light haze lay over the sea, but
it lifted soon, and then vast excitement was aroused on board when the
look-out shouted that he descried, under the lee of the island, a
vessel under full sail.  Turnpenny took a long look at her, and
declared that she was a bark somewhat larger than the Mirandola, though
at the distance--near four miles, he thought--it was impossible to be
sure.

"Of what nation is she?" asked Dennis.

"No mortal man could say," returned Amos; "but 'tis a hundred to one
she be a Spaniard, and we must either fight or run."

"Think you she will see us, being so small a vessel?"

"None can tell that either.  We must look to the worst.  True, we have
the weather-gage of her; but soon or late she will overhaul us if she
gives chase.  She has a look of speed, or I be no mariner.  'Tis
certain we cannot fight her; our armament will not suffice;
furthermore, from her size I reckon her crew be three or four times
ours, and our men have no mind to be captured and cast again into a
Spanish dungeon."

"We must e'en run then," said Dennis with a sigh.  "That means we must
put about?"

"True, and 'tis somewhat in our favour, for you perceive the wind has
shifted in the night to west-sou'-west, and belike we can sail
close-hauled better than she can."

Whiddon accordingly put the vessel about, and set the course so that
she could keep the island between herself and the stranger.  But in the
course of the next hour it was clear that the _Mirandola_ had not
escaped notice.  The stranger had weathered the island and was
manifestly standing in pursuit.  The crew of the _Mirandola_ watched
her anxiously.  They were but twenty-two all told, five of them being
French: and although they were all stout mariners with no lack of
native courage, the remembrance of their past sufferings did not
incline them to run risks.  For some time it was doubtful whether the
pursuing vessel was or was not gaining; but as the day wore on it
became clear that the _Mirandola_ was being outsailed.

"'Tis a piece of rare good luck we had the wind against us last night,"
said Turnpenny, "for in a straight chase in the open we should have no
chance against the critter, whereas if we get back among these islands
we may give her the slip."

"If we do not strike a reef and founder," replied Dennis.

Here Turnpenny tried a device that he had often seen practised on the
_Anne Gallant_.  He ordered two men to go up to the cross-trees with a
pulley-block; they rove a line through, and, hoisting up buckets of
water, saturated all the canvas.  Then he put all the men on to the lee
braces, and so got the vessel to lie a point nearer the wind.

The two manoeuvres considerably increased her speed, but in spite of
all that seamanship could do or devise the gap between the vessels
sensibly diminished; the pursuer loomed ever larger down to leeward.
Then Jan Biddle began to show himself in his true colours.  Dennis had
noticed that the man had attached to himself a group of the wilder
spirits among the crew, who with an ill grace went about the duties
assigned to them by Whiddon, and upon whom, indeed, the mate called as
seldom as possible.  When it became clear that the _Mirandola_ was
being surely overhauled, these men were observed in close talk beneath
the break of the poop.  By and by Biddle swaggered forward, followed by
seven or eight of his comrades, to where Whiddon and Turnpenny stood,
forward of the mainmast.  Batten was at the helm.

"Art mad, Ned Whiddon?" cried Biddle in a hectoring tone.  "Dost think
thou'rt a mariner?  Crymaces! if we trust to thee we'll be laid by the
heels in the hold of yonder craft ere night."

"Couldst do better, think 'ee?" asked Whiddon quietly.

"Better?  Who but a slin-pole would have done as 'ee have done?
There's but one way to scape out of the clutches of the Spaniards, and
that is to put the helm down, come about, and run for it.  This craft
is better running free than close-hauled."

"Know a fool by his folly," said Turnpenny.  "Rule your saucy tongue,
Jan Biddle, and offer not to teach your betters."

"Who be you to talk of betters, Amos Turnpenny--a sluddering rampallian
like you?  An you will take no counsel we'll e'en see to the manage of
the vessel ourselves.  Here, comrades, this be enough of these joulter
heads; let go the sheets; I will put the helm down and we'll go round
on the other tack: we'll have no fools over us, to bring us to harm."

But before one of the malcontents could step forward to do his bidding,
Turnpenny threw his arms around Biddle, lifted him clean off his feet,
and flung him against the bulwarks, where he lay stunned.

"And I'll serve any man likewise that dares to raise his voice in
mutiny.  Get about, you villains, and 'ware lest you be clapped in
irons and set awash in the bilge."

Dennis had hastened to Turnpenny's side at the first sign of
altercation.

"When the chase is over we will deal with these fellows," he said
quietly.  "Meanwhile, Amos, is not that our Maiden Isle on the lewside
ahead?"

"Surely it is, sir."

"Think you not 'twould serve us best to run in among the reefs
thereabouts?  The bark could not follow us."

"True, but we might strike and run aground any moment, and lose our
vessel and our lives withal."

"Ay, but we are being surely overhauled, and meseems 'twere better to
take the risk of running aground than to fall into the hands of the
Spaniards.  There is a chance of our threading a way through, whereas
the stranger, being of greater draught, would not venture her bottom
among these uncharted shoals."

"Verily 'tis a wise thought--if there be time.  What think 'ee, Ned?
Yonder, mark 'ee, is the isle whereon Master Hazelrig and I lived
secure for a matter of weeks, with food in plenty.  Think 'ee there be
time to make the shallows afore the Spaniard comes within shot of us?"

"Ay, there be time enough, but I fear me we should wreck our craft."

"There be no other way, Ned.  And I warrant me I could make a shift to
steer a safe course inshore, because 'twas on the south side of the
isle we landed from the timber ship, and there, i' fecks, be her
masts--see, Ned, standing out a little above the sea."

"Then do 'ee take the helm, Haymoss, and God save us all."

Clearly the course of the _Mirandola_ was being closely watched on the
pursuing vessel, for when, tacking in obedience to the helm, she made
direct for the south of the island, there came a puff of smoke from the
side of the bark, and a shot plumped into the sea about two
cable-lengths astern.

"'Twas over hurrisome, master don," said Turnpenny with a chuckle; "and
call me a Dutchman if 'ee ever get to closer range."

He ran the little vessel cleverly inshore and steered past the wreck of
the timber ship.  Then it occurred to Dennis that there must be a
practicable channel not far to the west, or the _Maid Marian_ would
have gone aground in the hurricane long before she did.  At his
suggestion the _Mirandola_ was kept on her course for half a mile
beyond the southernmost point of the island.  Then, as there was no
time to take soundings, she was put before the wind, with the object of
gaining the north of the island, where Dennis knew that if the pursuer
drew as much water as from her size seemed likely, there was little
chance of her being able to follow.

The confident bearing of Dennis and Turnpenny had a cheering influence
on the crew.  Even Jan Biddle, who had now recovered from his blow, and
his cronies seemed no longer inclined to quarrel with the handling of
the vessel.  The pursuer was now out of sight, hidden by the bend of
the shore.  The _Mirandola_ was making excellent sailing before the
wind, and Dennis hoped that if she could elude the Spaniard until dark,
there might be a good chance of her escaping any further attentions.

The pursuer came in sight again just as the _Mirandola_ was approaching
the rocky ridge which had been a barrier to Dennis's exploration of the
shore on his first day on the island.  He was rejoiced to see that in
wearing she had lost a little.  Then a sudden idea struck him.  Beyond
the ridge was the entrance to the gully, and up the gully the broad
pool in which the _Maid Marian_ lay.  Would not the best course after
all be to play a trick on the pursuer?  Why not try to run into the
pool?  When the _Mirandola_ had once rounded the shoulder of the cliff
she would again be almost out of sight; if she could run into the gully
the pursuers would almost certainly suppose that she had fled round the
northern side of the island; and safe in the pool, she might lie there
until the chase had been given up.  He mentioned his idea to Amos.

"Be jowned if it bean't a right merry notion," cried the mariner.

But none knew better the difficulty of steering the vessel safely into
the gully.  There was no time for consideration.  If once she passed
the entrance the vessel could not beat back again before the pursuer
came within range.  The slightest failure in Turnpenny's seamanship
would run the bark on the rocks.  But the old mariner knew the gully.
With set lips and a deep indentation between his brows he stood at the
helm and gave his orders to the men.

"Stand by the halliards," he cried, "and let go the moment I say the
word."

It was important to have plenty of way on the vessel, for the instant
she came to the headland the wind would be taken out of her canvas.
Easing the helm gently over, Turnpenny called to the men to let go as
the ship rounded the point; in a few moments the canvas was all taken
in, and with the way on her she glided up the gully.

Within ten minutes from the time when the notion first occurred to
Dennis the _Mirandola_ lay side by side with the wreck of the _Maid
Marian_ in the pool, invisible from the open sea.

"Mum's the word," said Turnpenny when the anchor had been dropped.
"Muzzle your jaws for a while.  Master Hazelrig and me we knows this
island, and we'll mount the cliff yonder and see what the don Spaniard
makes of us now."

Leaving the men to swim ashore if they chose, Dennis and Turnpenny
sprang overboard, soon found their footing, and scrambled up the rocks
and the cliff, keeping well under cover.  When they reached the top
they saw the pursuer about three miles distant.  She had shortened
sail, and was evidently inclined to give the coast a wider berth than
the _Mirandola_ had done.  It was growing dusk when she came level with
the gully, standing about a mile from the shore.  Her movements for a
time were erratic; clearly the people on board distrusted the waters
round the island, and were somewhat perplexed as to the course taken by
the fugitive.  At length they decided apparently to abandon the
pursuit, for she stood to windward, and the two watchers breathed again.




CHAPTER XVI

Jan Biddle, Master

"God be praised!" said Turnpenny, fervently; "we have escaped out of
the hands of the enemy."

"And we find ourselves once more on Maiden Isle, the which I never
thought to set foot on more.  I am glad of it, Amos, for now that we
have a bark fit to carry us over the sea, I would fain take with us
certain things that belonged to my dear comrades.  They will be
cherished by their sorrowing folks at home."

"True, the sight of such belongings of the dead and gone do have a
morsel of comfort in it.  And moreover we can take some of your stores,
for though our own monkey ship be not ill provided, yet the victuals be
Spanish, and 'twill make new men of our comrades to give 'em a rasher
of bacon now and again."

"Ay, but why monkey ship, Amos?"

"Why, sir, I cannot put my tongue to the name your fancy gave the
vessel, and to my thinking it is not to compare with _Anne Gallant_,
and _Jesus_, and _Minion_, and other craft I have served aboard, to say
nothing of the _Susans_ and _Bettys_ that are well beknown in Plimworth
Sound."

"Well, have your way.  To my ears _Mirandola_ hath a pleasant sound,
and it will always keep me in mind of my good friend.  But 'tis time we
returned to our comrades."

When they reached the entrance of the chine they found that the crew
had all come ashore, save one or two who were curiously examining the
wreck of the _Maid Marian_.  They could not refrain from shouting a
glad "Huzza!" when they learnt that the pursuing vessel was standing
away.  Jan Biddle and one of his cronies had been rummaging in Dennis's
hut and sheds, finding little to reward them, however, almost
everything having been transferred to Skeleton Cave.  Night was drawing
on apace, and though some of the crew were for setting sail in the
darkness, the majority agreed with Dennis that it would be better to
defer their departure until the following night.  This plan would give
them a whole day's rest; it would render it less likely that the
pursuer would be still in the neighbourhood; and it would enable them
to carry more water on board, which was desirable in view of the
possibility of a protracted voyage.  Dennis and Amos decided to occupy
their old hut; the men were given their choice of the sheds, now all
but empty, and the huts erected by the maroons near the logwood grove.
They all declared for sleeping ashore rather than on board ship, Hugh
Curder and Gabriel Batten, however, volunteering to remain on deck as a
night watch.

Next day, after the stores and things which Dennis wished to take home
had been transferred from the cave to the vessel, and several barrels
of fresh water from the spring in the cliff had been placed in her
hold, the men broke up into little groups and wandered about the
island, revelling in their liberty and in the abundance of fruit which
they could have for the picking.  Several times Dennis went to the
cliff top on one side and Amos on the other side of the island to scan
the horizon for a sail, but neither saw any sign of one.  In the
afternoon Dennis ventured to sound Sir Martin's trumpet as a signal of
recall, and the men came dropping back in ones and twos and threes in
anticipation of departure.

The tide was at flood, and Dennis had just given the order to go
aboard, when Tom Copstone suddenly exclaimed--

"Zuggers!  Where be Gabriel Batten?"

"Is he not here?" asked Dennis.

"Not the ghost of him," said Amos, looking round on the company.

"He were always a ninny-hammer," cried Jan Biddle angrily.  "Never did
I know such a man for simples and other trash.  Sure he be roaming
somewheres with his nose to the ground, trying to smell out some herb
that will heal a scratch or cure a distemper."

"Blow up the trumpet for en," suggested Copstone; "Gabr'el be a vitty
lad--none the worse for not being made so rampageous as 'ee, Jan
Biddle, for all he do go wool-gathering at whiles."

Biddle glared at the speaker, but said no more.  Hugh Curder, being the
man with the brazen lungs, blew a loud blast on the trumpet which set
the cliffs and the chine reverberating.  They waited; the wanderer must
have gone far indeed if he was out of earshot of that strident blare.
But as time went on, and he did not appear, Dennis began to be somewhat
vexed.

"'Twas thoughtless of the man," he said; "already is the tide beginning
to ebb, in two hours it will be impossible to embark this night, and
that entails upon us the loss of another day."

"Embark without him," growled Biddle.  "What is he that he should keep
a score of good men waiting his pleasure?"

"Nay, nay," said Dennis.  "We cannot leave him here.  You have had your
sufferings and sorrows, from the like of which God save us all; but is
there a man of you that hath dwelt alone upon an island, spending
nights and days without the sight of a face, or the sound of a voice?
That have I done, and not willingly shall I subject a man to a like
solitude.  There is still a little space during which the tide will
serve.  Let us scatter in parties, some going this way, some that, and
halloo; perchance some of us may light on our comrade."

The suggestion was adopted; only Jan Biddle and his few particular
friends went about the search grudgingly.  But though the men scoured
the island from shore to shore, and kept up the quest to the very verge
of nightfall, long after the tide had run so low that the idea of
setting sail till next day had to be abandoned, they discovered no
trace of the straggler, and returned weary and irritable when the
trumpet recalled them.

"He may come in by and by," said Dennis cheerfully.  "If not we must
e'en take up the search in the morning.  We shall have a whole day
wherein to pursue it.  Let us now get our supper and commend ourselves
and our comrades to God."

"Odspitikins!" cried Jan Biddle.  "What did I say!  What a captain is
this!  Here be we, twenty-one souls, raped up here for one slummaking
micher not worth a varden."

"My heart!" shouted Amos, "you were best keep a still tongue in your
noddle, Jan Biddle, or with the captain's leave I'll clap 'ee in irons
the instant we go aboard, and keep 'ee under hatches for a sluddering
mutineer--ay, and larrap 'ee first, I warrant 'ee."

Biddle's experience of the strength of Turnpenny's arm did not
encourage him to repeat his protest; but when the supper was spread on
the rocks above the pool, he carried off his portion to a place apart,
and nursed his wrath among a small group of his comrades who followed
him.  The malcontents numbered eight in all, and four of these were
Frenchmen, with whom Biddle could converse freely in their own tongue.

Again they slept ashore, except the two who had been selected to keep
watch on the vessel.  The precaution seemed hardly necessary, for it
was unlikely that a hostile ship would appear in the night; but
Turnpenny had suggested that it was well to keep up the customs
observed at sea.  The men chosen for this night's watch were two steady
fellows named William Hawk and Luke Fenton.

Dennis lay awake for some time, talking with Amos about the missing
man.  Though he had maintained a cheerful composure before the crew, he
was in reality not a little vexed at the delay caused by the
thoughtlessness of Gabriel Batten.

"Is it true, what Biddle said," he asked, "about Batten's madness for
gathering simples?"

"Ay, 'tis true.  He be a vitty lad, as Tom Copstone said, and a good
seaman, quiet withal; but he has a maggot, and 'tis that, without a
doubt, that has led him aroaming.  There be a time for everything, and
though I do not deny that Gabriel's skill in simples has ofttimes
served us well, 'tis not to be wondered at that the men make a pucker
about it."

"Well, we must find him to-morrow.  We cannot sail away without him;
why, there is not even a Mirandola here now to bear him company."

"Be jowned if I don't ballirag en to-morrow for his hanticks,
od-rat-en!"

Dennis passed a restless night, waking often, to wonder what had become
of the wanderer.  He resolved to set out himself as soon as dawn broke,
and take advantage of his knowledge of the island to search thoroughly.
Finding himself unable to sleep again, he got up while the chine was
still in darkness, and walked to the edge of the cliff overlooking the
pool.  In the gloom he could just see the dark form of the _Maid
Marian_; but then he started, rubbed his eyes, looked again, and felt a
shock of amazement when he realized that the other vessel was no longer
there.  Next moment it flashed upon him that she must have dragged her
moorings and floated away on the very last of the ebb-tide, and the
fact that no alarm had been given seemed to show that the watchers had
fallen asleep, overcome by the sweltering heat of the tropical night.

Calling to Amos, he set off at full speed down the cliff towards the
opening of the gully, narrowly escaping a serious fall in the darkness.
He was much relieved to see, on rounding the shoulder of the cliff, the
dark hull of the vessel in front of him.  The tide was so low that it
was marvellous she had floated so far without grounding, and the
thought that she might strike a reef and cause further delay while
repairs were made prompted a vigorous shout, to waken the neglectful
watch ere it was too late.  But there came no answering hail from the
vessel; and fearing that, even if she did not run aground, the men on
board might not have sufficient seamanship to bring her back in safety,
he dived into the water and struck out in her wake.

As he did so, he heard footsteps behind him, two or three voices, and
the sound of another splash.  Evidently some one had followed him.  The
_Mirandola_ was moving very slowly; the motion of the tide was indeed
almost imperceptible, and Dennis, being a good swimmer, soon came under
her counter.  Catching hold, by a happy chance as he thought, of a rope
that had formed her mooring cable, he swarmed hand over hand up the
side and on to the deck.  But no sooner had his feet touched the planks
than two figures sprang towards him, a blanket was thrown over his
head, and before he could utter a sound he was flung down, gagged, and
pinioned.

Even through the thick folds of the blanket Dennis was able to hear a
great scuffling on board within a few seconds of his own discomfiture.
Then all was still, except for the muffled tones of his captors'
voices.  He could not hear what they said, but it was not long before
he knew from the greater motion of the vessel that they must have
hoisted sail.  Not for a moment did he doubt the meaning of it all.
Who but Jan Biddle and his fellow malcontents would have had the daring
to run off with the vessel?  The man was a ruffian in looks, and Dennis
had already had several evidences of his turbulent spirit.  And, lying
helpless and half smothered on the deck, he did not have to seek far
for the motive of the act.  It was not merely chagrin at being denied a
rank; the man knew that there were pearls in the hold, a valuable
treasure, and his treachery was prompted by cupidity.  He had supposed,
Dennis suspected, that as a simple mariner among the crew he would get
but a small portion of the treasure when it should be divided, and
persuaded some of the men to make this attempt to secure the whole.
Angry as he was, Dennis could not withhold a certain admiration for the
man's daring; and then he fell a-wondering why he had not been struck
on the head and killed outright; a ruffian like Biddle would hardly
have spared him from any feeling of compunction.

How long Dennis lay half stifled under the blanket he could not tell.
Hours seemed to have passed when it was at last removed, and he could
breathe freely.  And there, beside him, lay Amos Turnpenny, gagged like
himself.  Jan Biddle and several of his comrades stood over them,
grinning with malicious triumph.

"Pegs, Captain," said the man, "you do seem betoatled.  Thought the
vessel had broke a-loose, I reckon.  And so she had--eh, comrades?"

"Ho! ho!" laughed the men, vastly appreciating their leader's joke.

"Now, we be eight, young master captain,--stout fellows, but a small
crew for this vessel.  You be in our power, you and Haymoss too, for
all he be a rare fustilugs; and down a-hold lie Bill Hawk and Luke
Fenton, that kept but a ninny-watch, to be sure.  Wherefore we be
twelve all told, enough for the manage of this craft.  Haymoss will not
be boatswain, to be sure, nor you captain; I be captain; boatswain is
French Michel yonder; but 'ee can take your choice,--help to work this
vessel, or walk the plank.  Now I will loose your gags, and you and
Haymoss can talk the matter out, and when ye've made up your minds
we'll unbind 'ee, or tumble 'ee overboard, according."

Left to themselves, Dennis and Turnpenny were not long in deciding on
their course of action.  They were at present outnumbered; they had to
accept the inevitable.  Their assistance would be very valuable in the
working of the vessel, and Biddle, in spite of his assured bearing, was
by no means so confident in his seamanship and skill as he tried to
make himself appear.  After his treacherous conduct he had no reason to
suppose that Turnpenny would lift a finger to make good his
deficiencies; on the other hand it was not to the interest of the
prisoners that the ship should come to grief through mishandling, and
Biddle knew that in extremity Turnpenny's instinct of seamanship would
forbid him to hold aloof.

But while Dennis and the mariner agreed that they had no choice but to
accept the position with what grace they might, they resolved to bide
their time for getting the vessel again under their control and
returning to the island.

"My poor comrades and me be parted again," said Amos, with a sigh.
"'Tis true it will not be so bad for them upon the island as 'twas for
us.  But there they be, and there they must bide until we can fetch 'em
off."

"And mayhap the Spaniards will land before we can get back to them, and
then God help the poor fellows.  There is little chance we two can
overpower these eight villains; we can but hope on."

Having acquainted Biddle with their decision, they were cast loose, and
sat beneath the break of the poop watching their captors' attempts at
navigation.  The vessel had rounded the easternmost point of the island
and was running before a south-south-westerly wind.  But it made little
progress; as the day wore on the breeze died away, and the island was
still in sight as the sun gradually sank in the western sky.  The
mutineers cast somewhat anxious glances around, as if fearing that the
comrades they had betrayed might even now find some means of following
them.  But as the island gradually faded into the dusk their spirits
rose, and having broached one of the few jars of wine which had been
left in the cabin, they began to boast of the success of their trick.
Biddle even acquainted the prisoners with the manner in which it had
been carried out.  In the darkness they had surprised the watch on
board, and cut the cable mooring the vessel to a tree at the side of
the gully; then seven of them had lowered the jolly-boat and in it
towed the ship past the shoulder of the cliff until the sails caught
the wind and it was carried free of the shore.  He told Dennis
exultantly that if he had swum out three or four minutes earlier the
plot would have been defeated, for only he was then on board, at the
helm.  But just before Dennis scrambled on board the others had
clambered up by the fore chains, and his cry and plunge having been
heard, there had been time to arrange for his reception.

The crescent moon, which had somewhat favoured the attack on the fort,
had now increased in size, and threw a thin silvery light upon the sea.
Biddle, among a little group of his comrades, was still recounting his
achievement for the benefit of Dennis and Turnpenny when the look-out
shouted that he spied a vessel to windward.

"What care I for a vessel to windward!" cried the man.  "We'll give her
the slip in the dark.  I, Jan Biddle, be captain now; ay, what did Hugh
Curder sing t'other day?

  Here is a master excelleth in skill,
  And our master's mate he is not to seek.

That be Dick Rackstraw, Haymoss, a merry soul, not a glumping galliment
like 'ee.

  And here is a boatswain will do his good will----

not you, Haymoss; you be boatswain no longer; 'tis French Michel, a
deal better man.

  And here is a ship-boy----

why, hang me if we won't make a ship-boy of our noble captain,
comrades.  'Tis a stripling, to be sure, and I warrant will be none the
worse for a smitch o' tar on his fingers.  Ees, we'll make him
ship-boy, we will so.  Ho! ho!

  And here is a ship-boy----"


But his mirth and the gleeful shouts of the others were suddenly
checked when the look-out cried that he saw a second, and then a third
vessel.  Biddle sprang up with an oath and ran to the taffrail.  What
he saw did not lessen his alarm.  The three strangers were coming up on
a broad front, half a mile between them.  They were evidently bringing
a freshening breeze with them, for they had not been visible when
darkness first fell.  It was clear to a mariner's eye that the bark
would have to show her best sailing powers if she was to escape.  She
had been sailing under foresail and mainsail only, but now in frantic
haste the crew, in obedience to Biddle's orders, set the topsails and
the topgallants.  But before the effect of this was apparent the
approaching ships had crept up within gun range.  It was not long in
doubt whether they had seen the _Mirandola_, and were making straight
for her.  A flash was seen from the bows of one of the vessels; a few
seconds afterwards a muffled roar was heard.

"Blank charge!" said Turnpenny to Dennis.  "'Tis a word of warning."

Biddle only shouted a defiant curse.  The bark was now feeling the full
force of the wind, and was making good headway.  It appeared likely
that, running before the wind, she could hold her own with the
strangers.  A minute later another gun was fired, and this time with no
harmless intent, for there was a great splash in the water a little
ahead of the _Mirandola_ on the starboard side.  After a short
interval, a third discharge shook the air, and the mutineers raised an
exultant shout when they saw the splash some distance astern.  It was
clear that, if the guns had been fired with the same elevation, the
chase was drawing away.  The dropping of a fourth and fifth shot still
farther astern left no room for doubt.

"What say you now, master boatswain as was!" cried Biddle,
triumphantly.  "Bean't Jan Biddle as good a mariner as Haymoss
Turnpenny?

  Here be a master excelleth in skill."


"My heart! it be a true saying, don't halloo till 'ee be out o' the
wood," said Amos, grimly.

"Zuggers! but you be a molkit, Haymoss, a molly-caudle to be sure.  Go
aft, Haymoss, and cuddle the ship-boy and say your prayers."

Turnpenny raised his arm to strike the insolent fellow, but Dennis
whispered him to let it pass; there was nothing to be gained by a fight
at the present moment, even supposing they prevailed against the odds.

Hour after hour the chase continued.  The moon went down, but still the
three vessels could be seen in the dim starlight.  Clearly the
_Mirandola_, good sailor as she was, could not shake them off.  Biddle
ceased to boast; his blustering confidence was changing to dismay, for
he now perceived that though he had drawn further and further away from
the vessel that had fired, her consort to windward was becoming more
clearly visible.  He had not reckoned on so obstinate a chase;
moreover, being unable to read a chart, he had no idea whither the
vessel was heading.  There was no chance of doubling.  To alter the
course would be to lose time, and allow the persistent pursuer to make
up on her.  She seemed indeed to be gradually decreasing the distance
between them, though the other two were out of sight.

So the chase went on through the hours of darkness, and daybreak showed
two vessels far astern, but the third without doubt creeping up slowly
but surely.  Biddle, weary with the long night's work, was in a sullen
rage; the other men watched the pursuer with undisguised terror; Dennis
and Turnpenny, holding themselves aloof, looked on with curiosity and
something of amusement.

"Jan Biddle be no fool," said Turnpenny once.  "I could not have
handled the craft better myself.  But 'tis not an end."

Then, when the spirits of the crew were depressed to the lowest, an
early morning mist settled down upon the sea, blotting the pursuer from
sight.

"Jaykle! 'tis a mercy!" cried Biddle, rousing himself.

He instantly changed the course of the vessel.

"We'll fool them this mizzly morn," he said.  "Mum's the word now,
comrades."

Dead silence was maintained on board, and for some hours the bark made
steady headway through the mist.  Dennis could not but admire the
mutineer's fine recklessness.  Without any sure knowledge of his
bearings he held the vessel steadily to the wind, though she might at
any moment strike a coral reef or even run aground on one of the
innumerable islets that studded the gulf.  He was bent only on escaping
the dreaded grip of the Spaniards.

At length the fog began to clear, dissipated by the increasing heat of
the mounting sun.  The crew strained their eyes through the eddying
mist, to assure themselves that the pursuer, as they hoped, had been
deluded by the change of course.  But they were appalled, and looked
from one to another with a gasp of dismay, when they saw, less than
half a league distant, a large Spanish galleon holding exactly the same
course as themselves.  Far down on the southern horizon another sail
could be seen.

"What I'd have done myself," said Turnpenny to Dennis.  "The Spanish
skipper be no fool neither.  When the mist came down he guessed the
manoeuvres of Master Jan, and afore he was closed in by it he had time
to signal the others to make off, one east, t'other sou'east, while he
held on the same course, thereby making sure that we'd still be in
sight of one or other of 'em when the mist lifted.  Ah! lookeedesee,
sir; there's a flag a-running up the galleon's forepeak.  'Tis a signal
to the others to come and join the chase.  Be jowned if Jan Biddle
han't got to run the race all over again!"




CHAPTER XVII

The Demi-Culverin

Jan Biddle's face was the image of despairing rage when he saw how he
had been outwitted.  But he stuck gamely to the helm.  The _Mirandola_
was now carrying every stitch of canvas possible; her only chance, and
that but a slight one, was to fly on before the wind.  Dennis was
tingling with excitement.  Here was the bark, cutting through the water
at a spanking rate; there the larger galleon, speeding after her under
press of sail, and two other vessels equally large coming up from the
south.  He had forgotten that he was a prisoner--forgotten everything
but the fact that the implacable enemy was at his heels.

Suddenly he saw the galleon luff up in the wind, and noticed a lift of
the foresail.

"Now she's at us!" cried Amos at his elbow, scarcely less excited.

From the bows of the galleon came a spout of white smoke, blown back
amid the sails and rigging, and disappearing in a long wispy trail to
leeward.  The report of the gun followed close, and the shot plumped
into the sea less than twenty yards astern.

"Be jowned if it do not put me in mind of brave doings on the _Anne
Gallant_" said Turnpenny.  "'Twas well aimed; an they get our range,
'tis heigh for our pearls and pieces of eight!"

A second shot came, falling about the same distance short of the mark.
A third and fourth followed at intervals, neither hitting the vessel,
each failure greeted with a yell from the crew, who seemed now to have
lost their terror in the sheer excitement of the chase.  On swept the
gallant _Mirandola_, showers of spray flashing over her bows, her
slender masts swaying and creaking under the stress of her bellying
canvas.  Then a shot whistled over the masthead.

"Too high, too high!" shouted Amos.  "She's got our range now, to a
surety; would they but depress the gun and our cockle-shell would be
shivered to splinters.  Jan Biddle be a better man than I took him for;
see the sinews of his arms as he grips the helm.  My heart! but he be a
mazy Jack to think he can 'scape that tantarabobs.  Ah!"

His final exclamation was occasioned by the effect of another shot from
the enemy's bow-chaser.  It struck the taffrail, and cast up a huge
splinter which flew straight across the poop.  Next moment Jan Biddle
was stretched senseless beside the helm, and the helm taking charge,
the ship ran off before the wind.  The crew were aghast.  Biddle was
their captain, but he was more; he was the soul of their enterprise.
Without him they were as a flock of sheep.  Not a man of them was fit
to direct.  Some cried out for surrendering; the bolder spirits howled
them down, swearing it were better to sink with the ship than to return
to the servitude from which they had but lately escaped.  When Biddle
fell, Amos, with the instinct of the mariner, had rushed towards the
unmanned helm.

"Sir, 'tis our turn," he called to Dennis.  "Let us do what we can to
save this vessel, and od-rabbit the mutineers!"

He leapt to the helm, seized it in his iron grip, and brought the ship
once more to the wind.

"See!" said Dennis at his side.  "Yonder streak on the horizon is
surely the mainland.  Is not our only chance to win the coast?  We
cannot escape by mere sailing, but there will be shallows amid which
perchance we may slip away as at Maiden Isle.  Shall we not attempt it,
Amos?"

"Ay, ay, sir.  We'll run inshore, and methinks I know a trick will help
us."

At this moment another shot fell and ploughed up the deck, striking up
a shower of splinters in all directions.  Again arose cries for
surrender; but Dennis shouted to the frantic men:

"Amos is at the helm.  Trust to him.  Remember what he did at the fort.
Never surrender to the dogs of Spain.  We will 'scape them even yet."

At his words they plucked up heart; all they wanted was a leader; and
when Turnpenny declared that land was in sight, and that he'd be jowned
if he didn't cheat the don Spaniards, they answered with a cheer.

Outclassed as the _Mirandola_ was in sailing before the wind, it
occurred to Amos that she might show to better advantage in working to
windward.  Accordingly he altered her course a few points.  The
immediate effect was that the enemy gained a little, and with a broader
target succeeded twice in hulling the vessel.  Apparently the shots did
little damage, for she still rode the waters buoyantly, and after some
time, to the joy of the crew, it was seen that the gap between the two
ships was sensibly widening.  But now a more serious danger threatened
the gallant bark.  The second of the enemy's vessels, which was some
distance to windward when the mist lifted, was rapidly making towards a
point where she might intercept the _Mirandola_ and drive her back
towards the galleon which she had just escaped.  Turnpenny's seamanship
was capable of no more.  To tack would have been to run into the lion's
jaws; to bear up would have been equally hopeless; all he could do was
to stand on, and possibly weather the vessel ahead.

He explained the difficulty to Dennis, who was still at his side.
Dennis knew no trick of navigation that would meet the case; but
racking his wits to find some means of helping the hardy mariner, he
suddenly asked himself whether it were not possible to use one of the
guns he had brought as trophies from the fort.  They were big guns,
quite disproportionate to so small a vessel as the _Mirandola_.  To
fire them might do more damage to her than to the enemy.  But it was a
moment when something might well be risked, and he mentioned his idea
to Turnpenny.

"Good-now, 'tis a brave notion!" cried the mariner.  "Do 'ee grab the
helm, sir; head her straight for the coast; Ise warrant 'ee I'll soon
give the villain a mouthful of iron."

Amos rushed amidships, called all the crew about him, set some of them
to rig up the tackle blocks by which the weapons had been lowered into
the hold, and himself knocked off the hatch and descended.  His first
proceeding was to unloose William Hawk and Luke Fenton, the two men who
had been surprised by the mutineers, and had since lain side by side in
no enviable state of mind or body.

"Od rabbit 'ee for a brace of numskulls!" he exclaimed.  "Get 'ee up
and come show a leg, now."

With their assistance he slung the demi-culverin by its pomelion, and
the men above hoisted it to the deck; the carriage followed, then its
ammunition, and Amos set about mounting it.  There was no time to lug
it to the quarter-deck.  Amos ordered the men to place the carriage,
consisting of two "cheeks" or side-pieces held together by thick
cross-pieces of wood, on the waist; then the cannon was slung on to it,
the clamps were fixed over the trunnions, and a quoin was driven under
the gun to prevent it from sagging towards the breech.  When mounted on
the fort it had not been secured by breechings, but Amos quickly made
ready a length of stout rope, fastened one end to the gun, and clinched
the other to ring-bolts in the vessel's side.  This would check the
recoil when the gun was fired.

Amos was now in his element.  He had not been for nothing gunner's mate
aboard the _Anne Gallant_ twenty-five years before.  He lost no time in
loading the piece with round shot; then, all being ready, he ran back
to instruct Dennis how to bring the vessel round when he gave the word.
He found that Biddle, who had merely been stunned by the flying
splinter, was now sitting with his back against the taffrail, watching
these proceedings in a sullen envy.

"The Spaniard will draw closer when we yaw, sir," said Amos, "but that
we cannot help; and 'tis a mercy we are out of range of her bow-chaser."

"Is she not beyond range of our gun, Amos?"

"Nare a bit, sir.  Our demi-culverin is bigger, I'se warrant, than any
gun she has aboard.  Point-blank her range be a hundred fathoms; but I
reckon I can hit the knave at six hundred at the least.  Put the helm
down when I call, and then I'll send an apple aboard will be ill to
digest."

He returned to the gun, and sang out to Dennis; he put the helm down,
the vessel yawed, and when she lay broadside to the pursuer, Amos
carefully laid the piece, aiming directly at the fore-mast.  He waited
till the vessel rose on the next wave, then gave the word to William
Hawk, who stood by the breech with lighted match.  The match was
applied; there was a deafening roar, followed by a sound of rending;
the _Mirandola_ quivered from stem to stern; and through the smoke it
was seen that the gun had jumped clean out of the carriage and was
lying against the step of the mainmast.  Amos ran to it in haste,
fearing that it might have burst in the discharge.  But it was
uninjured.  Several planks amidships had been started; the mainmast was
heavily scored; and a number of round shot were rolling about the
waist.  Amos shouted to the men to remount the gun and sponge it out,
while he ran to the side to see what the effect of the shot had been,
calling to Dennis to put the helm up again and head the vessel on her
former course.

The smoke had cleared away, and Amos saw that the pursuer had gained
considerably, and was still coming on apparently undamaged.  But a few
minutes later he uttered a shout of glee.  There was a bustle in the
forepart of the Spanish ship; men were crowding to the gunwale; and
Amos perceived that they were letting a sail down over the side.

"I hit her betwixt wind and water," he cried to Dennis.  "They are
letting down a sail to stop the leak.  True, I aimed at the foremast,
but she rose somewhat quicker than I did guess and so 'scaped with a
hulling."

"But she has gained on us, Amos.  The hurt she has suffered does not
abate her speed."

"Truly, so it is, but I will give her another so soon as the gun is
righted, and call me a joulter-head an I do not deal her such a blow
that she'll tottle like a man fair buddled."

Dennis called to Luke Fenton to take the helm, while he went forward to
scan the horizon for the hazy streak which he had taken, half an hour
before, for the shore-line.  He had barely reached the cut-water when
he heard the roar of a gun and the sound of a crashing blow.  For an
instant the vessel's head fell off, and turning hastily he saw Jan
Biddle rushing to the helm.  A round shot from the enemy's bow-chaser
had fallen smack upon the poop, smashing the binnacle, and killing poor
Fenton instantly.  Only Biddle's prompt action had saved the ship from
yawing and presenting her broadside to the pursuer.

Seeing that the helm was in safe hands, Dennis turned once more and
glanced anxiously towards the shore, which was now beginning to loom
large to windward.  Was it possible, he wondered, to reach it before he
could be cut off by the second Spanish vessel?  He measured the
distance with his eye, and his heart sank as he perceived that, if she
held her present course, the Spaniard could not fail to run across the
bows of the _Mirandola_ long before she could gain the coast.  It
seemed that he must choose between surrendering and fighting against
heavy odds.  But certainly one ship would be easier to deal with than
two; might not another fortunate shot from the demi-culverin cripple
the vessel in chase, and so enable the _Mirandola_ to get away from one
of her pursuers?  Dennis did not forget that there was still a third
vessel somewhere to leeward, but she was at present out of sight.

By this time the gun had been righted and reloaded.  Dennis hastened to
rejoin Amos.

"Shall I take the helm again, or leave it to Biddle?" he asked.

"Fegs, I say leave it to him, and do 'ee take the match, sir.  I'se
warrant 'ee'd be quicker than Billy Hawk.  Biddle will port the helm
when I give the word; he hates you and me, but he hates the Spaniards
worse."

This time the gun had been loaded with chain shot.  At a hail from
Amos, Biddle put the helm down, the vessel swung round, and as soon as
she was broadside to the enemy Amos carefully laid the gun, loosening
the quoin, and thereby elevating the muzzle, which he pointed straight
for the pursuer's foremast.  But the enemy was now more alert.  At the
first sign of the _Mirandola_ yawing the galleon began to swing round
by the stern, so that the two vessels came broadside on within a few
moments of each other.  Those few moments gave time for Amos to resight
his gun.  Dennis stood ready, match in hand.

"Now!" said the mariner, as the _Mirandola_ sank on the roll while the
galleon rose.

The gun spoke.  Only a second or two later it seemed to the crew of the
_Mirandola_ that the end of all things must have come.  With a
thunderous roar the whole broadside of the enemy burst upon them.  Some
of the enemy's shots passed clean over the smaller vessel; her masts
almost miraculously escaped harm, but her hull was struck in half a
dozen places, and her long-boat splintered to atoms.  And the big gun,
breaking loose from its extemporized breechings, recoiled obliquely
across the waist, smashed through the forecastle, and plunged with a
resounding splash into the sea.  Some of the men were groaning in pain;
the Frenchmen were flat on their faces beseeching their saints; Dennis
found himself in a heap by the break of the poop; for the moment Amos
was not to be seen.

Dennis picked himself up and peered through the smoke to see whether
the enemy had suffered any hurt.  To his joy he saw that both the
foremast and the mainmast of the galleon had been shattered.
Turnpenny's shot had cut away the shrouds of the foremast, causing this
to snap off, and struck the mainmast fair and square.  The enemy's
decks were smothered under a medley of spars and rigging; it was clear
that the galleon was out of action, and already the _Mirandola_ was
rapidly drawing away.  This her crew perceived, and the air was rent
with a tremendous shout of triumph.

But their exultation was short-lived.  Half a minute later Amos came up
the hatchway and hurried aft.

"Sir, there be three terrible rents in the hull below water.  I feared
as much when I felt the shots strike the vessel.  The galleon's masts
must have fallen just as the knaves were a-firing, and so the most of
her shots struck us low."

"Can we stop the leaks?"

"I fear, I fear!  But we'll try."

In a few minutes a sail was lowered over the side, and at the same time
two of the men ran below and tried to stop the leaks from within.  But
in spite of all efforts the water gained, and in the course of half an
hour it was plain to all on board that the vessel must founder unless
she could be run ashore in time.

While the men were still doing their best to check the inrush of the
water, Dennis and Turnpenny went forward to calculate their chances.

"'Tis a good ten mile away," said Turnpenny, "and we be going slower
every minute."

"True.  But see, the other vessel yonder, that might have cut us off,
has altered her course.  She is standing to her consort's aid."

"God be praised for that, but I fear we shall be water-logged in no
long time, and then she can overhaul us at her ease.  In an hour we
must take to the jollyboat.  'Tis a God's mercy that was not smashed up
like the long-boat."

"Then we'll put our stores aboard her at once, so that we lose no time
when the moment comes.  And I do not give up hope, even now, of running
the bark ashore."

But in half an hour it was clear that the case was hopeless.  The men
came running from below with the news that the water was gaining more
and more rapidly; the vessel was settling down; her motion had almost
ceased.  And the situation was rendered the more alarming by the fact
that during this half-hour the uninjured galleon, having found
apparently that her consort was in no immediate danger of sinking, had
again altered her course and was now in hot pursuit.  It was to be a
race to the shore.

The jolly-boat had already been stored with provisions, water, and a
number of calivers with their ammunition.  At the last moment Dennis
and Turnpenny brought from below the bags of pearls from the cabin in
which they had been locked.  Then Dennis ordered the boat to be
lowered, the crew quickly went down the side and entered her.  Two of
the men had been so badly hurt by the enemy's shot that they had to be
lowered into the boat.  Fenton was dead, so that the whole effective
company now numbered only nine men.  The wounded men were laid in the
bows, Dennis took the tiller, and the remaining eight gave way with a
will, knowing that hanging would be their mildest fate if they fell
again into the enemy's hands.




CHAPTER XVIII

Juan the Maroon

It was now past midday, and the sun's rays beat down upon them with
cruel power.  Yet none of them was glad when the wind freshened,
bringing a touch of coolth; for it filled the sails of the vessel in
chase, which loomed ever larger and larger in their wake.  The land
appeared to be very close, but to Dennis's anxious eyes it scarcely
seemed to grow closer.  For mile after mile the rowers toiled on in the
sweltering heat.  Dennis ventured to leave the tiller for a few moments
to give them water when they flagged.  One of the men collapsed, and
Dennis crawled to his thwart and took his oar, bidding him go to the
tiller.  So the chase went on, until, when the boat was still more than
a mile from land, the enemy began to fire.  The mere sight of the shots
splashing in the sea astern stirred the wearied rowers to renewed
efforts.  When, after a few minutes, a shot fell immediately in their
wake, sending up a terrific burst of spray, their energy seemed to be
doubled again.

[Illustration: "A shot fell immediately in their wake."]

Dennis now had his back to the shore.  It could not, he thought, be
more than half a mile away: how far would the enemy venture to follow
them?  Surely she would not come much farther, at the imminent risk of
running aground on a shoal.  He saw a man at the chains taking
soundings.  Then suddenly the vessel was thrown into the wind, and she
fired the whole of her broadside, in the hope, no doubt, that at least
one shot would strike the target.  The men were so played out that they
were not able even to raise a feeble cheer when they found that they
had escaped scot-free.  Any gladness they may have felt was
extinguished as soon as the smoke cleared away and the enemy perceived
that they had failed to hit the boat.  The galleon had hove to: the
Spaniard was lowering her boats; and in a few minutes all three,
long-boat, cock-boat, and jolly-boat, crowded with men, came sweeping
across the water.

But they were as yet half a mile away; looking over his shoulder Dennis
judged that his boat was now within less than a quarter-mile of the
shore.  Calling cheerfully to the men for a final spurt, he bade the
steersman run them aground on the first shoal or spit of land that
presented itself.  A minute later the boat was brought up with a jerk.
The men flung down their oars and began with desperate haste to gather
up some of the stores and the weapons.

"Billy Hawk, take the treasure," said Turnpenny.

But Biddle was too quick for him.  Hawk managed to secure one of the
goatskin bags; Biddle seized the two others.  There was no time to make
any alteration.  Trembling with their exertions, the men were
staggering up the beach, some loaded with articles from the boat, some
carrying the two wounded men.  Amos, remaining till the last, drove a
boat anchor through the bottom and hastened after the others.  But the
Spaniards' boats, fully manned with crews fresh and vigorous, had sped
over the water at a tremendous rate, and it seemed to Dennis, looking
back and marking how near they were to land, that after all he and his
party stood but a poor chance of getting away.  In the three boats
there were at least sixty well-armed men.  It was clearly their
intention to run ashore and continue the pursuit on land.  Within half
an hour they must be upon them.

There was only a few yards of beach.  The thick vegetation came down
almost to the water's edge.  It was a wild part of the shore; not a
path was to be seen through the undergrowth, and beyond rose the
forest.  But the foremost of the fugitives had struck out a way for
themselves through the plants, and Dennis and Turnpenny hurried along,
bringing up the rear.

The fugitives were greatly impeded by the necessity of carrying the
wounded men and the stores.  Even when they reached the forest, where
there was less undergrowth, their pace must be slower than that of the
Spaniards, who had only their arms to carry.  And to avoid them was
quite impossible, for the Spaniards were not unused to tracking runaway
slaves, and would not fail to follow up the broad trail left by the
party.

"'Tis vain to go farther," said Dennis to Amos, as they hastened on.
"We must be caught.  And we shall need all the poor remnant of our
strength.  Yonder is a thick clump of bush where with our calivers we
may perchance give pause to the enemy.  I will run on and tell our
comrades ahead to betake themselves thither."

"Ay, do so, though meseems 'tis but to stay for our death.  You be
lighter of foot than me.  I will go into the thicket and there hide."

Dennis ran forward, but had not gone far when he found the two wounded
men lying on the ground, deserted by their bearers.  The rest of the
party had disappeared.  Part of the stores also had been abandoned.
Clearly the men had bolted, perhaps in panic fright at some noise in
the forest, perhaps--Dennis saw in a flash the explanation.  Among the
things abandoned there was no sign of the bags of treasure.  Even at
this critical moment Jan Biddle's cupidity had got the better of all
other feelings, and he had made off with the booty and his fellow
mutineers.

Dennis bent over the wounded men.  One was past help; the shock of
being left to his fate had hastened the end that was probably in any
case inevitable.  The other man Dennis helped to bring back to where
Amos had taken up his position.

"Where be Billy Hawk, then?" said Turnpenny, when Dennis had acquainted
him with what had happened.  "He had one of the bags of pearls.
Od-rat-en for a traitorous faggett!"

But his attention was immediately diverted from Billy Hawk's
shortcomings by the sight of the enemy making their way through the
trees.  Dennis and the mariner had no hope of saving themselves.  They
two could not contend long with numbers so overwhelming.  But they were
resolved not to surrender.  They knew well--Amos by experience, Dennis
by the tales he had heard--what their fate would be as captives.  Their
whole aim was to sell their lives as dearly as might be.  Amos had
already kindled matches for their calivers.  These as they burnt gave
out an acrid smoke, which was bound to attract the attention of the
Spaniards if they came near.  Confident of their immense superiority in
point of numbers, even if the whole band of fugitives stood up against
them, the enemy were pressing forward without caution.  Dennis for a
moment debated with himself whether to fire on them or let them pass.
He owed nothing to Jan Biddle and the mutineers.  Twice had they
behaved treacherously towards him; they would receive no more than
their deserts if he allowed the Spaniards to go by unmolested.  But
then he reflected that after all some of the fugitives were his
fellow-countrymen; all had been miserable slaves; and what he had
learned of the Spaniards' dealings with those in their power made him
regard them as enemies of mankind.

Turnpenny for his part had no scruples.  To him, as to the majority of
the Englishmen of his time, the Spaniard was a hateful oppressor, who
appropriated the riches of the New World in order to set the nations of
the Old by the ears.  Even if he had not suffered personally at their
hands, the whole race of Spaniards was in his eyes no better than
vermin.  So when Dennis gave the word, he levelled his caliver with
right good will at the body of men that presented so easy a target, as
they came hurrying through the forest.  The two fired together; one man
fell; the rest halted, looking about them with an air of fright that
set Dennis mightily wondering.  While they hesitated, Amos and he
reloaded with what haste they might, and had not completed that
troublesome process when the enemy, plucking up courage, advanced again
in somewhat more extended order, firing as they marched.  Bullets
pattered on the tree trunks all around.  Dennis had come scatheless
through the action at sea, but now he felt a burning pang in his
forearm, and saw that the sleeve of his doublet was singed.  But at the
same moment he heard a deep sigh from the wounded man who lay at his
feet.  The poor wretch had again been hit.  There was no time to attend
either to him or to his own wound, for the Spaniards, taking heart at
the cessation of the fire from the copse, were preparing to make a rush.

By this time both Dennis and Turnpenny had reloaded, and stood waiting
to make a last stand against what they felt must be an irresistible
attack.  To their amazement, however, just when they were expecting to
hear the order to charge, they saw that a number of the enemy had swung
round, and were facing towards the coast, the direction in which they
had come.  Next moment there was a yell from among the trees: "Yo peho!
yo peho!"  The strange cry was taken up at point after point, until the
whole surrounding forest seemed to ring with fierce whoops and
battle-cries.  Then they caught sight of dark figures flitting among
the trees beyond the Spaniards, who had now clearly given up the idea
of advancing, and were crowded in a serried mass to meet another foe.
There was the sharp crackle of fire-arms, followed by the twang of
bow-strings.  A long arrow whizzed past Dennis's ear, perilously close.
The newcomers had formed, as it appeared, an immense semicircle about
the Spaniards; several of these had fallen, and the semicircle seemed
to be drawing ever closer.

"The maroons!  O Jaykle!" whispered Turnpenny.

Driven together now into a compact body, the Spaniards fired a volley.
Before the smoke had cleared away, from all around the maroons, dusky
forms clad in smocks that reached their knees, were among them.  Then
began a desperate hand-to-hand fight.  The Spaniards, in their turn
outnumbered by three to one, were wielding their swords with the
courage of despair against the javelins of their furious yelling enemy,
striving to break through the ring.

"Yo peho! yo peho!"  The maroon war-cry rose ever fiercer and fiercer.
It was an affair of a few minutes.  Half of the Spaniards were on the
ground; the survivors broke and scattered, some speeding towards the
copse, forgetful that their first check had come from thence.
Turnpenny levelled his caliver and fired at the foremost of them.

"Shoot 'em, sir!" he cried to Dennis, who had hesitated, feeling some
compunction.  "Shoot 'em, or we shall have the maroons in upon us, and
they will not stop to ask our names."

Dennis fired.  The Spaniards broke away to the left, and dashed into
the forest, pursued hotly by the exultant maroons.  Seeing that the
tide had passed them by, Turnpenny stepped out into the open and,
raising his arms, shouted "Amigos!" at the top of his voice to the
maroons within hail.  One or two let fly their arrows at him; some were
about to fire; but a big fellow among them called loudly to them in a
tongue that the Englishman did not understand.

"My heart, 'tis Juan!" cried Turnpenny, and as the man advanced towards
them Dennis recognised the leader of the maroons he had rescued on the
island--the man who had with Amos supported the ladder for his climb
into Fort Aguila.

Juan shook hands with them with every sign of delight.  While the
others continued the pursuit, he explained to Amos that his attention
had been attracted by the sound of firing at sea, and from a point some
distance along the coast he had watched, from among the trees, the race
in the boats.  Never loath to seize a chance of striking a blow at the
hated Spaniards, he had hurried with his comrades along the fringe of
forest.  He was overjoyed to think that the men whom his sudden
onslaught had saved were his old friends and the leaders of the attack
on Fort Aguila.  He invited them to accompany him to his village deep
in the forest, and wound a horn to recall his comrades.  Within a few
minutes they were all assembled.  The Englishmen recognized among them
some who had been with them at the attack on the fort.  Soon they were
on the march.  They took no prisoners; it was not the maroons' way to
spare any Spaniard who fell into their hands.  Four of them carried the
twice-wounded sailor, but ere they had gone far he succumbed to his
hurts, and they buried him under leaves in the forest.

An hour's march brought them to the maroons' village, built on a
hillside circled by a narrow river.  It was surrounded by a broad dyke,
and a mud wall ten feet high.  It had one long street and two cross
streets, very clean and tidy; and the huts of mud and wattle, thatched
with palm-leaves, and with doors of bamboo, were kept with a neatness
that surprised the Englishmen, who mentally contrasted them with the
dirty cottages of labourers at home.  Juan made them very welcome,
supplying them with a feast of wild hog, turkeys, oranges and other
pleasant fruits.

"I'feck, it be a dinner fit for a lord," said Turnpenny, appreciatively.

He related the events that had brought them to the straits in which
Juan had found them.  When the maroon learnt that some of their party
had deserted with the treasure, he despatched a band of his men to
follow them up.  And then he told his visitors a piece of news that
mightily cheered them.  El Draque, he said, the Dragon, the great
English sea-captain, had lately raided Nombre de Dios, the port whence
the great treasure fleets were wont to sail for Spain.  Then he had
disappeared.  The Spaniards were in a state of nervous dread.  So bold,
so sudden were his movements, that not a settlement on the coast but
lived in constant terror of his appearance.  The very mystery that
surrounded him, their ignorance of his whereabouts, added to the fear
his name inspired.

"They do not know where he is," said Juan, with a chuckle; "but I know.
He is a long day's march from this place, in a little harbour that no
passing ship can spy.  And there he waits till he can swoop like a
jaguar on the dogs of Spain."

"My heart, it be joyful tidings!" said Turnpenny.  "I knew Master
Francis would come again to these shores, to have a proper tit-for-tat
for the base dealings of the Spaniards at St. John d'Ulua.  Good-now,
sir, shall we take a journey and see the worthy captain, and
peradventure join with him in spoiling the knaves?"

"With all my heart, Amos," replied Dennis.  "Without doubt Juan will
furnish us with a guide."

Turnpenny spoke to the maroon.

"Better than that!" he said, after a brief colloquy.  "He says he will
e'en come himself with a party.  Master Francis, he says, does hurt to
no woman nor unarmed man; he is kind to the maroons; and not a man of
them but loves him and would serve him to the death.  Ay sure, a noble
man is Master Francis, that loves God and hates the Spaniards; and Ise
warrant we could do naught better than join ourselves to him.
Crymaces!  he will list with a ready ear to the tale of our adventures."

"'Twill be overlong for the captain," said Dennis, with a smile.  "But
I would fain see him and speak with him, for he may perchance spare a
vessel to go and seek for our poor comrades penned up in Maiden Isle."

"God-a-mercy, I had a'most forgotten, sir.  True, there be Tom
Copstone, and Hugh Curder, and Ned Whiddon all lone and lorn.  Master
Francis will help us to save them, or he be no true man."




CHAPTER XIX

Drake's Camp

Early in the afternoon of the second day thereafter, Dennis and
Turnpenny, with Juan and a company of maroons, came to the outskirts of
a large clearing at a little recess of the shore.  A bark and three
trim little pinnaces lay rocking in a secluded roadstead.  Neatly
thatched huts of the maroons' pattern bordered the clearing.  At one
end of it stood two archery butts at which men were shooting; a smith
was lustily plying his sledge at an anvil; and in the middle, on a
stretch of sward, two stalwart bearded figures were disporting
themselves at a game of bowls.

"I'fegs, 'tis very like home," said Turnpenny.  "'Tis Master Francis
himself, as I live, and Master John Oxnam, a gallant soul; and there be
Master Ellis Hixom, the captain his man, and a very worthy gentleman.
And Bob Pike, busy with the rum bowl--a good man, when not betoatled
with the drink.  And O cryal! lookeedesee, sir; Bob hath a monkey at
his elbow, and hang me if he be not teaching the poor beast the taste
of rum.  Oh Bobby, Bobby, the drink will be your undoing, an ye have
not a care.  They spy us, sir; 'tis a right merry sight, good-now, and
warming to the heart."

A maroon came from among the company to meet them.  He greeted Juan
warmly, looking with surprise and curiosity at his white companions.
Then they advanced into the clearing.  Bob Pike, a red-faced mariner,
sitting on a tub, looked up as they approached, and raised his bowl
unsteadily, singing--

  "Let us laugh, and let us quaff,
  Good drinkers think none ill a.

Welcome, Haymoss; I know not where be coom from but here be a sup for
'ee, comrade.

  Let us trip, and let us skip,
  And let us drink our fill a.

Why, what ha' taken the wink-a-puss?"

His exclamation was occasioned by a surprising action on the part of
the monkey that had been crouching at his feet.  With a chatter of
delight the animal had sprung up and was bounding on all fours towards
Dennis.  Next moment it was on his shoulder, stroking his cap with its
paw.

"Fi, Mirandola," said Dennis, with a laugh, "hast forgot my admonitions
to soberness?  Has all thy philosophy and my instruction not steeled
thee against temptation?"


  "My thirst to staunch, I fill my paunch
  With jolly good ale and old,"

sang Bob Pike; "though in truth it be new rum, for ale, under this sky,
would turn as sour as whey.  Good-now, Haymoss, come and take a sup
with me, soul.

  I drink to you with all my heart
  If you will pledge me the same."


"Stint it, stint it, Robert Pike," said the elder of the two players,
looking up.  "You'll be but a buddled oaf an you go this gait.  But
odds-an-end, who be this?"

"An Englishman of Devon, so please you, captain," said Dennis, doffing
his cap.

"Out of sky, or earth, or sea, for I swear you are not of my company?"

"Out of earth and sea, sir, newly come to bid you my duty."

"And that is Amos Turnpenny, an I be not in a maze.  We will finish our
game anon, Jack," he added, turning to Oxnam, "for there is a tale
hangs by this.  Come, young sir, methinks I know your face, though
rabbit me if I can mind the when or the where of seeing it."

"It was on an occasion like to this, sir," said Dennis.  "You were at
play with Sir Martin Blunt on Plymouth Hoe when----"

"Stay, I mind it well, and you were the youth that beat me!  I was in
somewhat of a dander, to be sure.  Are you of Sir Martin's party?  Sure
I looked for him months agone to join me, and wanting him has not been
to my comfort.  Is he at hand?"

"Alas, sir, Sir Martin has been at the bottom of the sea the washing of
many a tide.  I alone am left of all his company."

"God rest his soul!  He was a right good man.  But tell me, then, how
it chanced that you alone escaped.  And what brings you here in company
with this ancient mariner?  Furthermore, what strange affinity hast
thou with this monkey, who is friends with that besotted knave alone,
and that only for the love of liquor?"

"Mirandola and I are old friends, sir.  How he comes to this place it
passes my wit to guess; but he was my sole companion and friend on the
island whereon by God's mercy I was cast alive, in the same storm that
wrecked the _Maid Marian_ and swallowed all my dear comrades.  There I
spent many a day and night without sight of human face or sound of
human voice, until Spaniards came purposing to cut logwood, with slaves
of whom Amos was one, the only white man.  He had the good hap to
escape their hands----"

"Nay, captain," Amos broke in; "it was not good hap, but the wit and
spunk of Master Hazelrig.  He saved us from the knaves, and led us to
the taking of their vessel, in the which we purposed to sail away; but
the knave captain blew it up with powder; wherefore it was we came to
the main in a canow of the maroons' devising, and did take that strong
fort and fastness of Aguila, where----"

"Stay, stay!" cried Drake.  "Ods my life, this your tale makes my
noddle buzz with amaze.  What is this about Fort Aguila?"

"Why, sir, 'tis as I say," replied Turnpenny.  "We did sail to it in
the canow, which ran aground and was stove in.  But we mounted those
walls by a ladder, and crept upon the fort by night, and drew out of
their dungeon all my comrades--Ned Whiddon and Hugh Curder and Tom
Copstone, and nigh a score more.  And we dealt the knave Spaniards many
a dint, and took the fort, and blew up the towers, and sailed right
merrily away in their own vessel with great store of pearls and pieces
of eight.  And the vessel was named in the Spanish tongue _Our Lady of
Baria_, but Master Hazelrig he could not abide the Papist name, and
called her by the very name he had afore bestowed on this heathen
beast, Mirandola to wit, whereas I would liever have called her Susan
or Betty----"

"Jack, is 't not a midsummer night's dream?  A very mingle-mangle of
madness!  Tell on; I have a soft ear for mariners' tales."

"I' fegs, 'tis no mariner's tale, sir, but very truth.  We sailed away,
but the morn after, when it was mizzly, we spied a vessel that straight
gave chase, and but for the little small harbour of Maiden Isle,
whereinto we ran and lay hid and so diddled that knavish vessel, we had
e'en fallen again into those cruel hands."

"When shall we laugh, Jack?" cried Drake, smiting his thigh and loosing
a mighty roar that caused the archers to pause, and drew the smith from
his anvil, and at last brought the whole company crowding round.  "Why,
friend Amos, that knavish vessel was my own tight bark the _Pascha_
yonder, and 'twas I myself that chased thee, ay, and would have caught
thee, too, but for the huffling of the wind.  If 'twas thou handling
the vessel 'twas a mighty good piece of seamanship.  And mine was a
knavish vessel, good-now!  Ho! ho! 'tis a merry world."

"Be jowned if Ned Whiddon thinks so, or Hugh Curder, or Tom Copstone!
There they be, poor souls, marooned on that same island, which indeed
we took and named Maiden Isle for behoof of her gracious Majesty.  We
fled from that craft which in our thought was a knavish vessel of
Spain, and remained a night and a day to refresh ourselves, intending
to sail thence on the morrow.  But one of our company, Gabriel Batten,
a quiet good soul, but somewhat of a drumble-drone, did go astraying
after simples, and when the time came for us to embark, ods-fish, he
was not with us.  In that night, Jan Biddle, a man of Belial, made off
with our vessel; but Master Hazelrig spied her ere she ran clear, and
we swam to her and clomb aboard, and were vumped topsy-versy by those
knavish mutineers.  But they loosed us when she had made an offing, and
right well it was for them, for we were chased by three galleons of
Spain, and hardly escaped ashore in our jolly-boat.  And then be jowned
if Jan Biddle and his villainous crew did not skip off hippety-hoppety
with the treasure we got with our pains at Fort Aguila----"

"Aha!  I owe you a grudge for that, Master Hazelrig," cried Drake.  "I
had heard of the pearl-fishery, and was e'en chasing you, supposing
your craft was a merchant vessel out of Venta Cruz or Cartagena, to
inquire somewhat of the defences of that same fort.  I came by chance
to the place, and lo! it was a ruin.  You beat me at bowls, young sir;
art minded, meseems, to beat me at other games."

"Truly, sir, had I but known you were in these seas, I would surely
have joined myself to your company, with your good leave, and served
you with all diligence."

"Wilt serve me now, lad?"  Drake shot a keen glance at him.  "I am
preparing a sore dint for the Spaniards, and have but few men for the
job.  Wilt join me?"

"I could desire nothing better," said Dennis, with a flush of pleasure;
"but----"

"Say on; let me hear your but."

"Some half a score of Englishmen, the comrades of Amos, lie marooned on
yonder island, sir; and we came hither, when we heard of your presence,
to beg a vessel to go and fetch them off.  Methinks one of the pinnaces
yonder----"

"Knavish vessels, good-now!"

"Crymaces, sir, will 'ee remember that against me?" Amos broke in.  "A
man must say what a' thinks, but thinkin' don't alter what is.  'Twas
your vessel; then 'twas no knave."

"Save as the Spaniards think it so.  Well, I would fain help Englishmen
in so hard a case, but at this present I cannot spare a pinnace; nay, I
cannot even spare a man.  Yet when the matter I spoke of is brought to
an end, and falls out to our liking, I will go myself to that island
and bring off your comrades; for in truth I have a mind to see the
haven into which you fled and so 'scaped my knavish tricks.  Methinks
it should prove a secret and comfortable place for myself.  In brief, I
give you my word.  Now, what say you to my proposal."

"Sir, I am yours," said Dennis, "and I thank you for your good will."

"Ay, and me likewise," said Turnpenny, "and Ise warrant a man of my
muscle can do summat against those villain dons--lookeedesee!"

He exhibited the knotty muscles of his arms with a simple vanity that
set Drake and Oxnam a-laughing.

"But not the monkey," added Drake, as the animal chattered in concert.
"He is prone to utter his voice out of season, and an indiscreet cry
might be the undoing of my purpose, and me."

"How comes the monkey here, sir?" asked Dennis.  "We brought him with
us from the island; indeed, he would not be left; but he deserted us
some ten miles beyond Fort Aguila, and I supposed he had gone among his
kind and thought never to see him again."

"Why, we found him among the ruins of that fort, and meseems he saw
some likeness between Bob Pike and Turnpenny----"

"God forbid!" cried Amos earnestly.

"In muscle, not in manners," said Drake laughing.  "Howbeit, he hitched
himself on to Pike, and hath accompanied us ever since, and I trow not
what Pike will say if the beast transfers his allegiance.  But
good-now, the sun goes down; 'tis time to make our evening devotions
and then to supper.  Methinks you, Master Hazelrig, have good cause to
render thanks to the Almighty Father for the wondrous things He hath
wrought in your behoof; and we have great plenty of fish, fowls,
rabbits and the like, which, I doubt not, will be comfortable fare to
you after your late privations.  Come with me to my hut: I would hear
of your adventures more at leisure."

And thus Dennis became one of the company of Francis Drake.




CHAPTER XX

A Raid through the Forest

Though Dennis had accepted Drake's offer on the spur of the moment, he
saw no reason to repent when he talked the matter over with Amos next
day.  The rescue of their comrades on the island was indeed deferred;
but it was impossible to attempt that rescue without a suitable vessel
and a due equipment of men and stores; and since the men had plenty of
food on Maiden Isle, the delay of a few weeks would make no serious
difference to them, unless--and this possibility gave Dennis some
concern--they were molested by Spaniards.  He hoped, however, that if
an enemy did appear on the island the men would have sufficient warning
to give them time to take refuge in the cave, where with good luck they
might remain concealed until the danger had passed.

Before the day was out Dennis had made acquaintance with the members of
the little company at Port Diego, as it had been called.  From Ellis
Hixom, Drake's right-hand man, he learnt something of their adventures
since they left Plymouth in May, only a month after the _Maid Marian_
set sail.  Early in July they had arrived at Port Pheasant, a secret
anchorage discovered by Drake on a former voyage, and so named by him
"by reason of the great store of those goodly fowls which he and his
company did daily kill and feed on in that place."  On the 20th they
sailed for Nombre de Dios, and a week later made a night attack on that
unhealthy town, which once or twice in the year emerged into importance
when the galleons came there from Cartagena to take in their cargoes of
gold and silver sent for shipment by the governor of Panama.

The moon was rising as they stood in for the shore; but Drake, finding
that his men were full of superstitious terror of the night, persuaded
them that it was the dawn of day.  They landed on the sands, beneath a
battery, and only a few yards from the houses which were built on the
shore, with the forest behind.  The single sentry was slumbering, but
he was roused by the sound of their climbing up the redoubt, and fled
to give the alarm in the town.  They spiked the six big guns in the
fort, but ere they had finished they heard the great bell of the town
church booming out; drums beat in the narrow street; it seemed that
there was warm work before the little band of fifty.

Drake divided his men into three parties; one of twelve to guard the
boats, the second of sixteen, with his brother John and John Oxnam, to
enter by the east gate of the market-place; while himself, with about a
score, would march in at the other end to the sound of drum and
trumpet, with torches glaring at the end of their pikes.  He gave the
men orders to make all possible noise, so as to delude the garrison
into the belief that his force was stronger than it really was.

The market-place was crowded with a mob of mingled soldiers and
citizens when Drake and his men entered with great clatter from the
side nearest the sea.  The intrepid band was met by a hot volley, to
which they replied with their calivers and a flight of arrows; then,
not waiting to reload, they charged with a fierce shout, to do the rest
of the business with pike and sword.  As the same moment Oxnam and his
company dashed in at the other side with a great blast of trumpets.
The Spaniards, scared by the noise and the torches, still more by the
knowledge that El Draque was among them, did not stay to fight the
matter out, but flung down their weapons and rushed away in disorderly
flight along the road leading through the forest to Venta Cruz.

Drake re-formed his men, and, under the guidance of Spaniards he had
captured, made for the governor's house, where the mule trains from
Panama were unloaded.  The door was wide open, and by the light of a
torch the Englishmen saw a vast pile of silver bars standing in the
passage.  But Drake had learnt that in the King's treasure-house on the
eastern side lay a goodly store of gold and jewels, far more than they
could carry.  Accordingly he would not allow the men to break their
ranks and despoil the governor, but led them back to the market-place
to prepare for the more serious work.

Meanwhile the men on guard at the beach, hearing the din, and seeing by
the light of the torches men running this way and that in the streets,
began to be alarmed, especially when they learnt from the negroes who
had joined them that the garrison had been newly strengthened.  In
their panic they sent word to Drake that the pinnaces were in danger of
being taken.  Drake had no sooner sent his brother and John Oxnam to
allay their fears and assure them that all was well when a terrific
thunder-storm burst upon them, wetting their bowstrings and the charges
of their guns.  They ran for shelter to a shed at the western end of
the King's treasure-house, and there, while they repaired the damage,
the men began to mutter among themselves of the peril they were in, and
some talked of flight.  As soon as the storm had ceased, Drake, seeing
that the adventure was in jeopardy unless he led the men to action,
ordered Oxnam to take a party to break open the treasure-house while he
held his ground in the market-place.

But, unknown to the men, he had been severely wounded in the leg at the
first onset, and fell faint from loss of blood.  He perceived that some
of his men had already laden themselves with plunder from the houses
and booths in the market-place, and knew that they would be glad of any
excuse to get away to the boats.  It was no longer possible to hide his
wound, and the men, seeing it, begged him to return to the boats, and
paid no heed to his entreaty that they would leave him to fend for
himself and possess themselves of the treasure so nearly within their
grasp.  The possibility of losing their captain took all the heart out
of them.  They carried him hastily down to the beach, got aboard the
boats, and shoved off just as dawn was breaking.  It was a
disappointing end to the expedition; but only one man of them, a
trumpeter, had been killed, and they were all glad enough to get off so
lightly.

Since then they had cruised up and down the coast, capturing Spanish
vessels here and there, and making themselves a terror to the whole
Main.  They had suffered many losses, by sickness and in fight; John
Drake had been killed in leading a mad attack on a frigate; but small
as the company was, every man was now cheerful in the expectation of
gaining great plunder in the approaching expedition to Panama.  Dennis
and Turnpenny were welcome recruits, and none were more eager than they
to set off with the great captain, and go whithersoever he might lead.

[Illustration: Map to illustrate the adventures of Drake in 1572-73]

One day, about a week after their arrival at the camp, Drake called his
men together in council, and unfolded to them his daring plan.  The
Spanish treasure fleet, he had learnt, had arrived at Nombre de Dios,
and was awaiting there the consignments of gold and jewels which were
brought by long mule trains across the isthmus from Panama.  He
purposed to ambush one of these trains in a lonely spot on the north
road.  Solemnly he placed before the men the dangers of the expedition.
They had a march of sixty miles before them, through poisonous jungles
and fever-haunted swamps.  It was an enterprise for none but hardy and
courageous men, ready to endure labour and fatigue without murmuring.

Of his original company he had only forty-two left.  Some of these were
sick, others were required to guard the ships; and when Drake had
weeded out the least fit of the rest, he had only eighteen Englishmen
for the adventure.  To those he added thirty maroons, making a little
company of forty-eight all told.  Dennis observed with admiration how
carefully all things were prepared.  The men were provided with spare
boots, so that they might not go footsore and be troubled by the
jiggers of the jungles and the leeches of the swamps.  The bows were
all re-fitted, the arrows and fire-arms cleaned and scoured; large
stores of dried meat and biscuit were packed in bundles; and bottles
were filled with wine and rum, for it was unsafe to drink the water of
the rivers.

It was a bright February day, Shrove Tuesday, when the adventurous band
set out, the ships in the harbour dipping their colours and the
trumpeters sounding "a loath to depart."  The Englishmen carried
nothing but their weapons, the baggage being strapped to the shoulders
of the stalwart maroons.  They marched in the coolest part of the
morning, from sun-rise to ten, when they paused for dinner.  Soon after
noon they were afoot again, and at four halted for the night, the
maroons building for them with extraordinary rapidity little huts of
grass and palm-leaves, where they ate their supper over cheerful
wood-fires, beguiling the evening hours with song and talk.  It was a
new life for Dennis, and full of strange charm.  He spent many an hour
in the company of Drake and Oxnam, listening with a boyish admiration
to their talk, revelling in their tales of fight and adventure.

The great captain exercised a wonderful fascination upon him.  Drake
was at this time little more than thirty years old, below the medium
height, but with brawny limbs and a broad chest.  Brown hair clustered
close on a bullet-shaped head; his beard grew thick and strong; his
face was ruddy and pleasant to look upon; and the honesty of his soul
spoke out of his large, round blue eyes.  His voice was clear and
musical, and he had a natural eloquence, set off by the burr of his
native speech.  Nothing impressed Dennis more than to hear the Captain,
every night at sunset, recite the evening prayers and collects
bare-headed among his men assembled.  "By Thy great mercy defend us
from all perils and dangers of this night"--there was something very
real and earnest in the petition, uttered in the shade of the forest
where wild animals dwelt, and in a country where every man was a foe.
There was no doubt about the reality of Drake's religion; and it was
part of his simple belief that he was chosen of God to scourge a
pestilent enemy of mankind.

The order of the march was the same every day.  Four maroons led the
way, marking a trail by flinging broken branches or bundles of leaves
upon the ground.  Then came twelve more maroons, followed at an
interval by Drake and his eighteen Englishmen, and two maroon chiefs.
The rear was brought up by the rest of the maroons.

After four days' tramping through swampy woods, much entangled with
undergrowth, steaming with heat and infected with noisome odours, they
entered a pleasanter country, where the trees grew larger, and with
branches so thickly interlaced that they were defended from the sun's
rays and found their path less obstructed by creeping plants.  The
ground rose gradually, and Pedro, the maroon chief, told Drake that on
the summit of the ridge they were ascending, half way across the
isthmus, there grew an immense tree from which he could descry the
North Sea whence he had come and the South Sea whither he was going.
At ten o'clock on the eighth day of their march they came to the place,
and while the dinner was being got ready, Drake went with Pedro to the
tree of which he had spoken.  Ascending big steps cut on the bole, they
reached, near the top, a pleasant thatched arbour, large enough to seat
a dozen men.  The sky was clear; no haze blanketed the view; and
looking forth, Drake caught, thirty miles away, the sparkle of the
southern ocean on which no English boat had sailed.  The soul of the
great mariner was strangely moved: he fell on his knees, and "besought
Almighty God of His goodness to give him life and leave to sail once in
an English ship on that sea."  Then he called up Oxnam and others of
his company, and told them of his desire and prayer.  Dennis never
forgot the scene in that shady bower at the tree-top: the kindling face
of the sturdy captain, his shining eyes, the fervency of his speech.

They went on again, and in two days more reached the wide savannah,
with grass as high as corn, and great herds of black cattle.  Now and
then they got a glimpse of Panama, the city of their dream, and by and
by, when they were near enough to see the ships riding at anchor in the
roadstead, Drake called a halt: they had come within touch of danger
and must walk warily.  Resting in a grove some three miles from the
city, Drake sent one of the maroons, dressed like a negro of Panama,
into it as a spy an hour before dark.  He was to find out on what
night, and at what hour, the mule train set out with its precious
burden for Nombre de Dios.  He had learnt from Pedro that the first
stage of the journey, from Panama to Venta Cruz, was always performed
by night, because by day the open plain was scorched by the sun.  But
the second stage, from Venta Cruz to Nombre de Dios, was accomplished
by day, the road lying among cool shaded woods.  It was clear that the
first stage offered the best chances of a successful ambush, and Drake
had resolved to intercept the treasure-train between Panama and Venta
Cruz.

The spy returned sooner than he was expected.  From old acquaintances
in the city he had learnt that a train was to start that very night,
its departure being expedited because a Spanish hidalgo, the treasurer
of Lima, was in haste to reach a ship waiting at Nombre de Dios to
convey him to Spain.  His train consisted of fourteen mules, of which
eight were laden with gold and one with jewels.  Two other trains, of
fifty mules each, would follow, with provisions for the fleet and a
quantity of silver.

Within an hour of the receipt of this news, Drake and his men were
afoot on the road for Venta Cruz, some twelve miles away.  Before
starting, the English men all put their shirts on outside their other
garments, so that they might have some means of telling friend from foe
in the darkness.  When they had marched about half the distance, two of
the maroons, going ahead as scouts on the narrow track between long
grass, detected the smell of a burning match, and creeping stealthily
on, guided by the scent, and the now audible sound of snoring, came
upon a Spanish sentry fast asleep by the roadside.  In a trice they
pounced on him; they stuffed a gag into his gaping mouth, put out his
match, tied his arms to his sides, and haled him back to the main body.
This danger removed, Drake divided his band into two companies.  One of
these, under John Oxnam and Pedro the maroon, he stationed in long
grass fifty paces from the road; with the other he went to the same
distance on the other side, posting them so that, if it came to a
fight, their fire would not harm their comrades.  He gave strict orders
that no man should stir from his post, but that all should maintain
perfect quiet, and, if any travellers should come from the direction of
Venta Cruz, that these were to be allowed to pass without molestation.

Dennis and Turnpenny were placed among Oxnam's party, and lay side by
side in the grass.  The night was so dark, and the stalks so long, that
they could scarcely see each other, much less any other of their
company.  For a time all was quiet; nothing was heard but the faint
critch of insects among the herbage.  But by and by Dennis caught a
slight murmur from some point near at hand.  He lifted his head to
listen.  Yes, it was certainly a man mumbling.  Then he heard a
glug-glug, as of liquid poured from a narrow-necked vessel, and
immediately afterwards a deep sigh of contentment.  Again there was
silence; but after a while another glugging and another sigh.

"Begorz!" whispered Turnpenny, "'tis some bosky lubber a-puddling of
aqua vitae.  St!  Here be bells a-coming, on the neck of moyles, Ise
warrant.  St!"

The sound came from the direction of Venta Cruz: evidently a train was
returning to Panama.  Almost immediately afterwards there came a
fainter tinkle on the other side; the treasurer of Lima was on the
road, but he would not reach the ambush until the train from Venta Cruz
had passed.

Nearer came the sound, growing now into a loud clanging.  Dennis held
his breath.  The Venta Cruz party was to be allowed to pass; it would
meet the other travellers, and give them the word that all was well.
But what was this?  Some one was rustling in the grass near him; some
one was moving forward; and, peeping up, Dennis saw an Englishman, as
he knew by his shirt, creeping towards the road through the long
stalks, and a maroon following.

At this moment his ears caught the sound of a horse trotting.  He could
not see the road; the men who had gone through the grass were also out
of sight; but suddenly the trot changed into a gallop, and he heard the
horse clattering at a furious rate down the road.  His heart gave a
jump; he felt a hot flush surge through him: the rider, whoever he was,
had been startled, and was now doubtless dashing on to warn the coming
train.  Who could the fool be who had so flagrantly disobeyed the
captain's orders?  Had he been so mad as to expose himself, in his
shirt over-all, to the view of the horseman?  Turnpenny was as wrathful
as Dennis.

"Be jowned if I don't deal en a whap in the niddick," he whispered,
"as'll make en twine like an angle-twitch."

The sound of the hoofs died away, and Dennis expected that the clanging
of the bells would cease also, and all be brought to nought.  To his
surprise there was no change: the bells drew nearer and nearer; now he
heard men's voices; and then, with a suddenness that made him jump, a
shrill whistle-blast rose high above all other sounds.  It was the
signal for the attack.  Dennis and the sailor rushed through the grass;
on all sides white-clad forms rose from their lurking-places and made
towards the road with a cheer.  They sprang at the muleteers, toppled
them over, and without a shot fired the long line of mules was in the
raiders' hands.

With many a laugh and jest the sailors hauled the packs from the backs
of the mules and slit them with their hangers.  But soon the mirth was
turned to melancholy.

"Od-rat-en, what have we here?" cried Turnpenny, lifting a soft mass on
the end of his weapon.  "Bless my bones if it bean't a bunch of yokey
sheep's wool!"

"And here 'tis nought but dried meat as tough as leather."

"Ay, where be the goold, where be the goold?" cried Robert Pike,
breaking from the grasp of a maroon.  "Cap'n said there was nugs o'
goold as big as goose-eggs, and be jowned if I can see a farden's
worth!"

"And the gewgaws for the rory-tory madams o' Spain--where be the
gewgaws?" cried another of the seamen.  "Here, you codger"--seizing one
of the muleteers--"where be the gewgaws adiddled to?"

He shook the man till he gasped for breath, then hauled him before
Drake, who had come into the midst of the enraged sailors.  He bade the
muleteer speak.  The man told how the horseman, trotting by with a page
at his stirrup, had been startled to see a ghost-like figure rise out
of the grass at the side of the track, and galloped on to warn the
treasurer.  Superstitious as the Spaniards were, they knew so much of
the daring of El Draque that the treasurer did not for a moment doubt
he had to deal, not with a ghost, but with a very real and substantial
enemy.  The warning had reached him just in time.  He drew his mules,
bearing the treasure, to the side of the road to allow the train of
merchandise to pass; the loss of food and wool could be endured
patiently if the gold and jewels were saved.  Then, when the din ahead
confirmed his suspicions of an ambush, he turned the mules' heads back
towards Panama and slipped away.

Here was a pretty end to the adventure from which all had hoped so
much!  Loud was the outcry against the wretched man whose rashness had
had so untoward an effect.  While Drake took hurried counsel with Oxnam
and Pedro the maroon, the men went about growling, accusing each other,
threatening terrible punishment for the offender.  Of them all none was
louder or more vehement than Robert Pike.

"An I catch the knave," he shouted, "Ise fulsh en, Ise thump en, Ise
larn en a thing or two as the wink-a-puss won't forget."

But as he spoke he lurched towards Amos, who caught him by the collar
as a sudden suspicion dawned.

"Be jowned if I don't b'lieve 'twas 'ee, Bob Pike!  You hawk-a-mouth
knave, I smell 'ee, I do.  You been puddling aqua vitae, dang my
buttons an you bean't.  You bandy-legged piggish lubby, you, 'ee'll
fulsh en, will 'ee? and thump en, will 'ee? and larn the wink-a-puss a
thing or two, will 'ee?  The Old Smoker take 'ee for a lubberly knave
and a jackass."

"And 'ee for a gabbing rant-a-come-scour!" retorted Pike, when he got
his breath.  "What be 'ee jowering at me for?  I only supped a little
small drop to keep me awake, and when I heard the moyles a-coming,
od-rabbit-en, thinks I, Ise nab the first; and when I got to the road,
'twas no moyle, but a fine horse and rider, and I rose up to see what
he was, and a knave maroon pulled me down and sat upon me like to
squeeze out my vitals, and so the villain Spaniard got away."

"You bosky knave, I'll----"

But what Turnpenny would have done remained untold, for at this moment
Drake called all the men together.

"'Tis no good crying over spilt milk, my lads," he said.  "An we do not
shift for ourselves betimes, we shall have all the Spaniards of Panama
upon us pell mell.  To go back the way we came is a four leagues march;
we all be wearied and for-done, and meseems 'twere better to go forward
two leagues into the forest.  True, the town of Venta Cruz stands in
the way, but 'tis better, methinks, to encounter our enemies while we
have strength remaining than to be encountered and chased when we be
worn out with weariness.  We will e'en eat our suppers while we may;
there be great store of meat and drink in the mule-packs; then will we
mount upon these beasts, so that we do not weary ourselves with
overmuch marching.  And then, if God will, we will ding a blow at the
enemy for our honour; and mark 'ee, my lads, we are disappointed of a
most rich booty; but surely God would not that it should be taken, for
that, by all likelihood, it was well gotten by that treasurer, and not
by evil courses."

And, taking what comfort they could from their captain's explanation,
they set off on mule back as soon as supper was over, and came in an
hour to the woods a mile out of Venta Cruz.  There they dismounted.
Drake bade the muleteers remain out of harm's way, and led the men over
a cobbled road ten feet broad, running between great walls of
vegetation.

Following his custom, Drake sent forward two of the faithful maroons to
reconnoitre.  They came back with news that, half a mile farther on,
the enemy were hidden in the thickets; they had heard the rustle of
their movements and smelled the pungent smoke of their matches.

"Let no man fire till after the enemy hath dealt us a volley," said
Drake; "methinks they will first parley with us."

He led them quietly forward.  A few minutes later a dark form appeared
on the darker road.

"Hoo!" came a voice.

"Halloo!" replied Drake.

"What nation are you?" called the man in Spanish.

"Englishmen."

"In the name of the King of Spain my master," cried the captain, "I
charge you to yield, avouching on the word of a gentleman soldier that
I will deal with you most courteously."

"Come on, my lads," quietly said Drake, taking a few quick steps
forward.  Aloud he cried: "For the honour of the Queen of England, my
mistress, I must have passage this way."

At the same moment he fired his pistol.  The Spaniards in ambush,
mistaking the shot for a signal from their own officer, poured in a
volley.  Drake blew his whistle, and instantly his men sent a
spattering shower of bullets and arrows into the brushwood, following
it up with a charge.  The Spaniards bolted like hares, and at Drake's
command the maroons of his party swarmed forward to cut the enemy off
from a stronger position in the rear, shouting their terrifying
war-cry, "Yo peho!  Yo peho!"  Back went the Spaniards, scurrying along
to the shelter of the town, the maroons leaping and dancing after them
as their manner was in war, the seamen not far behind, adding to the
uproar with English yells.  Within a few yards of the town wall the
enemy attempted to rally, posting themselves across the road and in the
woods on both sides.  But the maroons swept upon their flanks, Drake
and his men charged full at the centre.  For a few moments the place
rang with the clash of sword and pike and the cries of the combatants.
Then as one man the Spaniards wheeled about and scampered through the
open gates of the town, with Drake's whole party at their heels.  On
they went into the streets, seamen and maroons, thrusting and slashing
without pause or respite, yet strictly observing their captain's
injunction to spare women and unarmed men.  In five minutes they were
masters of the town.

For little over an hour the men ran hither and thither, gathering what
spoils they could in the shape of articles easily carried.  Then, just
as dawn was breaking, and they were snatching a hasty breakfast before
departing, a dozen horsemen dashed in at the Panama gate.  Not until
they were within point-blank range of the musketeers whom Drake had
posted there did they perceive that the town was in the enemy's hands.
The sentries fired; half of the horsemen fell; the rest fled back
hastily into the forest.  But Drake feared they were the advance guard
of a larger force.  It was dangerous to delay.  He whistled his men
together; and in a few minutes they marched out of the town with their
spoils, some little compensation for the lost treasure of the mule
train.

The toils and sufferings of that homeward march lived long in the
memories of Dennis and Turnpenny.  Drake forced the pace unmercifully,
anxious to get back to his ship.  Food ran short; he would not stay to
hunt wild hog or deer.  Several of the men had been wounded; there was
no time to tend their wounds.  Their clothes were torn to tatters;
their boots, even the extra pairs, had given way, and they were driven
to bind their feet with rags.  The faithful maroons served them nobly,
carrying all the burdens, building huts for their rest at night,
bearing upon their shoulders some of the seamen who were too exhausted
and footsore to tramp any longer.  A maroon went forward to warn the
waiting company of their approach.  On the afternoon of the 23rd of
February, three weeks after they had started on the expedition, they
tottered out of the forest towards the beach, just as the pinnace, sent
by Ellis Hixom to take them off, scudded inshore.  There on the
glistening sand the little company of men, haggard, worn-out,
half-famished, raised their husky voices in a psalm of thanksgiving,
praising God because they saw their pinnace and their fellows again.




CHAPTER XXI

Maiden Isle Again

As they sailed back in the pinnace to the secret haven, the weary
adventurers were surrounded by their comrades, and feasted their ears
with wondrous tales of what had befallen them.  Ellis Hixom also had a
story to tell.  A few days after the departure of the company, there
had staggered into the clearing three men in the last stage of
exhaustion.  Two were English, one French.  They were pitiable objects,
their eyes bright with fever, their cheeks haggard with famine, their
feet blistered and bleeding from long wandering in the woods.  Each man
carried a bag of pearls.

And they told a pitiful story.  They had escaped, they said, from
captivity in Nombre de Dios, and set out with three comrades, bearing
plunder from the houses of their captors.  It was well known along the
coast that Drake was somewhere in hiding, and they marched eastward,
hoping by good hap to light upon his encampment.  But as they rested
one night, the leader had overheard a plot on the part of three of the
men to slay the rest and make off with the booty.  Fearing that if it
came to a fight he and his two comrades would stand but little chance
against the others, who were men of exceeding great strength and
ferocity, the three had slipped away in the darkness and had since been
tramping for days through the forest, unable to find sufficient food,
and subsisting on berries and mushrooms.  Once they had almost stumbled
into a village of maroons, and fled for their lives, dreading lest they
should be taken for Spaniards and slain before the error was discovered.

"And where are they now?" asked Drake.

"On the _Pascha_, sir," replied Hixom, "where they are slowly
recovering of their calentures."

"And the name of the leader?"

"Jan Biddle, by his own account a skilful mariner and----"

"Ay, I have heard tell of him," interrupted Drake with a grim smile.
"Master Hazelrig," he added, calling Dennis up, "I learn that the
captain of your mutineers waits your judgement on my vessel."

He repeated what Hixom had told him.

"What is the name of the other Englishman, Master Hixom?" asked Dennis.

"Dick Rackstraw, methinks.  The Frenchman's name is Michel Barren."

"Then what has become of our comrade Billy Hawk, I wonder?  Biddle and
his crew deserted from us with the treasure, when we came ashore in our
boat.  Billy Hawk went after them; I fear me there has been foul play."

"We will enquire into that matter when we gain our haven," said Drake,
"and see what Master Biddle has to say for himself."

As soon as he reached the haven, Drake boarded the _Pascha_ and called
Biddle and his companions before him.  He listened patiently to the
man's wild tale, then sent a boat ashore to bring off Dennis and
Turnpenny.  Biddle's jaw dropped when he saw them come over the side.
He attempted to bluster it out, but Drake cut him short.

"You are a foul liar and a mutineer," he said sternly.  "Art a murderer
also?  What didst thou to Billy Hawk thy comrade?  Answer to the point,
villain."

"Afore God, sir, I know nought of him.  With me came but four men, and
two of those lie dead in the forest, of a strange sickness that got
hold of them after that they had drunken of the water of a certain
river.  Of Billy Hawk I saw nor heard nought."

"My poor comrade!" said Turnpenny.  "I fear me he be gone or alost."

"These are your men," said Drake, turning to Dennis.  "The punishment
of mutiny is death.  Do with them as you list."

"I would fain leave them in your hands, sir," replied Dennis.  "For me,
I would not that any man should die."

"I will consider of it.  Have them put in irons and carried below."

Next day he decided, on Dennis's intercession, to content himself with
holding the men closely confined in the vessel.  The bags of pearls
were taken from them and handed to Dennis and Turnpenny.  And ere the
day was out Robert Pike was sent to join them.  Drake had learnt of the
mischievous part the man had played, which had resulted in the failure
of his attack on the mule trains.

"A little darkness and solitude may teach him to refrain from the
bottle," he said.

The enterprise had so nearly succeeded that when Drake declared he
would make the attempt again, as soon as the time came for another
convoy of treasure to cross the isthmus, every man of his company
eagerly besought him for a place in the expedition.  But Dennis
reminded him of his promise to lend him a pinnace in which to sail to
Maiden Isle and bring off his comrades.

"I will hold to my word," said Drake.  "You and your brawny henchman
have suffered less than the most of my men, by reason, I wot, of your
being inured to hardships on your island.  Some days must needs pass
before we are ready to attempt other enterprises.  The island is but a
day's sail, you said?"

"Ay, sir, and with good hap we should return on the second day, or the
third at most."

"Then take the _Minion_ pinnace, and good hap go with you.  You will
need men.  Choose out eight according to your mind, and a few maroons
also.  Juan was with you, I bethink me; he will doubtless serve you
right faithfully.  In sooth, I shall be mighty rejoiced to have with me
the dozen men you go to find, for if they be in spirit and body like to
you and your henchman, they will be most serviceable when I make my
next journey to Panama.  I would go fetch them myself, as I had
purposed, but that our preparations demand my presence here."

Next day, then, the _Minion_ pinnace sailed out of the little haven
with a crew of eight Englishmen and five maroons, three of whom were
the men who had accompanied Dennis from the island.  Mirandola also was
on board.  He had disappeared when Dennis set off with Drake to cross
the isthmus, but had evidently kept a watch on the settlement, for the
day after they returned he came out of the forest and attached himself
to his old master with demonstrations of delight.  A brisk breeze was
blowing off shore; the pinnace was a first-rate sailer; by midday they
were in sight of the island, and in the afternoon they rounded the
shoulder of the cliff, Turnpenny steering the vessel into the gully.

Dennis, standing in the bows, caught sight of a group of men beyond the
pool, near his sheds.  They were partly hidden by the foliage, and when
they saw the strange vessel making straight towards them, with the
evident intention of coming to an anchorage, they took to their heels
and disappeared.

"Poor souls! they take us for Spaniards," said Turnpenny.  "I warrant
they be most desperately in the dumps.  'Tis nigh a month since we
departed hence."

The pinnace dropped anchor beside the _Maid Marian_, and the men went
ashore.

"Blow a blast," said Dennis to one of the men, who carried a trumpet,
"with notes that will be familiar to their ears."

As the shrill notes rang out, he stepped ahead of the men, with
Mirandola on his shoulder.  Before long a man appeared among the trees
far up the chine.

"Hallo hoy!" shouted Turnpenny.  "Be that you, Tom Copstone?  Come,
comrade, never be afeard.  We've come to take 'ee off, poor soul, and
bring 'ee to Master Drake, who will make us all rich with much gold and
treasure.  Come, my hearts, Ned Whiddon, and Hugh Curder, and all."

Turnpenny's well-known voice was more successful than the trumpet's
notes in banishing the men's mistrust.  Soon they came hasting down the
gully, Copstone leading.

"I said it!  I knew it," he cried, as he approached.  "'You and me,
Haymoss'--the blessed words stayed in my noddle, and I knew 'ee would
come back somewhen, dear soul.  But we be in piteous case.  'Tis a long
ninny-watch we ha' kept, and hope was wellnigh drownded, sir.  We could
not make it out; we was mazed, every man of us; but you be come back,
praise be to God."

He told how the disappearance of the _Mirandola_ had filled them first
with consternation, then with bitter rage.  Some of the men declared
that they had been decoyed to the island; that they had been betrayed
and deserted for the sake of the treasure.  From the first Copstone and
Whiddon had absolutely refused to believe that Dennis and Turnpenny had
wilfully left them; Hugh Curder, indeed, had made a shrewd guess at
what had actually happened; but the rest clung to their first notion,
gave way to bursts of rage and reviling, and as the days passed,
settled down into a state of moody despair.

Copstone had tried to induce them to fit out the _Maid Marian_ for sea,
but he had found it impossible to whip up enough energy among them.
They had some reason for their reluctance, inasmuch as, the stores of
the _Maid Marian_ having been put aboard the _Mirandola_, there was no
provision for a long voyage.  The fruits of the island would spoil in a
week or so, whereas if they clung to the island they were at least sure
of finding a sufficient subsistence.  But they had been troubled even
on this point, for some of the men fell ill through recklessly eating
fruits and berries without first ascertaining whether they were fit for
food, and with broken health their spirits had been still further
depressed.

"Poor souls!" said Turnpenny.  "'Ee do look a wangery and witherly
crew.  But 'ee be all here, all twelve, not a man lacking?  My heart!
where be Gabriel Batten?"

"He never come back!"

"Never come back!  What do 'ee mean?"

"We looked for en, up along and down along, but nary a crim of him did
we see."

"Ay, and another be gone, too," said Hugh Curder.  "But a sennight
agone, poor Joe Toogood vanished out of our sight, and we never seed
him again."

"Be there devils upon the island, Haymoss?" asked Ned Whiddon,
anxiously.  "Be there pixies that lead poor souls into some ditch or
quagmire, where they be swallowed quick in the pluffy ground?  Once we
was bold mariners all, but now we be poor timorsome creatures, afeard
when the wind soughs in the trees."

Dennis remembered the boa-constrictor from whose clammy coils he had
saved the monkey that now sat upon his shoulder.

"'Twas no sprites nor pixies, comrades," he said.  "Without doubt they
came unawares upon a big serpent that charmed them first with his fiery
eyes, and then swathed them in his fearsome coils till he had crushed
the life out of them.  Poor souls! poor souls!"

"But now 'tis time to be merry, lads," said Amos quickly, "for here we
be, and our pinnace yonder is named the _Minion_, the same as the bark
that Captain Hampton handled so cunningly at St. John d'Ulua; and we be
goin' to take 'ee all back to Master Drake, who lies by a secret haven,
in little small huts built by the maroons; and there be archery butts,
and a smith's anvil, and other such homely things.  And we have seen
wondrous things, my lads--the blue south sea beyond, and the treasure
town, and Master Drake be set on leading us forth to adventure for gold
and jewels beyond price.  'Tis time to be merry, souls!"

And catching the infection of his cheery good-will, Hugh Curder flung
his hat in the air and began--

  Ill is the weather that bringeth no gain,
    Nor helps good hearts in need.


Dennis had transferred to the _Mirandola_--now, alas! at the bottom of
the sea--the greater part of the _Maid Marian's_ stores that he kept in
his sheds; but there was a goodly remnant still in the cave, and this
he determined to put on board the _Minion_ and carry to Port Diego.
The afternoon was too far advanced for the work to be completed that
night; so he determined to sleep on the island and make an early start
next morning.  As soon as it was light he sent a number of Turnpenny's
old comrades in different directions across the island to get a supply
of fresh fruit, while the men he had brought from the mainland set
about carrying the stores from the cave to the pinnace.

They had not been long at the work, however, when Ned Whiddon came
hurrying back.

"God-a-mercy, sir," he cried, "we have spied a crew of strangers on the
south shore, and in the offing two vessels at anchor.  They be all clad
and armed in the Spanish fashion, and when they set eyes on us they
gave chase, and but that we know the island now as well as we know the
lanes to home, none of us would have 'scaped."

Other men came in while he was speaking.  Dennis trembled for the fate
of those who had gone towards the northern shore and had not yet
returned.

"'Tis ill news indeed," he said.  "Run, Curder, after the men that have
gone northward, and warn them that Spaniards are here to trouble us,
lest they have not already discovered it.  Comrades," he added,
addressing the men about him, whose countenances bespoke their
alarm--"comrades, we must take counsel together.  What think you, Amos,
we should do?"

"Why, sir, we should steal out in the pinnace as soon as our men be
back along, leaving these stores, and thread a way betwixt the reefs to
nor'ward; for the knaves could not follow us save in their boats."

"Ay, sir," said Copstone, "that be the true way of it.  God send the
tide be high enough to serve."

"Then get aboard and make all ready to depart.  Amos, look to all
things, and make the rest of our comrades to embark as they arrive.  I
will run to the top of the cliff to spy if the coast be clear."

But on reaching the spot whence he had often before looked so longingly
and vainly for a sail, he made a most unwelcome discovery.  About a
mile to the south-west of the island lay a large vessel, which, since
she was busily engaged in signalling, was clearly a consort of the two
ships that Whiddon had seen.  Keeping well under cover, Dennis raced
along to a point half a mile south, whence the whole southern offing
was visible.  There were the two vessels; and, even as he looked, a
boat was lowered from the nearest of them, rapidly filled with men, and
was rowed towards the beach.

The sight was enough to cause the boldest heart to quake.  If the
pinnace ran out of the gully, she would have to pass within half a mile
of the ship, for the tide was low, and even the little _Minion_ drew
too much water to make her way northward until she had run at least
half a mile out to sea.  This would bring her under the guns of the
third vessel, and the Spaniards must be poor marksmen indeed if they
failed to hit her at this range.

He was beginning to retrace his steps when Turnpenny came up hurriedly.

"We be all aboard, sir, save yourself and Nick Joland.  Have 'ee seen
him?"

"No."

"He be but late better of a fever, as Tom telled me; pray he be not
swooned."

At this moment they heard loud shouts to their right.  Running down
through the trees, careful not to expose themselves, they saw four
Spaniards chasing this very Nick Joland, a thin cadaverous-looking man
whose stumbling gait betrayed his weakness.  He was making almost in a
straight line for a large bignonia bush that stood alone at the end of
the narrow clearing just below where the two men were watching.

With one accord Dennis and Turnpenny stole to the bush and dropped down
behind it.

"Let Joland pass," whispered Dennis; "then we can tackle the knaves as
they come up."

"Without arms?" replied Turnpenny.

Dennis nodded.  In a few moments the fugitive, panting hard, ran past
the bush.  The four Spaniards, running in a body, were close at his
heels.

"Now!" Dennis whispered.

They sprang out with a yell, and though they were unarmed, the odds
were not utterly against them, for the Spaniards were startled by this
unexpected onset.  A single blow from Turnpenny's sledge-hammer fist
stretched one of them senseless on the ground.  Dennis felled his man,
but his arm was less powerful, and the Spaniard began dizzily to regain
his feet while Dennis grappled with another.  As he rose he reeled just
within reach of Turnpenny's arm.  Catching him round the middle, the
seaman flung him bodily at the fourth Spaniard, who was making
furiously at him with drawn sword, Their heads collided with a terrific
thud, and down they fell on the grass together.

[Illustration: "The seaman flung him bodily at the fourth Spaniard."]

Meanwhile Dennis had come to grips with the third man, a heavy and
muscular fellow, who had only been prevented by the suddenness of the
onslaught from using his sword, which he was unable in the surprise of
the moment to shorten before Dennis was within his guard.  Dropping the
weapon, he strove to crush his antagonist by sheer strength.  But
Dennis was a wrestler.  He neatly tripped the Spaniard, who fell,
dragging his opponent with him.  With a tremendous effort, he heaved
himself uppermost and pinned Dennis to the ground.  His hand was
already on Dennis's throat when suddenly a bright object hurtled
through the air, striking him with terrific force on the side of the
head.  His grip relaxed, he fell with a groan upon Dennis, the object
that had struck him clattering to the ground.

Dennis was up in a moment.  The strange missile was the headpiece of
one of the Spaniards.  It had fallen from his head in the tussle, and
been picked up by Nick Joland, who, seeing the diversion in his favour,
had hurried up at the critical moment in time to save Dennis from
strangulation.

"Dead as door-nails!" said Turnpenny succinctly, seeing Dennis glance
at the Spaniards on the ground.  "'Tis a terrible heave-up, sir; we
were best to run back along to our comrades in the pinnace, for there
be gashly work afore us.  And we will take these knaves' swords and
calivers.  Crymaces! there be more running towards us, and a round
dozen; we durst not bide their coming.  We have but bare time to get
back to the chine.  Stir your stumps, Nick Joland; we can't save 'ee
twice, man."




CHAPTER XXII

A Fight on the Cliffs

The three doubled back towards the chine, which was little more than
half a mile away.  The Spaniards saw them ere they disappeared among
the trees, and followed with loud shouts, quickening their pace when
they reached the spot where their comrades lay.  But the Englishmen,
knowing the ground, came in good time to the edge of the gully, where a
steep and winding path led down to the ledge on which the huts were
built.  From the summit the ledge was not visible.

"Shall we run down at once, or give them a taste of their own lead
first?" asked Dennis, halting for a moment.

"Give the knaves a taste, to be sure," replied Amos.  "They know not
how many we be, nor can they see through the trees; and we must needs
check them, to give us time to acquaint our comrades with what is
toward, and set our defences in order."

While speaking he had kindled the matches taken from the Spaniards.
The calivers were already loaded.  Crouching behind the thick bushes
that lined the edge of the gully, they fired when they caught sight of
the Spaniards advancing among the trees.  Two of the enemy fell; the
rest halted; and while they stood considering whether to advance, the
three Englishmen hurried down the path, guessing that the Spaniards
would hardly venture to follow while they were ignorant of the size of
the force with which they had to deal.

Arriving at the ledge, Turnpenny gave a hail to the men on the deck of
the pinnace, bidding them leave the vessel and bring their arms and
ammunition with them.  They had been much alarmed by the continued
absence of their leaders, and by the sound of the shots, and asked
anxiously, when they reached the ledge, what was to be done.  Dennis
rapidly told them what he had seen from the summit of the cliff, and
how for the present the Spaniards had been checked, and then, taking
Turnpenny and two or three of the others aside, began to concert a plan
of defence.

The position was naturally a strong one.  The ledge was accessible only
by the narrow path from the cliff-top, and by a few yards of steep
ascent from the base of the gully.  It was protected from attack from
above by the overhanging cliff; it could only be assaulted from below
if the enemy got into the bed of the gully, either by coming in boats
round the shoulder of the cliff, or by clambering down the sides
inland.  The gully was forty yards across; the opposite bank was steep
and much overgrown with vegetation, trees and bushes growing thick to
the very edge.  Down the middle ran the stream from the marsh, very
shallow after a season of dry weather.  On their own side the defenders
could pick off the enemy if they came to attack them along the narrow
path; they were only in danger if the Spaniards took post on the summit
of the cliff opposite, and they could not reach that spot except by
making a long circuit about the marsh in which the stream took its
rise, or by clambering down the southern bank some distance up-stream,
wading through the water and climbing the other side.  This would be a
matter of an hour or two at least--an invaluable respite which Dennis
resolved to make the most of.

He sent one of the maroons up the path to keep watch on the enemy, and
another to cross the gully, clamber up the opposite face, and hide
among the trees there to give notice of an approach from the
north-east.  The other maroons, with several of the Englishmen, he set
to fortify the extremity of the ledge with a wall of branches, so that
the party might be screened from gunshot on the far side.  Turnpenny,
with the strongest of the mariners, went down to the pinnace, and at
the cost of great exertion brought up the falcon and rabinets which
formed, with the addition of a saker, her armament.  The saker was a
muzzle-loader weighing more than half a ton, and too cumbrous to be
hauled up the steep cliff; but the falcon was less than half that
weight, and the two rabinets weighed only three hundred pounds apiece.
The falcon was seven feet long, had a bore of two and a half inches,
and threw a shot of three pounds weight, with a similar weight of
powder.  The rabinet was only two and a half feet in length, its bore
was one inch, and its shot weighed only half a pound.  Both guns had a
point-blank range of from a hundred and twenty to a hundred and fifty
yards, and, mounted on the ledge, in embrasures of the extemporized
wall, they would prove very effective weapons of defence.

While the guns were being hauled into position, others of the men
brought buckets of water, filled at the cliff stream, and emptied them
into the casks which during the months spent on the island by Dennis
and the sailors had been depleted of the stores they had held when
brought from the hold of the _Maid Marian_.  Two casks still remained
full of cider, but this having gone sour in the heat, it was poured
away, the casks were swilled out, and re-filled with water.  It was
fortunate that a pure spring welled in the cliff, for the water of the
rivulet draining the marsh was unfit for drinking.

All the men worked with a will.  They knew not as yet how many the
enemy numbered, but since there were three vessels, of which each, if
fully manned, might contain from forty to seventy men, they had to
reckon with a force that might be from a hundred and twenty to more
than two hundred strong.  The odds were tremendously against them.  All
told, they numbered only twenty-six, of whom six were maroons.  But
they had only two courses open to them: to fight, and at least sell
their lives dearly, or to yield, and be shot or hanged or haled away to
a slavery worse than death.  Not one of them hesitated in his choice.

As a last resort, Dennis had the cave to fall back upon; but he was
loath to retire to it until he had made a good fight at the gully, for
while, from the ledge on which his hut stood, he could command the
entrance of the gully, and to some extent protect the pinnace, the cave
was deeper in the cliff and out of sight, and however strenuously the
party might defend itself there, the pinnace would then be at the mercy
of the enemy.  It was true that, even if the pinnace were carried away
or destroyed, a canoe could be dug out by the maroons, so that they
would still have a means of leaving the island; but Dennis was
determined to sail the _Minion_ back to Port Diego and to Francis Drake.

Midday came, and passed.  The maroons had finished their wall; the guns
were mounted and charged; the water-casks were filled: and still there
was no sign of the enemy.  But the scouts had not returned, and Dennis
began to feel somewhat uneasy.  What were the Spaniards doing?

"Have we left aught undone, think you?" he said to Turnpenny, as they
sat on upturned tubs eating their dinner.

"Nowt, sir, as I can see.  But methinks 't'ud be well to withdraw the
muzzles of our guns somewhat.  If the knaves come on t'other side and
spy them, they may sheer off and seek some other way of troubling us;
and I would that they came to close quarters here, where we can strike
them down."

"'Tis good counsel.  Not perceiving the guns they will be the more
emboldened to attack us, and 'twere well we have occasion to teach them
a sound lesson."

Accordingly the guns were withdrawn so that their muzzles did not
project from the other side of the wall.  Hardly had this been done
when the nose of a boat was seen shooting round the shoulder of the
cliff.

"Lookeedesee!" cried Turnpenny.  "The knaves that followed us did
assuredly go back to their comrades and tell them of the gully and the
path downwards, and they have sent their cock-boat to spy the place
from the sea."

"Let us keep out of sight and watch what they do," said Dennis.

The boat, filled with armed men, came under full sweep of oars up the
entrance to the gully.  When it was still some distance from the
pinnace the men rested on their oars, and one rose in the bows to look
about him.  For some time he saw nothing to indicate that the place was
defended, and his fellows in the boat began to talk over the situation,
the sound of their voices coming clearly to the men behind the wall.
Then, as the boat again moved towards the pool, some one in it suddenly
caught sight of the barricaded ledge, and the voices broke out once
more in eager discussion.  The upshot of this was that they came to the
conclusion that the pinnace had been abandoned to her fate, and with a
shout of triumph they bent lustily to their oars and came on with the
evident intention of securing the vessel.

But they were now within range of the calivers of the defenders.  At a
sign from Dennis eight of the men stepped forward to the wall, lit
their matches, and, resting the weapons on the top, fired when he gave
the word.  Several of the oarsmen were seen to fall back; the boat came
to a stop; and while the Spaniards were hesitating whether to advance
or retreat, eight more men sent a hot volley among them, working havoc
in the crowded boat.  Cries of pain were now mingled with their shouts;
the defenders heard a loud word of command; and the rowers began to
back water so as not to present the side of the boat to the hidden
marksmen.  When the boat was out of danger it swung round on the
current, and in a few minutes disappeared past the shoulder of the
cliff.

Scarcely was it out of sight when the maroon who had been sent up the
cliff to the south came running down the path.  He reported that he had
stealthily spied upon the Spaniards who had been baffled when Dennis
and Turnpenny vanished over the edge; they had returned to the southern
shore, where they rejoined a larger party which had assembled there.  A
council had been held on the beach; horns were sounded, no doubt to
recall scattered bands who had been ranging the island in other
directions; more men had been sent off from the ships; and the whole
force, numbering, as near as he could guess, nearly two hundred men,
had set off with matches already lighted, marching northward.
Moreover, the third vessel, which had been lying off the south-western
shore, was working slowly up the coast.

"'Twas from her, without doubt, the boat put off that we have lately
routed," said Dennis.  "The men aboard will tell what they have seen.
What will be the upshot, think you, Amos?"

"Be jowned if I can tell, sir.  My counsel is, let the maroon go back
and spy upon them.  An the knaves march directly northward they will
come upon the gully just above us, and methinks, however stout they be,
they will not dare to come down the path, where we can shoot them man
by man."

It was done as he suggested.  Within half an hour the maroon came back
with the news that the boat had been run ashore on low ground to the
west: many wounded men had been lifted out of it; and the majority of
the Spaniards had hastened across country to rejoin the marching force.
It halted while a consultation was held; then the march was resumed,
but this time in a more easterly direction, which would bring them to
the gully at a point about midway between the ledge and the morass,
where the banks were sufficiently low and the stream sufficiently
shallow to permit them to cross without difficulty.

"They be coming about to fire down at us from t'other side," said
Turnpenny.

"Over the wall," added Copstone.

"We can fire back," said Whiddon.

"Zuggers! but twenty of us cannot keep two hundred in check," said Hugh
Curder, anxiously.

"Say you so?" said Dennis.  "Master Drake with but few more did assault
and take a whole town.  The Spaniards have learnt the worth of an
English mariner; they will not approach us rashly.  And they know not
the ground as we know it.  'Twill be a matter of time to cross the
gully and climb the bank and creep along through the trees on the
further side until they face us here.  There is--you know it well--a
space on the opposite cliff where the trees grow somewhat thin: a space
which the knaves must cross an they wish to gain the edge.  Might we
not ensconce ourselves on the hither border of that space, and fire
upon them as they come?  We are not able, 'tis true, a poor twenty, to
withstand the fervent assault of two hundred; but we can assuredly
delay them, and teach them somewhat to respect us, and give time withal
for our wall to be increased in height; meseems it is lower than is
proper.  What say you, lads; shall we do this?"

"But how get back to this our fort, sir?" asked one of Drake's men.
"We must fall back before them if they push on, and then methinks they
might drive us over the brink, so that we fall headlong to the bottom,
and break in pieces."

"Nay, Wetherall," replied Dennis.  "We would take two, or even three,
calivers apiece, whereby we twenty become sixty, and I warrant me we
could do so much damage among them that they would pause ere they
resolved to bring it to a push.  And while they paused, we should have
time to scramble down through the trees and shrubs, and up this side
again, and come to our wall, mayhap, before they won to the edge.
Assuredly we can do them more hurt yonder than if we wait until they
stand in serried mass face to face with us above.  Shall we do it,
lads, for the honour of England?"

"Ay, ay, sir," shouted the men, fired by his enthusiasm and confidence;
and Hugh Curder began to troll--

  "And hey for the honour of old England,
    Old England, Old England!"


The move was instantly begun.  Dennis bade four of the maroons weave
more branches into the wall.  The rest of the men, with two loaded
calivers apiece--three were found to be too cumbrous a load--followed
Dennis down the cliff, forded the stream on rocks just above the pool
where the pinnace and the _Maid Marian_ lay, and clambered up the
opposite cliff by a zigzag path, assisting themselves by the branches
and projecting roots of trees.  Arriving at the summit, they waited
only to light their matches, then hurried forward through the
undergrowth to the edge of the somewhat open space which the enemy must
cross.  Each man posted himself behind a convenient tree.  For two
hundred yards in their front there were only a few scattered trees and
bushes.  Dennis wished there were time to fell these and so deprive the
enemy wholly of cover; but even if they could have been cut down, there
was no means at hand of dragging them away, and they would give less
protection if left erect than if they lay lengthwise across the space.

About half an hour after they had thus taken up their positions, the
maroon who had previously been sent across the gully as a scout came
running back to announce that the enemy were approaching.  They were
marching with great caution, the soldiers blowing on their smouldering
matches to keep them alight.  Dennis ordered the maroon to post himself
behind a tree, and the little party waited in breathless silence for
the enemy to appear.

At last one or two men could be seen among the trees on the other side
of the clearing.  They halted, evidently waiting for the main body to
appear before they moved across.  Dennis took advantage of the interval
to whisper his orders to the men.  If the enemy did not come on in a
mass, and at the charge, only alternate men were to fire the first
volley, then, if they had time, to reload their pieces, still having
the second loaded caliver in reserve.

In a few minutes the gleam of the Spaniards' headpieces and
shoulder-plates was seen as they joined the advance scouts among the
trees.  Then, as it were out of the leafy wall, some twenty men marched
resolutely forward in closed ranks, clearly without any suspicion that
the woods beyond were occupied.  Dennis waited until they were half-way
across the open space, then he sounded the "Hoo! hoo!" which was the
maroons' signal in wood fighting.  The calivers flashed from the belt
of trees; several of the enemy fell; the rest, startled and confused by
this sudden and unexpected attack, rushed back instantly upon the main
body, while the men who had fired began in all haste to reload.

But they had no time to complete the priming of their weapons.  A shout
was heard from beyond the clearing.  Immediately afterwards a tall
Spaniard, whom his dress marked out as an officer, dashed forward at
the top of his speed, carrying a short heavy pistol of the kind known
to Englishmen as "daggs."  With a yell the whole body followed at his
heels.  For a moment it seemed to Dennis that nothing could stay the
rush; he and his little party must be overwhelmed.  But he called aloud
to his men to hold their fire until the Spaniards should come within
point-blank range.  One man, Nick Joland, in sheer nervousness, fired
wildly before the proper time; but the rest, being old mariners who had
borne a part in many a scrimmage before, had sufficient self-command to
obey his orders.

On came the Spaniards, and some of the waiting Englishmen knew them to
be trained soldiers, infantrymen reputed the finest in the world.  But
none of the seamen quailed.  They knew what was at stake.  When the
enemy were within forty paces Dennis gave the word.  Twenty calivers
sped forth their deadly missiles, and every shot took effect.  Even the
splendid courage and discipline of the Spanish soldiery was unequal to
the strain put upon it.  Twenty of them lay writhing or motionless upon
the ground; the mass behind recoiled, and fled to cover, some to the
few trees and shrubs that dotted the open space, others to the thick
wood beyond.

Among those who had been struck down was the gallant captain.  He had
just risen on one knee when one of his men sprang from the shattered
ranks to his assistance.  Reckless of consequences, the brave fellow
rushed to the middle of the clearing, fully exposed to the marksmen,
and, lifting the wounded officer, carried him bodily among the trees.
His courage drew a great cheer from the Englishmen, not one of whom
raised his weapon to shoot.

"My heart, 'tis a brave lad," roared Turnpenny; "and withal a mighty."

The advance had been checked; the enemy had disappeared; but the voice
of another officer was heard haranguing the men.  Soon bullets began to
spatter among the trees behind which the Englishmen lurked, and there
were signs that the Spaniards were spreading out with the object of
taking them in flank.  It was time to retreat if they were not to be
cut off.  The enemy's movement would take some time,--after their check
they would hesitate to make another direct attack across the clearing;
and Dennis hoped to be able to clamber down the cliff and regain the
ledge before the Spaniards discovered that their opponents had
disappeared.  The word was passed quietly along the line; the men
snatched up their weapons; and running fleetly to the edge, leapt,
rolled, swung themselves down with all possible haste.

They had crossed the stream and were half-way up the opposite side when
the movement was seen by one of a flanking party of the Spaniards.  A
loud cry proclaimed his discovery of their flight; he fired his
caliver, and Hugh Curder gave a yell; the bullet had struck his foot.
But by the time other Spaniards had come to the brink of the cliff,
and, kneeling down, fired across the gully, the whole party had reached
the ledge, and dropped down panting behind the wall, where for the
moment they were safe.




CHAPTER XXIII

Bombarded

Bullets pattered upon the wall and the cliff behind; but Dennis and his
men, lying low, took no hurt, and made no reply to the Spaniards' fire.
This presently ceased, and Dennis, peering with caution through one of
the embrasures in the wall, saw the summit of the opposite cliff lined
with the enemy, who were clearly examining the position with careful
interest, and discussing it with animation.  At length, firing one or
two shots as by way of farewell, they withdrew from the edge and
disappeared among the trees.

"God be praised for all his mercies," said Amos, rising to his feet.
"But I know not what is to be the end of this."

"Nor I," said Dennis.  "'Tis not to be believed they have left us
altogether, but rather that they have retired to consider of the next
move.  They can do us no hurt from the cliff yonder except they bring
great guns from their ships to bombard us.  Nor can they assault us
from below, for the ascent is steep, and however bold they may be, they
will not come up merely to be shot at.  We must e'en wait and be ready."

"Ay, and think on Jan Biddle and what his villainous knavery has
brought us to.  But for him we should by this be snug in Plimworth,
a-kissing of our wives and little ones--those that have them.  Ah!
sweet Margery Tutt!  What a power of mischief one base villain can do!"

The day passed in quietude, the men cleaning their weapons and still
further strengthening the wall.  The tide rose in the gully, gently
dandling the pinnace as she lay at anchor in the pool.  Many a longing
glance was cast at the little craft, many a sigh broke from the breasts
of the mariners as they saw in imagination the dear cliffs of England,
which even the most confident among them scarcely hoped ever to behold
again.

Darkness fell.  Nothing was heard save the rumble of the surf beyond
the entrance of the gully, and the lapping of the waves against the
base of the cliffs.  Looking seawards, in the starlight Dennis saw the
mouth of the little harbour like a deep blue cleft in the blackness.
He had just divided the company into watches, to keep guard over the
ledge while the others slept, when Juan the maroon caught his arm and
pointed to a small dark patch at the bottom of the cleft.  It seemed to
be moving towards them.  At the same time there was a series of flashes
from the cliff opposite; bullets flew among them, one hitting Ned
Whiddon in the arm.  Instantly all the men sank below the level of the
wall, and Dennis, crouching close against it, looked through one of the
embrasures at that dark object slowly approaching up the gully, looming
larger every moment.

The meaning of it had already flashed upon him.  A boat, perhaps the
same as had appeared earlier in the day, was coming in to cut out the
pinnace.  The outbreak of firing from the cliff was intended to mask
the movement and deter the defenders from interfering.

"You see their cunning," said Dennis to Turnpenny, who had crept to his
side.  "By day they would not dare come within the range of our
calivers; they know that by night we can but fire at random, and
endamage them little."

"My heart, but we must save the pinnace!" said Turnpenny.  "She is all
our hope and salvation."

"Not all, Amos," replied Dennis.  "You forget the canoe which the
maroons built for us; they will build another.  But I am not content to
lose the _Minion_; how could we face Master Drake and confess we had
lost her?  I would fain save her, but how?"

"Ah, if we had but torches to light the scene!" said Tom
Copstone--"like to those we had at Fort Aguila yonder."

"Thanks for that word!" cried Dennis.  "Quick, Amos, into the shed!  I
bethink me there are barrels of oil that we did not place aboard the
_Mirandola_.  Broach one, man; tear some of your garments into rags and
plentifully soak them in the oil.  These we will light and fling down
into the pool."

Skipping back from the wall, Turnpenny and Copstone went into the shed
and crept back in less than two minutes with armfuls of drenched rags.
These they kindled and threw hastily over into the pool below.  The
enemy opposite poured in a hotter fire, but the little company kept
close and none was hit.  The device was not a moment too soon.  By the
light of the blazing rags it could be seen that the Spaniards had
swarmed on board the pinnace, hauled up her anchor, and fastened her
head rope to their boat.  She was indeed already moving slowly towards
the sea.

"Fire, my lads!" cried Dennis.  "Let them not all escape."

Half a dozen of the men leapt forward, and, heedless of the enemy's
bullets, discharged their calivers at the men on the deck of the
pinnace.  Cries proclaimed that some at any rate had hit the mark; but
in an instant afterwards the _Minion's_ deck was clear, the Spaniards
having sprung overboard or gone below.  Still the vessel slowly
receded.  As she was between the towing-boat and the ledge, the rowers
were protected from the Englishmen's bullets, and they uttered a
derisive yell as foot by foot they drew the vessel nearer the sea.

"The falconet, Amos!" cried Dennis.  "'Tis time to use our ordnance."

"But we be too high, sir.  I cannot lower the muzzle so as to bear on
the pinnace."

"You will be able to do that as she draws nearer the shoulder of the
cliff.  Lay the gun in readiness."

"Zuggers, sir, but if I hit the poor little craft 'twill smash her."

"I care not.  If we cannot keep her whole, neither shall the Spaniards
have her whole.  Lay the gun, man."

"My heart, and so I will, and the knaves shall have a plumper,
od-rat-en!"

The entrance to the gully was dimly lit by the burning rags floating in
the wake of the pinnace.  Amos had shoved the gun through the
embrasure, and, with his eye along its upper surface, watched the
little vessel as she floated on towards the open sea.  The firing
opposite had now ceased; it was as though the Spaniards, sure of
success, disdained to waste more powder and shot.  Apparently they were
watching the departing pinnace with so much interest that they had not
observed the muzzle of the falconet projecting from the wall.

The vessel was now at the very entrance of the gully.  In another half
minute she would round the shoulder of the cliff and disappear.  But
before that half minute was past there was a flash from the ledge; a
round shot flew seawards; and next moment there were shrieks from the
Spaniards who, now that they were out of range of the defenders' small
arms, had again come on deck.  The shot had struck the vessel square
astern.  Her rudder was shattered; she swung round on the tide, and in
another instant ran aground on a shoal and stuck fast.

A mighty cheer rose from the ledge when the men saw the effect of
Turnpenny's shot.

"'Twas famous, Haymoss," cried Copstone.  "Man, 'twas a thumping twack!"

And Hugh Curder in his glee lifted up his voice:

  "Then next the blacksmith he came in,
  And said 'Twas mighty hot!'"


"Smother you!" cried Turnpenny.  "Think of the little poor craft
yonder; 'tis like striking a 'ooman, and goes to my heart."

"But 'ee'd do that in kindness, Haymoss," said Copstone.  "See, the
knaves cannot pull her off; she be firm on the rocks, and with the tide
falling they'll never move her.  They'll think twice before they try
that same device again."

An angry volley from the cliff opposite set them all scurrying again to
cover behind the wall.  It proved as Copstone had said.  After vainly
endeavouring for some time to haul the pinnace from the shoal, the
occupants of the boat cast off the rope and disappeared.  The flames of
the burning rags went out one by one; black darkness settled over the
gully; quietness reigned all around; and leaving three men to keep the
first watch, the rest drew their garments around them and sought sleep,
wondering what the coming day might have in store.

Dennis passed a miserable night.  He could not share the childlike
elation which Turnpenny's successful shot had produced in the minds of
the mariners.  He felt that this enemy was not to be baulked; every
little set-back would only strengthen the Spaniards' resolve to crush
their opponents; and by this time they could be in no doubt how small
was the company resisting them.  His head ached with thinking before he
fell asleep, and when he woke, before dawn, it was with throbbing
temples and anxious heart.

And when he got up and looked towards the sea, he felt his spirit die
within him; for there, just past the shoulder of the cliff and some
distance out to sea, lay one of the enemy's vessels, moored at a point
which he had fondly believed to be unapproachable by any craft of her
size.  She had been descried by the men of the last watch, but the
meaning of the move was not clear to them as it was instantly to him.
The ledge was just within range of her guns, for although the shoulder
of the cleft hid the pool from any vessel in the main channel, it was
just within sight from the spot to which the enemy's vessel had worked.

"Jaykle! the skipper must be rare and bold," cried Turnpenny.

"And a mariner of right good skill," said Dennis.

But their admiration was turned to grave alarm when, with a roar, the
whole of the vessel's broadside was suddenly fired, and the round shot
came hurtling up the gully.  To reply was impossible.  The small guns
on the ledge were too light to carry the distance.  And there was
nothing to be hoped for from bad marksmanship on the enemy's part.  The
first discharge had no effect except to displace masses of rock and
earth from the cliff below the ledge.

"They cannot raise their muzzles high enough to hit the ledge," cried
Turnpenny in delight.

But this fond hope was shattered at the next broadside.  One shot
struck the hut; another tore a great gap in the wall; a third chipped
off large pieces of rock; several men were wounded.

"Our wall is vain now," said Dennis.  "Another shot will tear it away,
and we shall have no defence against the calivers of the enemy when
they again appear on the cliff.  Ah! and there they come.  We must run
for the cave, Amos; 'tis our last refuge.  Lead the men thither; let
them carry our arms and munitions, and what water and stores they can.
I and Copstone and one or two more will strive to make reply to the
enemy while aught of our wall remains."

Bullets were already falling on the ledge.  Led by Turnpenny, most of
the men, loaded with things, scuttled along the face of the cliff into
the thicket that half concealed the mouth of the cave.  Dennis with
three companions fired back at the opposite cliff; but in a few minutes
another volley of round shot came crashing up the gully, and scarcely a
man on the ledge but was wounded by splinters of rock, though none was
directly hit by the shot.  It was hopeless to cling to the position
longer.

"Follow me, lads," cried Dennis; and, rushing down the ledge to where
it widened and was overgrown with bushes, he and his comrades joined
the others safely in the cave.




CHAPTER XXIV

The Leaguer of Skeleton Cave

"Save us all!" cried Turnpenny, "we be like rats in a trap."

"The knaves cannot get at us, for this present at least," said Copstone.

"True, not without being well whopped; but they can block up the
entrance, and keep us mewed up until we must either yield or starve, or
perish of thirst."

"Keep a good heart," said Dennis, cheerfully.  "We will not yield or
starve yet.  Since I set sail from England in the _Maid Marian_ yonder
many a marvellous thing has befallen me.  I met a countryman when I had
given up hope!  Why may not things we do not foresee happen again?"

"Ay, true," said one of Drake's men; "and perchance Master Francis
himself may come to our aid."

"That is but a poor chance," said Dennis.  "It were better we trust in
God and our own wit.  We are safe at present; let us see what shelter
our cave affords; I confess I have not hitherto fully explored it."

Lighting a torch, he walked inwards, with two or three of the men, and
found after a few yards that the floor sloped slightly downwards, and
that the cave widened out on both sides, so that, if the enemy
discovered it, and fired into the opening, the inmates could find
shelter out of the line of fire.  The air was close, but as it did not
become oppressive so soon as Dennis expected, he was tempted to believe
that there was a hole somewhere in the roof which served to ventilate
the cave.  But though he looked carefully along the whole vault, which
extended for some thirty yards into the cliff, he found no such
opening, and concluded that the comparative freshness of the air was
due merely to the spaciousness of the cave and the width of its mouth.

The day wore away in quiet.  Careful watch was kept at the opening, and
occasionally Spaniards were seen moving up and down the gully and on
the opposite cliff; but no assault was made, and it seemed as though
the enemy was content to wait until hunger and thirst had done their
work.  An inspection of the stores showed that there was only two days'
food; all the water they had was contained in three buckets; and this,
in that climate, and the state of excitement to which the men were
wound up, was but a pitiful supply if the investment was to be
protracted.  Especially was it unfortunate seeing that several men were
wounded, some seriously.  Their injuries were dressed as carefully as
possible with the limited appliances at hand; but in the course of the
day one poor fellow died, and was solemnly buried in a grave dug with
their weapons in the floor.

Among the occupants of the cave was Mirandola.  The monkey had taken
refuge in a tree while the fighting was in progress, and Dennis thought
that the poor animal would certainly flee to the woody interior of the
island, far away from the din and turmoil.  But at nightfall the monkey
stole into the cave, and attached himself to Dennis, whom he followed
about like a shadow.

The hours of darkness dragged slowly along.  Almost as soon as it was
light, a round shot came crashing into the opening, scattering stones
and earth in all directions.  The Spaniards' inaction during the
previous day was explained: they had evidently brought from the vessel
in the offing a gun, perhaps more than one, and mounted it on the
opposite cliff.  The effect of the shot, which luckily harmed no one,
was to send the men in all haste to the sides of the cave.  But the
crash and the smoke made Mirandola shriek with fright.  He ran deeper
into the cave, and when Dennis, with a torch, followed to soothe his
terror, he discovered that the poor beast had taken refuge on the top
of an irregular pillar of rock that stood out from the wall about three
quarters of the way from the entrance.  He tried to coax the monkey to
descend, but without avail.  The top of the pillar being beyond his
reach, he called Turnpenny, and, climbing on to the mariner's broad
shoulders, reached up to seize the monkey.  But Mirandola retreated and
disappeared.

"The beast is deaved, to be sure," said Turnpenny, "and lacks his
little wit.  Let him bide, sir."

"Nay, he has been our partner so long that I am not willing to lose
him, and he will surely be stifled if we do not bring him nearer the
opening.  Hoist me, Amos."

He swarmed to the top of the rock, the sailor handing up the torch
after him.  It took a few moments to become accustomed to the
blackness, and in the red flickering light he failed to see any sign of
the monkey.  But he perceived with surprise that the pillar did not
abut immediately on the wall, as he had supposed.  Behind it he saw
what appeared to be a deep black hole, which seemed deeper when he
inserted his torch.  Into this Mirandola, his nerves completely
unstrung by the shattering explosion, must have run for refuge.

Dennis crawled in, and holding the torch over his head, was still more
amazed to find that he had come to the entrance of a second cave,
apparently larger than the first.  The floor of it was many feet below
him: he hesitated to risk a dislocation of his ankle if he sprang down;
so he retreated, and called to Turnpenny, informing him of his
discovery.

"Sling up a rope," he said; "you and Copstone keep a firm hold upon it
on your side, while I let myself down on the other side and see what is
beyond."

Lowering himself through the aperture, he found the monkey sitting on
the floor.

"Come, Mirandola," he said, "you taught me the merits of some of the
fruits of this island; hast more to teach me, old friend?  Let us go on
together."

He found that the floor of this cave also inclined downwards, and he
went very cautiously, lest he should come unawares upon a chasm and
fall headlong to his doom.  The atmosphere was damp and close, but not
foul, and as he proceeded he saw by the flickering of the torch that
there was a slight current of air.  No wall blocked his way, but by and
by the cave narrowed and the roof came lower, and he had to stoop, and
at last to crawl, to avoid knocking his head.  He had still not reached
the end of what was now a tunnel, when the torch went out.  For a
moment he hesitated whether to go on in the darkness; then, deciding
that it was not worth while to run any risks when he could procure
another light within a few minutes, he hurried back, got another and a
larger torch, and asked Turnpenny to accompany him.

The two together came to the spot where the first torch had been left,
and went on.  The rough irregular fissure grew no narrower, but its
slope became steeper at every yard.

"God-a-mercy, it likes me not!" murmured Turnpenny, who was filled with
superstitious fears in face of the unknown.  "Meseems we be going down
into the very bowels of the earth, or mayhap lower.  Dost fear no
goblins?  Dost not think we may come upon the Old Smoker?"

"Never a whit, Amos.  Why, man, the floor here is wet.  Touch it with
your hand.  And as I live, here are seaweeds and shells!  And look;
surely that is a glint of light yonder that comes not from our torch.
Here is a very pool; duck your head, man; I gave mine a rare crack just
then, the roof comes so low.  Crawl after me.  I smell the sea, Amos;
and ah! look! here we are on the shore.  Have a care; we must not be
spied."

Crawling actually through the water, they found themselves on the shore
at a point not far north of the spot where Dennis had first opened his
eyes on the island.  The hole in the cliff was almost hidden by the
overhanging plants.  Mirandola had halted; to go through water was not
to his taste.  Cautiously raising themselves, Dennis and Turnpenny
parted the screening leaves and looked out to sea.  There, a little
distance out, was the vessel that had fired on them.  The tide was low;
she had had to shift her position further into the main channel.  In
the little bay which here indented the shore a boat lay on the sand,
two Spaniards leaning against its side, keeping guard over it, no
doubt, while their comrades were engaged in investing the cave.

"One thing is plain," whispered Dennis; "here at least is a way of
retreat should we no longer be able to remain in our cave.  And when
water fails, we can creep out by the hole in the night time, and fill
our buckets at one of the rills that trickle from the cliff."

"Ah! that is something, sir," said Turnpenny, "but I would fain knock
those knaves yonder on the head and take their boat.  We might then
make a shift to row away from this isle."

"A good wish, Amos, but hard to come by.  We could not do it in
daylight, and methinks the Spaniards would not do us the grace to leave
their boat here on the shore for us to make free with at night.  But
assuredly we can keep a better watch on them here than from the cave
above, where we cannot show a head but with great peril; let us
therefore return and send one of the maroons hither as a sentinel."

There was great excitement among the men when they were told of this
discovery.  Though it seemed impossible that the passage to the sea
could avail them much, the knowledge that it was open to them gave just
that dash of comfort which is all the world to men in extremity.  And
when, as the day wore on, the enemy's guns began to play regularly on
the mouth of the cave, and brought down in front of it great masses of
the cliff above, they did not get into a state of panic, but almost
gaily made air-holes through the loosely piled earth with their
weapons, chuckling at the thought that the besiegers were no doubt
flattering themselves with the supposition that the hapless garrison
was being gradually entombed.

But it seemed to Dennis that an attempt should be made to turn this
strange discovery to account.  Clearly it was possible to leave the
cave, but supposing they all made their way to the shore, what then?
They might take to the woods in the centre of the island, and for a
time, perhaps, elude the enemy; but it would only be a matter of days
before they must be hunted down.  They could not, a mere handful, risk
a stand-up fight against a force six or seven times their number.  And
it was in the highest degree unlikely that the enemy would leave any of
their boats on shore during the night.  Still, there was just a chance
that a boat might be so left, and Dennis arranged that Juan the maroon
should go before dark to the exit on the shore, to see what he could
discover of the Spaniards' arrangements, and then to steal up the cliff
and learn how they encamped during the night.

The night was still young when the maroon returned.  He had seen the
boat put off, conveying officers to the vessel.  Then, waiting until it
was dark, he had climbed the cliff, and found that the enemy had formed
a camp on the summit immediately above the ledge, at some little
distance from the brink.  No pickets were posted; the Spaniards had
evidently recognized the hopelessness of any attempt to escape either
up or down the gully.

Juan had then crept round to the northern cliff, and discovered that
the two guns which had played on the cave during the day were left in
charge of two men.  Dennis was somewhat surprised that the main camp of
the enemy had not been made there instead of on the southern cliff,
until he remembered that only on the latter were there springs of fresh
water.

"'Tis as I feared, you see," he said to Turnpenny.  "The boat returns
to the ship at night--just as the boat was wont to return to your
lumber-ship.  It was but a poor hope, and that is dashed."

"And so 'tis.  The only thing that we poor souls could do would be to
crawl out by the hole, and fetch a long compass to the cliff yonder
where the guns be, and blow them up for the knaves.  If there be but
two men guarding them, 't'ud be no hard feat."

Dennis did not reply.  He seemed to have fallen into a brown study.

"I'se warrant I could do it, with Tom Copstone and Juan, and maybe
another of the maroons.  'T'ud not save us, to be sure, but 't'ud at
least give the knaves a turn, od rabbit en!"

"Amos," said Dennis with apparent inconsequence, "if you were a Spanish
officer----"

"God forbid, sir!" interrupted the seaman, fervently.

"It is impossible, I own.  Still, if you were a Spanish officer aboard
that vessel yonder, and in the blackest hour of night you heard a great
uproar on this island, and saw the flashing of guns, what would you do?"

"I'fecks, I would think there was a rare randy afoot, and straightway
lower a boat and come with all speed ashore to lend a hand."

"And you, Copstone,--what would you do?"

"Come with Haymoss, to be sure, sir.  You and me, Haymoss----"

"The words of my dream again, sir!" cried Amos in excitement.  "There
be summat in your mind, sir; tell it out, and, souls all, lend an ear."

And then Dennis unfolded a scheme which Juan's report and Turnpenny's
suggestion had set working in his mind.  For some minutes the little
group around him hung breathlessly upon his quiet words; then Turnpenny
exclaimed--

"We'll do it, we will so, and be jowned if the knaves will not wish
themselves anywhere but on Maiden Isle.  Come, my hearts, the sky is
black and lowering: 'tis the very time o' night for our intent, and
with God's help we will prosper in our doings."

And then the rough seaman fell on his knees, and with clasped hands
recited the prayer for help in time of need, and every man of the
little company responded with a low fervent "Amen!"

Half an hour later, Turnpenny, with Copstone, Juan, and a second
maroon, bade farewell to his comrades and clambered down into the
second cave.  When they were on the farther side of the dividing rock,
their weapons, with four belts packed full of grape shot from the
stores of the _Maid Marian_, were handed down to them, and after a
final "God speed!" from Dennis they started on the way to the sea.

An hour passed--an hour during which the rest of the company sat in
hushed expectancy, scarcely speaking a word.  One of the maroons had
pushed his way through the heap of loose earth piled at the mouth of
the cave, and crawled stealthily to the ledge, where he crouched amid
the ruins of the sheds.  Presently, from the opposite cliff, came a
slight booming sound like the cry of a night beetle.  The maroon,
invisible in the black shade of the cliff, crept back to the cave.
Immediately afterwards the whole company, man by man, crossed into the
inner cave, the two men most seriously wounded being lifted up one side
of the pillar, and lowered gently down the other.  Dennis leading, with
Mirandola close behind, they made their way by torch-light down the
sloping floor, then, extinguishing the torch, crawled out at the narrow
aperture, and, after Dennis had taken a careful look round, stood up, a
silent band of twenty-one, on the sea-shore.  The two men whose wounds
forbade exertion were left in a sheltered spot below the bank; then the
rest followed Dennis up through the vegetation, in single file.  It was
so dark that no man could see the man before him, but each one grasped
the caliver of the man ahead, thus guiding themselves through the
jungle.

Up they went, quietly, almost as surely as if it were broad daylight,
for Dennis knew every foot of the way, which he had trodden many times
since that day long before when he had begun his exploration of the
island.  Winding in and out, he came at length by a long circuit to the
high ground approaching the southern bank of the gully.  And there he
halted.  Through the trees before him he saw the watch-fires, dying
low, of the enemy encamped on the clearing beyond.  All was silent.  If
any sentinels were awake, they were not conversing.  The camp was as
quiet as though it were an abode of the dead.

Suddenly the deep silence was broken by the boom of a beetle.  It died
away.  So natural a sound was it that the Spanish sentinels, if any
were on guard, would never have suspected that it came from the throat
of a maroon.  Even Dennis's company might have been deceived had they
not known that the sound had been made by one of themselves, the maroon
at their leader's side.

Scarcely had it died away when two sharp cracks rent the air from some
point beyond the camp.  Then came an instant change over the scene--a
change which Amos and Tom Copstone had fired to bring about.  A loud
cry rang out in the camp, followed by a din of many voices and the
clash of arms.  Some one cast fuel on one of the fires, and the flame,
leaping up, shone on a camp in commotion; men were hurrying this way
and that, calling to their fellows excitedly.  What was this that had
disturbed their slumbers?  Was some one signalling to them from the
vessel out at sea?  Could it be that El Draque had sailed up out of the
night?

Into the midst of this noise and confusion broke a shattering sound,
the roar of a piece of ordnance.  Then the din was redoubled, and with
the astonished cries of some were mingled the shrieks and groans of
wounded men.  Still Dennis and his little band stood motionless amid
the trees, but every man now held a lighted match.  Another deep
reverberating roar thundered forth, with more cries and yells in the
camp.  Amos and his comrades had disposed of the men guarding the guns,
and had turned these upon the enemy.

"Now!" cried Dennis.

Then a mighty shout broke from the throats of the little company, and
with the roar of lusty British seamen mingled the weird "Yo peho! yo
peho!" of the maroons.  A volley flashed from the muzzles of nineteen
calivers, and nineteen men dashed forward towards the camp, shouting
like a hundred.  On they rushed through the trees into the clearing.
"Yo peho! yo peho!"  And with yells of panic fear the Spaniards, like a
flock of sheep, ran and ran and ran, helter-skelter, flinging their
arms away, tumbling over one another, falling, rising again, pelting
headlong through the woodland towards the marsh.

Again the guns on the opposite cliff thundered, but the shots did not
now come plunging into the camp.  How were the Spaniards, scared out of
their wits, to know that Turnpenny and Copstone were now firing into
the gully, lest they should hit their comrades?  But in a few moments
there was no risk of this, for Dennis wheeled about and led his men at
a mad scamper down by the way they had come, never stopping until,
bathed in sweat, panting for breath, they stood on the sea-shore, at
the place from which they had started.

And now Dennis looked again towards the sea, and strained his ears to
catch a sound he expected.  Would his expectation be fulfilled?  Would
Fortune favour him?  Would the Spanish officers aboard the ship do as
Copstone and Turnpenny in their place would have done--lower boats in
all haste and come to the aid of their comrades in peril?  None knew
the anxiety that troubled Dennis in those minutes of waiting.  If the
Spaniards were poltroons, if they were scared by the sudden outbreak
and feared to venture shorewards in the dark, his bold scheme would
fail, and then what the end would be he hardly dared to think.  It was
with real agony of soul he listened, listened for the sweep of oars.

Hark!  On the silence of the sea comes a thud, a measured beat, growing
in loudness, drawing near.  As yet he can see nothing, but his comrades
hear the sound; their hearts leap at it; they can scarcely check a
shout of joy.  On comes the boat; they hear the splash of oars, and
voices, and by and by the grating of a keel.  They wait in panting
silence.  Men are wading through the water; arms clash; a loud voice
gives an order; and now a score of dark forms can be seen running up
the beach, making for the very path lately traversed by the nineteen.
The men, lurking beneath the bank, hold their breath; Dennis feels as
though his very heart-beats must be heard; but the Spaniards pass, and
disappear, and are now hasting up towards the camp.  The sound of their
footsteps dies away; Dennis can scarcely bear to wait, so eager is he
to pursue his scheme to the end.  At last he gives the word, and
eighteen men rush after him, noiselessly on the sand, towards the boat,
a hundred yards away.

The two Spaniards left on guard catch sight of the running men when
they are half way across the beach.  Why should they suspect that these
are not their comrades who lately parted from them?  What has happened?
They are nervous, unstrung.  "What is it?" they cry; but the words are
choked in their throats, for two men have sprung upon them, and next
moment they lie stunned on the sand.  Four men return and bring their
wounded comrades with what haste they may.  Then lusty arms shove the
boat from the shoal; nineteen men leap in after the two; the oars are
out, and the boat's head points towards the vessel lying at anchor.

But it pauses as it comes level with the shoulder of the cliff.  The
four bold fellows who have so manfully played their part beyond the
gully are not forgotten.  And but a few moments after the boat has
stopped, four figures come swimming out with mighty strokes, and are
hauled aboard, dripping wet, but exultant.  Again the oars strike the
water and the boat moves out to sea.  A dark hull looms up in front.
Dennis whispers an order; all the oars are shipped but two; and the
boat goes slowly, with no sign of haste.  A voice hails it from the
deck.  "All's well!" calls Juan.  The boat is now under the vessel's
quarter: a lamp is slung over the bulwark to guide the returning crew;
a rope is thrown out to steady her; and Turnpenny begins to clamber up
by the battens.  Before Dennis reaches the deck he hears a cry, then a
heavy thud, and as he springs aboard he sees Amos with a prostrate
Spaniard between his legs.  Up they go, all twenty-five; only a dozen
of the vessel's crew are left on board; and the long pent-up excitement
of maroons and British mariners bursts forth in a shout of triumph; the
ship is theirs.

"Heave up the anchor, my hearts!" cried Turnpenny.  "Loose the
mainsail, Tom; the wind serves."

"Stay, Amos," said Dennis, "we must not forget the pinnace.  We cannot
return to Master Drake without her."

"Nor shall not," replied the seaman; "but we'll first give the knavish
vessels yonder a taste of our lead, an ye will but give us leave."

"A right good notion, Amos, if we can win to them at this low tide."

"That we can, sir; trust me."

With her courses set, and Turnpenny at the helm, the vessel stood out
half a mile until all danger of striking a shoal was past; then she was
headed southward.  Meantime Dennis superintended the loading of all her
ordnance, five guns on each side.  Soon they saw the dark hulls of the
two Spanish vessels anchored off the south-west corner of the island.

"There's room enough betwixt 'em, sir, for us to pass and rake 'em with
a broadside.  Not a man aboard 'em will suppose this craft is manned by
any but their own comrades, nor will they know better till they hear
our popguns."

As they approached, a voice hailed them from the vessel on the port
side, asking the meaning of the uproar lately heard.

"A fight ashore, but it is now over," sang out Juan the maroon.

The _Minion_ came between the two vessels.  So confident was Turnpenny
in the unpreparedness of the Spaniards that he hove to, not a dozen
yards separating the ships on either side.  The guns were manned; the
matches, already lighted, were screened from observation; then, at the
word, the five guns on the starboard side belched forth their heavy
charges of round shot.  Almost before the roar had died away the
gunners rushed to the larboard.  Again there was a mighty thunder and
crash as the shots raked the hapless vessel.  Through the cloud of
smoke the adventurous bark was got under way.  In a few minutes she ran
clear; Turnpenny put the helm down, and she beat up against the wind
until she reached her former anchorage westward of the gully.

Then Dennis, with Turnpenny and a dozen men, got into the boat which
had followed astern at the end of a rope, and rowed for the entrance
between the cliffs.  There was no guard over the pinnace.  The
Spaniards who had been surprised in their camp had fled to the other
side of the island.  Even those who had lately landed, hearing the
thunder of the guns to the south, had rushed inland, believing that El
Draque, the terror of their coasts, had suddenly come upon them.
Unmolested, Dennis and some of his party landed on the rocks.
Turnpenny made a rapid inspection of the pinnace.

"Her stern works be sore battered and her rudder shivered to
splinters," he said, "but she will take no water, a' b'lieve.  With a
strong pull we will have her off, sir."

The rope by which the Spaniards had attempted to tow her was still
fixed.  Under the haulage of twelve sturdy mariners she was slowly
shifted; she floated; and in twenty minutes lay alongside the Spanish
vessel.

Then, the men giving a parting cheer that echoed and re-echoed from the
shore, the ship stood away under full sail with the pinnace riding
merrily astern.  And when morning broke the long coast-line of the
mainland was already in sight.




CHAPTER XXV

The Mule Trains

"No Bobby Pike this time," whispered Turnpenny to Dennis, as they lay
eating their supper amid the scrub a mile or more south of Nombre de
Dios.  "And with all my soul I hope the Frenchmen be sober men, for to
fail of our purpose now through any frowardness would break Master
Drake his noble heart and send me into a decline."

"Hush!" returned Dennis, in a voice equally low.  "List to the church
bells, Amos, and the clatter of the hammers.  Does it not mind you of
home--the church on the cliff, and the busy carpenters in the docks
below?  My soul yearns for home, Amos."

"Ay, and so do I.  But I would fain return home with full hands--money
enough to buy a little fishing craft, and a cottage by the sea.  'Tis
five year and more since I sailed in the _Jesus_ out of Plimworth
Sound, and there was Margery Tutt a-waving her little handkercher to
me, thinking, poor soul, to see me again within a twelvemonth.  And I
warrant the pretty maid counted the days and went to every wedden in
church, to larn the fearsome promises word by word, so that she might
not fail when we should come to stand afore holy pa'son.  'With all my
worldly goods I thee endow': so it runs for the man to say, and here I
be, five year after, with not so much worldly goods as I had then,
saving some few pearls; and I warrant some knavish land-lubber has come
along and snatched up my little Margery, and I'll find her a bowerly
'ooman that has clean forgot poor Haymoss Turnpenny.  Ah me!  I be sick
of adventures, be jowned if I bean't."

"Be of good cheer, Amos.  If Fortune stand our friend, we shall have
more gold and silver than we can bear away before this night be ended;
and then Master Drake will sail away home, and who knows?--Margery may
be looking for you even yet.  'Twas seven years that Jacob served for
Rachel."

"Ay, but always within arm's length.  I warrant he kept an eye on the
wench.  There was never a thousand leagues of sea betwixt him and the
maid.  Od-rat-en, if I find Margery have changed her name with any
lubberly chaw-bacon, dang me if I don't deal en a clout he'll remember,
good-now, I will."

Turnpenny relapsed into silence, brooding on his melancholy forebodings.

It was the night of March 31.  Some forty men lay in the scrub
overlooking Nombre de Dios, awaiting the clang of mule-bells that would
announce the approach of a treasure train from Venta Cruz.  Half of
them were French, for a week or two before, as Drake and his men were
sportively pitching stones at the land crabs on the beach, a ship came
down from the west, whose captain proved to be a French Huguenot named
Le Testu, with a company of some seventy men and boys.  They were
perishing for want of water.  Having obtained from Drake, ever generous
to adventurers like himself, the supplies they needed, they prepared to
join themselves to him, in the hope of obtaining some share of Spanish
gold.

Drake hesitated to admit the Frenchmen to a partnership, for he had but
thirty-one men left, and feared that the seventy would claim too large
a portion of the booty if his projected attack on the mule-train should
succeed.  But the matter was compromised by Captain Le Testu joining
Drake with twenty men.  These, with fifteen Englishmen and a few
maroons, sailed in two of Drake's pinnaces for the mouth of the
Francisco river, fifteen miles from Nombre de Dios.  The rest of the
company were left at a secret spot in charge of one Richard Doble.
When the river mouth was made, Drake sent a few maroons back with the
pinnaces, ordering them to remain in hiding with Doble and to return in
four days' time to take off the adventurers.

Dennis and Turnpenny were among those who accompanied Drake in the
_Minion_.  They had won great praise from him for their exploits in
Maiden Isle and their capture of the Spanish ship, whose stores of food
and ammunition were very welcome.  The damage to the pinnace was
speedily repaired, Drake saying with a laugh that had she been rendered
unseaworthy he would have pinioned Dennis between decks and kept him
there until they dropped anchor in Plymouth Sound.

The adventurers were encamped on rising ground above the town.  Taking
a lesson from the previous failure, the men spoke in the lowest of
whispers, even though they were a mile away from the track.  All
through the night they heard the clatter of hammers from the bay, where
the Spanish shipwrights, avoiding the heat of the day, were preparing
the ships of the treasure fleet for sea.  The ambuscaders were grimly
resolved that the cargoes should be less by the weight of a good many
tons of silver and gold.

The hours passed too slowly for the impatient adventurers.  But at
length, a little before dawn, they heard a faint tinkle of bells afar
in the woods, and soon the maroon scouts came in with the news that
three trains, numbering nearly two hundred mules in all, were
approaching from Venta Cruz.  Such good fortune was unlooked for; and
though the scouts reported that the trains were escorted by soldiers,
not a man gave a thought to the odds against them.  Instantly they all
seized their calivers and bows and arrows, and hastened to the
trackway, where, as before, they posted themselves in the long grass on
either side.

On came the mules, their bells jangling and clanging in musical
discord.  In the grass lurked the raiders, silent--though Turnpenny
gave Dennis a nudge and whispered, "'Tis All Fools' Day!"  Suddenly
there sounded a blast from Drake's whistle; the men started up, and,
sending a volley of bullets and arrows at the Spanish infantrymen that
guarded the convoy, made straight for the heads of the leading mules.
Nothing loath to rest a while, the mules behind lay down contentedly on
the ground.  But the soldiers, who had blown on their matches as they
marched, to keep them alight, rallied in a group and fired back at the
assailants.  A maroon was killed outright: Captain Le Testu fell
seriously wounded; but the rest, kneeling down and supporting their
weapons on the prostrate mules, briskly returned the fire; then,
springing up before the enemy could reload, charged upon them with
fierce cries and drove them helter-skelter towards the town.
Immediately afterwards two men came rushing up to Turnpenny.

"Be jowned if it bean't Billy Hawk and fat Baltizar!" he cried in
astonishment.  "Oh Billy, poor soul, what a scarecrow 'ee do look!  Get
out, you jelly!" he cried to Baltizar, speeding him with a kick.  "You
be fat as butter; all is well with 'ee; get 'ee to the town after your
masters, and thank God your oily carcass be not left to fatten the
land.--Billy, dear heart, what hath happed to thee?"

Hawk told his story while Turnpenny and the other seamen, selecting the
mules that bore the heaviest loads, with nimble fingers cast off their
packs, unstrapped them, and helped themselves to the precious
contents--bars and quoits of solid gold, and silver uncountable.  He
had followed Biddle and the other mutineers in the hope of persuading
them to return to their duty; but they had soon fallen upon him, robbed
him of his bag of pearls, and left him bound in the forest.  There he
had been found by some fugitives from the routed Spaniards, who carried
him to their vessel, and conveyed him to Nombre de Dios.  Believing him
to be one of Drake's men, they tortured him to make him confess where
his captain's secret haven was, which he stedfastly refused to do; and
since then he had been kept in slavery, drudging as a muleteer between
Nombre de Dios and Panama.

"God be praised we have found 'ee!" cried Turnpenny.  "You shall come
back with us, and I'll give 'ee a share of all my treasure."

The raiders did up in bundles and bestowed about their persons as much
as they could stagger under, and set to work to bury what they could
not carry in the burrows of landcrabs and under the great trunks of
fallen trees.  For two hours they toiled on; then, hearing the clatter
of hoofs from the direction of the town, they seized their booty and
made off to the woods.  Up came a troop of horse; but when they reached
the mules they halted, for they heard in the woods the "Yo peho!" of
the maroons, and shrank from engaging those terrible forest fighters.
Staggering under the weight of their treasure, the raiders tramped with
what haste they might through the jungle.  They had not gone far when
Captain Le Testu lay down groaning; weak from loss of blood, he could
go no farther.  Two of his men volunteered to stay with him, and help
him on after he had rested.  The others hurried on, and after
struggling through the forest for two days and nights, drenched by
terrible rainstorms, burnt black by the torrid heat, reached their
landing-place on the bank of the Francisco River.

It was four days since they had left it; the pinnaces should have been
there awaiting them; but not a sign of them met their hungry eyes.
Instead, seven Spanish pinnaces were observed rowing from the island,
where the maroons had been ordered to shelter with Richard Doble.  The
drenched and footsore raiders were aghast.  Had their enemies captured
the pinnaces, and slain their comrades?  Were they to be imprisoned in
this swampy jungle, with no means of sailing or rowing away to Fort
Diego?  Loud murmurs, cries of despair, curses at being deserted, broke
from the seamen.  They cried out that they were betrayed; that the
Spaniards would fall on them and overwhelm them; that they would never
see home again.  Drake expostulated with them; the maroons offered to
lead them the sixteen days' journey overland, and promised, if the
ships proved indeed to be taken, to give them shelter in their
villages.  But the men cried out the more; some threw down the treasure
they had dared so much to win; some began to cry out against their
leader himself.

Then Drake showed the stuff of which he was made.

"Silence, you knaves!" he cried.  "Am I any whit better off than you?
Is this a time to yield to craven fear?  Nay, but rather to pluck up
heart and play the man.  If the Spaniards have in truth taken our
pinnaces, which God forbid, yet they must have time to search them,
time to examine the mariners, and, if they compel them by torture to
confess where our ships are, time to execute their resolution after it
is determined.  Before all these times be taken, we may get to our
ships if ye will.  We may not hope to go by land, for that the journey
is too long and the ways too foul.  But we may surely go by water.
Look at the trees here rolling down upon the flood, thrown down by the
storms that beset us so sorely.  May we not build ourselves a raft, and
put ourselves to sea?  I will be one; who will be the others?"

"That will I," said Dennis, stepping forward.

"And I too, good-now," cried Turnpenny.

"Nay, Master Hazelrig, you I will leave to command these timid rascals
if ill befall me; but Amos I will take, and go fetch those laggard
pinnaces."

Then the maroons, taking hands and forming into a line, stepped into
the river and intercepted the trees as they came down on the torrent.
With their hatchets they lopped off the branches; they bound the trunks
together with leathern thongs taken from the mules, and with tendrils
of creepers from the jungle.  A stout sapling was reared as a mast, and
with his own hands Turnpenny rigged up a biscuit sack for a sail, and
fashioned a crutch in which another sapling might serve as a rudder.
The raft being now ready, Drake selected two of the Frenchmen who could
swim well to accompany him and Turnpenny.  The four men stepped on to
the frail craft, and as she was hauled off over the bar at the river
mouth, Drake cried out:

"Be of good cheer, my hearts.  If it please God I put my foot in safety
aboard my frigate, I shall, God willing, by one means or other get ye
all aboard, in despite of all the Spaniards in the Indies."

And the seamen, with new hope born within their breasts, sped their
gallant captain with a cheer.

"My heart, 'twas a fearsome voyage!" said Turnpenny, relating the
adventure to Dennis afterwards.  "We sat inches deep in water, holding
on for very life, and the sea came tumbling aboard, swingeing us to the
armpits at every surge of the waves.  We scudded along before the wind,
but though 'twas strong, it scarce tempered the great heat; and what
with the parching of the sun, and what with the beating of the salt
water, we had all of us our skins much fretted away.  We had sailed for
six hours, and were making our third league, when God gave us the sight
of two pinnaces bearing towards us.  'God be praised!' cried our
captain; 'there is now no cause to fear.'  But the sky was become dark,
and the men on the pinnaces as they laboured towards us, the wind
driving the spray into their eyes, did not perceive us; and the gale
being exceedingly fierce, they bore up to the lee of a point of land,
and vanished from our sight.  Whereupon our captain ran ashore to
windward of the headland, and being mightily enraged for that the
knaves had not obeyed his command to wait us at the river, he was
minded to play a trick on them and turn their hearts sick with very
fear.  So when we did land, we ran in great haste towards where the
pinnaces were at anchor, making such speed as if we had been chased by
the enemy.  My heart! their eyes were astare with fear when they espied
us.  They hauled us aboard their boats, crying out, this one and that,
'Where be our comrades?'  'How fares it with them?' and other such
questions, to all which our Captain in a cold voice did answer only
'Well!'  Whereupon they began to lament with tears, crying out that
verily their dear comrades were dead or in captivity.

"Our captain for a space looked sternly upon them in their misery.  But
then, being willing to rid all doubts and fill them with joy, he took
from out his shirt a quoit of gold, and bade them praise God, for their
comrades were safe and had of that treasure enough and for all.  Then
he commanded them to get their anchors up, for that he was resolved
that very night to come back to the river.  And we rowed hard through
the darkness and in the teeth of the gale, and here we be, with
blistered skins indeed, but sound men and hearty."

Dennis had collected the men on the shore, and built a fire to keep
their spirits up.  With great joy they heard their comrades hailing
them as the vessels came up out of the dark, and they begged Drake's
forgiveness for their mutinous murmurs.  As soon as day dawned they
embarked; the pinnaces ran before the wind, picked up Richard Doble in
his frigate, and before noon arrived safely at Port Diego.  The
treasure was carried on shore, and in the middle of the smooth open
space, amidst cries of wonderment from those who had not had a part in
the adventure, Drake weighed the gold and silver on the steward's
meat-scales, delivering to the Frenchmen the half agreed upon.  These
then sailed away westward, to get news of their ill-fated captain.

Drake was not easy in mind about Le Testu.  It was pitiful to think of
him wounded and left with only two of his men deep in the woods.  So
while his vessel, the _Pascha_, too foul to be easily fitted for the
voyage home, was being stripped to equip the Spanish frigate Dennis had
captured, he prepared to lead an expedition in search of the French
Captain.  But his men raised such an outcry at his leaving them that he
gave the command to Oxnam, contenting himself with accompanying them to
the Francisco River.

Oxnam had not gone far up stream when a haggard figure emerged
tottering from the reeds, and falling on his knees, burst into tears
and thanked God that help had come.  Not many minutes after Drake had
left him and his comrade with Captain Le Testu, some Spanish
arquebusiers came upon them.  The Captain bade the two men flee, and
they ran off in haste, carrying their treasure.  But the Spaniards gave
chase, and this man, fearing that, burdened as he was, he must be
overtaken, flung away his possessions one after another.  Among them
was a box of jewels, and this his comrade, cupidity getting the better
of his fear, stopped to pick up.  The delay was fatal.  He was caught
and carried away with the captain.  The other fugitive was not farther
pursued; he reached the river after wandering for several days, during
which he had seen a great host of near two thousand Spaniards and
negroes searching for the treasure that had been buried.

Hearing this, Oxnam was not willing to return until he had seen whether
anything was left.  The Spaniards had dug up the ground over nearly a
square mile; but Oxnam found in the crab-holes a small quantity of
gold, with silver weighing about five hundred pounds.  Loaded with
this, his men returned to their pinnace, and came merrily back to Port
Diego.

Now all thoughts turned longingly homewards.  The value of the treasure
taken from the Spaniards was near L50,000, and it was not to be
supposed that so great a loss would be accepted by them with
equanimity.  Before long ships of war would doubtless be fitted out to
punish this audacious sea-rover who had made himself a terror
throughout the Main, and Drake thought it but prudent to get away with
his booty before his little band was overwhelmed.  He still needed a
vessel to serve as victualler to the frigate in which he purposed to
sail for England.  With his usual daring he set off for the mouth of
the Grande river, running right under the guns of Cartagena.  In the
middle of the night he chased and boarded a frigate that endeavoured to
slip past him to the west, and, returning to his secret haven with his
prize, he unloaded her cargo of maize, hens, hogs, and wild honey, and
prepared for the voyage home.

All hands were set to break up the pinnaces, which had been brought in
sections from England and were now, after a year's sailing, past
further service.  Their timbers were burned on the beach; their
ironwork was given to the maroons.  The two Spanish frigates were
overhauled, their keels cleared of barnacles, their spars and rigging
put in good repair, their holds filled with a plentiful store of food.
Then, when all was ready, Drake invited Pedro, the maroon chief, and
three of his best men to choose some reward for their good and loyal
services.  Pedro took a great fancy to a splendid scimitar which had
been given to Drake by Captain Le Testu and had once belonged to the
King of France.  Drake would rather he had chosen something else, but
he handed over the weapon with a good grace, and accompanied it with a
present of silk and fine cloth for the maroons' wives.  Pedro was so
much delighted that he begged Drake to accept four wedges of gold in
return, which the Captain threw into the common stock, saying it was
only just that those who had shared with him the dangers and hardships
of the adventures should share also in the full profits.

Dennis did not part from Juan without giving him a token of his thanks
and a memento of their common adventures.  He had lost almost all that
he had saved from the _Maid Marian_; with the _Mirandola_ it had fallen
into the hands of the Spaniards; and the division of the spoils of the
mule-train would not be made until they reached Plymouth.  But he had
always kept the sword of Sir Martin Blunt, and this he gave to Juan,
who received it with great satisfaction.

On the 17th of July the company went aboard the two frigates; the
anchors were heaved, all sail was set, and the little craft stood out
to sea.  The flag of St. George flew at their maintops; silk streamers
and ensigns dipped down to the water; a parting salute was fired; the
trumpeters blew a blast; and the English mariners shouted a farewell
cheer to the maroons gathered on the beach.  Down in the hold lay Jan
Biddle, repenting in darkness, it is to be hoped, his treacherous
conduct.  He alone of the company had no treasure to rejoice in; Drake
had sternly decreed that he should go home empty-handed, a prisoner
throughout the long voyage.

High up in the rigging sat a monkey, blinking and chattering, wondering
perhaps into what further perils his adventurous master would lead him.

"There is our Maiden Isle," said Dennis to Turnpenny, as they sailed
merrily northward.  "My vice-royalty was but brief; and methinks 'tis
but a poor jewel in the crown of Queen Bess.  Yet will it be a precious
jewel in my memory, for there I found a true friend in thee, Amos, and
we two have been enabled by God's providence to do somewhat for our
countrymen in distress."

"Good-now, Master Hazelrig," said Drake, coming up to them; "art
wishing to return and set up a monarchy on yonder small isle?"

"Nay, sir, it is already bespoke for our gracious queen, though meseems
the sovereignty belongs rightly to Mirandola, who now sits aloft, with
a most forlorn and wistful look."

"Well, my lad, maybe you and I shall live to see Her Majesty's sway
extend over all these islands, and far beyond.  Meantime, what think
'ee is my dearest wish at this moment?"

"I know not, sir."

"Why," said Drake, with a smile, "'tis to bowl at the jack once more on
Plymouth Hoe."




Conclusion

Little more than three weeks later, on Sunday, August 9, 1573, about
noon, the congregation in St. Andrew's church at Plymouth was startled
into wakefulness by the booming of guns.  The vicar was in the midst of
his sermon, and the good people were torn between their desire not to
offend the worthy parson and their longing to see what was happening at
the harbour.  A few minutes passed; then a whisper began to run through
the church: "Master Drake is home again!"  One looked at another;
anxious eyes were cast at the high pews where the gentry sat; then,
careless what squire or parson might think, by ones and twos and threes
the people stole from the church, and, when once outside, set off
running with all their might to the harbour.  And before they got there
a merry peal of bells rang out behind them.  The ringers in the belfry,
knowing, we must suppose, that their vicar was an easy man, a patriot,
and a Devonian to boot, were handling the ropes most lustily.

The two little frigates had just dropped anchor, and the men were
putting off in boats.  On shore men shouted, women wept and waved
handkerchiefs, boys yelled and dodged among their elders; but nobody
minded hustling and knocks, for was not Master Drake home again?
Deafening cheers rent the air as he landed; hundreds thronged around
him to clasp his hand.

"Good-now, dear friends," he said with a laugh as he passed through:
"ye'll do me more hurt than the Spaniards ever did."

"Huzzay! huzzay!  Spaniards be jowned!  What have 'ee got in thikky
ships, Master Drake?"

"Where be Bobby Pike?" cried a buxom dame with half a dozen children
clinging to her skirts.

"Here I be, Mally," cried the seaman, catching her in his arms, "and
i'fecks, I'll be sober for ever more, my lass."

"On my soul and body there be Ned Whiddon, and Tom Copstone, and Hugh
Curder, and Billy Hawk!" cried several voices in the crowd.  "Huzzay!
huzzay! we never thought to see 'ee more."

"And Haymoss Turnpenny!  Od's my life, what a day for Margery Tutt!"

And when Dennis, with Mirandola on his shoulder, returning glance for
glance with interest, got clear of the press, he saw Amos marching
along with a girl on each arm, his ruddy face beaming like the rising
sun.

"Why, Amos," said Dennis, "are there two Margerys?"

"My heart, I know a score!" cried Amos.  "But this be Margery Tutt,
sir, thikky wench on my left.  Loose my arm, lass, and drop a curtsey
to Master Hazelrig, for 'ithout him I'd never have been here this day.
She've waited for me, sir, bided single for my sake, and there's no
landlubber to whop after all.  T'other wench be Tom Copstone's Joan;
his mother's most terrible jealous, and she've got a hold of Tom now;
so 'You and me, Haymoss!' he sings out, and I've got his Joan under
convoy till the old 'ooman 's done a-kissing of him.  Margery, lass, if
'ee be willing, I'll go up along and see pa'son this very day and ax en
to call us next Sunday, for I've gold and silver and pearls, lass, and
won't they become your little plum neck!  Master Hazelrig, I do pity
'ee, I do so.  Bean't there a lass to welcome 'ee?  Good-now, bear up,
for 'ee be but a stripling yet."

And then he was borne away by the crowd, and Dennis saw him no more
that day.


Dennis found himself, when the treasure was divided, the possessor of
L2,000 in money in addition to the pearls he had got at Fort Aguila.
He devoted a goodly sum to the erection of a monument in his parish
church to the memory of Sir Martin Blunt and the other adventurers who
had sailed in the _Maid Marian_ eighteen months before.  A smaller
amount sufficed for a stone over the grave of Mirandola, who died in
the following winter.  The greater part of the money Dennis gave into
the hands of John Holles, his steward, who received it with all due
gravity, expressing the hope that his young master had had his fill of
adventuring and would now remain at home.

For a time Dennis was content to live in his rambling old house at
Shaston.  But four years later, learning that Drake was fitting out
five ships for a voyage round the world, he asked to be allowed to join
the expedition at his own charge.  His offer was accepted, and he
shared in the joys and sorrows, the failures and successes, of that
three years' voyage.  With closer intercourse he admired the great
Captain more and more; and Drake on his part came to regard him with
peculiar affection.  During the five years spent on shore after his
return, Sir Francis, as he now was, paid many visits to the house at
Shaston, and often played bowls with Dennis on the lawn behind.

In 1585, when Drake went out to the West Indies with a direct
commission from the Queen, Dennis was of his company.  He was one of
the first to enter the town of St. Domingo when it was assaulted; and
in the subsequent attack on Cartagena he was seriously wounded.  To his
great disappointment, he had not fully recovered in time to take part
in the famous expedition to Cadiz, when Drake "singed the King of
Spain's beard."  But next year, when all England was stirred at the
news that the long-expected Armada was at last approaching, Dennis
joined Drake on the _Revenge_, and had his part in the work of fighting
in the Channel and the North Sea.

At the conclusion of this year Dennis, now in his thirty-fourth year,
married the daughter of a neighbouring squire.  Her name happened to be
Margery.  Soon after the marriage Dennis took her to Plymouth on a
visit to his old comrade Amos Turnpenny, who was now blest with a
family of five boys and five girls.

"Do 'ee mind, sir," said Amos with a twinkling eye--"do 'ee mind the
day when we landed, and you axed me whether there were two Margerys?
Seems as if there be, sir; ay, and more; your madam be one, and my
'ooman be two, and my darter yonder be three, and Tom Copstone's darter
be four, and I shouldn't be mazed if there was five some day.  'A good
name,' says the Book, 'is rayther to be chosen than great riches.'
Margery be a good name, to be sure--a better name than Mirandola, poor
fond beast!  Next to Margery comes _Anne Gallant_, and that be my
second darter yonder."

Dennis Hazelrig became a man of weight in his county.  His wife and
little daughter--the fifth Margery--dissuaded him from joining Drake
and Hawkins in their fatal expedition to the Main in 1594, and he found
an outlet for his energies in organizing the yeomanry of Devon.

When James the First came to the throne Dennis received the honour of
knighthood.  None of his old friends was more delighted than Amos
Turnpenny, who was by this time nearly eighty, and a hale old
grandfather.

"Ay, I says to Tom Copstone when I heard the news, 'Tom,' says I,
'we've a king again now, my lad, though by all I hear tell he bean't so
proper a man as King Hal.  But he do have his good points too.  What be
fust thing 'ee done, think 'ee?'  'Be jowned if I know,' says Tom.  (He
do have common ways o' speech, poor soul!)  'Why, 'fecks,' says I, 'he
bin and made Master Hazelrig a noble knight, and we must call en Sir
Dennis to's face for ever more.'  'Well,' says Tom, 'we won't mind
that,--night or day,' says he--'you and me, Haymoss?'  And be jowned if
they were not the very words of my dream!"











End of Project Gutenberg's With Drake on the Spanish Main, by Herbert Strang

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WITH DRAKE ON THE SPANISH MAIN ***

***** This file should be named 38795.txt or 38795.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/7/9/38795/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
