The Project Gutenberg Etext of Zibeline, by Phillipe de Massa, v3
#20 in our series The French Immortals Crowned by the French Academy
#3 in our series by Phillipe de Massa

Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the laws for your country before redistributing these files!!!!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.

Please do not remove this.

This should be the first thing seen when anyone opens the book.
Do not change or edit it without written permission.  The words
are carefully chosen to provide users with the information they
need about what they can legally do with the texts.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These Etexts Are Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below, including for donations.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541



Title: Zibeline, v3

Author: Phillipe de Massa

Release Date: April, 2003  [Etext #3933]
[Yes, we are about one year ahead of schedule]
[The actual date this file first posted = 09/02/01]

Edition: 10

Language: English

The Project Gutenberg Etext of Zibeline, v3, by Phillipe de Massa
******This file should be named 3933.txt or 3933.zip******

This etext was produced by David Widger  <widger@cecomet.net>

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our books one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to send us error messages even years after
the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our sites at:
http://gutenberg.net
http://promo.net/pg


Those of you who want to download any Etext before announcement
can surf to them as follows, and just download by date; this is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03
or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release fifty new Etext
files per month, or 500 more Etexts in 2000 for a total of 3000+
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
should reach over 300 billion Etexts given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 4,000 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of July 12, 2001 contributions are only being solicited from people in:
Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho,
Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota,
Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, North
Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia,
Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in about 45 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met,
additions to this list will be made and fund raising
will begin in the additional states.  Please feel
free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork
to legally request donations in all 50 states.  If
your state is not listed and you would like to know
if we have added it since the list you have, just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in
states where we are not yet registered, we know
of no prohibition against accepting donations
from donors in these states who approach us with
an offer to donate.


International donations are accepted,
but we don't know ANYTHING about how
to make them tax-deductible, or
even if they CAN be made deductible,
and don't have the staff to handle it
even if there are ways.

All donations should be made to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541,
and has been approved as a 501(c)(3) organization by the US Internal
Revenue Service (IRS).  Donations are tax-deductible to the maximum
extent permitted by law.  As the requirements for other states are met,
additions to this list will be made and fund raising will begin in the
additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


***


Example command-line FTP session:

ftp ftp.ibiblio.org
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99 or etext00 through etext02, etc.
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etexts,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this etext,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the etext,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.07/27/01*END*





This etext was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>





[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





ZIBELINE

By PHILIPPE DE MASSA



BOOK 3.


CHAPTER XX

ZIBELINE RECEIVES

The Duchesse de Montgeron had no children, and her most tender affections
were concentrated upon her husband and her brother.  The scruples which
caused the latter to forswear matrimony grieved her deeply, for, knowing
the inflexibility of his character, she was sure that no one in the world
could make him alter his decision.

Thus, on one side the title of the Duc de Montgeron was destined to pass
to a collateral branch of the family; and on the other, the title of
Marquis de Prerolles would become extinct with the General.

But, although she now considered it impossible to realize the project
which she had momentarily cherished, she continued to show the same
kindness to Mademoiselle de Vermont.  She would have regarded any other
course as unworthy of her, since she had made the first advances;
moreover, the young girl's nature was so engaging that no one who
approached her could resist her charm.

Very reserved or absolutely frank, according to the degree of confidence
with which she was treated, Valentine had sufficient intuition to avoid a
lack of tact.

She was, in feminine guise, like 'L'Ingenu' of Voltaire, struck, as was
Huron, with all that was illogical in our social code; but she did not
make, after his fashion, a too literal application of its rules, and knew
where to draw the line, if she found herself on the point of making some
hazardous remark, declaring frankly: "I was about to say something
foolish!"  which lent originality to her playful conversation.

After receiving from Valentine's hands the contract signed in presence of
the notary, for the benefit of the Orphan Asylum, the president of the
society did not fail to give a dinner in honor of the new patroness.

As she was a foreigner she was placed in the seat of honor at the table,
to the great displeasure of Madame Desvanneaux, who was invited to take
the second place, in spite of her title of vice-president.

"It is because of her millions that she was placed before me," she said
in an undertone to her husband, as soon as the guests had returned to the
drawing-room.  And, giving orders that her carriage should be summoned
immediately, she left the house without speaking to any one, and with the
air of a peeress of England outraged in her rights of precedence!

This was, for the hostile pair, a new cause of grievance against
Zibeline.  When she, in her turn, gave at her home a similar dinner,
a fortnight later, she received from them, in reply to her invitation,
which was couched in the most courteous terms, a simple visiting card,
with the following refusal: "The Comte and the Comtesse Desvanneaux, not
being in the habit of accepting invitations during Lent, feel constrained
to decline that of Mademoiselle de Vermont."

The dinner was only the more gay and cordial.

Valentine's household was conducted on a footing more elegant than
sumptuous.

The livery was simple, but the appearance of her people was
irreproachable.  The butler and the house servants wore the ordinary
dress-coat and trousers; the powdered footmen wore short brown coats,
ornamented, after the English fashion, with metal buttons and a false
waistcoat; the breeches were of black velveteen, held above the knee by a
band of gold braid, with embroidered ends, which fell over black silk
stockings.  At the end of the ante-chamber where this numerous personnel
was grouped, opened a long gallery, ornamented with old tapestries
representing mythological subjects in lively and well-preserved coloring.
This room, which was intended to serve as a ballroom at need, was next to
two large drawing-rooms.  The walls of one were covered with a rich
material, on which hung costly paintings; the furniture and the ceiling
of the other were of oak, finely carved, relieved with touches of gold in
light and artistic design.

Everywhere was revealed an evident desire to avoid an effect of heaviness
and ostentation, and this was especially noticeable in the dining-room,
where the pure tone of the panels and the moulding doubled the intensity
of the light thrown upon them.  Upon the table the illumination of the
apartment was aided by two large candelabra of beautifully chiselled
silver, filled with candles, the light of which filtered through a forest
of diaphanous little white shades.

The square table was a veritable parterre of flowers, and was laid for
twelve guests, three on each side.

The young mistress of the house was seated on one side, between the Duc
de Montgeron and the Marquis de Prerolles.  Facing her sat the Duchesse
de Montgeron, between General Lenaieff and the Chevalier de Sainte-Foy.
--Laterally, on one hand appeared Madame de Lisieux, between M. de
Nointel and the painter Edmond Delorme; on the other, Madame de Nointel,
between M. de Lisieux and the Baron de Samoreau.

Never, during the six weeks that Valentine had had friendly relations
with the Duchess, had she appeared so self-possessed, or among
surroundings so well fitted to display her attractions of mind and of
person.  She was a little on the defensive on finding herself in this new
and unexpected society, but she felt, this evening, that she was in the
midst of a sympathetic and admiring circle, and did the honors of her own
house with perfect ease, finding agreeable words and showing a delicate
forethought for each guest, and above all displaying toward her
protectress a charming deference, by which the Duchess felt herself
particularly touched.

"What a pity!"  she said to herself, glancing alternately at Zibeline and
at her brother, between whom a tone of frank comradeship had been
established, free from any coquetry on her side or from gallantry on his.

The more clearly Henri divined the thoughts of his sister, the more he
affected to remain insensible to the natural seductions of his neighbor,
to whom Lenaieff, on the contrary, addressed continually, in his soft and
caressing voice, compliments upon compliments and madrigals upon
madrigals!

"Take care, my dear Constantin!"  said Henri to him, bluntly.  "You will
make Mademoiselle de Vermont quite impossible.  If you go on thus, she
will take herself seriously as a divinity!"

"Fortunately," rejoined Zibeline, "you are there, General, to remind me
that I am only a mortal, as Philippe's freedman reminded his master every
morning."

"You can not complain!  I serve you as a confederate, to allow you to
display your erudition," retorted the General, continuing his persiflage.

But he, too, was only a man, wavering and changeable, to use Montaigne's
expression, for his eyes, contradicting the brusqueness of his speech,
rested long, and not without envy, on this beautiful and tempting fruit
which his fate forbade him to gather.  The more he admired her freshness,
and the more he inhaled her sweetness, the more the image of Eugenie
Gontier was gradually effaced from his memory, like one of those tableaux
on the stage, which gauze curtains, descending from the flies, seem to
absorb without removing, gradually obliterating the pictures as they
fall, one after another.




CHAPTER XXI

A DASHING AMAZON

On leaving the table, the fair "Amphitryonne" proposed that the gentlemen
should use her private office as a smoking-room, and the ladies followed
them thither, pretending that the odor of tobacco would not annoy them in
the least, but in reality to inspect this new room.

Edmond Delorme had finished his work that very morning, and the enormous
canvas, with its life-size subject, had already been hung, lighted from
above and below by electric bulbs, the battery for which was cleverly
hidden behind a piece of furniture.

The portrait, bearing a striking resemblance to the original, was indeed
that of "the most dashing of all the Amazons on the Bois," to quote the
words of the artist, who was a better painter of portraits than of
animals, but who, in this case, could not separate the rider from her
steed.

Seaman, a Hungarian bay, by Xenophon and Lena Rivers, was drawn in
profile, very erect on his slender, nervous legs.  He appeared, on the
side nearest the observer, to be pawing the ground impatiently with his
hoof, a movement which seemed to be facilitated by his rider, who, drawn
in a three-quarters view and extending her hand, allowed the reins to
fall over the shoulders of her pure-blooded mount.

"What do you think of it?"  Zibeline inquired of General de Prerolles.

"I think you have the air of the commander of a division of cavalry,
awaiting the moment to sound the charge."

"I shall guard her well," said Zibeline, "for she would be sure to be put
to rout by your bayonets."

"Not by mine!"  gallantly exclaimed Lenaieff.  "I should immediately
lower my arms before her!"

"You!--perhaps!  But between General de Prerolles and myself the
declaration of war is without quarter.  Is it not, General?"  said
Valentine, laughing.

"It is the only declaration that fate permits me to make to you,
Mademoiselle," Henri replied, rather dryly, laying emphasis on the double
sense of his words.

This rejoinder, which nothing in the playful attack had justified,
irritated the Duchess, but Valentine appeared to pay no attention to it,
and at ten o'clock, when a gypsy band began to play in the long gallery,
she arose.

"Although we are a very small party," she said, "would you not like to
indulge in a waltz, Mesdames?  The gentlemen can not complain of being
crowded here," she added, with a smile.

M. de Lisieux and M. de Nointel, as well as Edmond Delorme, hastened to
throw away their cigarettes, and all made their way to the long gallery.
The Baron de Samoreau and the Chevalier de Sainte-Foy remained alone
together.

The Duchess took the occasion to speak quietly to her brother.

"I assure you that you are too hard with her," she said.  "There is no
need to excuse yourself for not marrying.  No one dreams of such a thing
--she no more than any one else.  But she seems to have a sentiment of
friendship toward you, and I am sure that your harshness wounds her."

A more experienced woman than Madame de Montgeron, who had known only a
peaceful and legitimate love, would have quickly divined that beneath her
brother's brusque manner lurked a budding but hopeless passion, whence
sprang his intermittent revolt against the object that had inspired it.

This revolt was not only against Zibeline's fortune; it included her all-
pervading charm, which penetrated his soul.  He was vexed at his sister
for having brought them together; he was angry with himself that he had
allowed his mind to be turned so quickly from his former prejudices; and,
however indifferent he forced himself to appear, he was irritated against
Lenaieff because of the attentions which that gentleman showered upon
Zibeline, upon whom he revenged himself by assuming the aggressive
attitude for which the Duchess had reproached him.

In a still worse humor after the sisterly remonstrance to which he had
just been compelled to listen, he seated himself near the entrance of the
gallery, where the gypsy band was playing one of their alluring waltzes,
of a cadence so different from the regular and monotonous measure of
French dance music.

The three couples who were to compose this impromptu ball, yielded
quickly to the spell of this irresistible accompaniment.

"Suppose Monsieur Desvanneaux should hear that we danced on the eve of
Palm Sunday?"  laughingly pro-tested Madame de Lisieux.

"He would report it at Rome," said Madame de Nointel.

And, without further regard to the compromising of their souls, each of
the two young women took for a partner the husband of the other.

Mademoiselle de Vermont had granted the eager request of Lenaieff that
she would waltz with him, an occupation in which the Russian officer
acquitted himself with the same respectful correctness that had formerly
obtained for him the high favor of some grand duchess at the balls in the
palace of Gatchina.

He was older and stouter than his brother-in-arms, Henri de Prerolles,
and a wound he had received at Plevna slightly impeded his movements, so
that he was unable to display the same activity in the dance as the other
waltzers, and contented himself with moving a 'trois temps', in an
evolution less in harmony with the brilliancy of the music.

Henri, on the contrary, who had been a familiar friend of the Austrian
ambassador at the time when the Princess de Metternich maintained a sort
of open ballroom for her intimates, had learned, in a good school, all
the boldness and elegance of the Viennese style of dancing.

But he sat immovable, as did also Edmond Delorme, because of the lack of
partners; and, not wishing to take the second place after Lenaieff, his
rival, he would not for the world abandon his role of spectator, unless
some one forced him to it.

"Suppose we have a cotillon figure, in order to change partners?"  said
Valentine suddenly, during a pause, after she had thanked her partner.

And, to set the example, she took, from a basket of flowers, a rosebud,
which she offered to Henri.

"Will you take a turn with me?"  she said, with the air of the mistress
of the house, who shows equal courtesy to all her guests.

"A deux temps?" he asked, fastening the rosebud in his buttonhole.

"Yes, I prefer that," she replied.

He passed his arm around her waist, and they swept out upon the polished
floor, he erect and gallant, she light and supple as a gazelle, her chin
almost resting upon her left hand, which lay upon her partner's shoulder,
her other hand clasped in his.

At times her long train swirled in a misty spiral around her, when they
whirled about in some corner; then it spread out behind her like a great
fan when they swept in a wide curve from one end of the gallery to the
other.

During the feverish flight which drew these two together, their breasts
touched, the bosom of the enchantress leaned against the broad chest of
the vigorous soldier, her soft hair caressed his cheek, he inhaled a
subtle Perfume, and a sudden intoxication overflowed his heart, which he
had tried to make as stern and immobile as his face.

"How well you waltz!"  murmured Zibeline, in his ear.

"I am taking my revenge for my defeat on the ice," he replied, clasping
her a little closer, in order to facilitate their movements.

"The prisoners you take must find it very difficult to escape from your
hands," she said, with a touch of malice.

"Does that mean that already you wish to reclaim your liberty?"

"Not yet--unless you are fatigued."

"Fatigued!  I should like to go thus to the end of the world!"

"And I, too," said Zibeline, simply.

By common consent the other waltzers had stopped, as much for the purpose
of observing these two as for giving them more space, while the wearied
musicians scraped away as if it were a contest who should move the
faster, themselves or the audacious couple.

"What a pity!"  again said the Duchess to her husband, whose sole
response was a shrug of his shoulders as he glanced at his brother-in-
law.

At the end of his strength, and with a streaming brow, the gypsy leader
lowered his bow, and the music ceased.

Henri de Prerolles, resuming his sang-froid, drew the hand of
Mademoiselle de Vermont through his arm, and escorted her to her place
among the other ladies.

"Bravo, General!"  said Madame de Lisieux.  "You have won your
decoration, I see," she added, indicating the rosebud which adorned his
buttonhole.

"What shall we call this new order, ladies?"  asked Madame de Nointel of
the circle.

"The order of the Zibeline," Valentine replied, with a frank burst of
laughter.

"What?--do you know--" stammered the author of the nickname, blushing up
to her ears.

"Do not disturb yourself, Madame!  The zibeline is a little animal which
is becoming more and more rare.  They never have been found at all in my
country, which I regret," said Mademoiselle de Vermont graciously.

The hour was late, and the Duchess arose to depart.  The Chevalier de
Sainte-Foy, exercising his function as a sort of chamberlain, went to
summon the domestics.  Meanwhile Valentine spoke confidentially to Henri.

"General," said she, "I wish to ask a favor of you."

"I am at your orders, Mademoiselle."

"I am delighted with the success of this little dinner," Valentine
continued, "and I wish to give another after Easter.  My great desire is
to have Mademoiselle Gontier--with whom I should like to become better
acquainted--recite poetry to us after dinner.  Would you have the
kindness to tell her of my desire?"

"I!" exclaimed the General, amazed at such a request.

"Yes, certainly.  If you ask her, she will come all the more willingly."

"You forget that I am not in the diplomatic service, Mademoiselle."

"My request annoys you?  Well, we will say no more about it," said
Zibeline.  "I will charge Monsieur de Samoreau with the negotiations."

They rejoined the Duchess, Zibeline accompanying her to the vestibule,
always evincing toward her the same pretty air of deference.

The drive home was silent.  The Duke and the Duchess had agreed not to
pronounce the name of Mademoiselle de Vermont before Henri, who racked
his brain without being able to guess what strange motive prompted the
young girl to wish to enter into closer relations with the actress.

A letter from Eugenie was awaiting him.  He read:

     "Two weeks have elapsed since you have been to see me.  I do not ask
     whether you love me still, but I do ask you, in case you love
     another, to tell me so frankly.

                                        "ARIADNE."

"So I am summoned to the confessional, and am expected to accuse myself
of that which I dare not avow even to my own heart!  Never!"  said Henri,
crushing the note in his hand.  "Besides, unless I deceive myself,
Ariadne has not been slow in seeking a consoling divinity!  Samoreau is
at hand, it appears.  He played the part of Plutus before; now he will
assume that of Bacchus," thought the recreant lover, in order to smother
his feeling of remorse.




CHAPTER XXII

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING

The life of General de Prerolles was uniformly regulated.  He arose at
dawn, and worked until the arrival of his courier; then he mounted his
horse, attired in morning military costume.

After his ride, he visited the quartermaster-general of his division,
received the report of his chief of staff, and gave necessary orders.
It was at this place, and never at the General's own dwelling, that the
captains or subaltern officers presented themselves when they had
occasion to speak to him.

At midday he returned to breakfast at the Hotel de Montgeron where,
morning and evening, his plate was laid; and soon after this meal he
retired to his own quarters to work with his orderly, whose duty it was
to report to him regarding the numerous guns and pieces of heavy ordnance
which make the object of much going and coming in military life.

After signing the usual number of documents, the General would mount
another of his horses, and at this hour would appear in civilian attire
for an afternoon canter.  After this second ride he would pass an hour
at his club, but without ever touching a card, no matter what game was
in progress.

He dined at different places, but oftenest with his sister, where by this
time a studied silence was preserved on the subject of Zibeline.  This,
however, did not prevent him from thinking of her more and more.

Mademoiselle de Vermont had not been seen again in the Bois de Boulogne
since the night of her dinner, although Henri had sought in vain to meet
her in the mornings in the bridle-path, and afternoons in the Avenue des
Acacias.

He decided that probably she did not wish to ride during Holy Week; but
when several days had passed after Easter, and still she was not seen
amusing herself in her usual fashion, he said to himself that perhaps it
would be the proper thing to make what is called "a dinner-call."

There are some women whose fascination is so overwhelming as to cause the
sanest of lovers to commit themselves, whence comes the slightly vulgar
expression, "He has lost his bearings."  Henri began to feel that he was
in this state when he presented himself at Zibeline's home.  A domestic
informed him that Mademoiselle had been absent a week, but was expected
home that evening.  He left his card, regretting that he had not waited
twenty-four hours more.

It was now the middle of April, the time when the military governor of
Paris is accustomed to pass in review the troops stationed on the
territory under his command, and this review was to take place the next
morning.

The order for the mobilizing of his own division having been received and
transmitted, Henri's evening was his own, and he resolved to pass it with
Lenaieff, feeling certain that his colleague at least would speak to him
of Zibeline.

The aide-de-camp general lived at the Hotel Continental, much frequented
by Russians of distinction.  Henri found his friend just dressing for
dinner, and well disposed to accept his proposition.

As they descended the stairs, they passed an imposing elderly man, with
white moustache and imperial, still very erect in his long redingote with
military buttons--a perfect type of the German officer who gets himself
up to look like the late Emperor William I.  This officer and the French
general stopped on the stairs, each eyeing the other without deciding
whether he ought to salute or not, as often happens with people who think
they recognize some one, but without being able to recall where or in
what circumstances they have met before.

It was Henri whose memory was first revived.

"Captain, you are my prisoner!" he said, gayly, seizing the stranger by
the collar.

"What!  The Commandant de Prerolles!"  cried the elderly man, in a
reproachful tone, from which fifteen years had not removed the
bitterness.

"I know who he is!"  said Lenaieff.  "Monsieur is your former jailer of
the frontier fortress!"

The officer of the landwehr attempted to withdraw from the hand that held
him.

"Oh, I don't intend to let you escape!  You are coming to dine with us,
and we will sign a treaty of peace over the dessert," said Henri,
clasping the officer's hand affectionately.

His tone was so cordial that the stranger allowed himself to be
persuaded.  A quarter of an hour later all three were seated at a table
in the Cafe Anglais.

"I present to you General Lenaieff," said Henri to his guest.  "You
should be more incensed against him than against me, for, if he had done
his duty, you would probably have had me imprisoned again."

"Not imprisoned--shot!"  the Captain replied, with conviction.

"In that case I regret my complicity still less," said Lenaieff, "for
otherwise I should have lost an excellent friend, and, had Prerolles been
shot, he never could have made me acquainted with the delicious
Mademoiselle de Vermont!"

"Ah!  So that is what you are thinking of?"  Henri said to himself.

"I do not know the young lady of whom you speak," the German interrupted;
"but I know that, for having allowed the Commandant to escape, I was
condemned to take his place in the prison, and was shut up there for six
months, in solitary confinement, without even seeing my wife!"

"Poor Captain!  How is the lady?"  Henry inquired.

"Very well, I thank you."

"Will you permit us to drink her health?"

"Certainly, Monsieur."

"Hock!  hoch!" said Henri, lifting his glass.

"Hock!  hoch!" responded the ex-jailer, drinking with his former
prisoner.

This delicate toast began to appease the bitterness of the good man;
while the memories of his escape, offering a diversion to Henri's mind,
put him in sympathetic humor with the stranger.

"'Ah!  There are mountains that we never climb but once,'" he said.  "We
three, meeting in Paris, can prove the truth of that proverb."

"Not only in Paris," said Lenaieff.  "If you were in Saint Petersburg,
Henri, you might, any evening, see your old flame, Fanny Dorville."

"Does she keep a table d'hote?"

"No, indeed, my boy.  She plays duenna at the Theatre Michel, as that fat
Heloise used to do at the Palais-Royal.  She must have died long ago,
that funny old girl!"

"Not at all.  She is still living, and is a pensioner of the Association
of Dramatic Artists!  But, pardon me, our conversation can hardly be
amusing to our guest."

"No one can keep a Frenchman and a Russian from talking about women!  The
habit is stronger than themselves!"  said the old officer, with a hearty
laugh.

"Well, and you, Captain," said Lenaieff: "Have you not also trodden the
primrose path in your time?"

"Gentlemen, I never have loved any other woman than my own wife," replied
the honest German, laying his large hand upon his heart, as if he were
taking an oath.  "That astonishes you Parisians, eh?"  he added
benevolently.

"Quite the contrary!  It assures us peace of mind!"  said Lenaieff.  "To
your health, Captain!"

"And yours, Messieurs!"

And their glasses clinked a second time.

"Apropos," said Lenaieff to Henri, "the military governor has asked me to
accompany him to-morrow to the review at Vincennes.  I shall then have
the pleasure of seeing you at the head of your division."

"Teufel!" exclaimed the German officer; "it appears that the Commandant
de Prerolles has lost no time since we took leave of each other."

"Thanks to you, Monsieur!  Had you not allowed me to withdraw from your
society, I should certainly not have reached my present rank!  To your
health, Captain!"

"To yours, General!"

Succeeding bumpers finally dissipated entirely the resentment of the
former jailer, and when they parted probably never to meet again--he and
his prisoner had become the best friends in the world.

"Meine besten complimente der Frau Hauptmannin!" said Henri to him, in
leaving him on the boulevard.

"Lieber Gott!  I shall take good care not to own to her that I dined with
you."

"And why, pray?"

"Because there is one thing for which she never will forgive you."

"What is that?"

"The fact that you were the cause of her living alone for six months!"




CHAPTER XXIII

THE MILITARY REVIEW

The different troops, assembled for review, were massed on the parade-
ground at Vincennes, facing the tribunes.

In the centre, the artillery brigade, surrounded by two divisions of
infantry, was drawn up in two straight columns, connected by regiments;
each division of infantry, in double columns, was connected by brigades.

These six columns were separated by spaces varying from twenty to twenty-
five metres.

In the background, the cavalry division was lined up in columns; behind
that was its artillery, in the same order of formation.

At a given signal, the troops advanced five hundred metres, and, as soon
as they halted, drums, clarinets and trumpets beat and sounded from all
parts of the field, saluting the arrival of the military governor of
Paris.

This functionary, followed by his staff, in the midst of which group
glittered the brilliant Russian uniform of the aide-decamp General
Leniaeff, rode slowly past the front and the flanks of the massed body,
the troops facing to the left or the right as he passed.

This inspection finished, he took up his stand before the pillars at the
entrance, and the march past began by battalions en masse, in the midst
of the acclamations of numerous spectators who had come to witness this
imposing display, well calculated to stir patriotic pride.

The enthusiasm increased; the Prerolles division marched past after its
artillery, and, as always, the martial and distinguished profile of its
general produced its usual effect on the public.

He rode Aida, his favorite mare, an Irish sorrel of powerful frame, with
solid limbs, whose horizontal crupper and long tail indicated her race;
she was one of those animals that are calm and lively at the same time,
capable of going anywhere and of passing through all sorts of trials.

After its parade, the infantry, whose part in the affair was finished,
retraced their steps and took up a position on the other side of the
field of manoeuvres, facing the north, and in front of rising ground, in
preparation for the discharge of musketry.

During this time the artillery brigade, re-formed in battle array on the
parade-ground, detached six batteries, which advanced at a trot to within
one hundred and fifty metres of the tribunes, where they discharged a
volley.  The long pieces were run rapidly to right and left, unmasking
the cavalry, which, after a similar volley from its own batteries,
appeared behind them in battle order, and executed a galloping march, its
third line held in reserve.

A few moments later all the troops rejoined the infantry on the ground
set apart for rest and for the purpose of partaking of a cold repast,
consisting of potted meats, with which each man was furnished.

Nothing more picturesque could be imagined than this temporary camp, with
its stacked arms, knapsacks lying on the ground, holes dug in the ground
in which to kindle fires, and the clattering of cans.  On the other side
of the field the artillerymen and cavalrymen ate, holding their reins
under their arms, while their officers stood around some temporary table,
served by canteen men of the united divisions.  Tiny columns of blue
smoke rose where coffee was making, and everywhere were the swift
movement and sprightly good-fellowship in which the soldier feels himself
in his natural element.

The curious spectators crowded themselves in front of the banner, while
in the centre of the square the military governor of Paris, and the other
officers, talked with some privileged persons who had been able to
present themselves among them.

Descending from his mount a little apart from the group, and plunged in
thought, the former sub-lieutenant of 'chasseurs a pied' gazed at the old
fortress, the sight of which recalled so many sad memories.

Vincennes had been his first garrison, and its proximity to Paris had
been disastrous for him.  There he had entered one morning, stripped of
his fortune!

And what a series of disasters had followed!  But for his heavy losses
upon that fatal night, he would not have been compelled to sell
Prerolles, the income of which, during his long absence, would have
sufficed to lessen the tax on the land, transmissible, had events turned
out otherwise, to some heir to his name.  If only fate had not made Paul
Landry cross his path!

"Good morning, General!"  came the sound of a fresh, gay voice behind,
which sent a thrill through him.

He turned and saw Zibeline, who had just stopped a few steps distant from
him, sitting in her carriage, to which was harnessed a pretty pair of
cobs, prancing and champing their bits.

"Ah, it is you, Mademoiselle!"  he said, carrying his hand to the visor
of his kepi, fastened under his chin.

"I found your card last night," said Zibeline, "and I have come here this
morning to return your call!"

Then, leaning back in her driving-seat in order to reveal Edmond Delorme
installed beside her, she added:

"I have brought also my painter-in-ordinary.  We have watched the review
together, and he is as enthusiastic as I over the picturesque effect of
this improvised bivouac.  See!  He is so much occupied with his sketch
that I can not get a word out of him."

It was Aida, whose bridle was held by a dragoon, that served as a model
for the artist's pencil.

"Will you permit me?" he said to Henri.

"It appears decidedly, that my mare has caught your eye," replied the
General, approaching the carriage and resting his spurred foot on its
step.

"She has superb lines," said the painter, without interrupting his
drawing.

"Well, I am curious to know whether she could beat Seaman," said
Zibeline.  "Are you willing to run a race with me, General?"

"As you please--some morning when you return to the Bois."

"You noticed my absence, then?"

"I assure you that I did," Henri replied, earnestly.

Then, fearing that he had said too much, he added:

"I, and many others!"

"Good!  You were almost making a pretty speech to me, but, as usual, the
disavowal was not slow in coming.  Fortunately, here comes your friend
Lenaieff, who is hastening to make amends to me."

"What good fortune to meet you here, Mademoiselle!"  cried Constantin,
who, having perceived Valentine from a distance, had taken an abrupt
leave of his general-in-chief.

"I know that you have called to see me several times," said she, "but I
was in the country."

"So early in the month of April?"

"Oh! not to live there.  Monsieur de Perolles knows that I have promised
to build our Orphan Asylum at a certain distance from Paris, and hardly
three weeks remain to me before I must hand over the property.  If I am
not ready on the day appointed, Monsieur Desvanneaux will be sure to
seize my furniture, and I could not invite you any more to dinner,
Messieurs!  A propos, General, Monsieur de Samoreau has failed in his
negotiations.  Mademoiselle Gontier refuses to come to recite at my next
soiree!"

"What necessity is there for you to make her acquaintance?"  demanded
Henri.

"Ah, that is my secret!"

During this conversation a hired fiacre, well appointed, had stopped
beside the road, and Eugenie Gontier descended from it, inquiring of an
officer belonging to the grounds where she could find General de
Prerolles.  When the officer had pointed out the General to her, she
started to walk toward him; but, on seeing her former lover leaning
familiarly against the door of Zibeline's carriage, she immediately
retraced her steps and quickly reentered her own.

"There is no longer any doubt about it!"  said Mademoiselle de Vermont,
who had been observing Eugenie's movements.  "Mademoiselle Gontier has
made a fixed resolution to avoid meeting me."

"That is because she is jealous of you!"  said Lenaieff naively.

"Jealous?  And why?"  said Zibeline, blushing.

Visibly embarrassed, Henri drew out his watch in order to avert his
countenance.

"Midday!"  he cried.  "This is the hour for the return of the troops to
their barracks.  You would do well not to delay in starting for home,
Mademoiselle.  The roads will be very crowded, and your horses will not
be able to trot.  I beg your pardon for taking away your model, my dear
Delorme, but I really must be off."

"It is all the same to me; I have finished my sketch," said the painter,
closing his portfolio.

At this moment, as the military governor passed near them, on his way to
the crossway of the Pyramid, Henri made a movement as if to rejoin him.

"Do not disturb yourself, General de Prerolles," said the military
governor.  "The compliments which I have made you on the fine appearance
of your troops are probably not so agreeable to you as those to which you
are listening at present!"

And saluting Mademoiselle de Vermont courteously, he went his way.

"Now you are free, Henri.  Suppose we accompany Mademoiselle back to
Paris?"  suggested Lenaieff, seeming to read his friend's mind.

"What an honor for me!"  Valentine exclaimed.

The General made a sign to his orderly, who approached to receive his
instructions.

"Tell the brigadier-generals that I am about to depart.  I need no more
escort than two cavalrymen for General Lenaieff and myself.  Now I am
ready, Mademoiselle," Henri continued, turning toward Valentine.  "If you
will be guided by me, we should do well to reach the fortifications by
way of the Lake of Saint-Mande."

She made a little sound with her tongue, and the two cobs set off in the
direction indicated, the crowds they passed stopping to admire their high
action, and asking one another who was that pretty woman who was escorted
by two generals, the one French, the other a foreigner.

"I must look like a treaty of peace in a Franco-Russian alliance!"  said
Zibeline, gayly.

The sun shone brightly, the new leaves were quivering on the trees, the
breeze bore to the ear the echo of the military bands.

Animated by the sound, the two cobs went ahead at a great pace, but they
were kept well in hand by their mistress, who was dressed this morning in
a simple navy-blue costume, with a small, oval, felt hat, ornamented with
two white wings, set on in a manner that made the wearer resemble a
valkyrie.  Her whip, an unnecessary accessory, lay across the seat at her
right, on which side of the carriage Henri rode.

The General's eyes missed none of the graceful movements of the young
girl.  And his reflections regarding her, recently interrupted, returned
in full force, augmenting still more his regret at the inexorable fate
that separated him from her.  "What a pity!"  he thought in his turn,
repeating unconsciously the phrase so often uttered by his sister.

Arrived at the Place du Tr&ne, Valentine stopped her horses a moment, and
addressed her two cavaliers:

"I thank you for your escort, gentlemen.  But however high may be your
rank, I really can not go through Paris looking like a prisoner between
two gendarmes!  So good-by!  I shall see you this evening perhaps, but
good-by for the present."

They gave her a military salute, and the carriage disappeared in the
Faubourg St. Antoine, while the two horsemen followed the line of the
quays along the Boulevard Diderot.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE CHALLENGE

That person who, in springtime, between ten o'clock and midday, never has
walked beside the bridle-path in the Bois de Boulogne, under the deep
shade of the trees, can form no idea of the large number of equestrians
that for many years have been devoted to riding along that delightful and
picturesque road.

To see and to be seen constitutes the principal raison d'etre of this
exercise, where the riders traverse the same path going and coming, a man
thus being able to meet more than once the fair one whom he seeks, or a
lady to encounter several times a cavalier who interests her.

On this more and more frequented road, the masculine element displayed
different costumes, according to the age and tastes of each rider.  The
young men appeared in careless array: leggins, short coats, and small
caps.  The older men, faithful to early traditions, wore long trousers,
buttoned-up redingotes, and tall hats, like those worn by their fathers,
as shown in the pictures by Alfred de Dreux.

For the feminine element the dress is uniform.  It consists of a riding-
habit of black or dark blue, with bodice and skirt smoothly molded to the
form by one of the two celebrated habit-makers, Youss or Creed.  The
personal presence alone varied, according to the degree of perfection of
the model.

A cylindrical hat, a little straight or turned-over collar, a cravat tied
in a sailor's knot, a gardenia in the buttonhole, long trousers and
varnished boots completed the dress of these modern Amazons, who, having
nothing in common with the female warriors of ancient times, are not
deprived, as were those unfortunates, of any of their feminine charms.

The military element is represented by officers of all grades from
generals to sub-lieutenants, in morning coats, with breeches and high
boots, forbidden under the Second Empire, but the rule at present.

At the top of the Pre-Catelan, the path is crossed by the Bagatelle road
to the lakes, a point of intersection situated near a glade where the
ladies were fond of stopping their carriages to chat with those passing
on horseback.  A spectator might have fancied himself at the meet of a
hunting-party, lacking the whippers-in and the dogs.

A few days after the review at Vincennes, on a bright morning in May,
a file of victorias and pony-chaises were strung out along this sylvan
glade, and many persons had alighted from them.  Announcing their arrival
by trumpet-blasts, two or three vehicles of the Coaching Club, headed by
that of the Duc de Mont had discharged a number of pretty passengers,
whose presence soon caused the halt of many gay cavaliers.

Several groups were formed, commenting on the news of the day, the
scandal of the day before, the fete announced for the next day.

More serious than the others, the group surrounding Madame de Montgeron
strolled along under the trees in the side paths which, in their
windings, often came alongside of the bridle-path.

"What has become of Mademoiselle de Vermont, Duchess?"  inquired Madame
de Lisieux, who had been surprised not to find Zibeline riding with their
party.

"She is in the country, surrounded by masons, occupied in the building of
our Orphan Asylum.  The time she required before making over the property
to us expires in two weeks."

"It is certainly very singular that we do not know where we are to go for
the ceremonies of inauguration," said Madame Desvanneaux, in her usual
vinegary tones.

"I feel at liberty to tell you that the place is not far away, and the
journey thence will not fatigue you," said the president, with the air of
one who has long known what she has not wished to reveal heretofore.

"The question of fatigue should not discourage us when it is a matter of
doing good," said M. Desvanneaux.  "Only, in the opinion of the founders
of the Orphan Asylum, it should be situated in the city of Paris itself."

"The donor thought that open fields and fresh air would be better for the
children."

"Land outside of Paris costs very much less, of course; that is probably
the real reason," said M. Desvanneaux.

"Poor Zibeline!  you are well hated!"  Madame de Nointel could not help
saying.

"We neither like nor dislike her, Madame.  We regard her as indifferently
as we do that," the churchwarden replied, striking down a branch with the
end of his stick, with the superb air of a Tarquin.

Still gesticulating, he continued:

"The dust that she throws in the eyes of others does not blind us, that
is all!"

The metaphor was not exactly happy, for at that instant the unlucky man
received full in his face a broadside of gravel thrown by the hoofs of a
horse which had been frightened by the flourishing stick, and which had
responded to the menace by a violent kick.

This steed was none other than Seaman, ridden by Mademoiselle de Vermont.
She had recognized the Duchess and turned her horse back in order to
offer her excuses for his misconduct, the effects of which Madame
Desvanneaux tried to efface by brushing off the gravel with the corner of
her handkerchief.

"What has happened?"  asked General de Prerolles, who at that moment
cantered up, mounted on Aida.

"Oh, nothing except that Mademoiselle has just missed killing my husband
with that wicked animal of hers!"  cried the Maegera, in a fury.

"Mademoiselle might turn the accusation against him," Madame de Nointel
said, with some malice.  "It was he who frightened her horse."

The fiery animal, with distended veins and quivering nostrils, snorted
violently, cavorted sidewise, and tried to run.  Zibeline needed all her
firmness of grasp to force him, without allowing herself to be thrown, to
stand still on the spot whence had come the movement that had alarmed
him.

"Your horse needs exercise," said Henri to the equestrienne.  "You ought
to give him an opportunity to do something besides the formal trot around
this path."

"I should be able to do so, if ever we could have our match," said
Zibeline.  "Will you try it now?"

"Come on!"

She nodded, gave him her hand an instant, and they set off, side by side,
followed by Zibeline's groom, no less well mounted than she, and wearing
turned-over boots, bordered with a band of fawn-colored leather,
according to the fashion.




CHAPTER XXV

THE AMAZON HAS A FALL

They were a well-matched pair: he, the perfect type of the elegant and
always youthful soldier; she, the most dashing of all the Amazons in the
Bois, to quote the words of Edmond Delorme.

Everyone was familiar with the personal appearance of both riders, and
recognized them, but until now Mademoiselle de Vermont had always ridden
alone, and now to see her accompanied by the gallant General, whose
embroidered kepi glittered in the sunlight, was a new spectacle for the
gallery.

The people looked at them all the more because Seaman was still prancing,
but without unseating his mistress, who held him at any gait or any
degree of swiftness that pleased her.

"What a good seat you have!"  said Henri.

"That is the first real compliment you ever have paid me.  I shall
appropriate it immediately, before you have time to retract it," Zibeline
replied.

At the circle of Melezes, Henri proposed to turn to the right, in order
to reach Longchamp.

"A flat race!  You are joking!"  Zibeline cried, turning to the left,
toward the road of La Vierge,

"You don't intend that we shall run a steeplechase, I hope."

"On the contrary, that is exactly my intention!  You are not afraid to
try it, are you?"

"Not on my own account, but on yours."

"You know very well that I never am daunted by any obstacle."

"Figuratively, yes; but in riding a horse it is another matter."

"All the more reason why I should not be daunted now," Zibeline insisted.

When they arrived at the public square of the Cascades, in front of the
Auteuil hippodrome, she paused a moment between the two lakes, uncertain
which course to take.

It was Thursday, the day of the races.  The vast ground, enclosed on all
sides by a fence, had been cleared, since early morning, of the boards
covering the paths reserved for pedestrians on days when there was no
racing; but it was only eleven o'clock, and the place was not yet open to
the paying public.  Several workmen, in white blouses, went along the
track, placing litters beside the obstacles where falls occurred most
frequently.

"Do you think the gatekeeper will allow us to enter at this hour?"
Zibeline asked.

"I hope not!"  Henri replied.

"Well, then, I shall enter without his permission!  You are free to
declare me the winner.  I shall be left to make a walkover, I see!"
And setting off at a gallop along the bridle-path, which was obstructed a
little farther on by the fence itself, she struck her horse resolutely,
and with one audacious bound sprang over the entrance gate.  She was now
on the steeplechase track.

"You are mad!"  cried the General, who, as much concerned for her safety
as for his own pride, urged on his mare, and, clearing the fence, landed
beside Zibeline on the other side.

"All right!"  she cried, in English, dropping her whip, as the starter
drops the flag at the beginning of a race.

The die was cast.  Henri bent over Aida's neck, leaning his hands upon
her withers in an attitude with which experience had made him familiar,
and followed the Amazon, determined to win at all hazards.

Zibeline's groom, an Englishman, formerly a professional jockey, had
already jumped the fence, in spite of the cries of the guard, who ran to
prevent him, and coolly galloped after his mistress, keeping at his usual
distance.

The first two hedges, which were insignificant obstacles for such horses,
were crossed without effort.

"Not the brook, I beg of you!"  cried Henri, seeing that, instead of
running past the grand-stand, Zibeline apparently intended to attempt
this dangerous feat.

"Come on!  Seaman would never forgive me if I balk at it!"  she cried,
riding fearlessly down the slope,

The good horse gathered up his four feet on the brink, took one vigorous
leap, appearing for a second to hover over the water; then he fell
lightly on the other side of the stream, with a seesaw movement, to which
the intrepid Amazon accommodated herself by leaning far back.  The
rebound threw her forward a little, but she straightened herself quickly
and went on.

The General, who had slackened his pace that he might not interfere with
her leap, gave vent to a sigh of relief.  He pressed Aida's flanks
firmly, and the big Irish mare jumped after her competitor, with the
majestic dignity of her race.

Reassured by the 'savoir-faire' of his companion, the former winner of
the military steeplechase felt revive within himself all his ardor for
the conflict, and he hastened to make up the distance he had lost.

The two horses, now on the west side of the racetrack, were almost neck-
and-neck, and it would have been difficult to prognosticate which had the
better chance of victory.  Zibeline's light weight gave Seaman the
advantage, but Aida gained a little ground every time she leaped an
obstacle; so that, after passing the hurdles and the third hedge, the
champions arrived simultaneously at the summit of the hill, from which
point the track extends in a straight line, parallel with the Allee des
Fortifications.

Feeling himself urged on still harder, the English horse began to lay
back his ears and pull so violently on the rein that his rider had all
she could do to hold him, and lacked sufficient strength to direct his
course.  Seeing Zibeline's danger, Henri hastened to slacken his horse's
pace, but it was too late: the almost perpendicular declivity of the
other side of the hill added fresh impetus to the ungovernable rush of
Seaman, who suddenly became wild and reckless.

The situation was all the more critical for the reason that the next
obstacle was a brook, only two metres wide, but of which the passage was
obstructed on the farther side of the track by heavy beams, laid one on
top of another, solidly riveted and measuring one metre and ten
millimetres from the base to the summit.  The excited horse charged
obliquely toward this obstruction with all his might.  Paying no more
attention to the pressure upon his bit, he rose in the air, but as he had
not given himself sufficient time to take plenty of room for the leap,
his hoofs struck violently against the top beam, the force of resistance
of which threw him over on one side; his hindquarters turned in the air,
and he fell in a heap on the other side of the obstacle, sending up a
great splash of water as he went into the brook.

Had Zibeline been crushed by the weight of the horse in this terrible
fall, or, not having been able to free herself from him, had she been
drowned under him?  Henri uttered a hoarse cry, struck his spurs into the
sides of his mare, crossed the brook breathlessly, stopping on the other
side as soon as he could control his horse's pace; then, rushing back, he
leaped to the ground to save the poor girl, if there was still time to do
so.

Zibeline lay inanimate on the grass, her face lying against the earth.
By a lucky chance, the horse had fallen on his right side, so that his
rider's limbs and skirt had not been caught.  Unhorsed by the violence of
the shock, Zibeline had gone over the animal's head and fallen on the
other side of the brook.  Her Amazon hat, so glossy when she had set out,
was now crushed, and her gloves were torn and soiled with mud; which
indicated that she had fallen on her head and her hands.

Henri knelt beside her, passed his arm around her inert and charming
body, and drew her tenderly toward him.  Her eyes were half-open and
dull, her lips pale; her nose, the nostrils of which were usually well
dilated, had a pinched look; and a deadly pallor covered that face which
only a moment before had been so rosy and smiling.

These signs were the forerunners of death, which the officer had
recognized so many times on the battlefield.  But those stricken ones had
at least been men, devoting themselves to the risks of warfare; while in
the presence of this young girl lying before him, looking upon this
victim of a reckless audacity to which he felt he had lent himself too
readily, the whole responsibility for the accident seemed to him to rest
upon his own shoulders, and a poignant remorse tore his heart.

He removed her cravat, unhooked her bodice, laid his ear against her
breast, from which an oppressed breathing still arose.

Two laborers hurried to open the gate and soon arrived at the spot with a
litter, guided by the groom, whose horse had refused to jump the brook,
and who since then had followed the race on foot outside the track.
While the General placed Zibeline on the litter, the groom took Aida by
the bridle, and the sad procession made its way slowly toward the
enclosure surrounding the weighing-stand.

As for Seaman, half submerged in the stream, and with an incurable
fracture of the leg, nothing was left to do for the poor animal but to
kill him.




CHAPTER XXVI

AN UNCONSCIOUS AVOWAL

Walking slowly, step by step, beside her whose power had so quickly and
so wholly subjugated him, watching over her removal with more than
paternal solicitude, Henri de Prerolles, sustained by a ray of hope,
drew a memorandum-book from his pocket, wrote upon a slip of paper a name
and an address, and, giving it to the groom, ordered him to go ahead of
the litter and telephone to the most celebrated surgeon in Paris,
requesting him to go as quickly as possible to the domicile of
Mademoiselle de Vermont, and, meantime, to send with the greatest
despatch one of the eight-spring carriages from the stables.

It was noon by the dial on the grand-stand when the litter was finally
deposited in a safe place.  The surgeon could hardly arrive in less than
two hours; therefore, the General realized that he must rely upon his own
experience in rendering the first necessary aid.

He lifted Valentine's hand, unbuttoned the glove, laid his finger on her
pulse, and counted the pulsations, which were weak, slow, and irregular.

While the wife of the gate-keeper kept a bottle of salts at the nostrils
of the injured girl, Henri soaked a handkerchief in tincture of arnica
and sponged her temples with it; then, pouring some drops of the liquid
into a glass of water, he tried in vain to make her swallow a mouthful.
Her teeth, clenched by the contraction of muscles, refused to allow it to
pass into her throat. At the end of half an hour, the inhalation of the
salts began to produce a little effect; the breath came more regularly,
but that was the only symptom which announced that the swoon might soon
terminate. The landau with the high springs arrived.  The General ordered
the top laid back, and helped to lift and place upon the cushions on the
back seat the thin mattress on which Zibeline lay; then he took his place
on the front seat, made the men draw the carriage-top back into its
proper position, and the equipage rolled smoothly, and without a jar, to
its destination. On the way they met the first carriages that had arrived
at the Auteuil hippodrome, the occupants of which little suspected what
an exciting dramatic incident had occurred just before the races.
Zibeline's servants, by whom she was adored, awaited their mistress at
the threshold, and for her maids it was an affair of some minutes to
undress her and lay her in her own bed.  During this delay, the surgeon,
who had hastened to answer the call, found Henri nervously walking about
from one drawing-room to the other; and, having received information as
to the details of the fall, he soon entered the bedchamber. While
awaiting the sentence of life or of death which must soon be pronounced,
he who considered himself the chief cause of this tragic event continued
to pace to and fro in the gallery--that gallery where, under the
intoxication of a waltz, the demon of temptation had so quickly
demolished all his resolutions of resistance. A half-hour--an age!--
elapsed before the skilled practitioner reappeared.  "There is no
fracture," he said, "but the cerebral shock has been such that I can not
as yet answer for the consequences.  If the powerful reactive medicine
which I have just given should bring her back to her senses soon, her
mental faculties will suffer no harm.  If not, there is everything to
fear.  I will return in three hours," he added. Without giving a thought
to the conventionalities, Henri entered the bedchamber, to the great
astonishment of the maids, and, installing himself at the head of the
bed, he decided not to leave that spot until Valentine had regained her
senses, should she ever regain them. An hour passed thus, while Henri
kept the same attitude, erect, attentive, motionless, with stray scraps
of his childhood's prayers running through his brain. Suddenly the heavy
eyelids of the wounded girl were lifted; the dulness of the eyes
disappeared; her body made an involuntary attempt to change its position;
the nostrils dilated; the lips quivered in an effort to speak. Youth and
life had triumphed over death. With painful slowness, she tried to raise
her hand to her head, the seat of her pain, where, though half paralyzed,
thought was beginning to return.  Her eyes wandered to and fro in the
shadowy room, seeking to recognize the surroundings. A ray of light,
filtering through the window-curtains, showed her the anxious face
bending tenderly over her. "Henri!"  she murmured, in a soft, plaintive
voice. That name, pronounced thus, the first word uttered after her long
swoon, revealed her secret.  Never had a more complete yet modest avowal
been more simply expressed; was it not natural that he should be present
at her reentrance into life, since she loved him?  With women, the
sentiment of love responds to the most diverse objects.  The ordinary
young girl of Zibeline's age, either before or after her sojourn in a
convent, considers that a man of thirty has arrived at middle age, and
that a man of forty is absolutely old.  Should she accept a man of either
of these ages, she does it because a fortune, a title, or high social
rank silences her other tastes, and her ambition does the rest. But, with
an exceptional woman, like Mademoiselle de Vermont, brought up in view of
wide horizons, in the midst of plains cleared by bold pioneers, among
whom the most valorous governed the others, a man like General de
Prerolles realized her ideal all the more, because both their natures
presented the same striking characteristics: carelessness of danger, and
frankness carried to its extremest limit.  Therefore, this declaration--
to use the common expression--entirely free from artifice or affectation,
charmed Henri for one reason, yet, on the other hand, redoubled his
perplexity.  How could he conciliate his scruples of conscience with the
aspirations of his heart?  The problem seemed then as insoluble as when
it had been presented the first time. But Valentine was saved.  For the
moment that was the essential point, the only one in question.  The
involuntary revelation of her secret had brought the color to her cheeks,
the light to her eyes, a smile to her lips, in spite of the leaden band
that seemed still pressing upon her head. "How you have frightened me!"
said Henri, in a low voice, seating himself on the side of the bed and
taking her hand. "Is that true?"  she asked, softly pressing his fingers.
"Hush!"  he said, making a movement to enjoin silence. She obeyed, and
they remained a few moments thus. Nevertheless, he reflected that the
account of the accident would soon be spread everywhere, that Valentine's
new friends would hear about it as soon as they arrived at the race-track
that day, and that he could no longer prolong his stay beside her.

"Are you leaving me so soon?"  Valentine murmured, when he said that he
must go.

"I am going to tell my sister and the Chevalier de Sainte-Foy of your
mishap."

"Very well," she replied, as if already she had no other desire than to
follow his wishes.

He gave the necessary orders, and again took his place beside the bed,
awaiting the second visit of the doctor, whose arrival was simultaneous
with that of the Duchess.

This time the verdict was altogether favorable, with no mention of the
possibility of any aggravating circumstances.  An inevitable
feverishness, and a great lassitude, which must be met with absolute
repose for several days, would be the only consequences of this dangerous
prank.

The proprieties resumed their normal sway, and it was no longer possible
for Henri to remain beside the charming invalid.




CHAPTER XXVII

DISTRACTION

The Duchesse de Montgeron, who had passed the rest of the day with
Mademoiselle de Vermont, did not return to her own dwelling until eight
o'clock that evening, bearing the most reassuring news.

Longing for fresh air and exercise, Henri went out after dinner, walked
through the Champs-Elysees, and traversed the crossing at l'Etoile, in
order to approach the spot where Zibeline lay ill.

If one can imagine the feelings of a man of forty-five, who is loved for
himself, under the most flattering and unexpected conditions, one can
comprehend the object of this nocturnal walk and the long pause that
Henri made beneath the windows of Zibeline's apartment.  A small garden,
protected by a light fence, was the only obstacle that separated them.
But how much more insuperable was the barrier which his own principles
had raised between this adorable girl and himself.

Had he not told his sister, confided to Eugenie Gontier, and reiterated
to any one that would listen to him, the scruples which forbade him ever
to think of marriage?  To change this decision, in asking for the hand of
Mademoiselle de Vermont, would-in appearance, at least--sacrifice to the
allurement of wealth the proud poverty which he had long borne so nobly.

But the demon of temptation was then, as always, lurking in the shadow,
the sole witness of this duel to the death between prejudice and love.

When he returned to his rooms he found another note from his former
mistress:

     "You have just had a terrible experience, my dear friend.  Nothing
     that affects you can be indifferent to me.  I beg you to believe,
     notwithstanding the grief which our separation causes me, in all the
     prayers that I offer for your happiness.

                                   "ARIADNE."

"My happiness?  My torture, rather!"  he said, the classic name of
Ariadne suggesting the idea that the pseudonym of Tantalus might well be
applied to himself.

But he had long kept a rule to write as little as possible, and was
guarded in making reply to any letter, especially to such a communication
as this.

When he left the house the next morning, on his way to attend to military
duties, he learned that his sister had gone away early on an excursion to
one of the suburbs, and that she would not return until evening.  As the
Duchess was the only person who had been initiated into the mystery
surrounding Zibeline on the subject of the building of the Orphan Asylum,
it was evident that she had gone to take her place in the directing of
the work.

In the afternoon Henri called to inquire for the invalid, and was
received by the Chevalier de Sainte-Foy.  She had had a quiet night;
a little fever had appeared toward morning, and, above all, an extreme
weakness, requiring absolute quiet and freedom from any excitement.
On an open register in the reception-room were inscribed the names of all
those persons who had called to express their interest in Mademoiselle de
Vermont: Constantin Lenaieff, the Lisieux, the Nointels, Edmond Delorme,
the Baron de Samoreau, and others.  Only the Desvanneaux had shown no
sign of life.  Their Christian charity did not extend so far as that.

Henri added his name to the list, and for several days he returned each
morning to inscribe it anew, feeling certain that, as soon as Valentine
was able to be placed half-reclining on a couch, she would give orders
that he should be admitted to her presence.  But nothing of the kind
occurred.

On the evening of the fifth day after the accident, the Duchess informed
her brother that their young friend had been taken to the country, where
it was thought a complete cure would sooner be effected.

This hasty departure, made without any preliminary message, caused Henri
to feel the liveliest disappointment.

Had he deceived himself, then?  Was it, after all, only by chance that
she had so tenderly pronounced his name, and had that familiar
appellative only been drawn from her involuntarily because of her
surprise at beholding his unexpected presence at her bedside?

Regarding the matter from this point of view, the whole romance that he
had constructed on a fragile foundation had really never existed save in
his own imagination!

At this thought his self-esteem suffered cruelly.  He felt a natural
impulse to spring into a carriage and drive to the dwelling of Eugenie
Gontier, and there to seek forgetfulness.  But he felt that his
bitterness would make itself known even there, and that such a course
would be another affront to the dignity of a woman of heart, whose
loyalty to himself he never had questioned.

Try to disguise it as he would, his sombre mood made itself apparent,
especially to his brother-in-law, who had no difficulty in guessing the
cause, without allowing Henri to suspect that he divined it.

The date for the formal transfer of the Orphan Asylum to the committee
had been fixed for the fifteenth day of May.

On the evening of the fourteenth, at the hour when the General was
signing the usual military documents in his bureau, a domestic presented
to him a letter which, he said, had just been brought in great haste by a
messenger on horseback:

The superscription, "To Monsieur the General the Marquis de Prerolles,"
was inscribed in a long, English hand, elegant and regular.  The orderly
gave the letter to his chief, who dismissed him with a gesture before
breaking the seal.  The seal represented, without escutcheon or crown, a
small, wild animal, with a pointed muzzle, projecting teeth, and shaggy
body, under which was a word Henri expected to find: Zibeline!

The letter ran thus:

     "MY DEAR GENERAL:

     "An officer, like yourself, whose business it is to see that his
     orders are obeyed, will understand that I have not dared, even in
     your favor, to infringe on those imposed upon me by the doctor.
     But those orders have been withdrawn!  If you have nothing better to
     do, come to-morrow, with your sister, to inspect our asylum, before
     Monsieur Desvanneaux takes possession of it!

     "Your military eye will be able to judge immediately whether
     anything is lacking in the quarters.  Yours affectionately,

                                   "VALENTINE DE VERMONT.

     "P.S.--Poor Seaman is dead!  I beg you to carry this sad news to his
     friend Aida.  V."


If a woman's real self is revealed in her epistolary style, finesse,
good-humor, and sprightliness were characterised in this note.
Zibeline's finesse had divined Henri's self-deception; her good-humor
sought to dissipate it; and her sprightliness was evidenced by her
allusions to M. Desvanneaux and the loss of her horse.

When they found themselves reunited at the dinner-hour, the Duchess said
simply to her brother:

"You must have received an invitation to-day from Mademoiselle de
Vermont.  Will you accompany us tomorrow?"

"Yes, certainly.  But where?  How?  At what hour?"

"We must leave here at one o'clock.  Don't disturb yourself about any
other detail--we shall look after everything."

"Good!  I accept."

As he was not so curious as the Desvanneaux, it mattered little to him to
what place they took him, so long as he should find Zibeline at the end
of the journey.

At the appointed hour the brother and sister drove to the Gare du Nord.
The Duke, a director of the road, who had been obliged to attend a
convocation of the Council until noon, had preceded them.  He was waiting
for them beside the turnstile at the station, having already procured
their tickets and reserved a carriage in one of the omnibus trains from
Paris to Treport which make stops at various suburban stations.

"Will it be a very long journey?"  Henri asked, on taking his place in
the carriage.

"Barely three-quarters of an hour," said the Duke, as the train started
on its way.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE VOW REDEEMED

The third road, constructed between the two lines which met at Creil,
passing, the one by way of Chantilly, the other, by Pontoise, was not in
existence in 1871, when, after the war, Jeanne and Henri de Prerolles
went to visit the spot, already unrecognizable, where they had passed
their childhood.  L'Ile-d'Adam was at that time the nearest station; to
day it is Presles, on the intermediate line, which they now took.

"This is our station," said Madame de Montgeron, when the train stopped
at Montsoult.  They descended from the carriage, and found on the
platform two footmen, who conducted them to a large char-a-banc, to which
were harnessed four dark bay Percherons, whose bridles were held by
postilions in Zibeline's livery, as correct in their appearance as those
belonging to the imperial stables, when the sojourn of the court was at
Compiegne or at Fontainebleau.

"Where are we going now, Jeanne?"  asked Henri, whose heart seemed to him
to contract at the sight of Maffliers, which he knew so well.

"A short distance from here," his sister replied.

The horses set off, and, amid the sound of bells and the cracking of
whips, the carriage reached the national road from Paris to Beauvais,
which, from Montsoult, passes around the railway by a rapid descent, from
the summit of which is visible, on the right, the Chateau of
Franconville; on the left, the village of Nerville perched on its crest.

One of the footmen on the rear seat held the reins, and a quarter of an
hour later the carriage stopped just before arriving at the foot of
Valpendant.

Valpendant had formerly been a feudal manor within the confines of Ile-
de-France, built midway upon a hill, as its name indicated.  On the side
toward the plain was a moat, and the castle itself commanded the view of
a valley, through which ran the little stream called Le Roi, which flows
into the river Oise near the hamlet of Mours.  Acquired in the fifteenth
century by the lords of Prerolles, it had become an agricultural
territory worked for their profit, first by forced labor, and later by
farmers.

Even recently, the courtyard, filled with squawking fowls and domestic
animals of all kinds, and the sheds crowded with agricultural implements
piled up in disorder, presented a scene of confusion frequent among
cultivators, and significant of the alienation of old domains from their
former owners.

"We have arrived!"  said the Duchess, alighting first.

"What, is it here?"  Henri exclaimed, his heart beating more quickly.

"Your old farm was for sale just at the time that Mademoiselle de Vermont
was seeking an appropriate site for the Orphan Asylum.  This spot
appeared to her to combine all the desirable conditions, and she has
wrought the transformation you are about to behold.  It might as well be
this place as another," the Duchess added.  "In my opinion, it is a sort
of consolation offered to us by fate."

"Be it so!"  said Henri, in a tone of less conviction.

He followed his sister along the footpath of a bluff, which as children
they had often climbed; while the carriage made a long detour in order to
reach the main entrance to the grounds.

The footpath, winding along near the railway embankment, ended at a
bridge, where Zibeline awaited the three visitors.  A significant
pressure of her hand showed Henri how little cause he had had for his
apprehensions.

They entered.  Seen from the main entrance, the metamorphosis of the
place was complete.

The old tower that had served as a barn alone remained the same; it was
somewhat isolated from the other building, and had been repaired in the
style of its period, making a comfortable dwelling for the future
director of the Asylum.  Mademoiselle de Vermont occupied it temporarily.

On each side of the grounds, standing parallel, rose two fine buildings:
on the ground floor of each were all the customary rooms and accessories
found on model farms; on the upper floors were dormitories arranged to
receive a large number of children of both sexes.  There were
schoolrooms, sewing-rooms, a chapel-in short, nothing was lacking to
assist in the children's intellectual and manual education.

"You have done things royally," said the Duke to the happy donor, when,
having finished the inspection of the premises, they returned to the
directors' room, indicated by a plate upon its door.

As for Henri, silent and absorbed, he hesitated between the dread of
facing a new emotion and the desire to go once more to gaze upon the
tower of Prerolles, hardly more than two kilometres distant.

"What is the matter with you, General?"  Zibeline asked, observing that
he did not appear to take pleasure in the surprise she had prepared.

"I lived here many years a long time ago," he replied.  "I am thinking of
all that it recalls to me; and, if you would not consider it discourteous
on my part, I should like to leave you for a little time to make a
pilgrimage on foot around the neighborhood."

"Would you like to have me take you myself?  I have a little English cart
which can run about anywhere," said Zibeline.

The proposition was tempting.  The sweetness of a tete-a-tete might
diminish the bitterness of recollections.  He accepted.

She ordered the cart brought around, and they climbed into the small
vehicle, which was drawn by a strong pony, driven by Zibeline herself.

"Which way?"  she asked, when they had passed through the gates.

"To the right," he said, pointing to a rough, half-paved slope, an
abandoned part of what had been in former days the highway, which now
joins the new road at the Beaumont tunnel.

Passing this point, and leaving on their left the state road of l'Ile-
d'Adam, they drove through a narrow cross-cut, between embankments, by
which one mounts directly to the high, plateau that overlooks the town of
Presles.

The hill was steep, and the pony was out of breath.  They were compelled
to stop to allow him to rest.

"It is not necessary to go any farther," said Henri to his companion.  "I
need only to take a few steps in order to see what interests me."

"I will wait for you here," she replied, alighting after him.  "Don't be
afraid to leave me alone.  The horse will not move; he is used to
stopping."

He left her gathering daisies, and walked resolutely to the panoramic
point of view, where a strange and unexpected sight met his eyes!

All that had once been so dear to him had regained its former aspect.
The kitchen-gardens had given place to the rich pastures, where yearling
colts frisked gayly.  The factory had disappeared, and the chateau had
been restored to its original appearance.  The walls enclosing the park
had been rebuilt, and even several cleared places indicated the sites of
cottages that had been pulled down.

Henri de Prerolles could hardly believe his eyes!  Was he the sport of a
dream or of one of those mirages which rise before men who travel across
the sandy African deserts?  The latitude and the position of the sun
forbade this interpretation.  But whence came it, then?  What fairy had
turned a magic ring in order to work this miracle?

A crackling of dry twigs under a light tread made him turn, and he beheld
Zibeline, who had come up behind him.

The fairy was there, pale and trembling, like a criminal awaiting arrest.

"Is it you who have done this?"  Henri exclaimed, with a sob which no
human strength could have controlled.

"It is I!"  she murmured, lowering her eyes.  "I did it in the hope that
some day you would take back that which rightfully belongs to you."

"Rightfully, you say?  By what act?"

"An act of restitution."

"You never have done me any injury, and nothing authorizes me to accept
such a gift from Mademoiselle de Vermont."

"Vermont was the family name of my mother.  When my father married her,
he obtained leave to add it to his own.  I am the daughter of Paul
Landry."

"You!"

"Yes.  The daughter of Paul Landry, whose fortune had no other origin
than the large sum of which he despoiled you."

Henri made a gesture of denial.

"Pardon me!"  Zibeline continued.  "He was doubly your debtor, since this
sum had been increased tenfold when you rescued him from the Mexicans who
were about to shoot him.  'This is my revenge!' you said to him, without
waiting to hear a word from him.  Your ruin was the remorse of his whole
life.  I knew it only when he lay upon his deathbed.  Otherwise--"

She paused, then raised her head higher to finish her words.

"Never mind!"  she went on.  "That which he dared not do while living, I
set myself to do after his death.  When I came to Paris to inquire what
had become of the Marquis de Prerolles, your glorious career answered for
you; but even before I knew you I had become the possessor of these
divided estates, which, reunited by me, must be restored to your hands.
You are proud, Henri," she added, with animation, "but I am none less
proud than you.  Judge, then, what I have suffered in realizing our
situation: I, overwhelmed with riches, you, reduced to your officer's
pay.  Is that a satisfaction to your pride?  Very well!  But to my own,
it is the original stain, which only a restitution, nobly accepted by
you, ever can efface!"

She paused, looking at him supplicatingly, her hands clasped.  As he
remained silent, she understood that he still hesitated, and continued:

"To plead my cause, to vanquish your resistance, as I am trying now to
triumph over it, could be attempted with any chance of success only by a
dear and tender friend; that is the reason why I sought to establish
relations with--"

"With Eugenie Gontier?"

"But she would not consent to it--all the worse for her!  For, since
then, you and I have come to know each other well.  Your prejudices have
been overcome one by one.  I have observed it well.  I am a woman, and
even your harshness has not changed my feelings, nor prevented me from
believing that, in spite of yourself, you were beginning to love me.
Have I been deceiving myself?--tell me!"

"You know that you have not, since, as I look at you and listen to you,
I know not which I admire more-your beauty or the treasures of your
heart!"

"Then come!"

"Whither?"

"To Prerolles, where all is ready to receive you."

"Well, since this is a tale from the Arabian Nights, let us follow it to
the end!  I will go!" said Henri.

Browsing beside the road, the pony, left to himself, had advanced toward
them, step by step, whinnying to his mistress.  Valentine and Henri
remounted the cart; which soon drew up before the gates of the chateau,
where, awaiting them, reinstated in his former office, stood the old
steward, bent and white with years.

The borders of the broad driveway were of a rich, deep green.  Rose-
bushes in full bloom adorned the smooth lawns.  The birds trilled a
welcome in jumping from branch to branch, and across the facade of the
chateau the open windows announced to the surrounding peasantry the
return of the prodigal master.

At the top of the flight of steps Valentine stepped back to allow Henri
to pass before her; then, changing her mind, she advanced again.

"No, you are at home," she said.  "It is I that must enter first!"

He followed her docilely, caring no longer to yield to any other will
than hers.

Within the chateau, thanks to the complicity of the Duchess, the
furnishings resembled as closely as possible those of former days.  The
good fairy had completed successfully two great works: the restoration of
the chateau and the building of the asylum.  The inhabitants of the one
would be so much the better able to foresee the needs of the other.

Having explored one of the wings, they returned to the central hall.
Mademoiselle de Vermont made a sign to the steward to remain there, and
beckoned to Henri to accompany her to the historic gallery.  After they
had entered it, she closed the door.  The family portraits had been
rehung in their former places, in chronological order, and, in its proper
place, figured that of the General of Division the Marquis de Prerolles,
in full uniform, mounted on Aida, the portrait being the work of Edmond
Delorme.

At this sight, touched to the depths of his heart, Henri knelt before
Valentine, and carried her hand to his lips.

"I adore you!"  he said, without attempting to hide the tears of
gratitude that fell upon those generous hands.

"Do you, indeed?"  Zibeline murmured.

"You shall see!"  he replied, rising.  "Come, in your turn."

He led her before the portrait of the ancestral marshal of France, and
said:

"Twenty-three years ago I vowed before that portrait either to vanquish
the enemy or to regain with honor all that I had lost at play.  I have
kept my word.  Will you be my wife?"

"Ah, you know my heart is yours!"  Zibeline whispered, hiding her face
upon his shoulder.

The door at the end of the gallery opened; the Duc and the Duchesse de
Montgeron appeared.  Henri took Zibeline's hand and approached them.

"The Marquise de Prerolles!"  he said, presenting her to his sister and
her husband.




CHAPTER XXIX

THE MARQUISE DE PREROLLES

The next day a special train landed the fair patronesses at the station
of Presles, whence Zibeline's carriages conducted them to Valpendant.

The deed of gift was signed before M. Durand and his colleague, a notary
of Pontoise.

This formality fulfilled, M. Desvanneaux, whose own role, for a moment
overshadowed, appeared to him to renew its importance, took the floor and
said:

"It remains to us, Mesdames, to assure the support of the Orphan Asylum
by means of an annual income."

"The Marquis and the Marquise de Prerolles assume this responsibility,"
said the ministerial officer, treasurer of the Asylum.  "This mutual
engagement will form the object of a special clause in the drawing up of
their contract."

In this way was the news of the approaching marriage between Valentine
and Henri announced to the Society.

"The little intriguer!"  murmured the churchwarden, nudging the elbow of
his Maegera.

The General, who noted the effect which this announcement had produced
upon the peevish pair, divined the malicious words upon the hypocritical
lips.  He drew the husband aside, and put one hand upon his shoulder.

"Desvanneaux," he said, "you have known me twenty-five years, and you
know that I am a man of my word.  If ever a malevolent word from you
regarding my wife should come to my ears, I shall elongate yours to such
a degree that those of King Midas will be entirely eclipsed!  Remember
that!"

The ceremony took place six weeks later, in the church of St. Honore-
d'Eylau, which was not large enough to hold the numerous public and the
brilliant corps of officers that assisted.

The witnesses for the bridegroom were the military governor of Paris and
the Duc de Montgeron.  Those of the bride were the aide-de-camp General
Lenaieff, in full uniform, wearing an astrachan cap and a white cloak
with the Russian eagle fastened in the fur; and the Chevalier de Sainte-
Foy.

On the evening before, a last letter from his former mistress had come to
the General:

     "I have heard all the details of your romance, my dear Henri.  Its
     conclusion is according to all dramatic rules, and I congratulate
     you without reserve.

     "If, on the eve of contracting this happy union, an examination of
     your conscience should suggest to you some remorse for having
     abandoned me so abruptly, let me say that no shadow, not even the
     lightest, must cloud the serenity of this joyous day: I am about to
     leave the stage forever, to become the wife of the Baron de
     Samoreau!
                    Always affectionately yours,
                                        "EUGENIE GONTIER."




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

All that was illogical in our social code
Only a man, wavering and changeable
Their Christian charity did not extend so far as that
There are mountains that we never climb but once




End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of Zibeline, v3
by Phillipe de Massa

