The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Manual of the Botany of the Northern
United States, by Asa Gray

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Manual of the Botany of the Northern United States
       Including the District East of the Mississippi and North
       of North Carolina and Tennessee

Author: Asa Gray

Release Date: April 11, 2012 [EBook #39423]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MANUAL OF BOTANY OF NORTHERN U.S. ***




Produced by John Williams and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                 BOTANY

                                   OF

                      THE NORTHERN UNITED STATES.




                                 MANUAL
                                   OF
                               THE BOTANY
                                 OF THE
                        NORTHERN UNITED STATES,

           INCLUDING THE DISTRICT EAST OF THE MISSISSIPPI AND
                 NORTH OF NORTH CAROLINA AND TENNESSEE.


                              BY ASA GRAY,
    LATE FISHER PROFESSOR OF NATURAL HISTORY IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY.


                             Sixth Edition.


          REVISED AND EXTENDED WESTWARD TO THE 100th MERIDIAN,
                                   BY
                             SERENO WATSON,
           CURATOR OF THE GRAY HERBARIUM, HARVARD UNIVERSITY,
                                  AND
                            JOHN M. COULTER,
                 PROFESSOR OF BOTANY IN WABASH COLLEGE,

              _ASSISTED BY SPECIALISTS IN CERTAIN GROUPS_.


                        WITH TWENTY-FIVE PLATES,
             ILLUSTRATING THE SEDGES, GRASSES, FERNS, ETC.


                     IVISON, BLAKEMAN, AND COMPANY,
                             _PUBLISHERS_,
                         NEW YORK AND CHICAGO.
                                 1890.

                           _Copyright, 1889_,
            BY THE PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS OF HARVARD COLLEGE.




CONTENTS.


                                                           Page

PREFACE                                                       1

SYNOPSIS OF THE ORDERS                                        5

ANALYTICAL KEY TO THE ORDERS                                 19

EXPLANATION OF ABBREVIATIONS OF AUTHORS' NAMES               30

EXPLANATION OF SIGNS                                         32

FLORA.--PHAENOGAMOUS OR FLOWERING PLANTS                      33
            Dicotyledonous or Exogenous Plants               33
              Angiospermous, Polypetalous                    33
                             Gamopetalous                   216
                             Apetalous                      425
              Gymnospermous Plants                          489
            Monocotyledonous or Endogenous Plants           495
        CRYPTOGAMOUS OR FLOWERLESS PLANTS                   675
            Vascular Acrogens, or Pteridophytes             675
            Cellular Acrogens, or Bryophytes (Hepaticae)     702

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS                                   733

TABLE OF ORDERS                                             736

GLOSSARY                                                    738

INDEX                                                       749

PLATES, WITH EXPLANATIONS                                   761




PREFACE.


The first edition of Gray's Manual was published in 1848. It was to a
great extent rewritten and its range extended in 1856, and it was again
largely rewritten in 1867. The great advances that have since been made
in systematic botany and in the knowledge of our flora have for several
years past made another revision desirable, which Dr. Gray before his
death was purposing to undertake.

The present editors, acting to the best of their ability in his stead,
have endeavored throughout to follow his methods and views. The original
plan, so long retained by Dr. Gray and so generally approved, has been
closely adhered to, the characters and descriptions of the last edition
have been left essentially unchanged so far as possible, and in the
numerous alterations and additions that have been considered necessary
or advisable, his conclusions and principles have governed in every
matter of importance, so far as they could be known. The effort
especially has been to maintain that high standard of excellence which
has always made the Manual an authority among botanists.

In the treatment of the genera and species, Gray's Synoptical Flora has
been made the basis in the revision of the Gamopetalous Orders, and the
manuscript in continuation of that work, so far as prepared, for the
Polypetalous Orders which precede _Leguminosae_ (excepting _Nuphar_, the
_Cruciferae, Caryophyllaceae, Vitis_, and the small Orders numbered 18,
22, 23, 25-27, and 29). The genus _Salix_ has been rewritten for this
edition by M. S. BEBB, Esq., the genus _Carex_ by Prof. L. H. BAILEY,
and the Ferns and allied orders by Prof. D. C. EATON. For the rest, all
known available sources of information have been made use of, and much
willing help has been received from botanists in all parts of our
territory.

The increasing interest that is taken in the study of the Cellular
Cryptogams, and the desire to encourage it, have led to the inclusion
again of the Hepaticae, which were omitted in the last edition. These
have been prepared through the kindness of Prof. L. M. UNDERWOOD, though
the limits of the volume have necessitated somewhat briefer descriptions
than he considered desirable. The three fine plates illustrating the
genera of these Orders, which were used in the early editions, are also
added, with a supplementary one, as well as an additional one in
illustration of the Grasses, thus increasing the number of plates to
twenty-five. A Glossary of botanical terms is appended, to meet an
expressed need of those who use the Manual alone, and a Synopsis of the
Orders in their sequence is given, to contrast more clearly their
characters, and to show the general principles which have determined
their present arrangement. This should be a useful adjunct to the more
artificially arranged Analytical Key.

GEOGRAPHICAL LIMITS, AND DISTRIBUTION.--The southern limit of the
territory covered by the present work is the same as in the later
previous editions, viz. the southern boundary of Virginia and Kentucky.
This coincides better than any other geographical line with the natural
division between the cooler-temperate and the warm-temperate vegetation
of the Atlantic States. The rapid increase of population west of the
Mississippi River, and the growing need of a Manual covering the flora
of that section, have seemed a sufficient reason for the extension of
the limits of the work westward to the 100th meridian, thus connecting
with the _Manual of the Flora of the Rocky Mountain Region_ by Prof.
Coulter. These limits, as well as that upon the north, have been in
general strictly observed, very few species being admitted that are not
known with some degree of certainty to occur within them. The extreme
western flora is no doubt imperfectly represented.

The distribution of the individual species is indicated somewhat more
definitely than heretofore in many cases, so far as it could be
satisfactorily ascertained. The extralimital range is also sometimes
given, but the terms "northward," "southward," and "westward" are more
frequently employed, signifying an indefinite range in those directions
beyond the limits of the Manual. Where no definite habitat is specified,
the species may be understood as found more or less generally throughout
the whole area, or at least to near the western limits.

NOMENCLATURE, ACCENTUATION OF NAMES, etc.--In case of question
respecting the proper name to be adopted for any species, Dr. Gray's
known and expressed views have been followed, it is believed, throughout
the work. While reasonable regard has been paid to the claims of
priority, the purpose has been to avoid unnecessary changes, in the
belief that such changes are in most cases an unmitigated evil. Synonyms
are rarely given except where changes have been made. As a guide to
correct pronunciation, the long sound of the accented vowel (modified
often in personal names) is indicated, as heretofore, by the grave
accent (`), and the short sound by the acute ('). In regard to the
derivations of generic names, many valuable suggestions have been due to
W. R. Gerard, Esq., of New York.

PROMINENT CHARACTERS are indicated by the use of _Italic type_ for the
leading distinctions of the Orders, and generally in the specific
descriptions for those points by which two or more nearly allied species
may be most readily distinguished. The ready discrimination of the
genera is provided for by a Synopsis of their leading characters under
each order. Whenever a genus comprises several species, pains have been
taken to render important differences conspicuous by proper grouping,
and when needed by a series of subordinate divisions and subdivisions.
The headings of these various groups are to be considered as belonging
to and forming a part of the specific characters of the several species
under them,--a fact which the student should always bear in mind.

ARRANGEMENT OF THE ORDERS.--The Natural Orders are disposed in very
close accordance with the method followed by Bentham and Hooker in the
_Genera Plantarum_, the principles of which are concisely shown in the
Synopsis of Orders which precedes the Analytical Key. The _Gymnospermae_
are retained as a Subclass following the Angiospermous Dicotyledons,
with which they have an obvious relationship, in preference to placing
them, as some authorities would do, next before the Pteridophytes, to
which their affinity, if no less certain, is nevertheless obscure. A
more natural arrangement than either would be the withdrawal of the
Endogens, placing them at the beginning, in perhaps an inverse order.

ANALYTICAL KEY TO THE ORDERS.--As stated in Dr. Gray's Preface to the
last edition, this is designed to enable the student to refer readily to
its proper Order any of our plants, upon taking the pains to ascertain
the structure of its flowers, and sometimes of the fruit, and by
following out a series of easy steps in the analysis. It is founded upon
the most obvious distinctions which will answer the purpose, and is so
contrived as to provide for all or nearly all exceptional instances and
variant cases. Referring to the Order which the Key leads him to, the
student will find its most distinctive points brought together and
printed in Italics in the first sentence of the ordinal description, and
thus can verify his results. The Synopsis which follows will then lead
him to the genus, to be verified in turn by the full generic description
in its place; and the progress thence to the species is facilitated,
when there are several to choose from, by the arrangement under
divisions and subdivisions, as already explained.

It will be seen that the Key directs the inquirer to ascertain, first,
the Class of the plant under consideration,--which, even without the
seeds, is revealed at once by the plan of the stem, as seen in a
cross-section, and usually by the veining of the leaves, and is commonly
confirmed by the numerical plan of the flower;--then, if of the first
Class, the Subclass is at once determined by the pistil, whether of the
ordinary kind, or an open scale bearing naked ovules. If the former,
then the choice between the three Divisions is determined by the
presence or absence of the petals, and whether separate or united. Each
Division is subdivided by equally obvious characters, and, finally, a
series of successively subordinated propositions,--each set more
indented upon the page than the preceding,--leads to the name of the
Order sought for, followed by the number of the page upon which it is
described in the body of the work.

The book is now submitted to those for whose benefit it has been
prepared, in the trust that its shortcomings will meet with friendly
indulgence, and with the earnest request that information be kindly
given of any corrections or additions that may appear to be necessary.

  SERENO WATSON.
  CAMBRIDGE, MASS., Dec. 26, 1889.




                    SYNOPSIS OF THE ORDERS OF PLANT

                        DESCRIBED IN THIS WORK.


SERIES I. PHAENOGAMOUS OR FLOWERING PLANTS: those producing real flowers
and seeds.


CLASS I. DICOTYLEDONOUS OR EXOGENOUS PLANTS.

Stems formed of bark, wood, and pith; the wood forming a zone between
the other two, and increasing, when the stem continues from year to
year, by the annual addition of a new layer to the outside, next the
bark. Leaves netted-veined. Embryo with a pair of opposite cotyledons,
or in Subclass II. often three or more in a whorl. Parts of the flower
mostly in fours or fives.


SUBCLASS I. ANGIOSPERMAE. Pistil consisting of a closed ovary which
contains the ovules and becomes the fruit. Cotyledons only two.

DIVISION I. POLYPETALOUS: the calyx and corolla both present; the latter
of _separate_ petals. (Apetalous flowers occur in various Orders, as
noted under the subdivisions.)

[A.] THALAMIFLORAE. Stamens and petals hypogynous (free both from the
calyx and from the superior ovary), upon a usually narrow receptacle
(not glandular nor discoid, except in Reseda, sometimes stipe-like).
(Stamens and petals upon the partly inferior ovary in some Nymphaeaceae.)
Apetalous flowers occur in the Ranunculaceae and Caryophyllaceae.

[*] 1. Carpels solitary or distinct (or coherent in Magnoliaceae); sepals
and petals deciduous (except in Nymphaeaceae); leaves alternate or
radical, without stipules (sometimes opposite or whorled and rarely
stipular in Ranunculaceae); embryo (except in Nelumbo) small, in fleshy
albumen.

1. Ranunculaceae (p. 34). Sepals (3 or more), petals (as many, in regular
flowers, or none), stamens (usually many), and carpels (1--many) all
distinct. Fruit achenes, follicles, or berries. Mostly herbs.

2. Magnoliaceae (p. 49). Sepals and petals colored alike, in three or
more rows of three, imbricate. Fruit cone-like, formed of the numerous
cohering pistils. Trees.

3. Anonaceae (p. 50). Sepals (3) and petals (6, in two rows) valvate.
Fruit pulpy. Shrubs or small trees.

4. Menispermaceae (p. 51). Sepals and petals in twos or threes,
imbricate. Pistils becoming 1-seeded drupes. Dioecious woody
climbers, with palmate or peltate leaves.

5. Berberidaceae (p. 52). Sepals and petals imbricate, each in two rows
of three (rarely in twos or fours). Stamens opposite the petals. Pistil
solitary, becoming a berry or pod. Shrubs or low herbs.

6. Nymphaeaceae, in part (p. 54). Sepals and petals each 3, or many in
several rows. Pistils becoming coriaceous and indehiscent. Aquatics;
floating leaves peltate.

[*] 2. Carpels (2 or more) united into a compound ovary with parietal,
often nerve-like placentae (or the seeds covering the inner surface in
Nymphaeaceae, and the placentae axile in Sarraceniaceae). Herbs (some
Cistaceae somewhat shrubby).

[+] Fruit 5--many-celled; calyx or whole perianth persistent; embryo
small, at the base of fleshy albumen.

6. Nymphaeaceae proper (p. 54). Sepals 2--6. Petals and stamens numerous,
on a thick hypogynous receptacle or inserted upon the ovary. Capsule
8--30-celled. Aquatics, with peltate or cordate leaves.

7. Sarraceniaceae (p. 57). Sepals and petals 5. Capsule 5-celled. Marsh
plants, with pitcher-shaped leaves.

[+][+] Fruit 1-celled, or spuriously 2--more-celled by partitions
connecting the placentae.

[++] Embryo minute at the base of fleshy albumen; perianth deciduous;
sepals 2.

8. Papaveraceae (p. 57.) Flowers regular. Sepals fugacious. Petals 4--12.
Stamens and seeds numerous. Capsule 2--several-valved. Juice milky or
colored.

9. Fumariaceae (p. 59.) Flowers irregular. Petals 4, in dissimilar pairs.
Stamens 6, diadelphous. Fruit 2-valved (indehiscent and 1-seeded in
Fumaria). Juice watery; leaves dissected.

[++][++] Albumen none; embryo curved or folded; perianth deciduous
(sepals persistent in Resedaceae).

10. Cruciferae (p. 61). Sepals and petals 4. Stamens mostly 6,
tetradynamous (two inserted lower and shorter). Pod 2-celled by a
transverse partition, 2-valved, or sometimes indehiscent or transversely
jointed. Bracts and stipules none.

11. Capparidaceae (p. 74). Sepals and petals 4. Stamens 6 or more, nearly
equal. Pod 1-celled, 2-valved. Embryo coiled. Leaves often palmately
divided; bracts and stipules often present.

12. Resedaceae (p. 75). Sepals and petals 4--7, irregular. Stamens
indefinite on an hypogynous disk, not covered in the bud. Pod 1-celled,
3--6-lobed, opening at the top.

[++][++][++] Embryo rather large in fleshy albumen; placentae on the
middle of the valves; calyx persistent.

13. Cistaceae (p. 76). Flowers regular; sepals and petals 5, the two
outer sepals minute. Stamens indefinite. Pod 1-celled, 3--5-valved.
Ovules orthotropous. Embryo curved. Leaves entire, the lower often
opposite.

14. Violaceae (p. 78). Flowers irregular; sepals and petals 5. Stamens 5,
with connivent introrse anthers. Style clavate. Pod 1-celled, 3-valved.
Ovules anatropous. Embryo straight. Stipules present.

[*] 3. Ovary compound, 1-celled, with central placentae; embryo curved
around mealy albumen (except in Dianthus); leaves entire; stipules
mostly none.

15. Caryophyllaceae (p. 82). Sepals (5, rarely 4) distinct or united,
persistent. Petals as many, rarely none. Stamens as many or twice as
many, rarely fewer. Styles 2--5. Leaves opposite.

16. Portulacaceae (p. 90). Sepals 2. Petals 5. Stamens 5--20. Capsule
3-valved or circumscissile. Fleshy herbs; leaves mostly alternate.

[*] 4. Calyx imbricate; stamens as many or twice as many as the petals
or often indefinite; ovary compound, 1-celled with parietal placentae or
several-celled with the placentae united in the axis; embryo straight or
slightly curved; albumen none or scanty.

17. Elatinaceae (p. 91). Small marsh annuals, with opposite leaves,
membranous stipules, minute axillary flowers, few stamens, and pod
2--5-celled.

18. Hypericaceae (p. 92). Herbs or shrubs, with opposite entire dotted
leaves and no stipules. Flowers cymose or panicled. Stamens few or many,
usually in 3 or more clusters. Pod 1-celled or 3--5-celled.

19. Ternstroemiaceae (p. 95). Trees or shrubs, with alternate leaves
and no stipules. Flowers large, axillary, solitary. Stamens numerous,
more or less united together and with the base of the petals. Pod
3--5-celled.

[*] 5. Calyx valvate; stamens numerous, usually more or less united
together and with the base of the petals; ovary 3--many-celled with the
placentae united in the axis (becoming 1-celled and 1-seeded in Tilia).

20. Malvaceae (p. 96). Stamens monadelphous; anthers 1-celled. Calyx
persistent. Seeds kidney-shaped, with curved embryo and little albumen.
Herbs or shrubs, with alternate palmately veined stipular leaves.

21. Tiliaceae (p. 101). Stamens polyadelphous or nearly distinct; anthers
2-celled. Calyx deciduous. Embryo nearly straight. Trees, with alternate
leaves and deciduous stipules.

[B.] DISCIFLORAE. Stamens as many as the petals or twice as many or
fewer, inserted upon or at the outer or inner base of a more or less
tumid hypogynous or perigynous disk, which is cushion-like or annular or
divided into glands, sometimes obscure or minute (or none in Linum,
Ilex, some Geraniaceae and Polygala); ovary superior (or half-inferior in
some Rhamnaceae); sepals more usually distinct. Petals wanting in some
Rutaceae, Rhamnaceae, and Sapindaceae.

[*] 1. Ovules (mostly 1 or 2 in each cell) pendulous, with the rhaphe
toward the axis of the ovary; disk often reduced to glands alternate
with the petals or none; ovary often lobed or the carpels nearly
distinct.

22. Linaceae (p. 101). Flowers regular, usually 5-merous. Capsule not
lobed, mostly 5-valved, spuriously 10-celled, 10-seeded. Stamens united
at base. Disk none or 5 minute glands. Herbs, with entire alternate or
opposite leaves; stipules gland-like or none.

23. Geraniaceae (p. 102). Flowers regular or irregular, 5-merous or
3-merous as to the stamens and pistils. Ovary 3--5-lobed, the cells
1--few-ovuled, and axis persistent. Disk of 5 glands or none. Herbs,
with often lobed or divided mostly alternate leaves, with or without
stipules.

24. Rutaceae (p. 106). Flowers mostly regular, 3--5-merous, dioecious
or polygamous in our genera. Ovary 2--5-lobed or the carpels nearly
distinct, upon a glandular disk; cells 2-ovuled. Mostly shrubs or trees,
with glandular-punctate compound leaves, without stipules.

[*] 2. Ovules (1 or 2) pendulous, the rhaphe away from the axis; disk
none and ovary not lobed.

25. Ilicineae (p. 107). Flowers small, dioeciously polygamous,
axillary, 4--8-merous. Fruit a 4--8-seeded berry-like drupe. Shrubs or
trees, with simple alternate leaves and no stipules.

[*] 3. Ovules (1 or 2 in each cell) erect, the rhaphe toward the axis;
disk fleshy, covering the base of the calyx; stamens as many
as the petals, at the margin of the disk; flowers perfect or
polygamo-dioecious; albumen fleshy; shrubs or trees, with simple
leaves (compound in some Vitaceae).

26. Celastraceae (p. 109). Sepals and petals imbricated, the stamens
alternate with the petals. Fruit 2--5-celled; seeds arilled.

27. Rhamnaceae (p. 111). Calyx valvate. Petals small or none. Stamens
alternate with the sepals. Fruit 2--5-celled; seeds solitary, not
arilled.

28. Vitaceae (p. 112). Calyx minute. Stamens opposite the valvate
caducous petals. Climbing by tendrils opposite the alternate leaves.

[*] 4. Ovules (1 or 2) ascending or horizontal, or pendulous from a
basal funicle; fleshy disk entire or lobed; stamens 5--10; shrubs or
trees, with compound leaves (simple in Acer) and mostly
polygamo-dioecious and often irregular flowers; petals imbricate
(sometimes none in Sapindaceae).

29. Sapindaceae (p. 115). Flowers mostly unsymmetrical or irregular.
Ovary 2--3-celled and -lobed.

30. Anacardiaceae (p. 118). Flowers regular, 5-androus. Ovary 1-celled,
becoming a small dry drupe. Leaves alternate; juice milky or resinous.

[*] 5. Ovules solitary, pendulous from the summit of the 2-celled ovary;
disk none; flowers irregular (subpapilionaceous), hypogynous; stamens
monadelphous or diadelphous; anthers 1-celled, opening by an apical
pore.

31. Polygalaceae (p. 120). Herbs, with perfect flowers and alternate or
opposite or whorled entire leaves. Stamens 6--8. Seed carunculate.

[C.] CALYCIFLORAE. Sepals rarely distinct; disk adnate to the base of the
calyx, rarely tumid or conspicuous; petals and stamens on the calyx,
perigynous or epigynous, the ovary being often inferior (hypogynous in
Drosera and Parnassia, nearly so in some Leguminosae and Crassulaceae).
Apetalous flowers in Orders 33, 35, 36, 38, 39, 41, 42, 47, and 50.

[*] 1. Ovary usually superior, the pistils solitary, or several and
distinct (sometimes more or less united but at least the styles distinct
except in some Saxifragaceae).

32. Leguminosae (p. 122). Flowers papilionaceous or regular. Stamens
usually 10, and mostly monadelphous or diadelphous. Pistil one, free,
becoming a legume; style terminal. Albumen none. Leaves mostly compound,
alternate, stipular.

33. Rosaceae (p. 150). Flowers regular, with usually numerous distinct
stamens, and 1--many pistils, distinct or (in Pomeae) united and combined
with the calyx-tube; style often lateral or basal. Calyx-lobes and
petals mostly 5. Ovules mostly 1 or 2. Albumen mostly none. Trees,
shrubs, or herbs; leaves usually alternate and stipulate, simple or
compound.

34. Calycanthaceae (p. 167). Calyx-lobes, petals, and stamens indefinite.
Pistils numerous, becoming achenes in a hollow receptacle. Albumen none.
Aromatic shrubs, with opposite entire leaves and no stipules.

35. Saxifragaceae (p. 168). Flowers regular, with 5--10 stamens (numerous
in Philadelphus), few (mostly 2) more or less united, free or partially
adnate carpels, and few--many ovules on axile or sometimes parietal
placentae. Seeds albuminous. Herbs or shrubs, with opposite or alternate
leaves, with or without stipules.

36. Crassulaceae (p. 170). Mostly fleshy herbs, with symmetrical flowers,
the usually distinct many-seeded carpels as many as the sepals. Seeds
albuminous. Leaves alternate or opposite or whorled; stipules none.

37. Droseraceae (p. 178). Glandular-haired scapose marsh herbs, with
regular 5-merous hypogynous flowers. Capsule 1-celled, with 3--5
many-seeded parietal placentae. Anthers extrorse. Leaves circinate in
vernation.

38. Hamamelideae (p. 179). Shrubs or trees; flowers often
polygamo-monoecious, in clusters, heads, or spikes; petals often none.
Seeds 2 or more, bony, in a 2-beaked woody pod opening above, the base
adnate to the calyx-tube. Stamens few or many. Leaves alternate, simple.

39. Halorageae (p. 180). Aquatic or marsh herbs; flowers perfect or
polygamo-dioecious, small, axillary or spicate; petals often none.
Stamens 1--8. Ovary inferior, the calyx-limb obsolete or very short.
Fruit small, indehiscent, 1--4-celled, 1--4-seeded. Leaves alternate or
opposite, the submersed often dissected.

[*] 2. Ovary inferior (except in Lythraceae), 1--several-celled; style
entire; flowers perfect, regular or nearly so, mostly 4-merous; herbs,
with simple and mostly entire leaves without stipules.

40. Melastomaceae (p. 183). Calyx open. Stamens definite; anthers opening
by an apical pore. Leaves opposite, 3--7-nerved; flowers cymose.

41. Lythraceae (p. 184). Calyx-lobes valvate. Pod free, but enclosed in
the calyx, membranous, 1--4-celled, many-seeded with axile placentae.
Leaves mostly opposite; flowers axillary or whorled; petals crumpled, or
none.

42. Onagraceae (p. 186). Calyx-lobes valvate. Ovary 1--4-celled, the
cells 1--many-ovuled. Stamens 2, 4, or 8. Petals 2 or 4, convolute, or
none. Leaves opposite or alternate.

[*] 3. Ovary inferior (except in Passifloraceae and Ficoideae), 1-celled
with parietal placentae or several-celled by the intrusion of the
placentae; flowers regular, perfect or unisexual; styles free or united;
herbs.

[+] Embryo straight; cotyledons foliaceous; leaves alternate, often
lobed.

43. Loasaceae (p. 193). Flowers perfect. Stamens indefinite. Style entire
or 2--3-cleft. Capsule 1-celled, with 2 or 3 many-seeded placentae.
Pubescence of hooked hairs.

44. Passifloraceae (p. 194). Climbing by tendrils. Flowers perfect.
Stamens 5, monadelphous. Ovary stalked, superior, becoming a 1-celled
many-seeded berry with 3 or 4 placentae. Styles 3, clavate.

45. Cucurbitaceae (p. 194). Tendril-bearing vines, with dioecious or
monoecious flowers. Corolla 5-lobed, often confluent with the calyx.
Stamens 3 or 5, usually more or less united and the anthers often
tortuous. Fruit fleshy or membranous, 1--5-celled, the placentae often
produced to the axis and revolute. Seeds exalbuminous.

[+][+] Embryo curved or coiled about central albumen; leaves entire.

46. Cactaceae (p. 196). Fleshy and mostly leafless prickly plants, with
solitary sessile perfect flowers. Calyx-lobes and petals indefinite,
imbricated, the numerous stamens on the tube. Fruit a 1-celled
many-seeded berry.

47. Ficoideae (p. 198). Calyx-lobes or sepals 5 and petals none in our
genera. Capsule 3--5-celled with axile placentae, loculicidal or
circumscissile, many-seeded. Often fleshy; leaves mostly opposite or
verticillate.

[*] 4. Flowers small, regular, perfect or polygamous; calyx-limb minute
or obsolete; ovary inferior, 2--several-celled, with solitary pendulous
ovules; petals and stamens mostly 4 or 5, on the margin of an epigynous
disk surrounding the styles; albumen copious.

48. Umbelliferae (p. 198). Flowers in umbels or heads. Petals (inflexed)
and stamens 5. Styles 2. Fruit of 2 dry seed-like carpels, the pericarp
usually with oil-tubes. Herbs, with alternate mostly compound leaves.

49. Araliaceae (p. 212). Flowers mostly in umbels and nearly as in
Umbelliferae; petals not inflexed and styles 2 or more. Fruit a
2--several-celled drupe. Herbs or shrubs, with alternate mostly compound
leaves.

50. Cornaceae (p. 213). Flowers not in umbels; petals (valvate, or none)
and stamens 4 or 5. Style 1. Fruit a 1--2-seeded drupe. Trees, shrubs,
or rarely herbs, with opposite or alternate simple and mostly entire
leaves.

DIVISION II. GAMOPETALOUS: calyx and corolla both present, the latter of
united petals (excepting some Ericaceae, Styracaceae, and Oleaceae, Galax,
Statice, and Lysimachia). Apetalous flowers occur in Glaux and some
Oleaceae. Stipules present only in Rubiaceae and Loganiaceae, or rarely in
Caprifoliaceae.

[*] 1. Ovary inferior; stamens borne upon the corolla, alternate with
its lobes.

[+] Stamens distinct; leaves opposite or whorled; seed albuminous except
in Valerianaceae.

51. Caprifoliaceae (p. 216). Corolla mostly 5-lobed, regular or
irregular, the stamens as many (one fewer in Linnaea, doubled in
Adoxa). Ovary 1--several-celled; fruit a berry, drupe, or pod,
1--several-seeded. Shrubs or herbs; leaves opposite, rarely stipular,
not turning black in drying.

52. Rubiaceae (p. 222). Flowers regular, 4--5-merous, the corolla mostly
valvate. Ovary 2--4-celled. Herbs or shrubs; leaves simple, entire,
opposite with stipules, or verticillate, usually turning black in
drying.

53. Valerianaceae (p. 228). Stamens (1--4) fewer than the lobes of the
somewhat irregular corolla. Ovary with two abortive or empty cells and
one containing a suspended ovule. Fruit dry and indehiscent. Herbs.

54. Dipsaceae (p. 229). Flowers mostly 4-merous and with 4 (rarely 2)
stamens, involucellate in involucrate heads; corolla-lobes imbricate.
Ovary simple, 1-celled, with a suspended ovule. Herbs.

[+][+] Anthers connate into a tube.

55. Compositae (p. 230). Stamens as many as the valvate corolla-lobes.
Ovary with a solitary erect ovule, becoming an achene. Albumen none.
Calyx-limb reduced to a pappus or none. Flowers in involucrate heads.

[*] 2. Ovary inferior (or superior in most Ericaceae and in
Diapensiaceae); stamens free from the corolla or nearly so (adnate in
some Diapensiaceae), as many as the lobes and alternate with them, or
twice as many; leaves alternate (opposite in some Ericaceae); style 1.

[+] Juice milky; capsule 2--5-celled, many-seeded; herbs.

56. Lobeliaceae (p. 305). Corolla irregular, 5-lobed. Stamens united, at
least by the anthers. Capsule 2-celled or with two placentae.

57. Campanulaceae (p. 307). Corolla regular, 5-lobed, valvate. Stamens
usually distinct. Capsule 2--several-celled.

[+][+] Juice not milky nor acrid; capsule 3--10-celled.

58. Ericaceae (p. 309). Flowers mostly regular, 4--5-merous. Stamens
distinct, more usually twice as many as the corolla-lobes or petals.
Ovary inferior or superior. Herbs or shrubs.

59. Diapensiaceae (p. 326). Flowers regular. Stamens 5, on the corolla,
or monadelphous with 5 petaloid staminodia. Ovary superior, 3-celled.

[*] 3. Ovary superior; stamens as many as the corolla-lobes and opposite
them.

60. Plumbaginaceae (p. 327). Stamens 5, on the base of the petals.
Styles 5. Fruit an achene or 1-seeded utricle. Herbs; leaves radical.

61. Primulaceae (p. 328). Stamens 4--8, perigynous. Style 1. Fruit a
capsule with several seeds on a central placenta. Herbs; leaves radical
or opposite or alternate.

62. Sapotaceae (p. 332). Flowers small, 4--5-merous. Style 1. Ovary
few--several-celled; fruit fleshy, bearing a single bony-coated seed.
Shrubs or trees, with milky juice and alternate entire leaves.

[*] 4. Ovary superior or more or less adnate to the calyx,
few--several-celled, the cells 1-ovuled; stamens twice as many as the
corolla-lobes or more; trees or shrubs, with alternate leaves.

63. Ebenaceae (p. 333). Flowers dioecious or polygamous. Stamens on the
corolla. Ovary superior. Styles distinct. Fruit fleshy, few-seeded.

64. Styracaceae (p. 333). Flowers perfect. Stamens subhypogynous. Ovary
more or less inferior. Style 1. Fruit dry or nearly so, 1--4-seeded.

[*] 5. Ovary superior, of two carpels (sometimes by division apparently
4-carpellary, sometimes of 3--5 in Polemoniaceae, Convolvulaceae, and
Solanaceae); stamens on the corolla (except in apetalous Oleaceae),
alternate with its lobes, as many or fewer.

[+] Corolla not scarious and nerveless.

[++] Corolla none, or regular and 4-cleft or -parted, the stamens fewer
than its lobes; style 1; seeds 1--3.

65. Oleaceae (p. 335). Trees or shrubs, with opposite and pinnate or
simple leaves. Flowers perfect or polygamo-dioecious. Stamens mostly
2, alternate with the usually 2-ovuled carpels.

[++][++] Corolla regular, its lobes 4--5 or rarely more; stamens as
many.

[=] Ovaries 2, becoming follicles; stigmas and sometimes the styles
united; herbs with milky juice, perfect 5-merous flowers, and simple
entire leaves.

66. Apocynaceae (p. 337). Stamens distinct or the anthers merely
connivent, with ordinary pollen. Style 1.

67. Asclepiadaceae (p. 338). Stamens monadelphous, the anthers
permanently attached to a large stigmatic body; pollen mostly in waxy
masses. Styles distinct below the stigma.

[=][=] Ovary compound (ovaries two in Dichondra), with 2 or 3 (rarely 4
or 5) cells or placentae; stamens distinct; mostly herbs.

[a.] Leaves opposite; corolla-lobes 4 or 5 or more.

68. Loganiaceae (p. 345). Leaves entire, with stipules or a stipular line
joining their bases. Capsule 2-celled, few--many-seeded. Herbs or woody
twiners (our species).

69. Gentianaceae (p. 346). Glabrous herbs; leaves entire, sessile and
simple (except in Menyanthes). Capsule 1-celled with 2 parietal placentae
or the whole inner surface ovuliferous, many-seeded.

[b.] Leaves alternate (sometimes opposite in Polemoniaceae and
Hydrophyllaceae); corolla-lobes always 5 in our species.

70. Polemoniaceae (p. 354). Capsule usually 3-celled, loculicidal; seeds
1--many in each cell on the stout placental axis. Style 3-cleft or
-lobed. Leaves opposite or alternate, simple or compound.

71. Hydrophyllaceae (p. 357). Leaves often lobed or divided, and the
inflorescence frequently scorpioid. Style 2-parted or 2-lobed. Capsule
1-celled, 2-valved with two parietal or introflexed placentae, or
sometimes 2-celled. Seeds 2 or more on each placenta.

72. Borraginaceae (p. 360). Leaves mostly entire and plants often
rough-hispid; inflorescence commonly scorpioid. Style 1. Ovary
4-ovulate, usually 4-lobed and maturing as 4 separate or separable
nutlets, or not lobed, 2--4-celled and separating when ripe into 2 or 4
nutlets.

73. Convolvulaceae (p. 367). Usually twining or trailing; flowers on
axillary peduncles or cymose-glomerate. Corolla 5-lobed or 5-plaited,
twisted in the bud. Styles 1 or 2. Ovary 2- (sometimes 3- or spuriously
4-) celled, becoming a globular 4--6-seeded capsule (or ovaries two and
distinct in Dichondra). Cotyledons broad-foliaceous.

74. Solanaceae (p. 373). Style 1. Ovary 2-celled (rarely 3--5-celled),
with numerous ovules on axillary placentae, becoming a pod or berry.
Cotyledons narrow.

[++][++][++] Corolla more or less bilabiately irregular (sometimes
nearly regular), 5-lobed. Fertile stamens 4 and didynamous, or 2. Style
1. Ovary always of two carpels.

[a.] Ovules several or many.

75. Scrophulariaceae (p. 377). Capsule 2-celled, with central placentae.
Seeds small, usually numerous. Herbs; leaves alternate or opposite.

76. Orobanchaceae (p. 393). Root-parasites with no green foliage. Capsule
1-celled, with 2 simple or double parietal placentae. Seeds many.

77. Lentibulariaceae (p. 395). Aquatic or marsh herbs, with scapes or
scape-like peduncles, sometimes nearly leafless. Corolla personate and
spurred. Capsule globular, 1-celled; placentae central, free,
many-seeded.

78. Bignoniaceae (p. 398). Large-flowered trees or often climbing shrubs,
with usually opposite simple or compound leaves. Capsule 2-celled by a
partition between the 2 parietal placentae. Seeds numerous, large, mostly
winged.

79. Pedaliaceae (p. 399). Herbs, with opposite simple leaves. Ovary
1-celled with two bilamellar parietal placentae, or 2--4-celled by their
union, becoming drupaceous or capsular. Seeds few or many, wingless.

80. Acanthaceae (p. 399). Herbs, with opposite simple leaves. Capsule
2-celled, loculicidal, with each axile placenta bearing 2--10 flattish
seeds.

[b.] Cells of the ovary 1--2-ovuled; herbs or low shrubs, with opposite
leaves.

81. Verbenaceae (p. 401). Ovary 2--4-celled, not lobed, the dry or
drupaceous fruit separating into 2 or 4 1-seeded nutlets (fruit 1-celled
and 1-seeded in Phryma). Style terminal.

82. Labiatae (p. 403). Ovary deeply 4-lobed around the style, the lobes
becoming dry seed-like nutlets. Stems square; aromatic.

[+][+] Corolla scarious and nerveless; flowers regular, 4-merous; style
1.

83. Plantaginaceae (p. 422). Scapose herbs, with perfect or
polygamo-dioecious or monoecious flowers in 1--many-flowered spikes.
Fruit a circumscissile 2-celled capsule, with one or more peltate seeds
in each cell, or an achene.


DIVISION III. APETALOUS EXOGENS. The corolla wanting (except in some
Euphorbiaceae), and sometimes also the calyx.

[*] 1. Ovary superior (though sometimes enclosed within the calyx),
1-celled with a solitary basal ovule (several-celled in Phytolaccaceae);
embryo coiled or curved (nearly straight in Polygonaceae) in or about
mealy albumen (albumen none in some Chenopodiaceae); herbs.

[+] Fruit the hardened or membranous closed base of the corolla-like
perianth enclosing a utricle.

84. Nyctaginaceae (p. 425). Perianth tubular or funnelform. Stamens
hypogynous. Fruit ribbed or winged. Leaves opposite; stipules none.

[+][+] Fruit a utricle; perianth mostly persistent, small, 4--5-lobed or
-parted, or none.

85. Illecebraceae (p. 426). Perianth herbaceous. Stamens perigynous.
Leaves opposite; stipules scarious (none in Scleranthus).

86. Amarantaceae (p. 427). Flowers sessile, bracteate, the bracts
(usually 3) more or less dry and scarious, as well as the 3--5 distinct
sepals. Stamens 1--5, hypogynous. Utricle indehiscent or circumscissile.
Embryo annular. Leaves mostly alternate, entire; stipules none.

87. Chenopodiaceae (p. 430). Flowers sessile, not scarious-bracteate.
Sepals greenish or succulent, 5 or fewer, or none. Stamens 5 or fewer,
perigynous or hypogynous. Embryo annular or spiral or conduplicate.
Leaves alternate; stipules none.

[+][+][+] Ovary of several 1-ovuled carpels, in fruit a berry (in our
genera).

88. Phytolaccaceae (p. 435). Sepals 4--5, petaloid or herbaceous. Stamens
5--30, hypogynous. Carpels 5--12. Embryo annular. Leaves alternate,
entire; stipules none.

[+][+][+][+] Fruit a triangular or lenticular achene.

89. Polygonaceae (p. 436). Flowers on jointed pedicels. Calyx 3--6-lobed
or -parted, more or less corolla-like. Stamens 4--12, on the calyx.
Embryo nearly straight. Leaves alternate, with sheathing stipules or
none.

[*] 2. Ovary compound, the cells many-ovuled (or 1-ovuled in Piperaceae);
embryo minute in copious albumen; flowers perfect.

90. Podostemaceae (p. 444). Aquatic, with the aspect of sea-weeds or
mosses, with minute naked flowers from a spathe-like involucre. Ovary
superior; pod 2--3-celled.

91. Aristolochiaceae (p. 444). Terrestrial herbs or climbing shrubs.
Calyx valvate, adnate at least at base to the 6-celled many-seeded
ovary. Stamens 6--12, more or less united with the style. Leaves
alternate, mostly cordate; stipules none.

92. Piperaceae (Sec. Saurureae), (p. 446). Marsh herb (our species). Perianth
none. Carpels 3--4, distinct, with usually a single ascending seed.
Leaves alternate, entire.

[*] 3. Ovary superior, simple, 1-celled, 1-ovuled, forming a berry or
drupe; trees or shrubs, with mostly entire leaves and no stipules.

93. Lauraceae (p. 446). Flowers perfect or dioecious. Sepals 4 or 6, in
2 rows. Stamens 9--12; anthers opening by 2 or 4 uplifted valves. Seed
suspended; albumen none. Aromatic; leaves alternate.

94. Thymelaeaceae (p. 448). Flowers perfect. Calyx corolla-like,
4--5-cleft. Stamens twice as many. Seed suspended, with little or no
albumen. Acrid shrubs with very tough bark; leaves alternate.

95. Elaeagnaceae (p. 448). Flowers mostly dioecious. Calyx-tube becoming
berry-like and enclosing the achene. Seed erect, albuminous. Leaves
silvery-scurfy, opposite.

[*] 4. Ovary inferior, 1-celled, 1--3-ovuled (but 1-seeded); albumen
without testa, bearing the embryo in a cavity at the apex; calyx-lobes
valvate.

96. Loranthaceae (p. 449). Parasitic on trees, with jointed stems and
opposite leaves. Flowers dioecious. Ovule solitary, erect. Fruit a
berry.

97. Santalaceae (p. 450). Flowers perfect. Ovules 2--4, suspended from
the apex of a central placenta. Fruit dry, indehiscent. Leaves
alternate.

[*] 5. Flowers all unisexual (polygamous in some Urticaceae and
Empetraceae, apparently perfect in Euphorbia); cells 1--2-ovuled; embryo
nearly as long as the albumen or filling the seed; calyx often wanting,
corolla-like only in some Euphorbiaceae and Empetraceae; stipules often
present.

[+] 1. Ovary superior, 3-celled (1-celled in Crotonopsis) with 1 or 2
pendulous ovules in each cell; herbs.

98. Euphorbiaceae (p. 451). Flowers monoecious or dioecious
(involucrate and apparently perfect in Euphorbia). Mostly with milky
juice, and usually alternate often stipulate leaves.

[+] 2. Ovary 1-celled, 1-seeded; trees or shrubs (except some
Urticaceae).

[++] Calyx regular, the stamens as many as the lobes and opposite them
or fewer; ovary superior.

99. Urticaceae (p. 461). Flowers monoecious, dioecious, or (in Ulmeae)
perfect. Seeds exalbuminous or nearly so. Inflorescence very various.

[++][++] Perianth mostly none; at least the staminate flowers in aments
or spikes or dense heads; albumen none.

100. Platanaceae (p. 466). Trees, with alternate palmately lobed leaves,
sheathing stipules, and monoecious flowers in separate globose heads.
Ovary superior; fruit a club-shaped nutlet.

101. Juglandaceae (p. 467). Trees, with alternate pinnate leaves, no
stipules, and monoecious flowers, the staminate in aments. Ovary
inferior; fruit a nut.

102. Myricaceae (p. 469). Shrubs, with resinous-dotted leaves, with or
without stipules, and monoecious or dioecious flowers, both kinds in
short scaly aments. Ovary superior, becoming a small drupe-like nut.

[+] 3. Ovary 2--7-celled, with 1 or 2 suspended ovules in each cell,
becoming 1-celled and 1-seeded; calyx mostly none or adherent to the
ovary; trees or shrubs with simple leaves.

103. Cupuliferae (p. 470). Flowers monoecious. Fruit a nut surrounded
by an involucre, or (in Betuleae) a small winged or angled naked nutlet
in the axils of the scales of an ament.

[+] 4. Ovary 1-celled, becoming a 2-valved pod with two parietal or
basal placentae bearing numerous small comose seeds; perianth none.

104. Salicaceae (p. 480). Dioecious trees or shrubs, with both kinds of
flowers in aments, and simple alternate stipulate leaves.

[+] 5. Ovary several-celled, becoming a drupe containing 3--9 1-seeded
nutlets; seed erect; low shrubby heath-like evergreens.

105. Empetraceae (p. 487). Flowers polygamous or dioecious,
scaly-bracted. Sepals somewhat petaloid or none. Embryo axile in
copious albumen.

[+] 6. Ovary 1-celled with a suspended ovule, becoming an achene; calyx
none; aquatic herbs, with finely dissected whorled leaves.

106. Ceratophyllaceae (p. 488). Flowers monoecious, minute, axillary
and sessile. Albumen none; the seed filled with a highly developed
embryo.


SUBCLASS II. GYMNOSPERMOUS EXOGENS. Ovules naked upon a scale, bract, or
disk. Cotyledons two or more.

107. Coniferae (p. 489). Resiniferous trees or shrubs, with mostly
awl-shaped or needle-shaped and evergreen leaves, and monoecious or
dioecious flowers.


CLASS II. MONOCOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS.

Stems without central pith or annular layers, but having the woody
fibres distributed irregularly through them (a transverse slice showing
the fibres as dots scattered through the cellular tissue). Embryo with a
single cotyledon and the early leaves always alternate. Parts of the
flower usually in threes (never in fives), and the leaves mostly
parallel-veined. Our species herbaceous, excepting Smilax.

[*] Ovary inferior (superior in Bromeliaceae, nearly so in some
Hemodoraceae); at least the inner lobes of the perianth petal-like.

[+] 1. Seeds without albumen, very numerous and minute.

108. Hydrocharidaceae (p. 495). Aquatics, with dioecious or polygamous
flowers from a spathe; outer perianth calyx-like, the inner sometimes
wanting. Stamens 3--12. Ovary 1-celled with 3 parietal placentae or
6--9-celled with axile placentae.

109. Burmanniaceae (p. 496). Terrestrial, with scale-like cauline leaves
and regular perfect triandrous flowers. Perianth corolla-like.

110. Orchidaceae (p. 497). Terrestrial, with very irregular perfect
flowers. Stamens and style connate; anthers 1 or 2. Capsule 1-celled;
placentae 3, parietal. Perianth corolla-like.

[+] 2. Seeds albuminous. (Ovary 3-celled and flowers regular in our
genera.)

111. Bromeliaceae (p. 511). Mostly epiphytes, with dry persistent scurfy
leaves. Flowers 6-androus; outer perianth calyx-like.

112. Hemodoraceae (p. 512). Fibrous-rooted, with equitant leaves and
perfect 3- or 6-androus flowers. Perianth persistent, woolly or scurfy
outside. (Ovary sometimes nearly free; leaves flat in Aletris.)

113. Iridaceae (p. 513). Root not bulbous; leaves equitant in two ranks.
Flowers from a spathe. Stamens 3, opposite the outer lobes of the
corolla-like perianth; anthers extrorse.

114. Amaryllidaceae (p. 515). Often bulbous-rooted and scapose. Perianth
corolla-like. Stamens 6; anthers introrse.

115. Dioscoreaceae (p. 517). Climbing, with net-veined leaves. Flowers
dioecious, small, 6-androus; perianth calyx-like. Ovules 1 or 2 in
each cell.

[*][*] Ovary superior (very rarely partially adnate to the calyx in
Liliaceae).

[+] 1. At least the inner perianth corolla-like; ovary compound; seeds
with copious albumen.

116. Liliaceae (p. 517). Flowers perfect, 6-androus, the regular perianth
corolla-like (dioecious in Smilax, dimerous in Maianthemum, the outer
divisions herbaceous in Trillium). Fruit a 3-celled capsule or berry.

117. Pontederiaceae (p. 535). Aquatic, with more or less irregular
perfect flowers from a spathe; perianth corolla-like. Stamens 3 or 6,
mostly unequal or dissimilar. Capsule 1-celled or imperfectly 3-celled.

118. Xyridaceae (p. 536). Rush-like, scapose. Flowers capitate, perfect,
3-androus, the calyx glumaceous. Capsule 1-celled.

119. Mayaceae (p. 537). Moss-like aquatic. Flowers perfect, axillary,
solitary, 3-androus; calyx herbaceous. Capsule 1-celled.

120. Commelinaceae (p. 538). Flowers perfect, regular or somewhat
irregular, with 3 more or less herbaceous persistent sepals and 3
fugacious petals. Stamens 6 or some sterile. Capsule 2--3-celled.

127. Eriocauleae (p. 566). Scapose aquatic or marsh plants, with linear
leaves and dense heads of monoecious (rarely dioecious) minute
flowers. Corolla tubular or none. Capsule 2--3-celled, 2--3-seeded.

[+] 2. Perianth small, of 6 equal persistent glumaceous segments;
flowers perfect; ovary compound.

121. Juncaceae (p. 539). Rush-like. Stamens 3 or 6. Capsule 1- or
3-celled, 3-valved.

[+] 3. Flowers without chaffy glumes, the perianth none or reduced to
bristles or sepal-like scales; flowers often monoecious or
dioecious; carpels solitary or united.

[++] Flowers capitate or upon a spike or spadix, with or without a
spathe.

122. Typhaceae (p. 547). Marsh or aquatic plants, with linear leaves, and
monoecious flowers without proper perianth, in heads or a naked spike.

123. Araceae (p. 548). Flowers perfect or monoecious upon the same
spadix, rarely dioecious, with 4 or 6 scale-like sepals or none.

[++][++] Flowers very minute, one or few from the margin of a floating
disk-like frond.

124. Lemnaceae (p. 551). Plants very small, green, mostly lenticular or
globose.

[+] 4. Perianth of 4 or 6 segments, the inner often petaloid, or none;
carpels solitary or distinct (coherent in Triglochin); seeds without
albumen; aquatic or marsh plants, often monoecious or dioecious.

125. Alismaceae (p. 553). Perianth of 6 segments, the inner petal-like.

126. Naiadaceae (p. 557). Perianth-segments herbaceous or none.

[+] 5. Flowers in the axils of chaffy scales or glumes arranged in
spikes or spikelets, without evident perianth; stamens 1--3; ovary
1-celled, 1-seeded; seed albuminous.

128. Cyperaceae (p. 567). Scales single. Perianth none or replaced by
bristles. Anthers basifixed. Fruit a triangular or lenticular achene.
Stem solid, often triangular, with closed sheaths.

129. Gramineae (p. 623). Glumes in pairs. Perianth replaced by minute
scales. Anthers versatile. Fruit a caryopsis. Culm usually hollow,
terete; sheaths split to the base.




SERIES II. CRYPTOGAMOUS OR FLOWERLESS PLANTS; destitute of stamens and
pistils, in fructification producing _spores_ instead of seeds.


CLASS III. ACROGENOUS PLANTS.

Cryptogamous plants with a distinct axis (stem and branches), growing
from the apex only, and furnished for the most part with distinct leaves
(sometimes taking the form of an expanded leaf-like usually prostrate
_thallus_); reproduction by means of antheridia and archegonia,
sometimes also by gemmation.

SUBCLASS I. VASCULAR ACROGENS, OR PTERIDOPHYTES. Stems (and foliage
when present) containing both woody fibre and vessels; antheridia or
archegonia, or both, borne on a minute prothallus, which is developed
from the spore on germination.

[*] Spores of only one kind; prothallus bearing antheridia and
archegonia.

130. Equisetaceae (p. 675). Cylindric jointed hollow-stemmed plants, with
toothed sheaths. Fructification in a terminal spike.

131. Filices (p. 678). Ferns, with fronds circinate in vernation,
bearing the fructification on the under surface or beneath the margin.

132. Ophioglossaceae (p. 693). Fronds often fern-like, erect in
vernation. Sporangia globose, coriaceous, 2-valved, in special spikes
or panicles.

133. Lycopodiaceae (p. 695). Low moss like plants with elongated stems
and small persistent entire several-ranked leaves. Sporangia solitary,
axillary, 1--3-celled, 2--3-valved.

[*][*] Spores of two kinds, the _macrospore_ producing a prothallus with
archegonia, the _microspore_ smaller and developing antheridia.

134. Selaginellaceae (p. 697). Low leafy moss-like or marsh plants, with
branching stems, and small 4--6-ranked leaves, or with a corm-like stem
and basal linear-subulate leaves, the two kinds of spores in distinct
solitary axillary 1-celled sporangia.

135. Marsiliaceae (p. 700). The two kinds of spores in the same or
different sporangia which are borne in a coriaceous peduncled sporocarp
arising from a slender creeping rhizome. Fronds digitately 4-foliolate
or filiform.

136. Salviniaceae (p. 701). The two kinds of spores in separate
thin-walled 1-celled sporocarps or conceptacles clustered beneath the
small floating fronds; macrospores solitary.


SUBCLASS II. CELLULAR ACROGENS, OR BRYOPHYTES.

Plants with cellular tissue only; both antheridia and archegonia borne
upon the plant itself.--Including the MUSCI, or Mosses (which are not
treated of here), never thallose, and bearing capsules which usually
dehisce by a lid and contain spores only, and the HEPATICAE, which bear
capsules which dehisce by valves or irregularly and usually have elaters
mingled with the spores. The latter division comprises the following
Orders.

[*] Capsule 4-valved; plant a leafy axis or sometimes a branching
thallus.

137. Jungermanniaceae (p. 702). Leaves, when present, without a midrib,
2-ranked, with often a third row beneath; pedicels slender.

[*][*] Capsule 2-valved, or dehiscing irregularly, or indehiscent; plant
a thallus or thalloid stem.

138. Anthocerotaceae (p. 726). Thallus without epidermis, irregularly
branching; pedicels stout or none. Capsule with a columella. Elaters
mostly without fibres.

139. Marchantiaceae (p. 727). Thallus radiate or dichotomous, the
epidermis usually porose. Capsules borne on the under side of a
pedunculate receptacle, irregularly dehiscent. Elaters 2-spiral.

140. Ricciaceae (p. 730). Thallus radiate or dichotomous, the epidermis
eporose. Capsules immersed in the thallus or sessile upon it,
indehiscent. Elaters none.




ANALYTICAL KEY TO THE ORDERS.


CLASS I. DICOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS. (See p. 1.)

SUBCLASS I. ANGIOSPERMAE. Pistil consisting of a closed ovary.
Cotyledons only two.

DIVISION I. POLYPETALOUS: the calyx and corolla both present;
the latter of _separate_ petals.

[A.] _Stamens numerous, at least more than 10, and more than
twice the sepals or lobes of the calyx._

[1.] _Calyx entirely free and separate from the pistil or
pistils._

                                                                   PAGE
  Pistils numerous but cohering over each other in a solid mass on an
  elongated receptacle.                                 MAGNOLIACEAE, 49

  Pistils numerous, separate, but concealed in a hollow receptacle.

    Leaves opposite, entire; no stipules.            CALYCANTHACEAE, 167

    Leaves alternate, with stipules.              Rosa, in ROSACEAE, 162

  Pistils several, immersed in hollows of the upper surface of a large
  top-shaped receptacle.                     Nelumbo, in NYMPHAEACEAE, 55

  Pistils more than one, separate, not enclosed in the receptacle.

    Stamens inserted on the calyx, distinct.               ROSACEAE, 150

    Stamens united with the base of the petals, monadelphous.
                                                           MALVACEAE, 96

    Stamens inserted on the receptacle.

      Filaments much shorter than the anther; trees.       ANONACEAE, 50

      Filaments longer than the anther.

        Flowers dioecious; twiners with alternate leaves.
                                                      MENISPERMACEAE, 51

        Flowers perfect; if climbers, the leaves opposite.

          Leaves not peltate; petals deciduous.        RANUNCULACEAE, 34

          Leaves peltate; petals persistent.
                                            Brasenia, in NYMPHAEACEAE, 55

  Pistils several-lobed, the ovaries united below the middle.
                                                          RESEDACEAE, 75

  Pistils several, their ovaries cohering in a ring around an axis.
                                                           MALVACEAE, 96

  Pistils strictly one as to the ovary; the styles or stigmas may be
  several.

    Leaves punctate under a lens with transparent dots. HYPERICACEAE, 92

    Leaves not punctate with transparent dots.

      Ovary simple, 1-celled, 2-ovuled.                    ROSACEAE, 150

      Ovary simple, 1-celled, with one parietal many-ovuled placenta.

        Leaves 2--3-ternately compound or dissected.   RANUNCULACEAE, 34

        Leaves peltate, simply lobed.  Podophyllum, in BERBERIDACEAE, 52

      Ovary compound, 1-celled, with a central placenta.
                                                       PORTULACACEAE, 90

      Ovary compound, 1-celled, with two or more parietal placentae.

        Calyx caducous; juice milky or colored.         PAPAVERACEAE, 57

        Calyx deciduous, of 4 sepals.                  CAPPARIDACEAE, 74

        Calyx persistent, of 3 or 5 sepals.                CISTACEAE, 76

      Ovary compound, several-celled.

        Calyx valvate in the bud, and

          Persistent; stamens monadelphous; anthers 1-celled.
                                                           MALVACEAE, 96

          Deciduous; anthers 2-celled.                    TILIACEAE, 101

        Calyx imbricated in the bud, persistent.

          Shrubs; stamens on the base of the petals.
                                                    TERNSTROEMIACEAE, 95

          Aquatic or marsh herbs; ovaries many,

            On 5 placentae in the axis.                SARRACENIACEAE, 57

            On the 8--30 partitions.                     NYMPHAEACEAE, 54

[2.] _Calyx more or less coherent with the surface of the (compound)
ovary._

  Ovary 8--30-celled; ovules many, on the partitions; aquatic.
                                                         NYMPHAEACEAE, 54

  Ovary 10-celled; cells 1-ovuled.         Amelanchier, in ROSACEAE, 166

  Ovary 2--5-celled.

    Leaves alternate, with stipules.             Pomeae, in ROSACEAE, 151

    Leaves opposite, without stipules.           Some SAXIFRAGACEAE, 168

    Leaves alternate, without stipules.                 STYRACACEAE, 333

  Ovary 1-celled, with the ovules parietal.

    Fleshy plants with no true foliage; petals many.      CACTACEAE, 186

    Rough-leaved plants; petals 5 or 10.                  LOASACEAE, 193

  Ovary one-celled, with the ovules rising from the base.
                                                       PORTULACACEAE, 90

[B.] _Stamens of the same number as the petals and opposite them._

  Pistils 3--6, separate; flowers dioecious; woody vines.
                                                      MENISPERMACEAE, 51

  Pistil only one.

    Ovary one-celled; anthers opening by uplifted valves.
                                                       BERBERIDACEAE, 52

    Ovary one-celled; anthers not opening by uplifted valves.

      Style and stigma one; ovules more than one.       PRIMULACEAE, 328

      Style 1; stigmas 3; sepals 2; ovules several.    PORTULACACEAE, 90

      Style twice or thrice forked; flowers monoecious.
                                      Crotonopsis, in EUPHORBIACEAE, 458

      Styles 5; ovule and seed only one.             PLUMBAGINACEAE, 327

    Ovary 2--4-celled.

      Calyx-lobes minute or obsolete; petals valvate.      VITACEAE, 112

      Calyx 4--5-cleft, valvate in the bud; petals involute.
                                                         RHAMNACEAE, 111

[C.] _Stamens not more than twice as many as the petals, when of just
the number of the petals then alternate with them._

1. _Calyx free from the ovary, i.e. the ovary wholly superior._

[*] _Ovaries 2 or more, separate._

  Stamens united with each other and with a large and thick stigma
  common to the two ovaries.                         ASCLEPIADACEAE, 338

  Stamens unconnected, on the receptacle, free from the calyx.

    Leaves punctate with pellucid dots.                    RUTACEAE, 106

    Leaves not pellucid-punctate.

      Tree, with pinnate leaves.         Ailanthus, in SIMARUBACEAE, 107

      Low shrub, with pinnate leaves. Xanthorrhiza, in RANUNCULACEAE, 48

      Herbs, not fleshy.                               RANUNCULACEAE, 34

      Herbs, with thick fleshy leaves.                 CRASSULACEAE, 176

  Stamens unconnected, inserted on the calyx.

    Just twice as many as the pistils (flower symmetrical).
                                                       CRASSULACEAE, 176

    Not just the number or twice the number of the pistils.

      Leaves without stipules.                        SAXIFRAGACEAE, 168

      Leaves with stipules.                                ROSACEAE, 150

[*][*] _Ovaries 2--5, somewhat united at the base, separate above._

  Leaves punctate with pellucid dots.                      RUTACEAE, 106

  Leaves not pellucid-punctate.

    Shrubs or trees with opposite leaves.               SAPINDACEAE, 115

    Terrestrial herbs; the carpels fewer than the petals.
                                                      SAXIFRAGACEAE, 168

[*][*][*] _Ovaries or lobes of ovary 3 to 5, with a common style._
                                                        GERANIACEAE, 102

[*][*][*][*] _Ovary only one, and_

[+] _Simple, with one parietal placenta._               LEGUMINOSAE, 122

[+][+] _Compound, as shown by the number of cells, placentae, styles, or
stigmas._

  Ovary one-celled.

    Corolla irregular; petals 4; stamens 6.              FUMARIACEAE, 59

    Corolla irregular; petals and stamens 5.               VIOLACEAE, 78

    Corolla regular or nearly so.

      Ovule solitary; shrubs or trees; stigmas 3.     ANACARDIACEAE, 118

      Ovules solitary or few; herbs.       Some anomalous CRUCIFERAE, 61

      Ovules more than one, in the centre or bottom of the cell.

        Petals not inserted on the calyx.            CARYOPHYLLACEAE, 82

        Petals on the throat of a bell-shaped or tubular calyx.
                                                         LYTHRACEAE, 184

      Ovules several or many, on two or more parietal placentae.

        Leaves punctate with pellucid and dark dots.    HYPERICACEAE, 92

        Leaves beset with reddish gland-tipped bristles.
                                                        DROSERACEAE, 178

        Leaves neither punctate nor bristly-glandular.

          Sepals 5, very unequal or only 3.                CISTACEAE, 76

          Sepals and petals 4; stamens 6.       Anomalous CRUCIFERAE, 61

          Sepals and petals 5; stamens 5 or 10.

            Ovary and stamens raised on a stalk.     PASSIFLORACEAE, 194

            Ovary sessile.                            SAXIFRAGACEAE, 168

  Ovary 2--several-celled.

    Flowers irregular.

      Anthers opening at the top,

        Six or eight and 1-celled; ovary 2-celled, 2-ovuled.
                                                       POLYGALACEAE, 120

        Ten and 2-celled; ovary 5-celled.
                                         Rhododendron, in ERICACEAE, 286

      Anthers opening lengthwise.

        Stamens 12 and petals 6 on the throat of a tubular inflated or
        gibbous calyx.                        Cuphea, in LYTHRACEAE, 186

        Stamens 5--8 or 10, and petals hypogynous, or nearly so.

          Ovary 3-celled.                               SAPINDACEAE, 115

          Ovary 5-celled.            Impatiens, &c., in GERANIACEAE, 105

    Flowers regular or nearly so.

        Stamens neither just as many nor twice as many as the petals,

          Triadelphous; petals 5.                       HYPERICACEAE, 92

          Tetradynamous (or rarely only 2 or 4); petals 4; pungent
          herbs.                                          CRUCIFERAE, 61

          Distinct and fewer than the 4 petals.            OLEACEAE, 335

          Distinct and more numerous than the petals.   SAPINDACEAE, 115

        Stamens just as many or twice as many as the petals.

          Ovules and seeds only 1 or 2 in each cell.

            Herbs; flowers monoecious or dioecious.   EUPHORBIACEAE, 451

            Herbs; flowers perfect and symmetrical.

              Cells of the ovary as many as the sepals, &c.
                                                        GERANIACEAE, 102

              Cells of the (divided) ovary twice as many as the styles,
              sepals, &c.                                  LINACEAE, 101

            Shrubs or trees.

              Leaves 3-foliolate, pellucid-punctate.
                                                Ptelea, in RUTACEAE, 107

              Leaves palmately veined and fruit 2-winged, or pinnate and
              fruit a berry.                            SAPINDACEAE, 115

              Leaves pinnately veined, simple, not punctate.

                Calyx not minute; pod colored, dehiscent; seeds enclosed
                in a pulpy aril.                       CELASTRACEAE, 109

                Calyx minute; fruit a berry-like drupe.   ILICINEAE, 107

          Ovules (and usually seeds) several or many in each cell.

            Stipules between the opposite and simple leaves.
                                                         ELATINACEAE, 91

            Stipules between the opposite and compound leaves (but they
            are caducous).                Staphylea, in SAPINDACEAE, 118

            Stipules none when the leaves are opposite.

              Stamens 5, monadelphous in a 10-toothed tube or cup;
              leaves simple, all radical.   Galax, in DIAPENSIACEAE, 326

              Stamens 10, monadelphous at the base. Leaflets 3,
              inversely heart-shaped.        Oxalis, in GERANIACEAE, 105

              Stamens distinct, free from the calyx.

                Style 1, undivided.                       ERICACEAE, 303

                Styles 2--5, separate.               CARYOPHYLLACEAE, 82

              Stamens distinct, inserted on the calyx.

                Styles 2 (or 3), or splitting into 2 in fruit.
                                                      SAXIFRAGACEAE, 168

                Style 1; pod in the calyx, 1-celled.     LYTHRACEAE, 184

[2.] _Calyx-tube adherent to the ovary, at least to its lower half._

  Tendril-bearing and often succulent herbs.          CUCURBITACEAE, 194

  Not tendril-bearing.

    Ovules and seeds more than one in each cell.

      Ovary 1-celled, many-ovuled from the base.       PORTULACACEAE, 90

      Ovary 1-celled, with 2 or 3 parietal placentae.  SAXIFRAGACEAE, 168

      Ovary 2--several-celled.

        Anthers opening by pores at the apex; style 1.
                                                      MELASTOMACEAE, 183

        Anthers not opening by pores.

          Stamens on a flat disk which covers the ovary.
                                                       CELASTRACEAE, 109

          Stamens inserted on the calyx.

            Eight or four (rarely five); style 1.        ONAGRACEAE, 186

            Five or ten; styles 2--3, distinct.       SAXIFRAGACEAE, 168

      Ovules and seeds only one in each cell.

        Stamens 10 or 5 (instead of many),--
                                    rarely in Crataegus, in ROSACEAE, 165

        Stamens 2 or 8; style 1; stigma 2--4-lobed; herbs.
                                                         ONAGRACEAE, 186

        Stamens 4 or 8; aquatics; styles or sessile stigmas 4.
                                                         HALORAGEAE, 180

        Perfect stamens 4; styles 2; shrub.            HAMAMELIDEAE, 179

        Stamens 4; style and stigma 1; chiefly shrubs.    CORNACEAE, 213

        Stamens 5; flowers in umbels, or rarely in heads.

          Fruit dry, splitting in two at maturity; styles 2.
                                                       UMBELLIFERAE, 193

          Fruit berry-like; styles 2--5, separate or united.
                                                         ARALIACEAE, 212

Division II. GAMOPETALOUS calyx and corolla both present; the latter
with its petals united more or less into one piece.

[A.] _Stamens more numerous than the lobes of the corolla._

  Ovary 1-celled with one parietal placenta.            LEGUMINOSAE, 122

  Ovary 1-celled with two parietal placentae.
                                        Adlumia, &c., in Fumariaceae, 60

  Ovary 1-celled with the ovules at the centre or base. STYRACACEAE, 333

  Ovary 2-celled with a single ovule in each cell.     POLYGALACEAE, 120

  Ovary 3--many-celled.

    Stamens free or nearly free from the corolla; style single.
                                                          ERICACEAE, 309

    Stamens free from the corolla; styles 5. Oxalis, in GERANIACEAE, 105

    Stamens inserted on the base or tube of the corolla.

    Filaments monadelphous; anthers 1-celled, kidney-shaped.
                                                           MALVACEAE, 96

    Filaments 1--5-adelphous at base; anthers 2-celled.

      Calyx free from the ovary.                    TERNSTROEMIACEAE, 96

      Calyx coherent with the ovary or with its base.   STYRACACEAE, 333

    Filaments wholly distinct; calyx free, persistent.    EBENACEAE, 333

    Filaments in pairs at each sinus; anthers 1-celled.
                                                     CAPRIFOLIACEAE, 216

[B.] _Stamens (fertile ones) as many as the lobes of the corolla and
opposite them._

  Ovary 5-celled; corolla appendaged with scales inside. SAPOTACEAE, 332

  Ovary 1-celled; pod several--many-seeded; style 1.    PRIMULACEAE, 328

  Ovary 1-celled; utricle 1-seeded; styles 5.        PLUMBAGINACEAE, 327

[C.] _Stamens as many as the lobes of the corolla and alternate with
them, or fewer._

[1.] _Ovary adherent to the calyx-tube (inferior)._

  Tendril-bearing herbs; anthers often united.        CUCURBITACEAE, 194

  Tendrils none.

    Stamens united by their anthers into a ring or tube.

      Flowers in an involucrate head.                    COMPOSITAE, 230

      Flowers separate, not involucrate; corolla irregular.
                                                        LOBELIACEAE, 305

    Stamens separate, free from the corolla or nearly so, as many as its
    lobes; stipules none; juice milky.                CAMPANULACEAE, 307

    Stamens separate, inserted on the corolla,

      One to three, always fewer than the corolla-lobes.
                                                      VALERIANACEAE, 228

      Four or five; leaves opposite or whorled.

        Ovary 1-celled; flowers in a dense involucrate head.
                                                          DIPSACEAE, 229

        Ovary 2--5-celled.

          Leaves whorled and without stipules.            RUBIACEAE, 222

          Leaves opposite or whorled, and with stipules.  RUBIACEAE, 222

          Leaves opposite without stipules (petioles sometimes with
          stipule-like appendages).                  CAPRIFOLIACEAE, 216

[2.] _Ovary free from the calyx (superior)._

[*] _Corolla irregular; stamens (with anthers) 4 and didynamous, or only
2._

  Ovules and seeds solitary in the (1--4) cells.

    Ovary 4-lobed, the style rising from between the lobes.
                                                           LABIATAE, 403

    Ovary not lobed, the style from its apex.           VERBENACEAE, 401

  Ovules numerous or at least as many as 2 in each cell.

    Ovary and pod 1-celled,

      With a free central placenta; stamens 2.        LENTIBULACEAE, 395

      With 2 or more parietal very many-seeded placentae; stamens 4.
                                                      OROBANCHACEAE, 393

    Ovary and fruit more or less 4--5-celled.           PEDALIACEAE, 399

    Ovary and pod 2-celled, but the 2 placentae parietal.
                                                       BIGNONIACEAE, 398

    Ovary and pod 2-celled; placentae in the axis.

      Seeds rarely few, not on hooks, with albumen.
                                                   SCROPHULARIACEAE, 377

      Seeds few, borne on hook-like or other projections of the
      placentae; no albumen.                             ACANTHACEAE, 399

[*][*] _Corolla somewhat irregular; stamens (with anthers) 5._

  Stamens free from the corolla; anthers with their cells opening by a
  hole or chink at the top.              Rhododendron, in ERICACEAE, 320

  Stamens inserted on the corolla.

    Ovary deeply 4-lobed around the style. Echium, in BORRAGINACEAE, 367

    Ovary not lobed; pod many-seeded.

      Filaments or some of them woolly. Verbascum, SCROPHULARIACEAE, 379

      Filaments not woolly.                  Hyoscyamus, SOLANACEAE, 376

[*][*][*] _Corolla regular._

[+] _Stamens as many as the lobes of the corolla._

  Ovaries 2, separate; their

    Styles and stigmas also wholly separate.
                                          Dichondra, CONVOLVULACEAE, 368

    Stigmas and sometimes styles united into one.

      Filaments distinct; pollen in ordinary grains.    APOCYNACEAE, 337

      Filaments monadelphous; pollen in masses.      ASCLEPIADACEAE, 338

  Ovary one, but deeply 4-lobed around the style (or 2-lobed in
  Heliotropium).

    Leaves alternate.                                 BORRAGINACEAE, 360

    Leaves opposite.                            Mentha, in LABIATAE, 407

  Ovary one; pod 2-lobed or 2-horned at the summit.     LOGANIACEAE, 345

  Ovary one; not deeply lobed,

    One-celled, one-ovuled, becoming an achene.      PLANTAGINACEAE, 422

    One-celled, with ovules parietal or on 2 parietal placentae.

      Leaves (or in Menyanthes three leaflets) entire. GENTIANACEAE, 346

      Leaves toothed, lobed, or pinnately compound. HYDROPHYLLACEAE, 357

    Two- to ten-celled.

      Leafless parasitic twining plants. Cuscuta, in CONVOLVULACEAE, 370

      Leaves opposite, their bases or petioles connected by stipules or
      a stipular line.                                  LOGANIACEAE, 345

    Leaves when opposite without stipules.

      Stamens free from the corolla or nearly so; style 1.
                                                          ERICACEAE, 309

      Stamens almost free from the corolla; style none.   ILICINEAE, 107

      Stamens in the sinuses of the corolla; style 1. DIAPENSIACEAE, 326

      Stamens inserted on the tube of the corolla,

        Four; pod 2-celled, circumscissile.          PLANTAGINACEAE, 422

        Four; ovary 2--4-celled; ovules solitary.       VERBENACEAE, 401

        Five or rarely more.

          Fruit of two or four seed-like nutlets.     BORRAGINACEAE, 360

          Fruit a few-seeded pod.

            Calyx 5-cleft; style 3-lobed or -cleft.   POLEMONIACEAE, 354

            Sepals 5; styles 1 or 2, entire or 2-cleft; seeds large,
            only one or two in a cell.               CONVOLVULACEAE, 367

            Fruit a many-seeded pod or berry.

              Styles 2.                Hydrolea, in HYDROPHYLLACEAE, 360

              Style single.                              SOLANACEAE, 373

[+][+] _Stamens fewer than the lobes of the corolla._

  Stamens 4, didynamous.

    Ovary 2-celled; the cells several-seeded.           ACANTHACEAE, 399

    Ovary 2--4-celled; the cells 1-seeded.              VERBENACEAE, 401

  Stamens only 2 with anthers; ovary 4-lobed.  Lycopus, in LABIATAE, 408

  Stamens 2, rarely 3; ovary 2-celled.

    Low herbs; corolla scarious, withering on the pod.
                                                     PLANTAGINACEAE, 422

    Herbs; corolla rotate, or somewhat funnelform, and slightly
    irregular.                        Veronica, in SCROPHULARIACEAE, 386

    Shrubs or trees; corolla perfectly regular.            OLEACEAE, 335

DIVISION III. APETALOUS: corolla (and sometimes calyx) wanting.

[A.] _Flowers not in catkins._

[1.] _Ovary or its cells containing many ovules._

  Ovary and pod inferior (i.e. calyx-tube adherent to the ovary),

    Six-celled; stamens 6--12.                     ARISTOLOCHIACEAE, 444

    Four-celled; stamens 4.                 Ludwigia, in ONAGRACEAE, 187

    One-celled, with parietal placentae.
                                   Chrysosplenium, in SAXIFRAGACEAE, 172

  Ovary and pod wholly naked (there being no calyx),

    Two-celled, 2-beaked; flowers capitate; tree.      HAMAMELIDEAE, 179

    Two-celled, many-ribbed; aquatic herb.            PODOSTEMACEAE, 444

  Ovary and pod superior, i.e. free from the calyx.

    Five-celled and 5-beaked, opening across the beaks, which fall off
    at maturity; stamens 10.             Penthorum, in CRASSULACEAE, 176

    Three-celled and 3-valved, or 3--5-celled and circumscissile.
                                                          FICOIDEAE, 198

    Two-celled or one-celled; placentae central.

      Stamens inserted on the throat or tube of the calyx.
                                                         LYTHRACEAE, 184

      Stamens inserted on the receptacle or the base of the calyx,

        Alternate with the 5 sepals.          Glaux, in PRIMULACEAE, 331

        Opposite the sepals when of the same number. CARYOPHYLLACEAE, 82

    One-celled, with one parietal placenta.            RANUNCULACEAE, 34

  Ovaries 2 or more, separate, simple.                 RANUNCULACEAE, 34

[2.] _Ovary or its cells containing only 1 or 2, rarely 3 or 4, ovules._

[*] _Pistils more than one, and distinct or nearly so._

  Stamens inserted on the calyx; leaves with stipules.     ROSACEAE, 150

  Stamens inserted on the receptacle.

    Leaves punctate with pellucid dots.    Xanthoxylum, in RUTACEAE, 106

    Leaves not dotted.

      Calyx present, and usually colored or petal-like.
                                                       RANUNCULACEAE, 34

      Calyx absent; flowers entirely naked, perfect, spiked.
                                                         PIPERACEAE, 446

[*][*] _Pistil one, either simple or compound._

  Ovary partly inferior, the calyx coherent to its lower half, 2-celled;
  styles 2; stamens many.                              HAMAMELIDEAE, 179

  Ovary wholly inferior (in perfect or pistillate flowers).

    Aquatic herbs; ovary 3--4-celled, or (Hippuris) 1-celled.
                                                         HALORAGEAE, 180

    Mostly woody plants; style or stigma one, entire; ovary 1-celled.

      Stigma running down one side of the style.
                                                Nyssa, in CORNACEAE, 215

      Stigma terminal, with or without a style.

        Parasitic on the branches of trees; anthers sessile.
                                                       LORANTHACEAE, 449

        Not parasitic above ground; anthers on filaments.
                                                        SANTALACEAE, 450

  Ovary really free from the calyx, but permanently invested by its
  tube, or the base of it, so as to seem inferior.

    Shrubs, with scurfy leaves; flowers mostly dioecious.
                                                        ELAEAGNACEAE, 448

    Herbs, with the calyx colored like a corolla.

      Leaves opposite, simple.                        NYCTAGINACEAE, 425

      Leaves alternate, pinnate.              Poterium, in ROSACEAE, 161

  Ovary plainly free from the calyx, which is sometimes wanting.

    Stipules (ocreae) sheathing the stem at the nodes.

      Tree; calyx none; flowers monoecious, in heads.   PLATANACEAE, 466

      Herbs; calyx present and commonly petal-like.    POLYGONACEAE, 436

    Stipules not sheathing the stem, or none.

      Aquatic herbs, submerged or nearly so.

        Leaves whorled and dissected; style single.
                                                   CERATOPHYLLACEAE, 488

        Leaves opposite, entire; styles 2; ovary 4-celled.
                                                         HALORAGEAE, 180

      Not aquatics, herbs.

        Ovary 10-celled; berry 10-seeded.            PHYTOLACCACEAE, 436

        Ovary 3- (rarely 1--2-) celled; juice usually milky.
                                                      EUPHORBIACEAE, 451

        Ovary 1-celled; juice not milky.

          Style, if any, and stigma only one; leaves simple; no scarious
          bracts around the flowers.                     URTICACEAE, 461

          Styles 3; embryo straight; flowers involucrate.
                                         Eriogonum, in POLYGONACEAE, 436

          Style or stigmas 2 or 3; embryo coiled or curved.

            Stipules not scarious, leaves palmately cleft or palmately
            compound.                     Cannabineae, in URTICACEAE, 461

            Stipules scarious (or none); leaves opposite.
                                                      ILLECEBRACEAE, 426

            Stipules none; but flowers with scarious bracts.
                                                       AMARANTACEAE, 427

            Stipules and scarious bracts none.       CHENOPODIACEAE, 430

      Shrubs or trees.

        Ovules a pair in each cell of the ovary.

          Fruit 2-celled, a double samara. Acerineae, in SAPINDACEAE, 115

          Fruit a 1-celled and 1-seeded samara or a drupe.
                                                           OLEACEAE, 335

        Ovules single in each cell of the

          Three-nine-celled ovary; leaves heath-like.   EMPETRACEAE, 487

          Three-celled ovary; leaves broad.              RHAMNACEAE, 111

          One--two-celled ovary; styles or stigmas 2-cleft.
                                                         URTICACEAE, 461

          One-celled ovary; style and stigma single and entire.

            Anthers opening longitudinally.            THYMELAEACEAE, 448

            Anthers opening by uplifted valves.           LAURACEAE, 446

[B.] _Flowers monoecious or dioecious, one or both sorts in catkins._

[1.] _Only one sort of flowers in catkins or catkin-like heads._

  Fertile flowers in a short catkin, head, or strobile.  URTICACEAE, 461

  Fertile flowers single or clustered; sterile in slender catkins
  (except in Fagus).

    Leaves pinnate; fertile flowers and fruit naked.   JUGLANDACEAE, 467

    Leaves simple; fertile flowers 1--3 in an involucre or cup.
                                                        CUPULIFERAE, 470

[2.] _Both sterile and fertile flowers in catkins or catkin-like heads._

  Ovary and pod 2-celled, many-seeded. Liquidambar, in HAMAMELIDEAE, 180

  Ovary and pod 1-celled, many-seeded; seeds furnished with a downy tuft
  at one end.                                            SALICACEAE, 480

  Ovary 1--2-celled, only one ovule in each cell; fruit 1-seeded.

    Parasitic on trees; fruit a berry.                 LORANTHACEAE, 449

    Trees or shrubs, not parasitic.

      Calyx regular, in the fertile flower succulent in fruit.
                                                         URTICACEAE, 461

      Calyx none, or rudimentary and scale-like.

        Style and stigma one, simple; the flowers in heads.
                                                        PLATANACEAE, 466

        Styles or long stigmas 2.

          Fertile flowers 2 or 3 at each scale of the catkin.
                                                        CUPULIFERAE, 470

          Fertile flowers single under each scale; nutlets naked,
          waxy-coated or drupe like.                     MYRICACEAE, 469

SUBCLASS II. GYMNOSPERMAE. Pistil an open scale or altered leaf, bearing
naked ovules on its margin or its upper surface, or in Taxus entirely
wanting. Flowers monoecious or dioecious.                 CONIFERAE, 489


CLASS II. MONOCOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS. (See p. 15.)

[A.] SPADICEOUS DIVISION. _Flowers aggregated on a spadix or fleshy
axis, or sometimes scattered, destitute of calyx and corolla (excepting
some_ Araceae _and_ Naiadaceae, _where, however, they are on a spadix),
and also without glumes (husky scales). Leaves sometimes with netted
veins._

  Little floating aquatics, with no distinction of stem and foliage.
                                                          LEMNACEAE, 551

  Immersed aquatics, branching and leafy.                NAIADACEAE, 557

  Reed-like or Flag-like marsh herbs, with linear and sessile nerved
  leaves; flowers in spikes or heads.

    Flowers monoecious, and quite destitute of floral envelopes.
                                                          TYPHACEAE, 547

    Flowers perfect, on a lateral spadix; sepals 6.
                                                 Acorus, in ARACEAE, 550

  Terrestrial or marsh plants; leaves mostly with a distinct
  netted-veined blade, petioled.                            ARACEAE, 548

[B.] PETALOIDEOUS DIVISION. _Flowers not collected on a spadix,
furnished with floral envelopes (perianth) answering to calyx or to both
calyx and corolla, either herbaceous or colored and petal-like (wholly
glumaceous in_ Juncaceae).

[1.] _Perianth adherent to the whole surface of the ovary._

  Flowers dioecious (or rarely perfect), regular.

    Aquatics; ovules and seeds several or numerous.
                                                   HYDROCHARIDACEAE, 495

    Twiners; ovules and seeds one or two in each cell.
                                                      DIOSCOREACEAE, 517

  Flowers perfect; ovules and seeds usually numerous.

    Stamens only one or two; flower irregular, gynandrous.
                                                        ORCHIDACEAE, 497

    Stamens three.

      Anthers introrse, opening transversely.         BURMANNIACEAE, 496

      Anthers introrse or versatile, opening lengthwise.
                                                       HAEMODORACEAE, 512

      Anthers extrorse, opening lengthwise.               IRIDACEAE, 513

    Stamens 6; flowers usually on a scape from a bulb.
                                                     AMARYLLIDACEAE, 515

[2.] _Perianth adherent only to the base or lower half of the ovary._

  Perianth woolly or roughish-mealy; leaves often equitant.
                                                       HAEMODORACEAE, 512

  Perianth smooth; the leaves grass-like.
                                    Stenanthium, etc., in LILIACEAE, 517

[3.] _Perianth wholly free from the ovary._

  Pistils numerous or few in a head or ring.             ALISMACEAE, 553

  Pistil one, compound (cells or placentae mostly 3).

    Perianth not glumaceous or chaffy; flowers not in dense heads.

      Stamens 6 (in Maianthemum 4), similar and perfect.

        Scurfy-leaved epiphyte; seeds hairy-tufted.    BROMELIACEAE, 511

        Marsh herbs; carpels nearly distinct or separating closed from
        the axis; seed without albumen.   Juncagineae, in NAIADACEAE, 557

        Terrestrial, not rush-like; seeds with albumen.

          Perianth of similar divisions or lobes, mostly colored.
                                                          LILIACEAE, 517

          Perianth of 3 foliaceous and green sepals and 3 colored
          withering-persistent petals.        Trillium in LILIACEAE, 517

          Perianth of 3 persistent green sepals, and 3 ephemeral
          deliquescent petals.                        COMMELINACEAE, 538

      Stamens 6, dissimilar, or only three with perfect anthers.

        Sepals 3, herbaceous; ephemeral petals 3, unequal.
                                                      COMMELINACEAE, 538

        Perianth tubular, 6-lobed.                   PONTEDERIACEAE, 535

      Stamens 3, similar. Moss-like aquatic.               MAYACEAE, 537

    Perianth wholly glumaceous, of 6 similar divisions.   JUNCACEAE, 539

    Perianth partly glumaceous or chaff-like; flowers in very dense
    heads. Rush-like or aquatic.

      Flowers perfect; inner perianth of three yellow petals; perfect
      stamens and plumose sterile filaments each 3; pod 1-celled,
      many-seeded on 3 parietal placentae.                XYRIDACEAE, 536

      Flowers monoecious or dioecious, whitish-bearded; stamens 4 or 3;
      pod 2--3-celled, 2--3-seeded.                     ERIOCAULEAE, 566

[C.] GLUMACEOUS DIVISION. _Flowers destitute of proper perianth, except
sometimes small scales or bristles, but covered by scale-like bracts or
glumes._

  Glume a single scale-like bract with a flower in its axil.
                                                         CYPERACEAE, 567

  Glumes in pairs, of two sorts.                          GRAMINEAE, 623


CLASS III. CRYPTOGAMOUS ACROGENS. (See p. 17.)

SUBCLASS I. PTERIDOPHYTES: with woody fibres and vessels.

  Spores of only one kind; spore-cases

    Borne beneath shield-shaped scales in a terminal spike; stems naked,
    sheathed at the nodes.                             EQUISETACEAE, 675

    On the back or margin of fronds circinate in vernation.
                                                           FILICES, 678

    Bivalvular, in special spikes or panicles; fronds erect in
    vernation, from short erect rootstocks.         OPHIOGLOSSACEAE, 693

    Solitary in the axils of leaves, 2--3-valved; low long-stemmed
    moss-like evergreens; leaves small, in 4--16 ranks.
                                                      LYCOPODIACEAE, 695

  Spores of two kinds, large and small; spore-cases

    Solitary in the axils of small 4-ranked leaves, or in the bases of
    linear radical leaves.                          SELAGINELLACEAE, 697

    Enclosed in peduncled sporocarps; leaves 4-foliolate.
                                                       MARSILIACEAE, 700

    Sporocarps sessile beneath the stem; small, floating, pinnately
    branched, with minute imbricate leaves.            SALVINIACEAE, 701

SUBCLASS II. BRYOPHYTES: with cellular tissue only. [Capsules not
operculate, containing spores and usually elaters, in the following
Orders.]

  Capsule 4-valved, pedicellate; plants leafy-stemmed, rarely thallose.
                                                   JUNGERMANNIACEAE, 702

  Capsule 2-valved or valveless; plants thallose.

    Thallus without epidermis; capsule with a columella,
    short-pedicelled or sessile on the thallus.     ANTHOCEROTACEAE, 726

    Capsules borne beneath a pedunculate receptacle. MARCHANTIACEAE, 727

    Capsules immersed in the thallus or sessile upon it, indehiscent.
                                                         RICCIACEAE, 730




ABBREVIATIONS

OF THE NAMES OF AUTHORS CITED IN THIS VOLUME.


_Adans._--Adanson, Michel.
_Ait._--Aiton, William.
_Ait. f._--Aiton, William Townsend.
_All._--Allioni, Carlo.
_Anders._--Andersson, Nils Johan.
_Arn._--Arnott, George A. Walker.
_Aust._--Austin, Coe Finch.
_Baldw._--Baldwin, William.
_Bart._--Barton, William P. C.
_Beauv._--Palisot de Beauvois, A. M. F. J.
_Benth._--Bentham, George.
_Benth. & Hook._--G. Bentham and J. D. Hooker.
_Bernh._--Bernhardi, Johann Jacob.
_Bess._--Besser, Wilhelm S. J. G. von.
_Bieb._--Bieberstein, F. A. M. von.
_Bigel._--Bigelow, Jacob.
_Bisch._--Bischoff, Gottlieb Wilhelm.
_Boeckl._--Boeckeler, Otto.
_Boiss._--Boissier, Edmond.
_Borkh._--Borkhausen, M. B.
_Br., R. Br._--Brown, Robert.
_Britt._--Britton, Nathaniel Lord.
_Carr._--Carriere, Elie Abel.
_Carring._--Carrington, Benjamin.
_Cass._--Cassini, Henri.
_Cav._--Cavanilles, Antonio Jose.
_Cerv._--Cervantes, Vicente.
_Cham._--Chamisso, Adalbert von.
_Chapm._--Chapman, Alvan Wentworth.
_Chois._--Choisy, Jacques Denis.
_Clayt._--Clayton, John.
_Cogn._--Cogniaux, Alfred.
_Coult._--Coulter, John Merle.
_Darl., Darling._--Darlington, William.
_DC._--DeCandolle, Augustin Pyramus.
_A. DC._--DeCandolle, Alphonse.
_Decsne._--Decaisne, Joseph.
_Desf._--Desfontaines, Rene Louiche.
_Desv._--Desvaux, Nicaise Augustin.
_Dicks._--Dickson, James.
_Dill._--Dillenius, Johan Jacob.
_Dougl._--Douglas, David.
_Dufr._--Dufresne, Pierre.
_Dumort._--Dumortier, Barthelemy C.
_Eat._--Eaton, Amos.
_Ehrh._--Ehrhart, Friedrich.
_Ell._--Elliott, Stephen.
_Endl._--Endlicher, Stephan L.
_Engelm._--Engelmann, George.
_Esch._--Eschscholtz, J. F.
_Fisch._--Fischer, F. E. Ludwig von.
_Foug._--Fougeroux, Auguste Denis.
_Forst._--Forster, J. R. and George.
_Froel._--Froelich, Joseph Aloys.
_Gaertn._--Gaertner, Joseph.
_Gaertn. f._--Gaertner, Carl Friedrich.
_Gal._--Galeotti, Henri.
_Gaud._--Gaudichaud-Beaupre, Charles.
_Gey._--Geyer, Charles (Carl Andreas).
_Ging._--Gingins de Lassaraz, F. C. J.
_Glox._--Gloxin, Benjamin Peter.
_Gmel._--Gmelin, Samuel Gottlieb.
_Gooden._--Goodenough, Samuel.
_Grev._--Greville, Robert Kaye.
_Griseb._--Grisebach, Heinrich R. A.
_Gronov._--Gronovius, Jan Fredrik.
_Guss._--Gussone, Giovanni.
_Hack._--Hackel, Eduard.
_Hartm._--Hartman, Carl Johann.
_Hassk._--Hasskarl, Justus Carl.
_Hausskn._--Haussknecht, Carl.
_Haw._--Haworth, Adrian Hardy.
_HBK._--Humboldt, F. Alexander von, Aime Bonpland, and C. S. Kunth.
_Hegelm._--Hegelmaier, Friedrich.
_Herb._--Herbert, William.
_Hochst._--Hochstetter, Christian F.
_Hoffm._--Hoffman, Georg Franz.
_Holl._--Hollick, Arthur.
_Hook._--Hooker, William Jackson.
_Hook. f._--Hooker, Joseph Dalton.
_Hornem._--Hornemann, Jens Wilken.
_Huds._--Hudson, William.
_Huebn._--Huebener, J. W. P.
_Jacq._--Jacquin, Nicolaus Joseph.
_Juss._--Jussieu, Antoine Laurent.
_A. Juss._--Jussieu, Adrien de.
_L., Linn._--Linnaeus, Carolus, or Carl von Linne.
_L. f._--Linne, Carl von (the son).
_L'Her._--L'Heritier de Brutelle, C. L.
_Lag._--Lagasca, Mariano.
_Lam._--Lamarck, J. B. A. P. Monnet.
_Ledeb._--Ledebour, Carl F. von.
_Lehm._--Lehmann, J. G. C.
_Less._--Lessing, Christian Friedrich.
_Light._--Lightfoot, John.
_Lindb._--Lindberg, Sextus Otto.
_Lindenb._--Lindenberg, Johann B. W.
_Lindl._--Lindley, John.
_Loisel._--Loiseleur-Deslongchamps, J. L. A.
_Lour._--Loureiro, Juan.
_Marsh._--Marshall, Humphrey.
_Mart._--Martens, Martin.
_Maxim._--Maximowicz, Carl Johann.
_Medic._--Medicus, Friedrich Casimir.
_Meisn._--Meisner, Carl Friedrich.
_Mey._--Meyer, Ernst (Heinrich F.).
_Mich._--Micheli, Pier' Antonio.
_Michx._--Michaux, Andre.
_Michx. f._--Michaux, Francois Andre.
_Mill._--Miller, Philip.
_Mitch._--Mitchell, J.
_Mitt._--Mitten, William.
_Mont._--Montagne, (J. F.) Camille.
_Moq._--Moquin-Tandon, Alfred.
_Muell._--Mueller, Jean (of Aargau).
_Muhl._--Muhlenberg, Henry (H. Ernst).
_Murr._--Murray, Johann Andreas.
_Neck._--Necker, Noel Joseph de.
_Nutt._--Nuttall, Thomas.
_Pall._--Pallas, Peter Simon.
_Pers._--Persoon, Christian Hendrik.
_Planch._--Planchon, Jules Emile.
_Poir._--Poiret, Jean Louis Marie.
_Poll._--Pollich, Johann Adam.
_R. & S._--Roemer, J. J., and Joseph August Schultes.
_Raf._--Rafinesque-Schmaltz, C. S.
_Reichenb._--Reichenbach, H. G. L.
_Richards._--Richardson, John.
_Roem._--Roemer, Johann Jacob.
_Rostk._--Rostkovius, F. W. G.
_Rottb._--Rottboell, Christen Fries.
_St. Hil._--St. Hilaire, Auguste de.
_Salisb._--Salisbury, Richard Anthony.
_Sartw._--Sartwell, Henry P.
_Sav._--Savi, Gaetano.
_Schlecht._--Schlechtendal, D. F. L. von.
_Schleich._--Schleicher, J. C.
_Schleid._--Schleiden, Matthias Jacob.
_Schrad._--Schrader, Heinrich A.
_Schreb._--Schreber, Johann C. D.
_Schum._--Schumacher, Christian F.
_Schwein._--Schweinitz, Lewis David de.
_Scop._--Scopoli, Johann Anton.
_Scribn._--Scribner, F. Lamson.
_Shuttlw._--Shuttleworth, Robert.
_Sibth._--Sibthorp, John.
_Sieb. & Zucc._--Siebold, P. F. von, and J. G. Zuccarini.
_Spreng._--Sprengel, Kurt.
_Steph._--Stephani, F.
_Steud._--Steudel, Ernst Gottlieb.
_Sulliv._--Sullivant, William Starling.
_Tayl._--Taylor, Thomas.
_Thuill._--Thuillier, Jean Louis.
_Thunb._--Thunberg, Carl Peter.
_Thurb._--Thurber, George.
_Torr._--Torrey, John.
_Tourn._--Tournefort, Joseph Pitton de.
_Tratt._--Trattenick, Leopold.
_Tuckerm._--Tuckerman, Edward.
_Turcz._--Turczaninow, Nicolaus.
_Underw._--Underwood, Lucien M.
_Vaill._--Vaillant, Sebastien.
_Vent._--Ventenat, Etienne Pierre.
_Vill._--Villars, Dominique.
_Wahl._--Wahlenberg, George.
_Wahlb._--Wahlberg, Pehr Fredrik.
_Walp._--Walpers, Wilhelm Gerhard.
_Walt._--Walter, Thomas.
_Wang._--Wangenheim, F. A. J. von.
_Web._--Weber, Friedrich.
_Wigg._--Wiggers, F. H.
_Willd._--Willdenow, Carl Ludwig.
_Wils._--Wilson, William.
_Wimm._--Wimmer, Friedrich.
_With._--Withering, William.
_Wormsk._--Wormskiold, M. von.
_Wr. (Eat. & Wr.)_--Wright, John.
_Wulf._--Wulfen, Franz Xaver.


SIGNS USED IN THIS WORK.

 deg., ','' . The sign of degrees ( deg.) is used for feet; of minutes ('), for
inches; of seconds (''), for lines,--the line being the twelfth part of
an inch, and very nearly equivalent to two millimetres.

 mu. In microscopic measurements, the conventional sign for the
micromillimetre or the one-thousandth part of a millimetre = one
two-thousandth part of a line.

[male] Bearing only stamens or antheridia.

[female] Pistillate or bearing archegonia.

? A mark of doubt.

! A mark of affirmation or authentication.

Figures or words separated by a short dash (--) indicate the extremes of
variation, as "5--10'' long, few--many-flowered," i.e. varying from 5 to
10 lines in length, and with from few to many flowers.




                                 BOTANY

                                 OF THE

                        NORTHERN UNITED STATES.



SERIES I.

PHAENOGAMOUS OR FLOWERING PLANTS.

Vegetables bearing proper flowers, that is, having stamens and pistils,
and producing seeds, which contain an embryo.


CLASS I. DICOTYLEDONOUS OR EXOGENOUS PLANTS.

Stems formed of bark, wood, and pith; the wood forming a layer between
the other two, increasing, when the stem continues from year to year, by
the annual addition of a new layer to the outside, next the bark. Leaves
netted-veined. Embryo with a pair of opposite cotyledons, or rarely
several in a whorl. Flowers having their parts usually in fives or
fours.


SUBCLASS I. ANGIOSPERMAE.

Pistil consisting of a closed ovary, which contains the ovules and forms
the fruit. Cotyledons only two.


DIVISION I. POLYPETALOUS EXOGENOUS PLANTS.

Floral envelopes consisting of both calyx and corolla; the petals not
united with each other. (Several genera or species belonging to
Polypetalous Orders are destitute of petals, or have them more or less
united.)


ORDER 1. RANUNCULACEAE. (CROWFOOT FAMILY.)

_Herbs or some woody plants, with a colorless and usually acrid juice,
polypetalous, or apetalous with the calyx often colored like a corolla,
hypogynous; the sepals, petals, numerous stamens, and many or few
(rarely single) pistils all distinct and unconnected._--Flowers regular
or irregular. Sepals 3--15. Petals 3--15, or wanting. Stamens
indefinite, rarely few. Fruits either dry pods, or seed-like (achenes),
or berries. Seeds anatropous (when solitary and suspended the rhaphe
dorsal), with hard albumen and a minute embryo.--Leaves often dissected,
their stalks dilated at the base, sometimes with stipule-like
appendages. (A large family, including some acrid-narcotic poisons.)


Synopsis of the Genera.

Tribe I. CLEMATIDEAE. Sepals normally 4, petal-like, valvate in the bud,
or with the edges bent inward. Petals none, or small. Achenes numerous,
tailed with the feathery or hairy styles. Seed suspended.--Leaves all
opposite.

1. Clematis. Climbing by the leafstalks, or erect herbs.

Tribe II. ANEMONEAE. Sepals 3--20, often petal-like, imbricated in the
bud. Stamens mostly numerous. Achenes numerous or several, in a head or
spike.--Herbs, never climbing; leaves alternate, or radical, the upper
sometimes opposite or whorled.

[*] Petals none (rarely some staminodia). Seed suspended.

[+] All but the lower leaves opposite or whorled. Peduncles 1-flowered.

2. Anemone. Involucre leaf-like, remote from the flower. Leaves compound
or dissected. Pistils very many.

3. Hepatica. Involucre close to the flower, of 3 oval bracts,
calyx-like. Leaves radical, simple and lobed. Pistils several.

4. Anemonella. Stigma terminal, broad and flat. Radical leaves and
involucre compound. Peduncles umbellate. Achenes 4--15, many-ribbed.

[+][+] Leaves alternate, compound. Flowers panicled, often dioecious.

5. Thalictrum. Sepals usually 4, petal-like or greenish, Achenes few.

[*][*] Petals none. Sepals 3--5, caducous. Seed erect. Leaves alternate.

6. Trautvetteria. Achenes numerous, inflated, 4-angled. Flowers
corymbose. Filaments white, clavate.

[*][*][*] Petals evident. Sepals usually 5. Achenes many.

7. Adonis. Sepals and petals (5--16, crimson or scarlet) flat,
unappendaged. Seed suspended.

8. Myosurus. Sepals spurred. Petals 5, white. Achenes in a long spike.
Scapes 1-flowered. Seed suspended.

9. Ranunculus. Petals 5, yellow or white, with a scale or gland at base.
Achenes capitate. Seed erect.

Tribe III. HELLEBOREAE. Sepals imbricated in the bud, rarely persistent,
petal-like. Petals often nectariferous or reduced to staminodia or
none. Pods (follicles) or berries (in n. 20, 21) few, rarely single,
few--many-seeded.--Leaves alternate.

[*] Ovules and commonly seeds more than one pair. Herbs.

[+] Flowers regular, not racemose. Petals inconspicuous nectaries or
slender or none. Sepals tardily deciduous.

10. Isopyrum. Petals none. Sepals broad, white. Pods few. Leaves
compound.

11. Caltha. Petals none. Sepals broad, yellow. Leaves kidney-shaped,
undivided.

12. Trollius. Petals 5--20, narrow, pitted above the base. Pods sessile.
Leaves palmately lobed.

13. Coptis. Petals 5--6, small, hollowed at apex, white. Pods
long-stalked. Leaves radical, trifoliolate.

14. Helleborus. Petals small, tubular, 2-lipped. Sepals 5, broad,
persistent and turning green. Pods sessile.

15. Eranthis. Petals small 2-lipped nectaries. Sepals 5--8, narrow,
deciduous. Flower solitary, involucrate.

[+][+] Sepals and large spur-shaped petals regular, each 5.

16. Aquilegia. Pistils 5, with slender styles. Leaves ternately
compound.

[+][+][+] Flowers unsymmetrical and irregular. Sepals 5.

17. Delphinium. Upper sepal spurred. Petals 4, of two forms; the upper
pair with long spurs, enclosed in the spur of the calyx.

18. Aconitum. Upper sepal hooded, covering the two long-clawed small
petals.

[+][+][+][+] Flowers regular, racemose. Sepals caducous. Petals very
small, stamen-like, or none. Leaves decompound.

19. Cimicifuga. Flowers in long often paniculate racemes. Pistils 1--8,
becoming many-seeded pods.

20. Actaea. Flowers in a single short raceme. Pistil single, forming a
many-seeded berry.

[*][*] Ovules a single pair. Flowers regular. Roots yellow and bitter.

21. Hydrastis. Flowers solitary. Sepals 3, petal-like, caducous. Petals
none. Stamens numerous. Pistils several, becoming 2-seeded berries.
Leaves simple, lobed.

22. Xanthorrhiza. Flowers in compound racemes. Sepals 5. Petals 5,
small, 2-lobed, with claws. Stamens 5--10. Pods 1-seeded. Shrub with
pinnate leaves.


1. CLEMATIS, L. VIRGIN'S-BOWER.

Sepals 4, or rarely more, colored, the valvate margins turned inward in
the bud. Petals none or small. Achenes numerous in a head, bearing the
persistent styles as naked, hairy, or plumose tails.--Perennial herbs or
vines, mostly a little woody, and climbing by the bending or clasping of
the leaf-stalks, rarely low and erect. Leaves opposite. ([Greek:
Klemati/s], a name of Dioscorides for a climbing plant with long and
lithe branches.)

Sec. 1. FLAMMULA. _Flowers cymose-paniculate, rather small, in our species
dioecious. Sepals petaloid, whitish, spreading, thin. Petals none.
Anthers short, blunt._

1. C. Virginiana, L. (COMMON VIRGIN'S-BOWER.) Smooth; leaves bearing 3
ovate acute leaflets, which are cut or lobed, and somewhat heart-shaped
at the base; tails of the fruit plumose.--River-banks, etc., common;
climbing over shrubs. July, August.

2. C. ligusticifolia, Nutt. Very similar, but the leaves 5-foliolate or
quinate-ternate.--Long Pine, Neb., and west to the Pacific.

Sec. 2. VIORNA. _Flowers large, solitary on long peduncles, usually
nodding. Sepals thick, erect and connivent at base, mostly dull purple.
Petals none. Anthers linear._

[+] _Stems climbing; leaves pinnate; calyx (and foliage) glabrous or
puberulent._

3. C. Viorna, L. (LEATHER-FLOWER.) Calyx ovate and at length
bell-shaped; the purplish _sepals_ (1' long) _very thick and leathery,
wholly connivent_ or only the tips recurved; long tails of the _fruit
very plumose_; leaflets 3--7, ovate or oblong, sometimes slightly
cordate, 2--3-lobed or entire; uppermost leaves often simple.--Rich
soil, Penn. to Mo., and southward. May--Aug.

4. C. Pitcheri, Torr. & Gray. Calyx bell-shaped; the dull purplish
_sepals with narrow and slightly margined recurved points; tails of the
fruit filiform and naked or shortly villous_; leaflets 3--9, ovate or
somewhat cordate, entire or 3-lobed, much reticulated; uppermost leaves
often simple.--S. Ind. to Kan., and Tex. June.

5. C. crispa, L. Calyx cylindraceous below, the upper half of the
bluish-purple _sepals_ (1--2' long) _dilated_ and widely spreading, with
_broad and wavy thin margins; tails of the fruit silky_ or glabrate;
leaflets 5--9, thin, varying from ovate or cordate to lanceolate, entire
or 3--5-parted. (C. cylindrica, _Sims._)--Va. near Norfolk, and
southward. May--Aug.

[+][+] _Low and erect, mostly simple; flowers solitary, terminal; leaves
sessile or nearly so, undivided, strongly reticulated._

6. C. ochroleuca, Ait. Leaves ovate, entire or sometimes 3-lobed, silky
beneath; peduncles long; tails of the fruit very plumose.--Copses, Long
Island to Penn. and Ga.; rare. May.

7. C. Fremonti, Watson. Leaves crowded, thick, often coarsely toothed,
sparingly villous-tomentose; peduncles very short; tails villous or
glabrate, not plumose.--Mo. and Kan.

Sec. 3. ATRAGENE. _Some of the outer filaments enlarged and more or less
petaloid; peduncles bearing single large flowers; the thin sepals widely
spreading._

8. C. verticillaris, DC. Woody-stemmed climber, almost glabrous; leaves
trifoliolate, with slender common and partial petioles; leaflets ovate
or slightly heart-shaped, pointed, entire, or sparingly toothed or
lobed; flower bluish-purple, 2--3' across; tails of the fruit
plumose.--Rocky places in mountainous districts, Maine and W. New Eng.
to Va., Minn., and northwestward; rare. May.--A pair of leaves with a
peduncle between them, developed in spring from each of the opposite
buds, gives the appearance of a whorl, whence the specific name.


2. ANEMONE, Tourn. ANEMONE. WIND-FLOWER.

Sepals few or many, petal-like. Petals none, or in n. 1 resembling
abortive stamens. Achenes pointed or tailed, flattened, not ribbed. Seed
suspended.--Perennial herbs with radical leaves; those of the stem 2 or
3 together, opposite or whorled, and forming an involucre remote from
the flower; peduncles 1-flowered, solitary or umbellate. (The ancient
Greek and Latin name, from [Greek: a)nemo/o], to be shaken by the wind.)

Sec. 1. PULSATILLA. _Carpels numerous in a head, with long hairy styles
which in fruit form feathery tails, as in_ Clematis; _flower large,
usually with some minute or indistinct gland-like abortive stamens
answering to petals._

1. A. patens, L., var. Nuttalliana, Gray. (PASQUE-FLOWER.) Villous with
long silky hairs; peduncle solitary; flower erect, developed before the
leaves, which are ternately divided, the lateral divisions 2-parted, the
middle one stalked and 3-parted, the segments deeply once or twice cleft
into narrowly linear and acute lobes; lobes of the sessile involucre
like those of the leaves, at the base all united into a shallow cup;
sepals 5--7, purplish or whitish (1--11/2' long), spreading when in full
anthesis.--Prairies, Ill. and Mo., thence northward and westward.
March--April.--A span high. Tail of carpels 2' long. (Eu. Siberia.)

Sec. 2. ANEMONE proper. _Styles short, not plumose. Staminodia none._

[*] _Achenes densely long-woolly, compressed; involucre far below the
flower._

[+] _Stem single, from a small tuber; sepals 10--20; style filiform._

2. A. Caroliniana, Walt. Stem 3--6' high; root-leaves once or twice
3-parted or cleft; involucre 3-parted, its wedge-shaped divisions
3-cleft; sepals 10--20, oblong-linear, purple or whitish; head of fruit
oblong.--Ill. to Neb. and southward. May.

[+][+] _Stems several; sepals 5--8; style filiform._

3. A. parviflora, Michx. Stem 3--12' high from a slender rootstock,
1-flowered; root-leaves 3-parted, their broadly wedge-shaped divisions
crenate-incised or lobed; involucre 2--3-leaved; sepals 5 or 6, oval,
white; head of fruit globular.--Lake Superior, northward and westward.
May, June.

4. A. multifida, DC. Stems from a branching caudex, silky-hairy (6--12'
high); principal involucre 2--3-leaved, bearing one naked and one or two
2-leaved peduncles; leaves of the involucre short-petioled, similar to
the root-leaves, twice or thrice 3-parted and cleft, their divisions
linear; sepals obtuse, red, sometimes greenish-yellow or whitish; head
of fruit spherical or oval.--Rocks, etc., N. E. Maine to Lake Superior,
north and westward; rare. June.

[+][+][+] _Taller, commonly branching above or producing two or more
peduncles; involucral leaves long-petioled; sepals 5--8, silky or downy
beneath (4--6'' long), oval or oblong; style subulate._

5. A. cylindrica, Gray. (LONG-FRUITED A.) Slender (2 deg. high),
silky-pubescent; flowers 2--6, on very long upright _naked peduncles_;
involucral leaves twice or thrice as many as the peduncles, 3-divided;
their divisions _wedge-lanceolate_, the lateral 2-parted, the middle
3-cleft; lobes cut and toothed at the apex; _sepals 5, rather obtuse_,
greenish-white; _head of fruit cylindrical_ (1' long).--Dry woods, N.
Eng. to Mo., and northwestward. May.--Peduncles 7--12' long, all from
the same involucre and naked throughout, or one involucellate in the
middle.

6. A. Virginiana, L. More loosely pubescent or glabrate; involucral
leaves 3, 3-parted; their _divisions ovate-lanceolate_, pointed,
cut-serrate, the lateral 2-parted, the middle 3-cleft; peduncles
elongated, the earliest naked, the others with a 2-leaved involucel at
the middle, repeatedly proliferous; _sepals 5_, _acute_, greenish (in
one variety white and obtuse); _head of fruit oval or oblong_.--Woods
and meadows; common. June--August.--Plant 2--3 deg. high; the upright
peduncles 6--12' long.

[*][*] _Achenes naked, orbicular, compressed, wing-margined; sepals 5,
obovate; involucre sessile._

7. A. Pennsylvanica, L. Hairy, rather low; primary involucre 3-leaved,
bearing a naked peduncle, and soon a pair of branches or peduncles with
a 2-leaved involucre at the middle, which branch similarly in turn;
their leaves broadly wedge-shaped, 3-cleft, cut and toothed; radical
leaves 5--7-parted or cleft; sepals white (6--9'' long); head of fruit
spherical.--W. New Eng. to Penn., Ill., and northwestward. June--Aug.

[*][*][*] _Achenes rather few, nearly naked, ovate-oblong; stems
slender, 1-flowered; leaves radical._

8. A. nemorosa, L. (WIND-FLOWER. WOOD A.) Low, smoothish; stem perfectly
simple, from a filiform rootstock; _involucre of 3 long-petioled
trifoliolate_ leaves, their leaflets wedge-shaped or oblong, and toothed
or cut, or the lateral ones (var. QUINQUEFOLIA) 2-parted; a similar
radical leaf in sterile plants solitary from the rootstock; peduncle not
longer than the involucre; sepals 4--7, oval, white, sometimes blue, or
tinged with purple outside; carpels only 15--20, oblong, with a hooked
beak.--Margin of woods. April, May.--A delicate vernal species; the
flower 1' broad. (Eu.)

9. A. nudicaulis, Gray. Glabrous, rootstock filiform; radical leaves
reniform, 3-parted, the divisions broadly cuneate with rounded
crenate-incised or -lobed summit; involucre of a single similar
petiolate leaf or wanting; achenes glabrous, tipped with a
slender-subulate hooked style.--North shore of Lake Superior near Sand
Bay, Minn., in bogs. (_Joseph C. Jones._) Imperfectly known.


3. HEPATICA, Dill. LIVER-LEAF. HEPATICA.

Involucre simple and 3-leaved, very close to the flower, so as to
resemble a calyx; otherwise as in Anemone.--Leaves all radical,
heart-shaped and 3-lobed, thickish and persistent through the winter,
the new ones appearing later than the flowers, which are single, on
hairy scapes. (Name from a fancied resemblance to the liver in the shape
of the leaves.)

1. H. triloba, Chaix. Leaves with 3 ovate obtuse or rounded lobes; those
of the involucre also obtuse; sepals 6--12, blue, purplish, or nearly
white; achenes several, in a small loose head, ovate-oblong, pointed,
hairy.--Woods; common from the Atlantic to Mo., Minn., and northward,
flowering soon after the snow leaves the ground in spring. (Eu.)

2. H. acutiloba, DC. Leaves with 3 ovate and pointed lobes, or sometimes
5-lobed; those of the involucre acute or acutish.--Passes into the other
and has the same range.


4. ANEMONELLA, Spach.

Involucre compound, at the base of an umbel of flowers. Sepals 5--10,
white and conspicuous. Petals none. Achenes 4--15, ovoid, terete,
strongly 8--10-ribbed, sessile. Stigma terminal, broad and
depressed.--Low glabrous perennial; leaves all radical, compound.

1. A. thalictroides, Spach. (RUE-ANEMONE.) Stem and slender petiole of
radical leaf (a span high) rising from a cluster of thickened tuberous
roots; leaves 2--3-ternately compound; leaflets roundish, somewhat
3-lobed at the end, cordate at the base, long-petiolulate, those of the
2--3-leaved 1--2-ternate involucre similar; flowers several in an umbel;
sepals oval (1/2' long, rarely pinkish), not early deciduous. (Thalictrum
anemonoides, _Michx._)--Woods, common, flowering in early spring with
Anemone nemorosa, and considerably resembling it. Rarely the sepals are
3-lobed like the leaflets.


5. THALICTRUM, Tourn. MEADOW-RUE.

Sepals 4--5, petal-like or greenish, usually caducous. Petals none.
Achenes 4--15, grooved or ribbed, or else inflated. Stigma unilateral.
Seed suspended.--Perennials, with alternate 2--3-ternately compound
leaves, the divisions and the leaflets stalked; petioles dilated at
base. Flowers in corymbs or panicles, often polygamous or dioecious.
(Derivation obscure.)

[*] _Flowers dioecious or sometimes polygamous, in ample panicles;
filaments slender; stigmas elongated, linear or subulate; achenes
sessile or short-stipitate, ovoid, pointed, strongly several-angled and
grooved._

1. T. dioicum, L. (EARLY MEADOW-RUE.) Smooth and pale or glaucous, 1--2 deg.
high; leaves (2--3) all with general petioles; leaflets drooping,
rounded and 3--7-lobed; flowers purplish and greenish, dioecious; the
yellowish anthers linear, mucronate, drooping on fine capillary
filaments.--Rocky woods, etc.; common. April, May.

2. T. polygamum, Muhl. (TALL M.) Smooth, not glandular, 4--8 deg. high;
stem-leaves sessile; leaflets rather firm, roundish to oblong, commonly
with mucronate lobes or tips, sometimes puberulent beneath; panicles
very compound; flowers white, the fertile ones with some stamens;
anthers not drooping, small, oblong, blunt, the mostly white filaments
decidedly thickened upwards. (T. Cornuti, _Man._, not _L._)--Wet meadows
and along rivulets, N. Eng. to Ohio and southward; common. July--Sept.

3. T. purpurascens, L. (PURPLISH M.) Stem (2--4 deg. high) usually purplish;
stem-leaves sessile or nearly so; leaflets more veiny and reticulated
beneath, with or without gland-tipped or glandless hairs or waxy atoms;
panicles compound; flowers (sepals, filaments, etc.) greenish and
purplish, dioecious; anthers linear or oblong-linear, mucronulate,
drooping on capillary filaments occasionally broadened at the
summit.--Dry uplands and rocky hills, S. New Eng. to Minn., and
southward. May, June.

[*][*] _Flowers all perfect, corymbed; the filaments strongly
club-shaped or inflated under the small and short anther; stigma short;
achenes gibbous, long-stipitate._

4. T. clavatum, DC. Size and appearance of n. 1; leaves only twice
ternate; flowers white, fewer; achenes 5--10, flat, somewhat
crescent-shaped, tapering into the slender stipe.--Mountains of Va. and
southward. June.


6. TRAUTVETTERIA, Fisch. & Mey. FALSE BUGBANE.

Sepals 3--5, usually 4, concave, petal-like, very caducous. Petals none.
Achenes numerous, capitate, membranaceous, compressed-4-angled and
inflated. Seed erect.--A perennial herb, with alternate palmately-lobed
leaves, and corymbose white flowers. (For _Prof. Trautvetter_, a Russian
botanist.)

1. T. palmata, Fisch. & Mey. Stems 2--3 deg. high; root-leaves large,
5--11-lobed, the lobes toothed and cut.--Moist ground along streamlets,
Md. to S. Ind., and south to Ga.


7. ADONIS, Dill.

Sepals and petals (5--16) flat, unappendaged, deciduous. Achenes
numerous, in a head, rugose-reticulated. Seed suspended.--Herbs with
finely dissected alternate leaves and showy flowers. ([Greek: A)/donis],
a favorite of Venus, after his death changed into a flower.)

A. AUTUMNALIS, L. A low leafy annual, with scarlet or crimson flowers,
darker in the centre.--Sparingly naturalized from Europe.


8. MYOSURUS, Dill. MOUSE-TAIL.

Sepals 5, spurred at the base. Petals 5, small and narrow, raised on a
slender claw, at the summit of which is a nectariferous hollow. Stamens
5--20. Achenes numerous, somewhat 3-sided, crowded on a very long and
slender spike-like receptacle (whence the name, from [Greek: my~s], _a
mouse_, and [Greek: ou)ra/], _a tail_), the seed suspended.--Little
annuals, with tufted narrowly linear-spatulate root-leaves, and naked
1-flowered scapes. Flowers small, greenish.

1. M. minimus, L. Fruiting spike 1--2' long; achenes quadrate,
blunt.--Alluvial ground, Ill. and Ky., thence south and west. (Eu.)


9. RANUNCULUS, Tourn. CROWFOOT. BUTTERCUP.

Sepals 5. Petals 5, flat, with a little pit or scale at the base inside.
Achenes numerous, in a head, mostly flattened, pointed; the seed
erect.--Annuals or perennials; stem-leaves alternate. Flowers solitary
or somewhat corymbed, yellow, rarely white. (Sepals and petals rarely
only 3, the latter often more than 5. Stamens occasionally few.)--(A
Latin name for a little frog; applied by Pliny to these plants, the
aquatic species growing where frogs abound.)

R. FICARIA, L. (representing the Sec. _Ficaria_), which has
tuberous-thickened roots, Caltha-like leaves, and scape-like peduncles
bearing a 3-sepalous and 8--9-petalous yellow flower, has been found as
an escape from gardens about New York and Philadelphia.

Sec. 1. BATRACHIUM. _Petals with a spot or naked pit at base, white, or
only the claw yellow; achenes marginless, transversely wrinkled; aquatic
or subaquatic perennials, with the immersed foliage repeatedly dissected
(mostly by threes) into capillary divisions; peduncles 1-flowered,
opposite the leaves._

[*] _Receptacle hairy._

1. R. circinatus, Sibth. (STIFF WATER-CROWFOOT.) _Leaves_ all under
water and _sessile_, with broad conspicuous stipules, the divisions and
subdivisions short, spreading in one roundish plane, _rigid, not
collapsing when withdrawn from the water_. (R. divaricatus, _Man._, not
_Schrank_.)--Ponds and slow streams, Maine and Vt., to Iowa, north and
westward, much rarer than the next. June--Aug. (Eu.)

2. R. aquatilis, L., var. trichophyllus, Gray. (COMMON WHITE
WATER-CROWFOOT.) _Leaves_ all under water and mostly _petioled_, their
capillary divisions and subdivisions _rather long and soft, usually
collapsing more or less when withdrawn from the water_; petiole rather
narrowly dilated.--Common, especially in slow-flowing waters, the
eastern form with more soft and flaccid leaves. June--Aug. (Eu.)

Var. caespitosus, DC. A dwarf terrestrial form, rooting at the nodes, the
small leaves somewhat fleshy, with broader rigid divisions.--S. Ill.
(_Schneck_), and westward.

[*][*] _Receptacle glabrous; no submersed leaves._

R. HEDERACEUS, L. Rooting freely in shallow water; leaves all reniform,
angulate-lobed.--Fresh-water marshes at Norfolk, Va. (Nat. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. HALODES. _Petals yellow, with nectariferous pit and scale; carpels
thin-walled, striate, in an oblong head; scapose, spreading by runners._

3. R. Cymbalaria, Pursh. (SEA-SIDE CROWFOOT.) Glabrous; scapes 1--6'
high, 1--7-flowered; leaves clustered at the root and on the joints of
the long rooting runners, roundish-heart-shaped or kidney-shaped,
crenate, rather fleshy, long-petioled; petals 5--8.--Sandy shores, from
New Jersey northward, and along the Great Lakes to Ill., Kan. and
westward; also at salt springs. June--Aug.

Sec. 3. RANUNCULUS proper. _Petals with a little scale at the base, yellow;
achenes nerveless._

[*] _Achenes smooth; mostly perennial._

[+] _Aquatic; immersed leaves filiformly dissected, as in_ Sec. Batrachium.

4. R. multifidus, Pursh. (YELLOW WATER-CROWFOOT.) Stems floating or
immersed, with the leaves all repeatedly 3-forked into long filiform
divisions, or sometimes creeping in the mud (perennial by rooting from
the nodes, if at all); emersed leaves with shorter and linear or
wedge-shaped divisions, or else kidney-shaped and sparingly lobed or
toothed; petals 5--8, deep bright yellow, 4--6'' long, much larger than
the calyx; carpels in a round head, pointed with a straight beak.--E.
New Eng. to S. Penn., Mo., and northward. May--July.--Out of water it is
often pubescent, especially in

Var. terrestris, Gray. Stem rooting in the mud or ascending from the
base; leaves all smaller, coarsely dissected, round-reniform in outline;
flowers and fruit twice or thrice smaller.--N. Ohio to N. Ill., Minn.,
and westward.

[+][+] _Terrestrial but growinq in very wet places, glabrous or nearly
so; leaves entire or barely toothed, all or else all but the lowest
lanceolate or linear; carpels forming a globular head._ (SPEARWORT.)

5. R. ambigens, Watson. (WATER PLANTAIN SPEARWORT.) Stems ascending
(1--2 deg. high), often rooting from the lower joints; leaves lanceolate or
the lowest oblong, mostly denticulate (3--5' long), contracted into a
margined half-clasping petiole; petals 5--7, bright yellow, oblong
(2--3'' long); _carpels flattened, large_ (1'' long), _pointed with a
long narrow-subulate beak_. (R. alismaefolius, _Man._, not _Gey._)--N.
Eng. to Ont., Minn. and southward; common, especially at the north.
June--Aug.

6. R. Flammula, L. (SMALLER SPEARWORT.) Stem reclining or ascending,
rooting below, leaves lanceolate or linear, or the lowest ovate-oblong
to lanceolate, entire or nearly so, mostly petioled (1--2' long), petals
5--7, much longer than the calyx, bright yellow, _carpels small,
flattish but turgid, mucronate with a short abrupt point_.--Only a small
form (var. INTERMEDIUS) met with in this country (shore of L. Ontario,
and northward), a span high, with flowers 3--5'' in diameter, passing
into

Var. reptans, E. Meyer. (CREEPING S.) Small, slender, the _filiform
creeping stems rooting at all the joints_; leaves linear, spatulate, or
oblong (1/4--1' long); flowers small.--Gravelly or sandy banks; Newf. to
Penn., north and westward. June--Sept. (Eu.)

7. R. oblongifolius, Ell. Usually annual; stem erect or ascending, often
pubescent below, slender (1--2 deg. high), _diffusely branched above and
many-flowered; leaves serrate or denticulate_, lower long-petioled,
ovate or oblong (1/2--11/2' long), uppermost linear; flowers 3--5'' broad;
_petals_ 5, bright yellow, 1--3'' long; _carpels_ minute, almost
_globular_, the small style deciduous.--Wet prairies, Ill., Mo., and in
S. States. June.

8. R. pusillus, Poir. Stem ascending, weak, loosely branching (6--18'
long); _leaves entire_ or obscurely denticulate, the lowest round-ovate
or heart-shaped (1/2' long), long-petioled, the upper oblong or lanceolate
(1--11/2' long); _flowers very small; petals 1--5, yellowish_; stamens
3--10; carpels very turgid, smooth or slightly papillose, tipped with a
minute sessile stigma.--Wet places, S. New York, and southward along the
coast. June--Aug.

[+][+][+] _Terrestrial, but often in wet places; leaves mostly cleft or
divided._

[++] _Root-leaves not divided to the very base; achenes marginless._

9. R. affinis, R. Br. Somewhat hairy or glabrous; low or slender, 1 deg.
high or less; leaves pedately cleft, the cauline with linear or narrow
oblanceolate divisions; petals light yellow, 3--4'' long or smaller;
_heads oblong; achenes turgid_, with small and mostly recurved style,
pubescent or glabrous.--And var. VALIDUS, Gray, stouter and with more
fleshy leaves, the lower mostly undivided and roundish, cordate,
truncate or cuneate at base, coarsely crenate or more or less
cleft.--Minn., Iowa, north and westward.

10. R. rhomboideus, Goldie. Low (3--8' high), _hairy; root-leaves
roundish or rhombic-ovate_, rarely subcordate, toothed or crenate;
lowest stem-leaves similar or 3--5-lobed, the upper 3--5-parted, almost
sessile, the lobes linear; _carpels_ orbicular _with a minute beak_, in
a globose head; _petals large_, deep yellow.--Prairies, Mich. to N.
Ill., Minn., and northward. April, May.

11. R. abortivus, L. (SMALL-FLOWERED C.) Biennial, _glabrous_,
branching, 6'--2 deg. high; primary _root-leaves round heart-shaped or
kidney-form_, barely crenate, the succeeding often 3-lobed or 3-parted;
those of the stem and branches 3--5-parted or divided, subsessile, the
divisions oblong or narrowly wedge-form, mostly toothed; head globose;
_carpels mucronate, with a minute curved beak; petals pale yellow,
shorter than the small reflexed calyx_.--Shady hillsides and along
brooks, common. April--June.

Var. micranthus, Gray. _Pubescent_, roots often fusiform-thickened;
root-leaves seldom at all heart-shaped, some 3-parted or 3-divided;
peduncles more slender and carpels fewer.--E. Mass. to Ill., Minn., and
westward.

12. R. sceleratus, L. (CURSED C.) Annual, glabrous; _root-leaves
3-lobed_, rounded; lower stem-leaves 3-parted, the lobes obtusely cut
and toothed, the uppermost almost sessile, with the lobes oblong-linear
and nearly entire; _carpels barely mucronulate_, very numerous, _in
oblong or cylindrical heads; petals scarcely exceeding the
calyx_.--Wet ditches; appearing as if introduced. June--Aug.--Stem thick
and hollow, 1 deg. high; juice acrid and blistering; leaves thickish;
flowers small, pale yellow. (Eu.)

[++][++] _Leaves variously cleft or divided; achenes in globular heads
(except n. 17), compressed, with an evident firm margin; hirsute or
pubescent._

[=] _Achenes with long recurved beak; root-leaves rarely divided._

13. R. recurvatus, Poir. (HOOKED C.) Hirsute, 1--2 deg. high; leaves of the
root and stem nearly alike, long-petioled, deeply 3-cleft, large; the
lobes broadly wedge-shaped, 2--3-cleft, cut and toothed toward the apex;
petals shorter than the reflexed calyx, pale.--Woods, common. May, June.

[=][=] _Style long and attenuate, stigmatose at the tip, persistent or
the upper part usually deciduous; early root-leaves only 3-parted, the
later 3--5-foliolate; petals bright yellow, much larger than the calyx
(except n. 18)._

14. R. fascicularis, Muhl. (EARLY C.) Low, ascending, 5--9' high,
pubescent with close-pressed silky hairs; _root a cluster of thickened
fleshy fibres; radical leaves appearing pinnate_, the long-stalked
terminal division remote from the sessile lateral ones, itself
3--5-divided or parted and 3--5-cleft, the lobes oblong or linear;
petals often 6 or 7, spatulate-oblong, twice the length of the spreading
calyx; _carpels scarcely margined_, tipped with a slender straight or
rather curved beak.--Dry or moist hills. April, May.

15. R. septentrionalis, Poir. Low, hairy or nearly glabrous; _stems
ascending, or in wet ground some of them procumbent or forming long
runners_; leaves 3-divided, the divisions all stalked (or at least the
terminal one), broadly wedge-shaped or ovate, unequally 3-cleft or
parted and variously cut, never pinnately compound; petals obovate, much
larger than the spreading calyx; _carpels strongly margined_, pointed by
a stout straightish beak. (R. repens, of _Manual_, mainly.)--Moist or
shady places, etc., May--Aug.--Extremely variable in size and foliage,
commencing to flower by upright stems in spring before any long runners
are formed.

[=][=][=] _Style subulate, stigmatose along the inner margin, mostly
persistent._

16. R. repens, L. In habit and foliage closely similar to the last
species; leaves frequently white-variegated or spotted; commencing to
flower somewhat later.--In low grounds; generally in waste grounds near
the coast and probably introduced from Europe, but indigenous westward.

17. R. Pennsylvanicus, L. f. (BRISTLY C.) Stout and erect from a usually
annual root, hirsute with widely spreading bristly hairs, leafy to the
top, 1--2 deg. high; leaves all ternately divided or compound, the stalked
leaflets unequally 3-cleft, sharply cut and toothed, acute; flowers
inconspicuous; calyx reflexed; head of carpels oblong.--Wet places,
common. June--Aug.

18. R. hispidus, Hook. (not Michx. or DC.). Resembling the last, but the
ascending or reclining stems few-leaved, rarely if ever rooting, not
always hirsute; petals (about 3'' long) surpassing the hardly reflexed
and soon deciduous calyx; achenes with a stout straight beak, in a
globose or oval head.--On the northern shore of Lake Superior, and north
and westward; probably in N. Minn.

R. BULBOSUS, L. (BULBOUS C. or BUTTERCUPS.) Hairy; _stem erect from a
bulb-like base_, 1 deg. high; radical leaves 3-divided; _the lateral
divisions sessile, the terminal stalked_ and 3-parted, all wedge-shaped,
cleft and toothed; peduncles furrowed; petals round, wedge shaped at
base; calyx reflexed; carpels tipped with a very short beak.--Fields;
very abundant only in E. New England; rare westward. May--July.--Leaves
appearing as if pinnate. Petals often 6 or 7, deep glossy yellow, the
corolla more than an inch broad. (Nat. from Eu.)

R. ACRIS, L. (TALL C. or BUTTERCUPS.) Hairy; stem erect (2--3 deg. high);
leaves 3-divided; _the divisions all sessile_ and 3-cleft or parted,
their segments cut into lanceolate or linear crowded lobes; peduncles
not furrowed; petals obovate, much longer than the spreading
calyx.--Fields; common, especially eastward. June--Aug.--Flower nearly
as large as the last, but not so deep yellow.--The _Buttercups_ are
avoided by cattle, on account of their very acrid or even blistering
juice, which property, however, is dissipated in drying when these
plants are cut with hay. (Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Achenes beset with rough points or small prickles; annuals._

R. MURICATUS, L. Nearly glabrous; lower leaves roundish or reniform,
3-lobed, coarsely crenate; the upper 3-cleft, wedge-form at the base;
_petals longer than the calyx; carpels flat, spiny-tuberculate_ on the
sides, strongly beaked, surrounded with a wide and sharp smooth
margin.--Eastern Virginia and southward. (Nat. from Eu.)

R. PARVIFLORUS, L. Hairy, slender and diffuse; lower leaves
roundish-cordate, 3-cleft, coarsely toothed or cut; the upper
3--5-parted; _petals not longer than the calyx; carpels minutely hispid
and rough_, beaked, narrowly margined.--Norfolk, Va., and southward.
(Nat. from Eu.)


10. ISOPYRUM, L.

Sepals 5, petal-like, deciduous. Petals 5, minute, wanting in the
American species. Stamens 10--40. Pistils 3--6 or more, pointed with the
styles. Pods ovate or oblong, 2--several-seeded.--Slender smooth
perennial herbs, with 2--3-ternately compound leaves; the leaflets
2--3-lobed. Flowers axillary and terminal, white. (From [Greek:
i)so/pyron], the ancient name of a Fumaria.)

1. I. biternatum, Torr. & Gray. Petals none; filaments white,
club-shaped; pistils 3--6 (commonly 4), divaricate in fruit,
2--3-seeded; seeds smooth.--Moist shady places, Ohio to Minn. and
southward. May.--Fibres of the root thickened here and there into little
tubers. Aspect and size of the plant much as in Anemonella.


11. CALTHA, L. MARSH MARIGOLD.

Sepals 5--9, petal-like. Petals none. Pistils 5--10, with scarcely any
styles. Pods (follicles) compressed, spreading, many-seeded.--Glabrous
perennials, with round and heart-shaped or kidney-form, large, undivided
leaves. (An ancient Latin name for the common Marigold.)

1. C. palustris, L. Stem hollow, furrowed; leaves round or
kidney-shaped, either crenate or dentate or nearly entire; sepals
broadly oval (bright yellow).--Swamps and wet meadows, common northward.
April, May.--Often called incorrectly _Cowslips_; used as a pot-herb in
spring, when coming into flower. C. FLABELLIFOLIA, Pursh, is a weak
slender form, with open-reniform leaves and smaller flowers (1' broad or
less), occurring in cold mountain springs, N. Y. to Md. (Eu.)


12. TROLLIUS, L. GLOBE-FLOWER.

Sepals 5--15, petal-like. Petals numerous, small, 1-lipped, the
concavity near the base. Stamens and pistils numerous. Pods 9 or more,
sessile, many-seeded.--Smooth perennials with palmately parted and cut
leaves, like Ranunculus, and large solitary terminal flowers. (Name
thought to be derived from the old German word _troll_, a globe, or
something round.)

1. T. laxus, Salisb. (SPREADING GLOBE-FLOWER.) Leaves 5--7-parted;
sepals 5--6, spreading; petals 15--25, inconspicuous, much shorter than
the stamens.--Deep swamps, N. H. to Del. and Mich. May.--Flowers twice
the size of the common Buttercup; the sepals spreading, so that the name
is not appropriate, as it is to the _European Globe-flower_ of the
gardens, nor is the blossom showy, being pale greenish-yellow, or nearly
white.


13. COPTIS, Salisb. GOLDTHREAD.

Sepals 5--7, petal-like, deciduous. Petals 5--7, small, club-shaped,
hollow at the apex. Stamens 15--25. Pistils 3--7, on slender stalks.
Pods divergent, membranaceous, pointed with the style, 4--8-seeded.--Low
smooth perennials, with ternately divided root-leaves, and small white
flowers on scapes. (Name from [Greek: ko/pto], _to cut_, alluding to the
divided leaves.)

1. C. trifolia, Salisb. (THREE-LEAVED GOLDTHREAD.) Leaflets 3,
obovate-wedge-form, sharply toothed, obscurely 3-lobed, scape
1-flowered.--Bogs, abundant northward, extending south to Maryland along
the mountains, and west to Iowa. May.--Root of long, bright yellow,
bitter fibres. Leaves evergreen, shining. Scape naked, slender, 3--5'
high. (Eu.)


14. HELLEBORUS, Tourn. HELLEBORE.

Sepals 5, petal-like or greenish, persistent. Petals 8--10, very small,
tubular, 2-lipped. Pistils 3--10, sessile, forming coriaceous
many-seeded pods.--Perennial herbs, with ample palmate or pedate leaves,
and large, solitary, nodding, early vernal flowers. (An ancient name of
unknown meaning.)

H. VIRIDIS, L. (GREEN HELLEBORE.) Root-leaves glabrous, pedate; calyx
spreading, greenish.--Has been found wild on Long Island, in Penn., and
W. Va. (Adv. from Eu.)


15. ERANTHIS, Salisb. WINTER ACONITE.

Sepals 5--8, petal-like, deciduous. Petals small 2-lipped nectaries.
Carpels few, stipitate, several-seeded.--Perennial herbs, with palmately
multifid radical leaves, the scape bearing a single large yellow flower
surrounded by an involucre of a single leaf. (Name from [Greek: e)~r],
_spring_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_.)

E. HYEMALIS, Salisb. Dwarf; flowers cup-shaped, 11/2' in diameter; petals
shorter than the stamens.--Near Philadelphia. (Adv. from Eu.)


16. AQUILEGIA, Tourn. COLUMBINE.

Sepals 5, regular, colored like the petals. Petals 5, all alike, with a
short spreading lip, produced backward into large hollow spurs, much
longer than the calyx. Pistils 5, with slender styles. Pods erect,
many-seeded.--Perennials, with 2--3-ternately compound leaves, the
leaflets lobed. Flowers large and showy, terminating the branches. (Name
from _aquilegus_, water-drawing.)

1. A. Canadensis, L. (WILD COLUMBINE.) Spurs nearly straight; stamens
and styles longer than the ovate sepals.--Rocks, common.
April--June.--Flowers 2' long, scarlet, yellow inside (or rarely all
over), nodding, so that the spurs turn upward, but the stalk becomes
upright in fruit.

2. A. brevistyla, Hook. Flowers small, blue or purplish or nearly white;
spurs incurved.--Red River valley, Dak.; Rocky Mts., northward.

A. VULGARIS, L., the common GARDEN COLUMBINE, of Europe, with hooked
spurs, is beginning to escape from cultivation in some places.


17. DELPHINIUM, Tourn. LARKSPUR.

Sepals 5, irregular, petal-like; the upper one prolonged into a spur at
the base. Petals 4, irregular, the upper pair continued backward into
long spurs which are enclosed in the spur of the calyx, the lower pair
with short claws; rarely only 2, united into one. Pistils 1--5, forming
many-seeded pods in fruit.--Leaves palmately divided or cut. Flowers in
terminal racemes. (Name from _Delphin_, in allusion to the shape of the
flower, which is sometimes not unlike the classical figures of the
dolphin.)

[*] _Perennials, indigenous; pistils 3._

1. D. exaltatum, Ait. (TALL LARKSPUR.) Stem slender, 2--5 deg. high; leaves
deeply 3--5-cleft, the divisions narrow wedge-form, diverging, 3-cleft
at the apex, acute; _racemes wand-like_, panicled, _many-flowered_;
flowers purplish-blue, downy; spur straight; _pods erect_.--Rich soil,
Penn. to Minn. and southward. July.

2. D. tricorne, Michx. (DWARF L.) Leaves deeply 5-parted, their
divisions unequally 3--5-cleft; the lobes linear, acutish; _raceme
few-flowered, loose_; spur straightish, ascending; _pods strongly
diverging_.--W. Penn. to Minn. and southward. April, May.--Root a
tuberous cluster. Stem simple, 6'--3 deg. high. Flowers bright blue,
sometimes white, occasionally numerous.

3. _D. azureum_, Michx. Leaves deeply 3--5-parted, the divisions 2--3
times cleft; the lobes all narrowly linear; _raceme strict_; spur
ascending, usually curved upward; _pods erect_.--Wisc. to Dak. and
southward. May, June.--Stem 1--2 deg. high, slender, often softly pubescent.
Flowers sky-blue or whitish.

[*][*] _Annual, introduced; petals 2, united into one body; pistil
single._

D. CONSOLIDA, L. (FIELD L.) Leaves dissected into narrow linear lobes;
inflorescence loosely paniculate; pedicels shorter than the bracts; pod
glabrous.--Old grain-fields, Penn. and Va.; also sparingly along
roadsides farther north. (Nat. from Eu.)

D. AJACIS, L. Flowers more numerous and spicately racemose; pods
pubescent.--Sparingly escaped from gardens in E. Atlantic States. (Nat.
from Eu.)


18. ACONITUM, Tourn. ACONITE. MONKSHOOD. WOLFSBANE.

Sepals 5, petal-like, very irregular; the upper one (helmet) hooded or
helmet-shaped, larger than the others. Petals 2 (the 3 lower wanting
entirely, or very minute rudiments among the stamens), consisting of
small spur-shaped bodies raised on long claws and concealed under the
helmet. Pistils 3--5. Pods several-seeded. Seed-coat usually wrinkled
or scaly.--Perennials, with palmately cleft or dissected leaves, and
showy flowers in racemes or panicles. (The ancient Greek and Latin
name, of uncertain origin.)

1. A. Noveboracense, Gray. Erect from tuberous-thickened roots, 2 deg. high,
leafy, _the summit and_ strict loosely flowered _raceme pubescent_;
leaves rather deeply parted, the broadly cuneate divisions 3-cleft and
incised; flowers blue, _the helmet gibbous-obovate_ with broad rounded
summit and short descending beak.--Chenango and Orange Cos., N. Y.

2. A. uncinatum, L. (WILD MONKSHOOD.) Glabrous; _stem slender, from
tuberous-thickened roots, erect_, but weak and disposed to climb;
_leaves firm, deeply 3--5-lobed_, petioled, the lobes ovate-lanceolate,
coarsely toothed; _flowers blue; helmet erect, obtusely conical_,
compressed, slightly beaked in front.--Rich shady soil along streams,
Penn., and southward in the mountains; Wisc. June--Aug.

3. A. reclinatum, Gray. (TRAILING WOLFSBANE.) Glabrous; stems trailing
(3--8 deg. long); _leaves deeply 3--7-cleft_, petioled, the lower orbicular
in outline; the divisions wedge-form, incised, often 2--3-lobed;
_flowers white_, in very loose panicles; _helmet soon horizontal,
elongated-conical_, with a straight beak in front.--Cheat Mountain, Va.,
and southward in the Alleghanies. Aug.--Lower leaves 5--6' wide.
Flowers 9'' long, nearly glabrous.


19. CIMICIFUGA, L. BUGBANE.

Sepals 4 or 5, falling off soon after the flower expands. Petals, or
rather transformed stamens, 1--8, small, on claws, 2-horned at the apex.
Stamens as in Actaea. Pistils 1--8, forming dry dehiscent pods in
fruit.--Perennials, with 2--3-ternately-divided leaves, the leaflets
cut-serrate, and white flowers in elongated wand-like racemes. (Name
from _cimex_, a bug, and _fugo_, to drive away.)

Sec. 1. CIMICIFUGA proper. _Pistils 3--8, stipitate; seeds flattened
laterally, covered with chaffy scales, in one row in the membranaceous
pods; style awl-shaped; stigma minute._

1. C. Americana, Michx. (AMERICAN BUGBANE.) Stem 2--4 deg. high; racemes
slender, panicled, ovaries mostly 5, glabrous; pods flattened, veiny,
6--8-seeded.--Mountains of S. Penn. and southward. Aug.--Sept.

Sec. 2. MACROTYS. _Pistil solitary, sometimes 2--3, sessile; seeds smooth,
flattened and packed horizontally in the pod in two rows, as in_ Actaea;
_stigma broad and flat._

2. C. racemosa, Nutt. (BLACK SNAKEROOT. BLACK COHOSH.) Stem 3--8 deg. high,
from a thick knotted rootstock; racemes in fruit becoming 1--3 deg. long;
pods ovoid.--Rich woods, Maine to Wisc., and southward. July.--Var.
DISSECTA, Gray. Leaves irregularly pinnately decompound, the rather
small leaflets incised.--Centreville, Del. (_Commons._)


20. ACTAEA, L. BANEBERRY. COHOSH.

Sepals 4 or 5, falling off when the flower expands. Petals 4--10, small,
flat, spatulate, on slender claws. Stamens numerous, with slender white
filaments. Pistil single; stigma sessile, depressed, 2-lobed. Fruit a
many-seeded berry. Seeds smooth, flattened, and packed horizontally in
2 rows.--Perennials, with ample 2--3-ternately compound leaves, the
ovate leaflets sharply cleft and toothed, and a short and thick terminal
raceme of white flowers. (From [Greek: a)kte/a], _actaea_, ancient names
of the elder, transferred by Linnaeus.)

1. A. spicata, L., var. rubra, Ait. (RED BANEBERRY.) _Raceme ovate_;
petals rhombic-spatulate, much shorter than the stamens; _pedicels
slender; berries cherry-red_, or sometimes white, oval.--Rich woods,
common, especially northward. April, May.--Plant 2 deg. high. (Eu.)

2. A. alba, Bigel. (WHITE BANEBERRY.) Leaflets more incised and sharply
toothed; _raceme oblong; petals slender_, mostly truncate at the end,
appearing to be transformed stamens; _pedicels thickened in fruit_, as
large as the peduncle and red, the globular-oval _berries white_.--Rich
woods, flowering a week or two later than the other, and more common
westward and southward.--White berries rarely occur with slender
pedicels, also red berries with thick pedicels; but these are perhaps
the result of crossing.


21. HYDRASTIS, Ellis. ORANGE-ROOT. YELLOW PUCCOON.

Sepals 3, petal-like, falling away when the flower opens. Petals none.
Pistils 12 or more in a head, 2-ovuled; stigma flat, 2-lipped. Ovaries
becoming a head of crimson 1--2-seeded berries in fruit.--A low
perennial herb, sending up in early spring, from a thick and knotted
yellow rootstock, a single radical leaf and a simple hairy stem, which
is 2-leaved near the summit and terminated by a single greenish-white
flower. (Name unmeaning.)

1. H. Canadensis, L. (GOLDEN SEAL, etc.) Leaves rounded, heart-shaped
at the base, 5--7-lobed, doubly serrate, veiny, when full grown in
summer 4--9' wide.--Rich woods, N. Y. to Minn., and southward.


22. XANTHORRHIZA, Marshall. SHRUB YELLOW-ROOT.

Sepals 5, regular, spreading, deciduous. Petals 5, much smaller than the
sepals, concave and obscurely 2-lobed, raised on a claw. Stamens 5 to
10. Pistils 5--15, with 2 pendulous ovules. Pods 1-seeded, oblong, the
short style becoming dorsal.--A low shrubby plant; the bark and long
roots deep yellow and bitter. Flowers polygamous, brown purple, in
compound drooping racemes, appearing along with the 1--2-pinnate leaves
from large terminal buds in early spring. (Name compounded of [Greek:
xantho/s], _yellow_, and [Greek: r(i/za], _root_.)

1. X. apiifolia, L'Her. Stems clustered, 1--2 deg. high; leaflets cleft and
toothed.--Shady banks of streams, Penn. to S. W. New York and Ky., and
south in the mountains. The rootstocks of this, and also of the last
plant, were used as a yellow dye by the aborigines.

       *        *       *       *       *

NIGELLA DAMASCENA, L., the FENNEL-FLOWER, which offers a remarkable
exception in having the pistils partly united into a compound ovary, so
as to form a several-celled capsule, grows nearly spontaneously around
gardens.


ORDER 2. MAGNOLIACEAE. (MAGNOLIA FAMILY.)

_Trees or shrubs, with the leaf-buds covered by membranous stipules,
polypetalous, hypogynous, polyandrous, polygynous; the calyx and corolla
colored alike, in three or more rows of three, and imbricated (rarely
convolute) in the bud._--Sepals and petals deciduous. Anthers adnate.
Pistils many, mostly packed together and covering the prolonged
receptacle, cohering with each other, and in fruit forming a sort of
fleshy or dry cone. Seeds 1 or 2 in each carpel, anatropous; albumen
fleshy; embryo minute.--Leaves alternate, not toothed, marked with
minute transparent dots, feather-veined. Flowers single, large. Bark
aromatic and bitter.


1. MAGNOLIA, L.

Sepals 3. Petals 6--9. Stamens imbricated, with very short filaments,
and long anthers opening inward. Pistils coherent, forming a fleshy and
rather woody cone-like red fruit; each carpel at maturity opening on the
back, from which the 1 or 2 berry-like seeds hang by an extensile thread
composed of unrolled spiral vessels. Inner seed-coat bony.--Buds
conical, the coverings formed of the successive pairs of stipules, each
pair enveloping the leaf next above, which is folded lengthwise and
applied straight against the side of the next stipular sheath, and so
on. (Named after _Magnol_, Professor of Botany at Montpellier in the
17th century.)

[*] _Leaves all scattered along the branches; leaf-buds silky._

1. M. glauca, L. (SMALL or LAUREL MAGNOLIA. SWEET BAY.) _Leaves_ oval to
broadly lanceolate, 3--6' long, _obtuse, glaucous beneath; flower
globular, white_, 2' long, _very fragrant_; petals broad; cone of fruit
small, oblong.--Swamps, from near Cape Ann and N. Y. southward, near the
coast; in Penn. as far west as Cumberland Co. June--Aug.--Shrub 4--20 deg.
high, with thickish leaves, which farther south are evergreen.

2. M. acuminata, L. (CUCUMBER-TREE.) _Leaves thin, oblong, pointed,
green_ and a little pubescent beneath, 5--10' long; _flower oblong
bell-shaped, glaucous-green_ tinged with yellow, 2' long; cone of fruit
2--3' long, cylindrical.--Rich woods, western N. Y. to Ill., and
southward. May, June.--Tree 60--90 deg. high. Fruit when young slightly
resembling a small cucumber, whence the common name.

3. M. macrophylla, Michx. (GREAT-LEAVED MAGNOLIA.) _Leaves
obovate-oblong, cordate_ at the narrowed base, pubescent and _white
beneath; flower open bell-shaped, white, with a purple spot at base_;
petals ovate, 6' long; cone of fruit ovoid.--S. E. Ky. and southward.
May, June.--Tree 20--40 deg. high. Leaves 1--3 deg. long, somewhat clustered on
the flowering branches.

[*][*] _Leaves crowded on the summit of the flowering branches in an
umbrella-like circle; leaf-buds glabrous; flowers white, slightly
scented._

4. M. Umbrella, Lam. (UMBRELLA-TREE.) _Leaves obovate-lanceolate,
pointed at both ends_, soon glabrous, 1--2 deg. long; petals obovate-oblong,
4--5' long.--S. Penn. to Ky. and southward. May.--A small tree. Fruit
rose-color, 4--5' long, ovoid-oblong.

5. M. Fraseri, Walt. (EAR-LEAVED UMBRELLA-TREE.) _Leaves oblong-obovate
or spatulate, auriculate at the base_, glabrous, 8--20' long; petals
obovate-spatulate, with narrow claws, 4' long.--Va. and Ky., along the
Alleghanies, and southward. April, May.--A slender tree 30--50 deg. high.
Flower more graceful and cone of fruit smaller than in the preceding.


2. LIRIODENDRON, L. TULIP-TREE.

Sepals 3, reflexed. Petals 6, in two rows, making a bell-shaped corolla.
Anthers linear, opening outward. Pistils flat and scale-form, long and
narrow, imbricating and cohering together in an elongated cone, dry,
separating from each other and from the long and slender axis in fruit,
and falling away whole, like a samara or key, indehiscent, 1--2-seeded
in the small cavity at the base. Buds flat, sheathed by the successive
pairs of flat and broad stipules joined at their edges, the folded
leaves bent down on the petiole so that the apex points to the base of
the bud. (Name from [Greek: li/rion], _lily_ or _tulip_, and [Greek:
de/ndron], _tree_.)

1. L. Tulipifera, L.--Rich soil, S. New Eng. to Mich., Wisc., and
southward. May, June.--A most beautiful tree, sometimes 140 deg. high and
8--9 deg. in diameter in the Western States, where it is wrongly called
WHITE POPLAR. Leaves very smooth, with 2 lateral lobes near the base,
and 2 at the apex, which appears as if cut off abruptly by a broad
shallow notch. Petals 2' long, greenish-yellow marked with orange. Cone
of fruit 3' long.


ORDER 3. ANONACEAE. (CUSTARD-APPLE FAMILY.)

_Trees or shrubs, with naked buds and no stipules, a calyx of 3 sepals,
and a corolla of 6 petals in two rows, valvate in the bud, hypogynous,
polyandrous._--Petals thickish. Anthers adnate, opening outward;
filaments very short. Pistils several or many, separate or cohering in a
mass, fleshy or pulpy in fruit. Seeds anatropous, large, with a
crustaceous seed-coat, and a minute embryo at the base of the
_ruminated_ albumen.--Leaves alternate, entire, feather-veined. Flowers
axillary, solitary.--A tropical family, excepting the following genus:--


1. ASIMINA, Adans. NORTH AMERICAN PAPAW.

Petals 6, increasing after the bud opens; the outer set larger than the
inner. Stamens numerous in a globular mass. Pistils few, ripening 1--4
large and oblong pulpy several-seeded fruits. Seeds horizontal, flat,
enclosed in a fleshy aril.--Shrubs or small trees with unpleasant odor
when bruised, the lurid flowers solitary from the axils of last year's
leaves. (Name from _Asiminier_, of the French colonists, from the Indian
name _assimin_.)

1. A. triloba, Dunal. (COMMON PAPAW.) Leaves thin, obovate-lanceolate,
pointed; petals dull-purple, veiny, round-ovate, the outer ones 3--4
times as long as the calyx.--Banks of streams in rich soil, western
N. Y. and Penn. to Ill., S. E. Neb., and southward. April, May.--Tree
10--20 deg. high; the young shoots and expanding leaves clothed with a rusty
down, soon glabrous. Flowers appearing with the leaves, 11/2' wide.
Fruits 3--4' long, yellowish, sweet and edible in autumn.


ORDER 4. MENISPERMACEAE. (MOONSEED FAMILY.)

_Woody climbers, with palmate or peltate alternate leaves, no stipules,
the sepals and petals similar, in three or more rows, imbricated in the
bud; hypogynous, dioecious, 3--6-gynous; fruit a 1-seeded drupe, with a
large or long curved embryo in scanty albumen._--Flowers small. Stamens
several. Ovaries nearly straight, with the stigma at the apex, but
often incurved in fruiting, so that the seed and embryo are bent into a
crescent or ring.--Chiefly a tropical family.

[*] Sepals and petals present. Anthers 4-celled. Seed incurved.

1. Cocculus. Stamens, petals, and sepals each 6.

2. Menispermum. Stamens 12--24, slender. Petals 6--8.

[*][*] Petals none. Anthers 2-celled. Seed saucer-shaped.

3. Calycocarpum. Stamens in the sterile flowers 12; in the fertile
flowers 6, abortive.


1. COCCULUS, DC.

Sepals, petals, and stamens 6, alternating in threes, the two latter
short. Anthers 4-celled. Pistils 3--6 in the fertile flowers; style
pointed. Drupe and seed as in Menispermum.--Flowers in axillary racemes
or panicles. (An old name, a diminutive of _coccus_, [Greek: ko/kkos], a
berry.)

1. C. Carolinus, DC. Minutely pubescent; leaves downy beneath, ovate or
cordate, entire or sinuately or hastately lobed, variable in shape;
flowers greenish, the petals in the sterile ones auriculate-inflexed
below around the filaments; drupe red (as large as a small
pea).--River-banks, Va. to S. Ill., Kan., and southward. July, Aug.


2. MENISPERMUM, L. MOONSEED.

Sepals 4--8. Petals 6--8, short. Stamens 12--24 in the sterile flowers,
as long as the sepals; anthers 4-celled. Pistils 2--4 in the fertile
flowers, raised on a short common receptacle; stigma broad and flat.
Drupe globular, the mark of the stigma near the base, the ovary in its
growth after flowering being strongly incurved, so that the (wrinkled
and grooved) laterally flattened stone takes the form of a large
crescent or ring. The slender embryo therefore is horseshoe-shaped;
cotyledons filiform.--Flowers white, in small and loose axillary
panicles. (Name from [Greek: me/ne], _moon_, and [Greek: spe/rma],
_seed_.)

1. M. Canadense, L. Leaves peltate near the edge, 3--7-angled or
lobed.--Banks of streams; common. June, July.--Drupes black with a
bloom, ripe in September, looking like frost grapes.


3. CALYCOCARPUM, Nutt. CUPSEED.

Sepals 6, petaloid. Petals none. Stamens 12 in the sterile flowers,
short; anthers 2-celled. Pistils 3, spindle-shaped, tipped with a
radiate many-cleft stigma. Drupe globular; the thin crustaceous putamen
hollowed out like a cup on one side. Embryo foliaceous,
heart-shaped.--Flowers greenish-white, in long racemose panicles. (Name
from [Greek: ka/lyx], _a cup_, and [Greek: karpo/s], _fruit_.)

1. C. Lyoni, Nutt. Leaves large, thin, deeply 3--5-lobed, cordate at the
base; the lobes acuminate; drupe an inch long, black when ripe; the
shell crested-toothed on the edge of the cavity.--Rich soil, Ky. to S.
Ill. and Kan., and southward. May.--Stems climbing to the tops of trees.


ORDER 5. BERBERIDACEAE. (BARBERRY FAMILY.)

_Shrubs or herbs, with the sepals and petals both imbricated in the bud,
usually in two rows of 3 (rarely 2 or 4) each; the hypogynous stamens as
many as the petals and opposite to them; anthers opening by 2 valves or
lids hinged at the top._ (Podophyllum is an exception, and Jeffersonia
as respects the sepals in one row.) _Pistil single._ Filaments short.
Style short or none. Fruit a berry or a pod. Seeds few or several,
anatropous, with albumen. Embryo small, except in Berberis. Leaves
alternate, with dilated bases or stipulate.

[*] Petals and stamens 6. Fruit few-seeded.

1. Berberis. Shrubs, with yellow flowers and wood; a pair of glandular
spots on the base of each petal. Fruit a berry.

2. Caulophyllum. Herb, with greenish flowers; petals thick, much shorter
than the sepals. Ovary soon bursting; the two seeds left naked.

3. Diphylleia. Herb with white flowers; petals much longer than the
sepals. Berry 2--4-seeded.

[*][*] Petals 6--9. Stamens 8--18. Fruit many-seeded. Herbs.

4. Jeffersonia. Petals and stamens usually 8; anthers opening by
uplifted valves. Pod opening by a lid.

5. Podophyllum. Petals 6--9. Stamens 12--18; anthers not opening by
uplifted valves. Fruit a large berry.


1. BERBERIS, L. BARBERRY.

Sepals 6, roundish, with 2--6 bractlets outside. Petals 6, obovate,
concave, with two glandular spots inside above the short claw. Stamens
6. Stigma circular, depressed. Fruit a 1--few-seeded berry. Seeds erect,
with a crustaceous integument.--Shrubs, with yellow wood and inner bark,
yellow flowers in drooping racemes, sour berries, and 1--9-foliolate
leaves. Stamens irritable. (Derived from _Berberys_, the Arabic name of
the fruit.)

1. B. Canadensis, Pursh. (AMERICAN BARBERRY.) Leaves repandly toothed,
the teeth less bristly-pointed; _racemes few-flowered_; petals notched
at the apex; _berries oval_; otherwise as in the next.--Alleghanies of
Va. and southward; _not_ in Canada. June.--Shrub 1--3 deg. high.

B. VULGARIS, L. (COMMON BARBERRY.) Leaves scattered on the fresh shoots
of the season, mostly reduced to sharp triple or branched spines, from
the axils of which the next season proceed rosettes or fascicles of
obovate-oblong closely bristly-toothed leaves (the short petiole
jointed!), and drooping _many-flowered racemes_; petals entire; _berries
oblong_, scarlet.--Thickets and waste grounds in E. New Eng., where it
has become thoroughly wild; elsewhere occasionally spontaneous. May,
June. (Nat. from Eu.)


2. CAULOPHYLLUM, Michx. BLUE COHOSH.

Sepals 6, with 3 or 4 small bractlets at the base, ovate-oblong. Petals
6 thick and gland-like somewhat kidney-shaped or hooded bodies, with
short claws, much smaller than the sepals, one at the base of each of
them. Stamens 6; anthers oblong. Pistil gibbous; style short; stigma
minute and unilateral; ovary bursting soon after flowering by the
pressure of the 2 erect, enlarging seeds, and withering away; the
spherical seeds naked on their thick seed-stalks, looking like drupes,
the fleshy integument turning blue; albumen horny.--A perennial glabrous
herb, with matted knotty rootstocks, sending up in early spring a simple
and naked stem, terminated by a small raceme or panicle of
yellowish-green flowers, and a little below bearing a large triternately
compound sessile leaf (whence the name, from [Greek: kaulo/s], _stem_,
and [Greek: phy/llon], _leaf_, the stem seeming to form a stalk for the
great leaf.)

1. C. thalictroides, Michx. (Also called PAPPOOSE-ROOT.) Stems 1--21/2 deg.
high; leaflets obovate wedge-form, 2--3-lobed, a smaller biternate leaf
often at the base of the panicle; flowers appearing while the leaf is
yet small.--Deep rich woods; common westward. April, May.--Whole plant
glaucous when young, as also the seeds, which are as large as peas.


3. DIPHYLLEIA, Michx. UMBRELLA-LEAF.

Sepals 6, fugacious. Petals 6, oval, flat, larger than the sepals.
Stamens 6; anthers oblong. Ovary oblong; style hardly any; stigma
depressed. Ovules 5 or 6, attached to one side of the cell below the
middle. Berry globose, few-seeded. Seeds oblong, with no aril.--A
perennial glabrous herb, with thick horizontal rootstocks, sending up
each year either a huge centrally peltate and cut-lobed, rounded,
umbrella-like radical leaf, on a stout stalk, or a flowering stem
bearing two similar (but smaller and more 2-cleft) alternate leaves
which are peltate near one margin, and terminated by a cyme of white
flowers. (Name composed of [Greek: di/s], _double_, and [Greek:
phy/llon], _leaf_.)

1. D. cymosa, Michx. Root-leaves 1--2 deg. in diameter, 2-cleft, each
division 5--7-lobed; lobes toothed; berries blue.--Wet or springy
places, mountains of Va. and southward. May.


4. JEFFERSONIA, Barton. TWIN-LEAF.

Sepals 4, fugacious. Petals 8, oblong, flat. Stamens 8, anthers
oblong-linear, on slender filaments. Ovary ovoid, soon gibbous, pointed,
stigma 2-lobed. Pod pear-shaped, opening half-way round horizontally,
the upper part making a lid. Seeds many in several rows on the lateral
placenta, with a fleshy lacerate aril on one side.--A perennial glabrous
herb, with matted fibrous roots, long-petioled root-leaves, parted into
2 half-ovate leaflets, and simple naked 1-flowered scapes. (Named in
honor of _Thomas Jefferson_.)

1. J. diphylla, Pers. Low; flower white, 1' broad, the parts rarely in
threes or fives.--Woods, western N. Y. to Wisc. and southward. April,
May.--Called _Rheumatism-root_ in some places.


5. PODOPHYLLUM, L. MAY-APPLE. MANDRAKE.

Flower-bud with three green bractlets, which early fall away. Sepals 6,
fugacious. Petals 6 or 9, obovate. Stamens twice as many as the petals
in our species; anthers linear-oblong, not opening by uplifted valves.
Ovary ovoid; stigma sessile, large, thick and undulate. Fruit a large
fleshy berry. Seeds covering the very large lateral placenta, in many
rows, each seed enclosed in a pulpy aril, all forming a mass which fills
the cavity of the fruit.--Perennial herbs, with creeping rootstocks and
thick fibrous roots. Stems 2-leaved, 1-flowered. (Name from [Greek:
pou s], _a foot_, and [Greek: phy/llon], _a leaf_, probably referring to
the stout petioles.)

1. P. peltatum, L. Stamens 12--18; leaves 5--9-parted, the lobes oblong,
rather wedge-shaped, somewhat lobed and toothed at the apex.--Rich
woods, common. May.--Flowerless stems terminated by a large round
7--9-lobed leaf, peltate in the middle like an umbrella. Flowering stems
bearing two one-sided leaves, with the stalk fixed near their inner
edge; the nodding white flower from the fork nearly 2' broad. Fruit
ovoid, 1--2' long, ripe in July, sweet and slightly acid, edible. The
leaves and roots are drastic and poisonous!--Found occasionally with
from 2 to 6 carpels!


ORDER 6. NYMPHAEACEAE. (WATER-LILY FAMILY.)

_Aquatic perennial herbs, with horizontal rootstocks and peltate or
sometimes only cordate leaves floating or emersed; the ovules borne on
the sides or back (or when solitary hanging from the summit) of the
cells, not on the ventral suture; the embryo enclosed in a little bag_
at the end of the albumen next the hilum, except in Nelumbium, which has
no albumen. Radicle hardly any; cotyledons thick and fleshy, enclosing a
well-developed plumule.--Flowers axillary, solitary. Vernation involute.
Rootstocks apparently endogenous.--The few genera differ so much in the
flower and fruit that they are separated into the three following
suborders.


SUBORDER I. Cabombeae. Sepals and petals each 3 or sometimes 4,
hypogynous and persistent. Stamens definite (3--18). Pistils 2--18, free
and distinct, coriaceous and indehiscent, 1--3-seeded on the dorsal
suture.--Stems slender, leafy, coated with mucilage. Flowers small.

1. Cabomba. Stamens 3--4. Carpels 2--3. Submersed leaves
capillary-multifid.

2. Brasenia. Stamens 12--18. Carpels 4--18. Leaves all peltate.


SUBORDER II. Nelumboneae. Sepals and petals numerous in several rows,
passing gradually into each other, and with the indefinitely numerous
stamens hypogynous and deciduous. Pistils several, 1-ovuled, separately
immersed in the obconical receptacle, which is much enlarged and broadly
top-shaped at maturity, the imbedded nut-like fruits resembling small
acorns. Embryo large; no albumen.--Petioles and peduncles all from the
tuberous rootstock, the centrally peltate leaves and the flowers large.

3. Nelumbo. Character of the Suborder.


SUBORDER III. Nymphaeaceae proper. Sepals 4--6, and petals numerous in
many rows, persistent or decaying away, either hypogynous or variously
adnate to the surface of the compound 8--30-celled ovary, which is
formed by the union of as many carpels; the numerous ovules inserted
over the whole inner face of the cells, except at the ventral suture.
Stigmas radiate as in Poppy. Fruit baccate, with a firm rind. Petioles
and peduncles from a thick rootstock.

4. Nymphaea. Petals adnate to the ovary, large; the stamens on its
summit.

5. Nuphar. Petals (very small and stamen-like) and stamens inserted
under the ovary.


1. CABOMBA, Aublet.

Sepals 3. Petals 3, oval, bi-auriculate above the very short claw.
Stamens 3--6; anthers short, extrorse. Pistils 2--4, with small terminal
stigmas. Seeds 3, pendulous.--Slender, mainly submersed, with opposite
or verticillate capillary-dissected leaves, a few floating, alternate
and centrally peltate. Flowers single on long axillary peduncles.
(Probably an aboriginal name.)

1. C. Caroliniana, Gray. Floating leaves linear-oblong or -obovate,
often with a basal notch; flowers 6--8'' broad, white with yellow spots
at base; stamens 6.--Ponds, S. Ill. (May--Sept., _Schneck_) to Fla. and
Tex.


2. BRASENIA, Schreber. WATER-SHIELD.

Sepals 3 or 4. Petals 3 or 4, linear, sessile. Stamens 12--18; filaments
filiform; anthers innate. Pistils 4--18, forming little club-shaped
indehiscent pods; stigmas linear. Seeds 1--2, pendulous on the dorsal
suture!--Rootstock creeping. Leaves alternate, long-petioled, centrally
peltate, oval, floating. Flowers axillary, small, dull-purple. (Name of
uncertain origin.)

1. B. peltata, Pursh. Leaves entire, 1--4' across.--Ponds and slow
streams. June--Aug. (Asia, Africa and Australia.)


3. NELUMBO, Tourn. SACRED BEAN.

The only genus of the suborder. (_Nelumbo_ is the Ceylonese name of the
East Indian species, the pink-flowered N. speciosum.)

1. N. lutea, Pers. (YELLOW NELUMBO, or WATER CHINQUAPIN.) Leaves usually
raised high out of the water, circular, with the centre depressed or
cupped, 1--2 deg. in diameter; flower pale yellow, 5--10' broad; anthers
tipped with a slender hooked appendage. (Nelumbium luteum, _Willd._)--S.
Conn. (probably of Indian introduction) to Lake Ontario, Mich., Minn.,
E. Neb., and southward; rare in the Middle States.--Tubers farinaceous
and edible. Seeds also eatable. Embryo like that of Nymphaea on a large
scale; cotyledons thick and fleshy, enclosing a plumule of 1 or 2
well-formed young leaves, enclosed in a delicate stipule-like sheath.


4. NYMPHAEA, Tourn. WATER-NYMPH. WATER-LILY.

Sepals 4, green outside, nearly free. Petals numerous, in many rows, the
innermost gradually passing into stamens, imbricately inserted all over
the ovary. Stamens indefinite, inserted on the ovary, the outer with
dilated filaments. Ovary 12--35-celled, the concave summit tipped with
a globular projection at the centre, around which are the radiate
stigmas; these project at the margin, and are extended into linear and
incurved sterile appendages. Fruit depressed-globular, covered with the
bases of the decayed petals, maturing under water. Seeds enveloped by a
sac-like aril.--Flowers white, pink, yellow, or blue, very showy.
(Dedicated by the Greeks to the Water-Nymphs.)

1. N. odorata, Ait. (SWEET-SCENTED WATER-LILY.) _Rootstock with few and
persistent branches_; leaves orbicular, cordate-cleft at the base to the
petiole (5--9' wide), the margin entire; stipules broadly triangular or
almost kidney-shaped, notched at the apex, appressed to the rootstock;
_flower_ white, _very sweet scented_ (often as much as 51/2' in diameter
when fully expanded, opening early in the morning, closing in the
afternoon); petals obtuse; anthers blunt; aril much longer than the
distinctly stipitate _oblong seeds_ (these about 11/2'' long).--Ponds and
still or slow-flowing water; common. June--Sept.--Varies with
pinkish-tinged and rarely with bright pink-red flowers (especially at
Barnstable, Mass.), the leaves often crimson underneath,--and in size by
gradations into

Var. minor, Sims., with leaves only 2--5' and flowers 2--3'
broad.--Shallow water, in cold bogs and in sandy soil.

2. N. reniformis, DC. (TUBER-BEARING W.) Leaves reniform-orbicular,
mostly larger (8--15' wide) and more prominently ribbed than the last,
rarely purplish beneath; _rootstock bearing numerous spontaneously
detaching often compound tubers; flower scentless_ (or with a slight
odor as of apples), white, never pinkish, 41/2--9' in diameter, the petals
proportionally broader and blunter than in n. 1; the fruit more
depressed, and with fewer but much larger (i.e. twice as broad)
_globular-ovoid seeds_, which when mature are barely enclosed by the
aril and not stipitate. (N. tuberosa, _Paine_.)--Lakes, slow rivers,
etc., western N. Y. (from Oneida Lake, _Paine_) and near Meadville,
Penn., to Mich., E. Neb., and probably in the Southern States.
July--Sept.


5. NUPHAR, Smith. YELLOW POND-LILY. SPATTER-DOCK.

Sepals 5, 6, or sometimes more, colored, or partly green outside,
roundish, concave. Petals numerous, small and thickish, stamen-like or
scale-like, inserted with the very numerous short stamens on the
receptacle under the ovary, not surpassing the disk-like 8--24-rayed
sessile stigma, persistent and at length recurved. Fruit ovoid, naked,
usually ripening above water. Aril none.--Rootstock creeping,
cylindrical. Leaves with a deep sinus at the base. Flowers yellow or
sometimes tinged with purple, produced all summer. (Name said to be of
Arabic origin.)

1. N. advena, Ait. f. _Sepals 6, unequal; petals shorter than the
stamens_ and resembling them, thick and fleshy, truncate; stigma nearly
entire, 12--24-rayed, pale red; ovary and fruit (11/2' long) ovate, not
contracted above into a narrow neck; thin submersed leaves seldom
present; floating or emersed and erect leaves thick (6--12' long), from
roundish to ovate or almost oblong, the sinus open, or closed or
narrow.--Very common, in still or stagnant water; stout and coarse;
flower often partly purplish (var. VARIEGATUM, Engelm.).

Var. minus, Morong. More slender; leaves somewhat smaller (3--8' long);
flowers usually smaller (sepals 12--15'' long); petals spatulate;
stigmas 9--13-rayed, crenately toothed, bright red or crimson; fruit 1'
long, contracted above. (N. rubrodiscum, _Morong._ N. luteum, _Man._;
not _Smith_.)--N. Vt. to Mich. and Penn. Probably a hybrid between this
and the next species.

2. N. Kalmianum, Ait. Very slender and with slender rootstock; submersed
leaves thin, round-reniform, the floating broadly elliptical with a deep
narrow sinus, 2--4' long; sepals usually 5, the flowers an inch broad or
less; petals spatulate or obovate; stigmas 7--10-rayed, dark red; fruit
globular with a short neck (6--9'' in diameter). (N. luteum, var.
pumilum, _Man._)--Maine to Penn. and Minn., and northward.

3. N. sagittifolium, Pursh. Rootstock stout; leaves narrowly oblong to
oblong-lanceolate with a short sinus, 6--15' long; flowers small (1'
broad).--S. Ind. and Ill. (_Schneck_), and southward.


ORDER 7. SARRACENIACEAE. (PITCHER-PLANTS.)

_Polyandrous and hypogynous bog-plants, with hollow pitcher-form or
trumpet-shaped leaves_,--comprising one plant in the mountains of
Guiana, another (Darlingtonia, _Torr._) in California, and the following
genus in the Atlantic United States.

1. SARRACENIA, Tourn. SIDE-SADDLE FLOWER.

Sepals 5, with 3 bractlets at the base, colored, persistent. Petals 5,
oblong or obovate, incurved, deciduous. Stamens numerous, hypogynous.
Ovary compound, 5-celled, globose, crowned with a short style, which is
expanded at the summit into a very broad and petal-like, 5-angled,
5-rayed, umbrella-shaped body, the 5 delicate rays terminating under the
angles in as many little hooked stigmas. Capsule with a granular
surface, 5-celled, with many-seeded placentae in the axis, loculicidally
5-valved. Seeds anatropous, with a small embryo at the base of fleshy
albumen.--Perennials, yellowish-green and purplish; the hollow leaves
all radical, with a wing on one side, and a rounded arching hood at the
apex. Scape naked, 1-flowered; flower nodding. (Named by Tournefort in
honor of _Dr. Sarrasin_ of Quebec, who first sent our Northern species,
and a botanical account of it, to Europe.)

1. S. purpurea, L. (SIDE-SADDLE FLOWER. PITCHER-PLANT. HUNTSMAN'S CUP.)
_Leaves pitcher-shaped_, ascending, curved, broadly winged; the hood
erect, open, round heart-shaped; _flower deep purple_; the fiddle-shaped
petals arched over the greenish-yellow style.--Varies rarely with
greenish-yellow flowers, and without purple veins in the
foliage.--Peat-bogs; common from N. Eng. to Minn., N. E. Iowa, and
southward east of the Alleghanies. June.--The curious leaves are
usually half filled with water and drowned insects. The inner face of
the hood is clothed with stiff bristles pointing downward. Flower
globose, nodding on a scape a foot high; it is difficult to fancy any
resemblance between its shape and a side-saddle, but it is not very
unlike a pillion.

2. S. flava, L. (TRUMPETS.) _Leaves long (1--3 deg.) and trumpet-shaped_,
erect, with an open mouth, the erect hood rounded, narrow at the base;
wing almost none; _flower yellow_, the petals becoming long and
drooping.--Bogs, Va. and southward. April.


ORDER 8. PAPAVERACEAE. (POPPY FAMILY.)

_Herbs with milky or colored juice, regular flowers with the parts in
twos or fours, fugacious sepals, polyandrous, hypogynous, the ovary
1-celled with two or more parietal placentae._--Sepals 2, rarely 3,
falling when the flower expands. Petals 4--12, spreading, imbricated and
often crumpled in the bud, early deciduous. Stamens rarely as few as 16,
distinct. Fruit a dry 1-celled pod (in the Poppy imperfectly
many-celled, in Glaucium 2-celled). Seeds numerous, anatropous, often
crested, with a minute embryo at the base of fleshy and oily
albumen.--Leaves alternate, without stipules. Peduncles mostly
1-flowered. Juice narcotic or acrid.

[*] Petals 8--12, not crumpled in the bud, white. Pod 1-celled,
2-valved.

1. Sanguinaria. Petals white. Leaves and 1-flowered scape from a short
rootstock.

[*][*] Petals 4, crumpled in the bud. Pod 2-valved or more.

[+] Pod 2--4-valved, the valves separating to the base from the
placentas. Leaves pinnately parted. Flowers yellow.

2. Stylophorum. Pod bristly; style distinct; stigmas and placentas 3--4.

3. Chelidonium. Pod linear, smooth; style almost none; stigmas and
placentas 2.

4. Glaucium. Pod rough, long-linear, 2-celled by a spongy partition;
style none.

[+][+] Pod 4--20-valved, dehiscent only at the top or to the middle.

5. Papaver. Ovary incompletely many-celled; stigmas united into a
radiate sessile crown.

6. Argemone. Stigmas (sessile) and placentas 4--6. Pod and leaves
prickly.


1. SANGUINARIA, Dill. BLOOD-ROOT.

Sepals 2. Petals 8--12, spatulate-oblong, the inner narrower. Stamens
about 24. Style short; stigma 2-grooved. Pod oblong, turgid, 1-celled,
2-valved. Seeds with a large crest.--A low perennial, with thick
prostrate premorse rootstocks, surcharged with red-orange acrid juice,
sending up in earliest spring a rounded palmate-lobed leaf, and a
1-flowered naked scape. Flower white, handsome, the bud erect, the
petals not crumpled. (Name from the color of the juice.)

1. S. Canadensis, L.--Open rich woods; common. April, May.


2. STYLOPHORUM, Nutt. CELANDINE POPPY.

Sepals 2, hairy. Petals 4. Style distinct, columnar; stigma 2--4-lobed.
Pods bristly, 2--4-valved to the base. Seeds conspicuously
crested.--Perennial low herbs, with stems naked below and oppositely
2-leaved, or sometimes 1--3-leaved, and umbellately 1--few-flowered at
the summit; the flower-buds and the pods nodding. Leaves pinnately
parted or divided. Juice yellow. (From [Greek: sty/los], _style_, and
[Greek: phe/ro], _to bear_, one of the distinctive characters.)

1. S. diphyllum, Nutt. Leaves pale or glaucous beneath, smoothish,
deeply pinnatifid into 5 or 7 oblong sinuate-lobed divisions, and the
root-leaves often with a pair of smaller and distinct leaflets;
peduncles equalling the petioles; flower deep yellow (2' broad); stigmas
3 or 4; pod oval.--Damp woods, W. Penn. to Wisc. and Tenn. May.--Foliage
and flower resembling Celandine.


3. CHELIDONIUM, L. CELANDINE.

Sepals 2. Petals 4. Stamens 16--24. Style nearly none; stigma 2-lobed.
Pod linear, slender, smooth, 2-valved, the valves opening from the
bottom upward. Seeds crested.--Biennial herb with brittle stems,
saffron-colored acrid juice, pinnately divided or 2-pinnatifid and
toothed or cut leaves, and small yellow flowers in a pedunculate umbel;
buds nodding. (Ancient Greek name from [Greek: chelido/n], the
_swallow_, because its flowers appear with the swallows.)

C. MAJUS, L. (CELANDINE.) Waste grounds near dwellings. May--Aug. (Adv.
from Eu.)


4. GLAUCIUM, Tourn. HORN-POPPY.

Sepals 2. Petals 4. Style none; stigma 2-lobed or 2-horned. Pod very
long and linear, completely 2-celled by a spongy false partition; seeds
crestless.--Annuals or biennials, with saffron-colored juice, clasping
leaves, and solitary yellow flowers. (The Greek name, [Greek:
glau/kion], from the glaucous foliage.)

G. LUTEUM, Scop. Lower leaves pinnatifid; upper ones sinuate-lobed and
toothed, cordate-clasping; pods rough (6--10' long).--Waste places S. E.
New Eng., Md., and Va.; not common. (Adv. from Eu.)


5. PAPAVER, Tourn. POPPY.

Sepals mostly 2. Petals mostly 4. Stigmas united in a flat 4--20-rayed
crown, resting on the summit of the ovary and capsule; the latter short
and turgid, with 4--20 many-seeded placentae projecting like imperfect
partitions, opening by as many pores or chinks under the edge of the
stigma.--Herbs with a white juice; the flower-buds nodding. (Derivation
obscure.)--Three annual species of the Old World are sparingly
adventive; viz.:

P. SOMNIFERUM, L. (COMMON POPPY.) _Smooth_, glaucous; leaves clasping,
wavy, incised and toothed; _pod globose_; corolla mostly white or
purple.--Near dwellings in some places. (Adv. from Eu.)

P. DUBIUM, L. (SMOOTH-FRUITED CORN-POPPY.) Pinnatifid leaves and the
long stalks _bristly; pods club-shaped, smooth_; corolla light
scarlet.--Cult. grounds, Westchester, Penn., and southward; rare. (Adv.
from Eu.)

P. ARGEMONE, L. (ROUGH-FRUITED C.) Smaller, with finer-cut leaves and
paler flowers than the last; _pods club-shaped and bristly_.--Waste
grounds, near Philadelphia. (Adv. from Eu.)


6. ARGEMONE, L. PRICKLY POPPY.

Sepals 2 or 3, often prickly. Petals 4--6. Style almost none; stigmas
3--6, radiate. Pod oblong, prickly, opening by 3--6 valves at the top.
Seeds crested.--Annuals or biennials, with prickly bristles and yellow
juice. Leaves sessile, sinuate-lobed, and with prickly teeth, often
blotched with white. Flower-buds erect, short-peduncled. (Name from
[Greek: a)/rgema], a disease of the eye, for which the juice of a plant
so called by the Greeks was a supposed remedy.)

1. A. platyceras, Link & Otto. Setose-hispid all over; petals white,
11/2--2' long; capsule armed with stout spines.--Central Kan. and Neb.,
south and westward.

A. MEXICANA, L. (MEXICAN P.) Flowers yellow, rarely white.--Waste
places, southward. July--Oct. (Adv. from trop. Amer.)
(Addendum)--ARGEMONE MEXICANA. Collected at Merodosia, Ill., with white
flowers, by _A. B. Seymour_.


ORDER 9. FUMARIACEAE. (FUMITORY FAMILY.)

_Delicate smooth herbs, with watery juice, compound dissected leaves,
irregular flowers, with 4 somewhat united petals, 6 diadelphous stamens,
and 2-merous pods and seeds like those of the_ Poppy Family.--Sepals 2,
small and scale-like. Corolla flattened, closed; the 4 petals in two
pairs; the outer with spreading tips, and one or both of them spurred or
saccate at the base; inner pair narrower, and their callous crested tips
united over the stigma. Stamens in two sets of 3 each, placed opposite
the larger petals, hypogynous; their filaments often united; middle
anther of each set 2-celled, the lateral ones 1-celled. Pod 1-celled,
either 1-seeded and indehiscent, or several-seeded with 2 parietal
placentae and deciduous valves.--Leaves delicate, usually alternate,
without stipules. Slightly bitter, innocent plants.

[*] Corolla bigibbous or 2-spurred, the 2 outer petals alike. Pod
several-seeded.

1. Adlumia. Petals united into a spongy persistent subcordate corolla.
Seeds crestless.

2. Dicentra. Corolla cordate or 2-spurred at base, less united. Seeds
crested.

[*][*] Corolla with but one petal spurred at base, deciduous.

3. Corydalis. Pod with few to many crested or arilled seeds.

4. Fumaria. Fruit a globular 1-seeded nutlet. Seed crestless.


1. ADLUMIA, Raf. CLIMBING FUMITORY.

Petals all permanently united in a cordate-ovate corolla, becoming
spongy-cellular and persistent, enclosing the small, few-seeded pod.
Seeds not crested. Stigma 2-crested. Filaments monadelphous below in a
tube which is adherent to the corolla, diadelphous at the summit.--A
climbing biennial, with thrice-pinnate leaves, cut-lobed delicate
leaflets, and ample panicles of drooping white or purplish flowers.
(Dedicated by Rafinesque to _Major Adlum_.)

1. A. cirrhosa, Raf.--Wet woods; N. Eng. to Mich., E. Kan., and
southward. June--Oct.--A handsome vine, with delicate foliage, climbing
by the slender young leaf-stalks over high bushes; often cultivated.


2. DICENTRA, Borkh. DUTCHMAN'S BREECHES.

Petals slightly cohering into a heart-shaped or 2-spurred corolla,
either deciduous or withering-persistent. Stigma 2-crested and sometimes
2-horned. Filaments slightly united in two sets. Pod 10--20-seeded.
Seeds crested.--Low, stemless perennials (as to our wild species) with
ternately compound and dissected leaves, and racemose nodding flowers.
Pedicels 2-bracted. (Name from [Greek: di/s], _twice_, and [Greek:
ke/ntron], _a spur_;--accidentally printed DICLYTRA in the first
instance, which by an erroneous conjecture was afterwards changed into
DIELYTRA.)

[*] _Raceme simple, few-flowered._

1. D. Cucullaria, DC. (DUTCHMAN'S BREECHES.) Scape and slender-petioled
leaves from a sort of _granulate bulb_; lobes of leaves linear; _corolla
with 2 divergent spurs_ longer than the pedicel; _crest of the inner
petals minute_.--Rich woods, especially westward.--A very delicate
plant, sending up in early spring, from the cluster of grain-like tubers
crowded together in the form of a scaly bulb, the finely cut leaves and
the slender scape, bearing 4--10 pretty, but odd, white flowers tipped
with cream-color.

2. D. Canadensis, DC. (SQUIRREL CORN.) Subterranean shoots bearing
scattered _grain-like tubers_ (resembling peas or grains of Indian corn,
yellow); leaves as in n. 1; _corolla merely heart-shaped_, the spurs
very short and rounded; _crest of the inner petals conspicuous,
projecting_.--Rich woods, especially northward. April, May.--Flowers
greenish-white tinged with rose, with the fragrance of Hyacinths.

[*][*] _Racemes compound, clustered._

3. D. eximia, DC. Subterranean shoots scaly; divisions and lobes of the
leaves broadly oblong; corolla oblong, 2-saccate at the base; crest of
the inner petals projecting.--Rocks, western N. Y., rare, and
Alleghanies of Va. May--Aug.--Coarser-leaved than the others; scapes
6--10' high.


3. CORYDALIS, Vent.

Corolla 1-spurred at the base (on the upper side), deciduous. Style
persistent. Pod many-seeded. Seeds crested or arilled. Flowers in
racemes. Our species are biennial, leafy-stemmed, and pale or glaucous.
(The ancient Greek name for the crested lark.)

[*] _Stem strict; flowers purplish or rose-color with yellow tips._

1. C. glauca, Pursh. (PALE CORYDALIS.) Racemes panicled; spur of the
corolla very short and rounded; pods erect, slender, elongated.--Rocky
places; common; 6'--2 deg. high. May--Aug.

[*][*] _Low, ascending; flowers yellow._

[+] _Outer petals wing-crested on the back._

2. C. flavula, DC. Pedicels slender, conspicuously bracted; corolla pale
yellow, 3--4'' long, spur very short; tips of the outer petals pointed,
longer than the inner; crest 3--4-toothed; pods torulose, pendulous or
spreading; seeds acutely margined, rugose-reticulated; aril
loose.--Penn. to Minn., and southward.

3. C. micrantha, Gray. Pedicels short and bracts small; corolla pale
yellow, 4'' long, with short spur and entire crest, or flowers often
cleistogamous and much smaller, without spur or crest; pods ascending,
torulose; seeds obtuse-margined, smooth and shining.--N. Car., Mo.,
Minn., and southward.

4. C. crystallina, Engelm. Pedicels short, erect; corolla bright yellow,
8'' long, the spur nearly as long as the body; crest very broad, usually
toothed; pods terete, erect, densely covered with transparent vesicles,
seeds acutely margined, tuberculate.--S. W. Mo. and southward.

[+][+] _Outer petals merely carinate on the back, not crested._

5. C. aurea, Willd. (GOLDEN C.) Corolla golden-yellow, 1/2' long, the
slightly decurved spur about half as long, shorter than the
pedicel; pods spreading or pendulous, becoming torulose; seeds
obtuse-margined.--Rocky banks, Vt. to Penn., Mo., Minn., and westward.

Var. occidentalis, Engelm. Flowers rather larger, the spur nearly as
long as the body; pods less torulose, on short pedicels; seeds acutish
on the margin.--Neb. and Kan. to W. Tex. and westward.


4. FUMARIA, Tourn. FUMITORY.

Corolla 1-spurred at the base. Style deciduous. Fruit indehiscent,
small, globular, 1-seeded. Seeds crestless.--Branched and leafy-stemmed
annuals, with finely dissected compound leaves, and small flowers in
dense racemes or spikes. (Name from _fumus_, smoke.)

F. OFFICINALIS, L. (COMMON FUMITORY.) Sepals ovate-lanceolate, acute,
sharply toothed, narrower and shorter than the corolla (which is
flesh-color tipped with crimson); fruit slightly notched.--Waste places,
about dwellings. (Adv. from Eu.)


ORDER 10. CRUCIFERAE. (MUSTARD FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with a pungent watery juice and cruciform tetradynamous flowers;
fruit a silique or silicle._--Sepals 4, deciduous. Petals 4, hypogynous,
regular, placed opposite each other in pairs, their spreading limbs
forming a cross. Stamens 6, two of them inserted lower down and shorter
(rarely only 4 or 2). Pod usually 2-celled by a thin partition stretched
between the two marginal placentae, from which when ripe the valves
separate, either much longer than broad (a _silique_), or short (a
_silicle_), sometimes indehiscent and nut-like (_nucumentaceous_), or
separating across into 1-seeded joints (_lomentaceous_). Seeds
campylotropous, without albumen, filled by the large embryo, which is
curved or folded in various ways: i.e. the _cotyledons accumbent_, viz.,
their margins on one side applied to the radicle, so that the
cross-section of the seed appears thus o==; or else _incumbent_, viz.,
the back of one cotyledon applied to the radicle, thus o||. In these
cases the cotyledons are plane; but they may be folded upon themselves
and round the radicle, as in Mustard, where they are _conduplicate_,
thus o>>. In Leavenworthia alone the whole embryo is straight.--Leaves
alternate, no stipules. Flowers in terminal racemes or corymbs; pedicels
rarely bracted.--A large and very natural family, of pungent or acrid,
but not poisonous plants. (The characters of the genera are taken almost
wholly from the pods and seeds; the flowers being nearly alike in all.)

SERIES I. Pod 2-celled, regularly dehiscent by 2 valves.

[*] Pod compressed parallel to the broad partition. Seeds flat or
flattish, orbicular or oval; cotyledons accumbent or nearly so.

[+] Pod large, oblong-elliptical, valves nerveless. Seeds in 2 rows.
Flowers yellow.

1. Selenia. Leaves pinnatisect. Raceme leafy-bracteate. Seeds winged.

[+][+] Pod linear; valves nerveless. Seeds in one row. Flowers yellow
only in n. 3.

2. Leavenworthia. Seed winged; embryo straight or nearly so. Annual;
stem often scapose, 1--few-flowered.

3. Dentaria. Stem naked below, 2--3-leaved. Pod coriaceous, with thick
placentas, long-styled. Seeds wingless; cotyledons thick, very unequal.

4. Cardamine. Stem leafy. Pod coriaceous, with thick placentas. Seeds
wingless; cotyledons flattened, equal.

[+][+][+] Pod linear, or oblong, or orbicular; valves 1-nerved or
nerveless. Seeds in 2 rows (except in species of n. 4).

5. Arabis. Pod long-linear, the flat or flattish valves more or less
1-nerved. Seeds winged or wingless. Flowers white to purple. Stems
leafy, at least below.

6. Draba. Pod oval to narrowly oblong or lanceolate; valves flat or
flattish, faintly nerved or veined. Seeds wingless, numerous.

7. Alyssum. Pod orbicular; valves veinless, somewhat convex with
flattened margin. Seeds wingless, 2--4.

[*][*] Pod terete or turgid, or 4-angled by the prominent midnerves.
Seeds wingless, more or less turgid.

[+] Pods short. (See also n. 10.)

8. Lesquerella. Pod globular-inflated, about 4-seeded; valves nerveless.
Cotyledons accumbent. Flowers yellow.

9. Camelina. Pod obovoid, many-seeded; valves 1-nerved; style slender.
Cotyledons incumbent. Flowers yellow.

10. Subularia. Pod ovoid or globular, few-seeded, valves 1-nerved; style
none. Cotyledons long, folded transversely. Flowers white. Dwarf
stemless aquatic.

[+][+] Pod linear (or oblong or even globular in n. 10).

[++] Cotyledons accumbent.

11. Nasturtium. Pod often short; valves strongly convex, nerveless.
Seeds small, in 2 rows in each cell. Flowers yellow or white.

12. Barbarea. Pod somewhat 4-sided; valves strongly 1-nerved. Seeds in 1
row. Flowers yellow.

[++][++] Cotyledons incumbent or partially so.

13. Hesperis. Pod terete, elongated; stigma-lobes narrow, erect. Flowers
large, purple.

14. Erysimum. Pod 4-sided; valves strongly 1-nerved; stigma broadly
2-lobed. Pubescence of appressed 2--3-parted hairs. Flowers yellow.

15. Sisymbrium. Pod angled or teretish; valves 1--3-nerved; stigma
small. Flowers yellow or white, small.

16. Thelypodium. Pod teretish; valves 1-nerved; stigma entire.
Cotyledons obliquely incumbent. Flowers rose-color. Leaves auricled.

[++][++][++] Cotyledons conduplicate.

17. Brassica. Pod beaked or pointed beyond the end of the valves, or
tipped with a rigid style, nearly terete, or 4-sided. Flowers yellow or
whitish.

[*][*][*] Pod short; the boat-shaped valves conduplicate or much
flattened contrary to the narrow partition. Flowers white.

18. Capsella. Pod many-seeded, obcordate-triangular, wingless.
Cotyledons incumbent.

19. Thlaspi. Pod several-seeded, obovate or obcordate, winged.
Cotyledons accumbent.

20. Lepidium. Pod 2-seeded, flat, scale-shaped. Cotyledons incumbent or
accumbent.

21. Senebiera. Pod 2-seeded, didymous; the valves rugose, separating at
maturity from the little partition as 2 closed 1-seeded nutlets.
Cotyledons incumbent, narrow.

SERIES II. Pods indehiscent, continuous or transversely jointed; joints
1-celled.

22. Cakile. Pod short, 2-jointed; joints 1-seeded. Cotyledons plane,
accumbent.

23. Raphanus. Pod elongated, several-seeded, continuous, or constricted
between the seeds and moniliform. Cotyledons conduplicate.


1. SELENIA, Nutt.

Pod large, oblong-elliptical, flat; the valves nerveless. Seeds in 2
rows in each cell, rounded, broadly winged; cotyledons accumbent;
radicle short.--A low annual, with once or twice pinnatifid leaves and
leafy-bracteate racemes of yellow flowers. (Name from [Greek: sele/ne],
_the moon_, with allusion to Lunaria, which it somewhat resembles in its
pods.)

1. S. aurea, Nutt. Lobes of the simply pinnatifid leaves entire or
toothed; pod 1/2' long, on elongated spreading pedicels, beaked by the
long slender style.--Mo. and Kan. to Tex.


2. LEAVENWORTHIA, Torr.

Pod broadly linear or oblong, flat; the valves nerveless, but minutely
reticulate-veined. Seeds in a single row in each cell, flat, surrounded
by a thick wing. Embryo straight! or the short radicle only slightly
bent in the direction which if continued would make the orbicular
cotyledons accumbent.--Little winter annuals, glabrous and often
stemless, with lyrate leaves and short 1--few-flowered scape-like
peduncles. (Named in honor of the late _M. C. Leavenworth_.)

1. L. Michauxii, Torr. Scapes 2--6' high; leaf-lobes usually numerous
(7--15); petals purplish or nearly white with a yellowish base, obtuse;
pods not torulose, oblong to linear (6--15'' long); style short.--S. Ind
to Tenn. and Mo.

2. L. torulosa, Gray. Similar, but pods torulose even when young,
linear; style 1--2'' long; seeds acutely margined rather than winged;
petals emarginate.--Barrens of Ky. and Tenn.


3. DENTARIA, Tourn. TOOTHWORT. PEPPER-ROOT.

Pod lanceolate, flat, as in Cardamine. Style elongated. Seeds in one
row, wingless, the stalks broad and flat. Cotyledons petioled, thick and
very unequal, their margins somewhat infolding each other.--Perennials,
of damp woodlands, with long, horizontal, fleshy, sometimes interrupted,
scaly or toothed rootstocks, of a pleasant pungent taste; the simple
stems leafless below, bearing 2 or 3 petioled compound leaves about or
above the middle, and terminated by a single corymb or short raceme of
large white or purple flowers. Flowers larger, pods broader, and seeds
larger than is usual in Cardamine. (Name from _dens_, a tooth.)

[*] _Rootstock elongated; leaves 3-foliolate._

1. D. diphylla, L. Rootstock long and continuous, often branched,
toothed; stem-leaves 2, similar to the radical ones, close together;
leaflets rhombic-ovate or oblong-ovate, shortly petiolate, coarsely
crenate, the teeth abruptly acute; petals white.--Rich woods, Maine to
Minn. and Ky. May.--Rootstocks 5--10' long, crisp, tasting like
Water-Cress.

[*][*] _Rootstock tuberous, more or less moniliform; leaves 3-foliolate
or 3-parted._

2. D. laciniata, Muhl. Tubers deep-seated, usually not jointed nor
prominently tubercled; root-leaves often none; stem-leaves 3-parted, the
lateral segments often 2-lobed, all broadly oblong to linear, more or
less gash-toothed; flowers white or rose-color.--N. Eng. to Minn., Kan.,
and southward. April, May.--Var. MULTIFIDA, a slender form with the
narrowly linear segments usually more or less divided into linear lobes.
(D. multifida, _Muhl._) Southward, scarcely if at all within our limits.

3. D. heterophylla, Nutt. Tubers near the surface, jointed, narrowly
oblong or thick-clavate, prominently tubercled; leaves 3-foliolate, the
leaflets distinctly petiolate, oblong-lanceolate to linear, entire to
rather deeply crenate, rarely laciniate or lobed; root-leaves with ovate
or lanceolate and usually lobed leaflets.--Penn. to Ky. and southward.
Blooming a little later than the last.

4. D. maxima, Nutt. Tubers jointed, strongly tubercled; stem-leaves
usually alternate, 3-foliolate; leaflets ovate or oblong-ovate, coarsely
toothed and somewhat cleft or lobed.--Vt. to western N. Y. and Penn.
May.


4. CARDAMINE, Tourn. BITTER CRESS.

Pod linear, flattened, usually opening elastically from the base; the
valves nerveless and veinless, or nearly so; placentas and partition
thick. Seeds in a single row in each cell, wingless; their stalks
slender. Cotyledons accumbent, flattened, equal or nearly so,
petiolate.--Mostly glabrous perennials, leafy-stemmed, growing along
watercourses and in wet places. Flowers white or purple. (A Greek name,
in Dioscorides, for some cress, from its cordial or cardiacal
qualities.)

[*] _Root perennial; leaves simple._

1. C. rhomboidea, DC. (SPRING CRESS.) _Stems upright from a tuberous
base and slender rootstock bearing small tubers, simple_; root-leaves
round and often heart-shaped; lower stem-leaves ovate or rhombic-oblong,
somewhat petioled, the upper almost lanceolate, sessile, all often
sparingly toothed; pods linear-lanceolate, pointed with a slender style
tipped with a conspicuous stigma; _seeds round-oval_.--Wet meadows and
springs; common. April--June.--Flowers large, white.

Var. purpurea, Torr. Lower (4--6' high), and usually slightly pubescent;
flowers rose-purple, appearing earlier.--Along streams in rich soil.
Western N. Y. to Md. and Wisc.

2. C. rotundifolia, Michx. (MOUNTAIN WATER-CRESS.) _Stems branching,
weak or decumbent, making long runners; root fibrous_; leaves all much
alike, roundish, somewhat angled, often heart-shaped at the base,
petioled; pods small, linear-awl-shaped, pointed with the slender style;
stigma minute; _seeds oval-oblong_.--Cool shaded springs, N. J.
(Middletown, _Willis_) to Ky., and southward along the mountains. May,
June.--Flowers white, smaller than in n. 1.

3. C. bellidifolia, L. _Dwarf_ (2--3' high), alpine, tufted; leaves
ovate, entire, or sometimes with a blunt lateral tooth (4'' long), on
long petioles; pods 1' long, upright, linear; _style nearly none_,
stout.--Summits of the White Mountains and Katahdin, Maine.
July.--Flowers 1--5, white. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Root perennial; leaves pinnate; flowers showy._

4. C. pratensis, L. (CUCKOO FLOWER.) Stem ascending from a short
rootstock, simple; leaflets 7--13, those of the lower leaves rounded and
stalked, of the upper oblong or linear, entire, or slightly
angled-toothed; petals (white or rose-color) thrice the length of the
calyx; pod 9--15'' long, 1'' broad; style short.--Wet places and bogs,
Vt. to N. J., Wisc., and northward; rare. May. (Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Root mostly biennial or annual; leaves pinnate; flowers
small, white._

5. C. hirsuta, L. (SMALL BITTER CRESS.) Glabrous or beset with scattered
hairs; stems (3'--2 deg. high) erect or ascending from the spreading cluster
of root-leaves; their leaflets rounded, those of the upper leaves oblong
or linear and often confluent, all either toothed, angled, or entire;
pods linear, very narrow, erect or ascending; style variable.--Wet
places; common. May--July. The ordinary form corresponds closely to the
European var. SYLVATICA, Gaud. The typical imperfectly developed annual
form, with only 4 stamens and rather strict pods, occurs very rarely. A
form answering to C. parviflora of Europe, with mostly linear leaflets
and pods often erect on spreading pedicels, is occasionally found in
drier localities. (Eu., Asia.)


5. ARABIS, L. ROCK CRESS.

Pod linear, flattened; placentas not thickened; the valves plane or
convex, more or less 1-nerved in the middle, or longitudinally veiny.
Seeds usually margined or winged. Cotyledons accumbent or a little
oblique.--Leaves seldom divided. Flowers white or purple. (Name from the
country, _Arabia_. See _Linn. Phil. Bot._ Sec. 235.)

Sec. 1. ARABIS proper. _Seeds in one row in each cell, orbicular or nearly
so, more or less wing-margined; cotyledons strictly accumbent._

[*] _Low, chiefly biennials, diffuse or spreading from the base._

1. A. Ludoviciana, Meyer. Nearly glabrous, often annual; leaves all
pinnately parted into oblong or linear few-toothed or entire divisions,
those of the lower leaves numerous; pedicels very short; flowers small,
white; pods rather broadly linear, spreading, flat; seeds winged.--Open
grounds, Va. to Mo., and southward.

[*][*] _Erect and simple leafy-stemmed biennials, with simple leaves,
white or whitish flowers, narrow but flattened ascending or erect pods,
and nearly wingless seeds._

2. A. patens, Sulliv. Downy with spreading hairs, erect (1--2 deg. high);
stem-leaves oblong-ovate, acutish, coarsely toothed or the uppermost
entire, partly clasping by the heart-shaped base; petals (bright white,
4'' long) twice the length of the calyx; _pedicels slender, spreading;
pods spreading or ascending, tipped with a distinct style_.--Penn. to
central Ohio and southward; Minn. April, May.

3. A. hirsuta, Scop. Rough-hairy, sometimes smoothish, strictly erect
(1--2 deg. high); stem-leaves oblong or lanceolate, entire or toothed,
partly clasping by a somewhat arrow-shaped or heart-shaped base; petals
(greenish-white) small, but longer than the calyx; _pedicels and pods
strictly upright; style scarcely any_; immature seeds somewhat
2-rowed.--Rocks, common, especially northward. May, June. (Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Erect and simple leafy-stemmed biennials (1--3 deg. high), with
small whitish flowers, recurved-spreading or pendulous flat pods (3--4'
long), and broadly winged seeds, their stalks adherent to the partition;
root-leaves rarely lyrate._

4. A. laevigata, Poir. _Smooth_ and glaucous, upright; _stem-leaves
partly clasping_ by the arrow-shaped base, lanceolate or linear,
sparingly cut-toothed or entire; petals scarcely longer than the calyx;
_pods long and narrow, recurved-spreading_ on ascending or merely
spreading pedicels.--Rocky places, Maine to Minn. and southward. May.

5. A. Canadensis, L. (SICKLE-POD.) Stem upright, smooth above;
_stem-leaves pubescent, pointed at both ends_, oblong-lanceolate,
sessile, the lower toothed; petals twice the length of the calyx,
oblong-linear; _pods very flat, scythe-shaped, hanging_ on rough-hairy
pedicels (2'' wide).--Woods and ravines; not rare, especially westward.
June--Aug.

Sec. 2. TURRITIS. _Seeds not so broad as the partition, in two more or less
distinct rows in each cell, at least when young; strict and very
leafy-stemmed biennials; cauline leaves partly clasping by a sagittate
base. (Our species very glabrous, except the mostly hirsute base of the
stem and the lower leaves.)_

6. A. perfoliata, Lam. (TOWER MUSTARD.) Tall (2--4 deg. high), _glaucous_;
stem-leaves oblong or ovate-lanceolate, entire; _petals yellowish-white,
little longer than the calyx; pods very narrow_ (3' long) _and pedicels
strictly erect_; seeds marginless; cotyledons often oblique.--Rocks and
fields, N. Eng. to Minn. (rare), north and westward. (Eu.)

7. A. confinis, Watson. Scarcely glaucous, 1--3 deg. high; pubescence below
finely stellate; _stem-leaves lanceolate or oblong-linear_, entire
(1--2' long), with narrow auricles, or the lowest spatulate and toothed;
_petals white or rose-color, fully twice the length of the calyx_;
pedicels and flat _pods loosely erect, or ascending, or even spreading_;
seeds wing-margined, when mature little narrower than the partition. (A.
Drummondii, _Man._)--From the lower St. Lawrence to Minn., south to
Conn., N. Y., and Ill.--Pods 21/2--31/2' long, or in a var. (T. brachycarpa,
_Torr. & Gray_) only 1--2' long.

Sec. 3. PSEUDARABIS. _Seeds oblong or elliptical, very small, wingless, in
one row; cotyledons often more or less oblique. Biennial or perennial,
branching from the base._

8. A. lyrata, L. Mostly glabrous, except the _lyrate-pinnatifid
root-leaves_; stem-leaves scattered, spatulate or linear with a tapering
base, sparingly toothed or entire; _petals white_, much longer than the
yellowish calyx; pods long and slender, flat, ascending or
spreading.--On rocks or sandy shores, New Eng. to Ky. along the
mountains, Minn., and northward. April--July.--Usually biennial, but
southward in the mountains decidedly perennial.

9. A. dentata, Torr. & Gray. Roughish pubescent, slender (1--2 deg. high);
_leaves oblong_, very obtuse, unequally and sharply toothed; those of
the stem _numerous, half-clasping and eared_ at the base, of the root
broader and tapering into a short petiole; petals (whitish) scarcely
exceeding the calyx; _pods widely spreading, very slender,
short-stalked; style scarcely any_.--N. Y. to Mich., Minn., and
southward. May, June.


6. DRABA, Dill. WHITLOW-GRASS.

Pod oval, oblong, or even linear, flat; the valves plane or slightly
convex; the partition broad. Seeds several or numerous, in 2 rows in
each cell, marginless. Cotyledons accumbent. Filaments not
toothed.--Low herbs with entire or toothed leaves, and white or yellow
flowers; pubescence often stellate. (Name from [Greek: dra/be], applied
by Dioscorides to some cress; meaning unknown.)

Sec. 1. DRABAEA. _Petals not notched or cleft; perennial or biennial,
leafy-stemmed, flowers white, pods twisted when ripe._

1. D. ramosissima, Desv. _Diffusely much branched_ and forming many
radical tufts, perennial (5--8' high), pubescent; _leaves
laciniate-toothed_, linear-lanceolate, the lower oblanceolate, racemes
corymbosely-branched; _pods hairy_, oval-oblong or lanceolate (2--5''
long), on slender spreading pedicels, tipped with a _long
style_.--Cliffs, Harper's Ferry, Natural Bridge, etc., Va., to Kentucky
River, and southward. April, May.

2. D. incana, L. _Hoary-pubescent_, biennial or somewhat perennial, the
radical tuft seldom branching; leaves oblanceolate or the cauline
lanceolate to ovate, few-toothed or entire; _pods oblong to lanceolate,
usually acute and straight, often pubescent_, on short erect pedicels;
style very short or none.--Dry rocks, Willoughby Mountain, Vt.; also
northward and far westward. (Eu.)

Var. arabisans, Watson. Caudex much branched; pod glabrous, acuminate or
acute, twisted, beaked with a longer distinct style. (D. arabisans,
_Michx._)--N. Vt. to western N. Y. and the shores of the upper lakes.

Sec. 2. DRABELLA. _Winter annuals; leafy stems short; flowers white (yellow
in n. 5); style none. (Leaves oblong or obovate, hairy, sessile.)_

3. D. Caroliniana, Walt. Small (1--5' high); leaves obovate, entire;
peduncles scape-like; petals usually twice the length of the calyx;
_raceme short or corymbose in fruit_ (1/2--1' long); _pods broadly linear,
smooth_, much longer than the ascending pedicels.--Sandy and waste
fields, E. Mass. to Minn., and southward. March--May.--Petals often
wanting in the later racemes, especially in the var. MICRANTHA, Gray,
with minutely rough-hairy pods, which is found with the other, westward.

4. D. cuneifolia, Nutt. Leaves obovate, wedge-shaped, or the lowest
spatulate, toothed; _raceme somewhat elongated in fruit_ (1--3'), at
length equalling the naked peduncle; petals emarginate, much longer than
the calyx; _pods oblong-linear, minutely hairy, longer than the
horizontal pedicels_.--Grassy places, Ill. to E. Kan., and southward.
March, April.

5. D. brachycarpa, Nutt. Low (2--4' high), minutely pubescent; _stems
leafy_ to the base of the dense at length elongated raceme; leaves
narrowly oblong or the lowest ovate (2--4'' long), few toothed or
entire; flowers small; _pods smooth, narrowly oblong, acutish_ (2''
long), _about the length of the ascending or spreading pedicels_.--Dry
hills, Ill., Ky., Va. (_A. H. Curtiss_), and southward. April.--Petals
sometimes minute, sometimes none.

6. D. nemorosa, L. Leaves oblong or somewhat lanceolate, more or less
toothed; _racemes elongated_ (4--8' long in fruit); petals emarginate,
small; _pods elliptical-oblong, half the length of the horizontal or
widely-spreading pedicels_, pubescent or smooth.--Fort Gratiot, Mich.,
N. Minn., and westward. (Eu.)

Sec. 3. EROPHILA. _Petals 2-cleft. (Annual or biennial; flowers white.)_

D. VERNA, L. (WHITLOW-GRASS.) Small (scapes 1--3' high); leaves all
radical, oblong or lanceolate; racemes elongated in fruit; pods varying
from round-oval to oblong-lanceolate, smooth, shorter than the
pedicels.--Sandy waste places and roadsides. April, May. (Nat. from Eu.)


7. ALYSSUM, Tourn.

Pod small, orbicular, with only one or two wingless seeds in a cell;
valves nerveless, somewhat convex, the margin flattened. Flowers yellow
or white. Filaments often toothed. Cotyledons accumbent. (Greek name of
a plant reputed to check the hiccup, as the etymology denotes.)

A. MARITIMUM, L. (SWEET ALYSSUM), with green or slightly hoary linear
leaves, honey-scented small white flowers, and 2-seeded pods, commonly
cult., begins to be spontaneous southward. (Adv. from Eu.)

A. CALYCINUM, L., a dwarf hoary annual, with linear-spatulate leaves,
pale yellow or whitish petals little exceeding the persistent calyx, and
orbicular sharp margined 4-seeded pod, the style minute, occurs
occasionally in grassland. (Adv. from Eu.)


8. LESQUERELLA, Watson.

Pod mostly globular or inflated, with a broad orbicular to ovate hyaline
partition nerved to the middle, the hemispherical or convex thin valves
nerveless. Seeds few or several, in 2 rows, flat. Cotyledons accumbent.
Filaments toothless.--Low herbs, hoary with stellate hairs or lepidote.
Flowers mostly yellow. (Named for _Leo Lesquereux_.)

1. L. globosa, Watson. Minutely hoary all over; stems spreading or
decumbent from an annual or biennial root; leaves oblong or lanceolate
with a tapering base, repand-toothed or nearly entire; raceme at length
elongated, with filiform diverging pedicels; petals light yellow; style
filiform, much longer than the small globose, acutish, about 4-seeded
pod; seeds marginless. (Vesicaria Shortii, _Torr._)--Rocky banks, Ky.
to Tenn. and Mo. May, June.

2. L. gracilis, Watson. Annual, slender; pubescence very fine; leaves
narrowly oblanceolate; pods glabrous, suberect on ascending or curved
pedicels, stipitate; style long. (Vesicaria gracilis, _Hook._)--S. Kan.
to Tex.

3. L. Ludoviciana, Watson. Biennial or perennial; pubescence compact;
leaves linear-oblanceolate, mostly entire; pods pubescent, pendulous on
recurved pedicels; style long. (Vesicaria Ludoviciana, _DC._)--Minn. to
Neb. and southwestward.


9. CAMELINA, Crantz. FALSE FLAX.

Pod obovoid or pear-shaped, pointed, flattish parallel to the broad
partition; valves 1-nerved. Seeds numerous, oblong. Cotyledons
incumbent. Style slender. Flowers small, yellow. (Name from [Greek:
chamai/], _dwarf_, and [Greek: li/non], _flax_.)

C. SATIVA, Crantz. Annual; leaves lanceolate and arrow-shaped; pods
margined, large. A weed in flax-fields, etc. (Adv. from Eu.)


10. SUBULARIA, L. AWLWORT.

Pod ovoid or globular, with a broad partition; the turgid valves
1-nerved. Seeds several. Cotyledons long and narrow, incumbently folded
transversely, i.e., the cleft extending to the radicular side of the
curvature. Style none.--A dwarf stemless perennial, aquatic; the tufted
leaves awl-shaped (whence the name). Scape naked, few-flowered, 1--3'
high. Flowers minute, white.

1. S. aquatica, L. Margin of lakes in Maine; Echo Lake, Franconia,
N. H.; also in alpine regions of the western mountains. June, July.
(Eu.)


11. NASTURTIUM, R. Br. WATER-CRESS.

Pod a short silique or a silicle, varying from oblong-linear to
globular, terete or nearly so; valves strongly convex, nerveless. Seeds
usually numerous, small, turgid, marginless, in 2 irregular rows in each
cell (except in N. sylvestre). Cotyledons accumbent.--Aquatic or marsh
plants, with yellow or white flowers, and commonly pinnate or pinnatifid
leaves, usually glabrous. (Name from _Nasus tortus_, a convulsed nose,
alluding to the effect of its pungent qualities.)

Sec. 1. _Petals white, twice the length of the calyx; pods linear; leaves
pinnate._

N. OFFICINALE, R. Br. (TRUE WATER-CRESS.) Perennial; stems spreading and
rooting; leaflets 3--11, roundish or oblong, nearly entire; pods (6--8''
long) ascending on slender widely spreading pedicels.--Brooks and
ditches; escaped from cultivation. (Nat. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. _Petals yellow or yellowish, seldom much exceeding the calyx; pods
linear, oblong, or even ovoid or globular; leaves mostly pinnatifid._

[*] _Perennial from creeping or subterranean shoots; flowers rather
large, yellow._

N. SYLVESTRE, R. Br. (YELLOW CRESS.) Stems ascending; _leaves pinnately
parted_, the divisions toothed or cut, lanceolate or linear; pods (1/2'
long) on slender pedicels, linear and narrow, bringing the seeds into
one row; _style very short_.--Wet meadows, Mass. to Va.; rare. (Nat.
from Eu.)

1. N. sinuatum, Nutt. Stems low, diffuse; _leaves pinnately cleft_, the
short lobes nearly entire, linear-oblong; pods linear-oblong (4--6''
long), on slender pedicels; _style slender_.--Banks of the Mississippi
and westward. June.

[*][*] _Annual or biennial, rarely perennial (?), with simple fibrous
roots; flowers small or minute, greenish or yellowish; leaves somewhat
lyrate._

2. N. sessiliflorum, Nutt. Stems erect, rather simple; _leaves obtusely
incised_ or toothed, obovate or oblong; _flowers minute, nearly
sessile_; pods elongated-oblong (5--6'' long), thick; style very
short.--W. Ill. to E. Kan., Tenn., and southward. April--June.

3. N. obtusum, Nutt. Stems much branched, diffusely spreading; _leaves
pinnately parted or divided_, the divisions roundish and obtusely
toothed or repand; _flowers minute, short-pedicelled; pods longer than
the pedicels_, varying from linear-oblong to short-oval; style
short.--With n. 1 and 2.

4. N. palustre, DC. (MARSH CRESS.) Stem erect; _leaves pinnately cleft
or parted_, or the upper laciniate; the lobes oblong, cut-toothed;
_pedicels about as long as the small flowers and mostly longer than_ the
oblong, ellipsoid, or ovoid _pods_; style short.--Wet places or in
shallow water; common. June--Sept.--Flowers only 1--11/2'' long. Stems
1--3 deg. high.--The typical form with oblong pods is rare. Short pods and
hirsute stems and leaves are common. Var. HISPIDUM is a form with ovoid
or globular pods. (Eu.)

Sec. 3. _Petals white, much longer than the calyx; pods ovoid or globular;
leaves undivided, or the lower ones pinnatifid; root perennial._

5. N. lacustre, Gray. (LAKE CRESS.) Aquatic; immersed leaves
1--3-pinnately dissected into numerous capillary divisions; emersed
leaves oblong, entire, serrate, or pinnatifid; pedicels widely
spreading; _pods ovoid, 1-celled, a little longer than the
style_.--Lakes and rivers, N. E. New York to N. J., Minn., and
southwestward. July--Aug.--Near N. amphibium.

N. ARMORACIA, Fries. (HORSERADISH.) Root-leaves very large, oblong,
crenate, rarely pinnatifid, those of the stem lanceolate; fruiting
pedicels ascending; _pods globular_ (seldom formed); _style very short_.
(Cochlearia Armoracia, _L._)--Roots large and long; a well-known
condiment. Escaped from cultivation into moist ground. (Adv. from Eu.)


12. BARBAREA, R. Br. WINTER CRESS.

Pod linear, terete or somewhat 4-sided, the valves being keeled by a
mid-nerve. Seeds in a single row in each cell, marginless. Cotyledons
accumbent.--Mostly biennials, resembling Nasturtium; flowers yellow.
(Anciently called the Herb of St. Barbara.)

1. B. vulgaris, R. Br. (COMMON WINTER CRESS. YELLOW ROCKET.) Smooth;
lower leaves lyrate, the terminal division round and usually large, the
lateral 1--4 pairs or rarely wanting; upper leaves obovate, cut-toothed,
or pinnatifid at the base; pods erect or slightly spreading; or in var.
STRICTA, appressed; in var. ARCUATA, ascending on spreading
pedicels.--Low grounds and roadsides; apparently introduced, but
indigenous from L. Superior northward and westward. (Eu.)

B. PRAECOX, R. Br. (EARLY WINTER C.), with 5--8 pairs of lateral lobes to
the leaves, and longer pods on very thick pedicels,--yet probably only a
variety of the other,--somewhat cultivated from N. Y. southward as a
winter salad, under the name of SCURVY-GRASS,--is beginning to run wild.
(Eu.)


13. HESPERIS, Tourn. ROCKET.

Pod linear, nearly cylindrical; stigma lobed, erect. Seeds in 1 row in
each cell, oblong, marginless. Cotyledons incumbent.--Biennial or
perennial, with serrate sessile or petiolate leaves, and large purple
flowers. (Name from [Greek: e(spe/ra], evening, from the evening
fragrance of the flowers.)

H. MATRONALIS, L. (DAME'S VIOLET.) Tall; leaves lanceolate, acuminate,
mostly petiolate; pods 2--4' long, spreading.--Sparingly naturalized.
(Nat. from Eu.)


14. ERYSIMUM, Tourn. TREACLE MUSTARD.

Pod linear, 4-sided, the valves keeled with a strong midrib; stigma
broadly lobed. Seeds in 1 row in each cell, oblong, marginless.
Cotyledons (often obliquely) incumbent.--Chiefly biennials, with yellow
flowers; the leaves not clasping. Pubescence of appressed 2--3-parted
hairs. (Name from [Greek: e)ry/o], _to draw blisters_.)

1. E. asperum, DC. (WESTERN WALL-FLOWER.) Minutely roughish-hoary; stem
simple, leaves lanceolate to linear, entire or somewhat toothed; _pods
nearly erect_ or widely spreading _on short pedicels, elongated_ (3--4'
long), exactly 4-sided; stigma 2-lobed.--Ohio (on limestone cliffs) to
Ill., Ark., Dak., and common westward. June, July.--Plant stout, 1--2 deg.
high; the crowded bright orange-yellow flowers as large as those of the
Wall-flower. Petals orbicular, on very slender claws.

2. E. cheiranthoides, L. (WORM-SEED MUSTARD.) Minutely roughish,
branching, slender; leaves lanceolate, scarcely toothed; flowers small;
_pods small and short_ (7--12'' long), very obtusely angled, ascending
on slender _divergent pedicels_.--Banks of streams, Mass. to Penn.,
Minn., and northward. July. (Eu.)

3. E. parviflorum, Nutt. Stem erect, often simple; leaves
linear-oblanceolate, entire or the lowest coarsely toothed; flowers
small (3'' long); pods narrow, 1--21/2' long, ascending on short
pedicels.--Minn. to Kan. and westward.


15. SISYMBRIUM, Tourn. HEDGE MUSTARD.

Pod terete, flattish or 4--6-sided, the valves 1--3-nerved; stigma
small, entire. Seeds oblong, marginless, in 1 or 2 rows in each cell.
Cotyledons incumbent. Calyx open.--Flowers small, white or yellow.
Pubescence spreading. (An ancient Greek name for some plant of this
family.) Ours are mostly annuals or biennials.

1. S. humile, Meyer. Perennial, branching from the base, sparingly
pubescent, 6' high or less; leaves narrowly oblanceolate, mostly
coarsely and sharply toothed; flowers white or rose-color; pods very
narrow, subterete, 4--9'' long, ascending on short pedicels, beaked with
a short style, seeds 1-ranked. (Arabis petraea, _Man._, not
_Lam._)--Willoughby Mountain, Vt.; Canada and westward. (N. Asia.)

2. S. canescens, Nutt. (TANSY MUSTARD.) _Leaves 2-pinnatifid_, often
hoary or downy, the divisions small and toothed; flowers yellowish, very
small; pods in long racemes, oblong-club-shaped or oblong-linear,
shorter than their mostly horizontal pedicels; _seeds 2-ranked_ in each
cell.--Penn. and N. Y. to Lake Superior, thence southward and westward.
June--Aug.

S. SOPHIA, L. A similar hoary species, with decompound leaves; pods
slender, 6--15'' long, ascending; seeds 1-ranked.--Sparingly naturalized
from Europe.

S. OFFICINALE, Scop. (HEDGE MUSTARD.) _Leaves runcinate_; flowers very
small, pale yellow; _pods awl-shaped, close pressed_ to the stem,
scarcely stalked.--Waste places. May--Sept.--An unsightly branched weed,
2--3 deg. high. (Nat. from Eu.)

S. THALIANA, Gaud. (MOUSE-EAR CRESS.) _Leaves obovate or oblong, entire_
or barely toothed; flowers white; pods linear, somewhat 4-sided, longer
than the slender spreading pedicels.--Old fields and rocks, Mass. to
Kan. April, May.--A span high, slender, branched, hairy at the base.
(Nat. from Eu.)

S. ALLIARIA, Scop. Stout, erect; leaves reniform to ovate-cordate,
coarsely repand-dentate; flowers white; pods tapering, 1--2' long,
ascending on very stout spreading pedicels.--Near Georgetown, D. C.
(Nat. from Eu.)


16. THELYPODIUM, Endl.

Pod terete or teretish; valves 1-nerved; stigma mostly entire. Seeds in
1 row in each cell, oblong, marginless. Cotyledons obliquely
incumbent.--Stout biennials or perennials, with mostly large purplish or
white flowers. Leaves or petioles often auricled at base. (Name from
[Greek: the~lys], _female_, and [Greek: pou/s], _foot_, the ovary in
some species being stipitate.)

1. T. pinnatifidum, Watson. Glabrous (1--3 deg. high), often branched above;
root-leaves round or heart-shaped, on slender petioles; stem-leaves
auricled, ovate-oblong and ovate-lanceolate (2--6' long), sharply and
often doubly toothed, tapering to each end, the lower into a winged
petiole, rarely bearing a pair or two of small lateral lobes; flowers
purplish; pods 1--11/2' long, on short diverging pedicels, pointed by a
short style. (Arabis hesperidoides, _Gray_.) Alluvial river-banks, Ohio
to Minn., Mo., and southwestward. May, June.


17. BRASSICA (Brassica and Sinapis), Tourn.

Pod linear or oblong, nearly terete or 4-sided, with a stout 1-seeded
beak or a rigid style; valves 1--5-nerved. Seeds globose, 1-rowed.
Cotyledons incumbent, folded around the radicle.--Annuals or biennials,
with yellow flowers. Lower leaves mostly lyrate, incised, or pinnatifid.
(The Latin name of the Cabbage. Sinapis is the Greek [Greek: si/napi],
which is said to come from the Celtic _nap_, a turnip.)

B. SINAPISTRUM, Boiss. (or SINAPIS ARVENSIS, L., the English CHARLOCK),
with knotty pods, fully one third occupied by a stout 2-edged beak
(which is either empty or 1-seeded), the upper leaves barely toothed, is
a noxious weed in grain-fields, from N. Eng. to Penn. and N. Y.
westward. (Adv. from Eu.)

B. (or SINAPIS) ALBA. (WHITE MUSTARD.) Pods bristly, ascending on
spreading pedicels, more than half its length occupied by the
sword-shaped 1-seeded beak; leaves all pinnatifid; seeds pale. (Cult.
and adv. from Eu.)

B. (or SINAPIS) NIGRA, Koch. (BLACK MUSTARD.) Pods smooth (1/2' long),
4-cornered (the valves only 1-nerved), erect on appressed pedicels
forming a slender raceme, tipped with a stout persistent style; seeds
dark brown, smaller and more pungent than in the last; lower leaves with
a large terminal lobe and a few small lateral ones.--Fields and waste
places. (Adv. from Eu.)

B. CAMPESTRIS, L., in the form of the RUTABAGA and the TURNIP, sometimes
persists a year or two in neglected grounds.


18. CAPSELLA, Medic. SHEPHERD'S PURSE.

Pod obcordate-triangular, flattened contrary to the narrow partition;
the valves boat-shaped, wingless. Seeds numerous. Cotyledons
incumbent.--Annuals; flowers small, white. (Name a diminutive of
_capsa_, a box.)

C. BURSA-PASTORIS, Moench. Root-leaves clustered, pinnatifid or toothed;
stem-leaves arrow-shaped, sessile.--Waste places; the commonest of
weeds. April--Sept. (Nat. from Eu.)


19. THLASPI, Tourn. PENNYCRESS.

Pod orbicular, obovate, or obcordate, flattened contrary to the narrow
partition, the midrib or keel of the boat-shaped valves extended into a
wing. Seeds 2--8 in each cell. Cotyledons accumbent. Petals equal.--Low
plants, with root-leaves undivided, stem-leaves arrow-shaped and
clasping, and small white or purplish flowers. (Ancient Greek name, from
[Greek: thla/o], _to crush_, from the flattened pod.)

T. ARVENSE, L. (FIELD P. or MITHRIDATE MUSTARD.) A smooth annual, with
broadly winged pod 1/2' in diameter, several seeded, deeply notched at
top; style minute.--Waste places; rarely naturalized. (Nat. from Eu.)


20. LEPIDIUM, Tourn. PEPPERWORT. PEPPERGRASS.

Pod roundish, much flattened contrary to the narrow partition; the
valves boat-shaped and keeled. Seeds solitary in each cell, pendulous.
Cotyledons incumbent, or in n. 1 accumbent! Flowers small, white or
greenish. (Name from [Greek: lepi/dion], _a little scale_, alluding to
the small flat pods.)--Ours are annuals or biennials, except the last.

[*] _Leaves all with a tapering base, the upper linear or lanceolate and
entire, the lower and often the middle ones incised or pinnatifid; pods
orbicular or oval, with a small notch at the top; the style minute or
none; stamens only 2._

1. L. Virginicum, L. (WILD PEPPERGRASS.) _Cotyledons accumbent_ and seed
minutely margined; _pod marginless_ or obscurely margined at the top;
petals present, except in some of the later flowers.--June--Sept.
A common roadside weed, which has immigrated from farther south.

2. L. intermedium, Gray. _Cotyledons incumbent_ as in the following;
_pod minutely wing-margined at the top_; petals usually minute or
wanting; otherwise nearly as in n. 1.--Dry places, from western N. Y.
and N. Ill., north and westward.

L. RUDERALE, L. More diffuse, the smaller and oval _pods and the seeds
marginless; petals always wanting_.--Roadsides, near Boston,
Philadelphia, etc.; not common. (Adv. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Stem-leaves with a sagittate partly clasping base, rather
crowded._

L. CAMPESTRE, Br. Minutely _soft downy_; leaves arrow-shaped, somewhat
toothed; _pods ovate, winged_, rough, the style longer than the narrow
notch.--Old fields, Mass. and N. Y. to Va.; rare. (Nat. from Eu.)

L. DRABA, L. Perennial, _obscurely hoary_; leaves oval or oblong, the
upper with broad clasping auricles; flowers corymbose; _pods
heart-shaped, wingless_, thickish, entire, tipped with a conspicuous
style.--Astoria, near New York, _D. C. Eaton_. (Adv. from Eu.)


21. SENEBIERA, DC. WART-CRESS. SWINE-CRESS.

Pod flattened contrary to the narrow partition; the two cells
indehiscent and falling away at maturity from the partition as closed
nutlets, strongly wrinkled or tuberculate, 1 seeded. Cotyledons narrow
and incumbently folded transversely. Low and diffuse or prostrate
annuals or biennials, with minute whitish flowers. Stamens often only 2.
(Dedicated to _J. Senebier_, a distinguished vegetable physiologist.)

S. DIDYMA, Pers. Leaves 1--2-pinnately parted; _pods notched at the
apex, rough-wrinkled_.--Waste places, at ports, E. Mass. to Va., etc.;
an immigrant from farther south.

S. CORONOPUS, DC. Leaves less divided, with narrower lobes; _pods not
notched at the apex, tubercled_.--At ports, R. I. to Va., etc. (Adv.
from Eu.)


22. CAKILE, Tourn. SEA-ROCKET.

Pod short, 2-jointed across, fleshy, the upper joint separating at
maturity; each indehiscent, 1-celled and 1-seeded, or the lower
sometimes seedless. Seed erect in the upper, suspended in the lower
joint. Cotyledons obliquely accumbent.--Seaside fleshy annuals. Flowers
purplish. (An old Arabic name.)

1. C. Americana, Nutt. (AMERICAN SEA-ROCKET.) Leaves obovate, sinuate
and toothed; lower joint of the fruit obovoid, emarginate; the upper
ovate, flattish at the apex.--Coast of the Northern States and of the
Great Lakes. July--Sept.--Joints nearly even and fleshy when fresh; the
upper one 4-angled and appearing more beaked when dry.


23. RAPHANUS, Tourn. RADISH.

Pods linear or oblong, tapering upward, indehiscent, several-seeded,
continuous and spongy within between the seeds, or necklace-form by
constriction between the seeds, with no proper partition. Style long.
Seeds spherical and cotyledons conduplicate, as in Brassica.--Annuals or
biennials. (The ancient Greek name from [Greek: r(ai], _quickly_, and
[Greek: phai/no], _to appear_, alluding to the rapid germination.)

R. RAPHANISTRUM, L. (WILD RADISH. JOINTED CHARLOCK.) Pods necklace-form,
long-beaked; leaves lyre-shaped, rough; petals yellow, turning whitish
or purplish, veiny.--A troublesome weed in fields, E. New Eng. to Penn.
(Adv. from Eu.)


ORDER 11. CAPPARIDACEAE. (CAPER FAMILY.)

_Herbs_ (when in northern regions), _with cruciform flowers, but 6 or
more not tetradynamous stamens, a 1-celled pod with 2 parietal placentae,
and kidney-shaped seeds._--Pod as in Cruciferae, but with no partition;
seeds similar, but the embryo coiled rather than folded. Leaves
alternate, mostly palmately compound.--Often with the acrid or pungent
qualities of Cruciferae (as in _capers_, the flower-buds of Capparis
spinosa).

1. Polanisia. Stamens 8 or more. Pod many-seeded, not or scarcely
stipitate.

2. Cleome. Stamens 6. Pod linear, many-seeded, long stipitate.

3. Cleomella. Stamens 6. Pod very short, rhomboidal, few-seeded,
long-stipitate.


1. POLANISIA, Raf.

Petals with claws, notched at the apex. Stamens 8--32, unequal.
Receptacle not elongated, bearing a gland behind the base of the ovary.
Pod linear or oblong, veiny, turgid, many-seeded.--Fetid annuals, with
glandular or clammy hairs. Flowers in leafy racemes. (Name from [Greek:
poly/s], _many_, and [Greek: a)/nisos], _unequal_, points in which the
genus differs in its stamens from Cleome.)

1. P. graveolens, Raf. Leaves with 3 oblong leaflets; stamens about 11,
scarcely exceeding the petals; style short; pod slightly
stipitate.--Gravelly shores, from Conn. and W. Vt. to Minn. and Kan.
June--Aug.--Flowers small (2--3'' long); calyx and filaments purplish;
petals yellowish-white.

2. P. trachysperma, Torr. & Gray. Flowers larger (4--5'' long), the
stamens (12--16) long-exserted; style 2--3'' long; pod sessile; seeds
usually rough.--Iowa to Kan. and westward.


2. CLEOME, L.

Petals entire, with claws. Stamens 6. Receptacle somewhat produced
between the petals and stamens, and bearing a gland behind the stipitate
ovary. Pod linear to oblong, many-seeded.--Our species a glabrous
annual, with 3-foliolate leaves, leafy-bracteate racemes, and
rose-colored or white flowers. (Name of uncertain derivation, early
applied to some mustard-like plant.)

1. C. integrifolia, Torr. & Gray. Calyx 4-cleft; petals with very short
claws, leaflets narrowly lanceolate to oblong; bracts simple; pod oblong
to linear, 1--2' long, the stipe as long as the pedicel.--Minn. to Kan.
and westward; N. Ill. Flowers showy; 2--3 deg. high.

(Addendum) C. SPINOSA, L. Viscid-pubescent, 3--4 deg. high; a pair of short
stipular spines under the petiole of each leaf; leaflets 5--7,
oblong-lanceolate; flowers large, rose-purple to white; stamens 2--3'
long; stipe of the linear pod about 2' long. (C. pungens, _Willd._)--An
escape from cultivation, near Mt. Carmel, Ill. (_Schneck_), and in waste
grounds southward; also on ballast. (Int. from Trop. Amer.)


3. CLEOMELLA, DC.

Differing from Cleome in the clawless petals, glandless receptacle, and
the short few-seeded pod with more or less distended or even conical
valves. Flowers small, yellow. (Name a diminutive of _Cleome_.)

1. C. angustifolia, Torr. Glabrous, 1--2 deg. high; leaflets (3) and simple
bracts linear to linear-lanceolate, acute; pod rhomboidal, the valves
very bluntly conical; stipe shorter than the pedicel.--Kan. to Tex. and
westward.


ORDER 12. RESEDACEAE. (MIGNONETTE FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with unsymmetrical 4--7-merous small flowers, a fleshy 1-sided
hypogynous disk between the petals and the (3--40) stamens, bearing the
latter. Calyx not closed in the bud. Capsule 3--6-lobed, 3--6-horned,
1-celled with 3--6-parietal placentae, opening at the top before the
seeds_ (which are as in Order 11) _are full grown._--Leaves alternate,
with only glands for stipules. Flowers in terminal spikes or racemes.--A
small and unimportant family, of the Old World, represented by the
Mignonette (_Reseda odorata_) and the Dyer's Weed.

1. RESEDA, Tourn. MIGNONETTE. DYER'S ROCKET.

Petals 4--7, cleft, unequal. Stamens 12--40, on one side of the flower.
(Name from _resedo_, to calm, in allusion to supposed sedative
properties.)

R. LUTEOLA, L. (DYER'S WEED or WELD.) Leaves lanceolate; calyx 4-parted;
petals 4, greenish-yellow; the upper one 3--5-cleft, the two lateral
3-cleft, the lower one linear and entire; capsule depressed.--Roadsides,
N. Y., etc.--Plant 2 deg. high. Used for dyeing yellow. (Adv. from Eu.)

R. LUTEA, L. Leaves irregularly pinnately parted or bipinnatifid; sepals
and petals 6, stamens 15--20.--Nantucket, Mass., and ballast-grounds.


ORDER 13. CISTACEAE. (ROCK-ROSE FAMILY.)

_Low shrubs or herbs, with regular flowers, distinct and hypogynous
mostly indefinite stamens, a persistent calyx, a 1-celled 3--5-valved
capsule with as many parietal placentae borne on the middle of the
valves, and orthotropous albuminous seeds._--Sepals 5; the two external
much smaller, bract-like, or sometimes wanting; the three others a
little twisted in the bud. Petals 3 or 5, convolute in the opposite
direction from the calyx in the bud. Anthers short, innate, on slender
filaments. Style single or none. Ovules few or many, on slender stalks,
with the orifice at the apex. Embryo long and slender, straightish or
curved, in mealy albumen; cotyledons narrow.--Leaves simple and mostly
entire, the lower usually opposite, and the upper alternate. Inert
plants.

1. Helianthemum. Petals 5, crumpled in the bud, fugacious (or none).
Stigma nearly sessile. Stamens and ovules numerous in the petal-bearing
flowers.

2. Hudsonia. Petals 5, fugacious. Stamens 9--30. Style long and slender.
Pod strictly 1-celled, 2--6-seeded. Heath-like.

3. Lechea. Petals 3, persistent. Stamens 3--12. Style none. Pod partly
3-celled, the imperfect partitions bearing broad 2-seeded placentae.


1. HELIANTHEMUM, Tourn. ROCK-ROSE.

Petals 5, crumpled in the bud, fugacious. Styles short or none in our
species; stigma 3-lobed. Capsule strictly 1-celled. Embryo curved in the
form of a hook or ring.--Flowers in most N. American species of two
sorts, viz., _primary_ or earlier ones, with large petals, indefinitely
numerous stamens and many-seeded pods; and _secondary_, or later ones,
which are much smaller and in clusters, with small petals or none, 3--10
stamens, and much smaller 3--few-seeded pods. The yellow flowers open
only once, in sunshine, and cast their petals by the next day. (Name
from [Greek: e(/lios], _the sun_, and [Greek: a)/nthemon], _flower_.)

1. H. Canadense, Michx. (FROST-WEED.) _Petal-bearing flowers solitary;
the small secondary flowers clustered in the axils of the leaves_,
nearly sessile; calyx of the large flowers hairy-pubescent, of the small
ones hoary, like the stem and lower side of the lanceolate-oblong
leaves.--Sandy or gravelly dry soil, Maine to Minn. and southward.
June--Aug.--Stems at first simple. Corolla of the large flowers 1'
wide, producing pods 3'' long; pods of the smaller flowers not larger
than a pin's head. A variety is more hoary, and with a stronger tendency
to multiply the minute clustered flowers. Late in autumn crystals of ice
shoot from the cracked bark at the root, whence the popular name.

2. H. corymbosum, Michx. _Flowers all clustered at the summit_ of the
stem or branches, the petal-bearing ones at length on slender stalks;
calyx woolly.--Pine barrens, N. J. and southward along the coast.


2. HUDSONIA, L.

Petals 5, fugacious (lasting but a day), much larger than the calyx.
Stamens 9--30. Style long and slender; stigma minute. Pod oblong,
enclosed in the calyx, strictly 1-celled, with 1 or 2 seeds attached
near the base of each nerve-like placenta. Embryo coiled into the form
of a closed hook.--Bushy heath-like little shrubs (seldom a foot high),
covered all over with the small awl-shaped or scale-like alternate
persistent downy leaves, producing numerous (small but showy) bright
yellow flowers crowded along the upper part of the branches. (Named in
honor of _Wm. Hudson_, an early English botanist.)

1. H. ericoides, L. Downy but greenish; leaves slender, awl-shaped,
loose; flowers on slender naked stalks; ovary hairy.--Dry sandy soil
near the coast, E. Maine to Va.; N. Conway, N. H. (_Miss Minns._) May.

2. H. tomentosa, Nutt. Hoary with down; leaves oval or narrowly oblong,
1'' long, close-pressed and imbricated; flowers sessile or some
short-peduncled.--Sandy shores, Maine to Md., and along the Great Lakes
to Minn.; rarely on banks of streams inland. May, June.


3. LECHEA, Kalm. PINWEED.

Petals 3, narrow, flat in the bud, not longer than the calyx,
withering-persistent. Stamens 3--12. Style scarcely any; stigmas 3,
plumose. Pod globular, partly 3-celled; the 3 broad and thin placentae
borne on imperfect partitions, each bearing 2 seeds on the face toward
the valve; in our species the placentae curve backward and partly enclose
the seeds. Embryo straightish.--Homely perennial herbs, with very small
greenish or purplish flowers, in summer. (Named in honor of _John
Leche_, a Swedish botanist.)

[*] _Pubescence villous, spreading; leaves oblong; flowers very
short-pedicelled in cymulose clusters._

1. L. major, Michx. Stem upright (1--2 deg. high), stout, simple, very
leafy, producing slender prostrate branches from the base; leaves
elliptical, mucronate-pointed, alternate and opposite or sometimes
whorled; flowers densely crowded; pedicels shorter than the very small
depressed-globose pod; sepals narrower than its valves.--Sterile
grounds; common, especially southward.

[*][*] _Pubescence appressed, leaves narrower; flowers paniculate._

[+] _Leaves comparatively short, broad, and thin; panicles leafy._

2. L. thymifolia, Michx. Erect, about 2 deg. high; stem-leaves oval or
oblong (3--6'' long), commonly somewhat hairy, some whorled or opposite,
those of the rather crowded panicles more linear; pod obovate-globose,
one of the narrow outer sepals often longer. (L. Novae-Caesareae,
_Austin_.)--Dry grounds near the coast, E. Mass. to Fla.

[+][+] _Leaves firmer, narrow, the cauline linear to slender-subulate;
panicles more naked and racemiform._

[++] _Fruiting calyx globular or broadly ovoid; pod rather large, nearly
globose._

3. L. minor, L. Rather strict, 1 deg. high or more, usually glabrate in age;
leaves of radical shoots lanceolate, rigid, 2--3'' long, the cauline
linear, 6--9'' long; pod about 1'' high.--Dry and sterile ground;
common.

Var. maritima, Gray in herb. Stouter and more rigid, leaves of radical
shoots thicker, linear, hoary, the cauline puberulent or glabrous, calyx
canescent. (L. thymifolia, _Pursh._; L. maritima, _Leggett_.)--Sandy
soil near the coast, Mass. to Ga.

4. L. tenuifolia, Michx. Low, slender and diffuse, minutely pubescent or
glabrous; leaves all small and very narrow; flowers mostly on very short
pedicels, diffusely racemose-paniculate; sepals without lateral ribs;
pod ovoid-globose.--Dry, sterile soil, E. Mass. to Mo., and southward.

[++][++] _Smaller-flowered; fruiting calyx narrower; pod ellipsoidal._

5. L. racemulosa, Lam. Erect, soft-pubescent when young, soon nearly
glabrous; leaves of radical shoots narrowly oblong, the cauline
oblong-linear, 4--6'' long; inflorescence loose and diffuse; fruiting
calyx glabrous.--Dry and rocky soil, Long Island to Ky., and southward.


ORDER 14. VIOLACEAE. (VIOLET FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with a somewhat irregular 1-spurred corolla of 5 petals, 5
hypogynous stamens with adnate introrse anthers conniving over the
pistil, and a 1-celled 3-valved pod with 3 parietal placentae._--Sepals
5, persistent. Petals imbricated in the bud. Stamens with their short
and broad filaments continued beyond the anther-cells, and often
coherent with each other. Style usually club-shaped, with the simple
stigma turned to one side. Valves of the capsule bearing the
several-seeded placentae on their middle; after opening, each valve as it
dries folds together lengthwise firmly, projecting the seeds. Seeds
anatropous, rather large, with a hard seed-coat, and a large and
straight embryo nearly as long as the albumen; cotyledons flat.--Leaves
alternate, with stipules. Flowers axillary, nodding. (Roots slightly
acrid or emetic.)

1. Viola. Sepals auricled. Lower petal spurred. Stamens distinct, the 2
lower spurred.

2. Solea. Sepals not auricled. Petals equal in length. Stamens united
into a sheath.

3. Ionidium. Sepals not auricled. Petals very unequal. Filaments
distinct, the anthers merely connivent.


1. VIOLA, Tourn. VIOLET. HEART'S-EASE.

Sepals extended into ears at the base. Petals somewhat unequal, the
lower one spurred at the base. Stamens closely surrounding the ovary,
often slightly cohering with each other; the two lower bearing spurs
which project into the spur of the corolla. Besides these conspicuous
blossoms, which appear in spring, others are produced later (especially
in the stemless species), on shorter peduncles or on runners, usually
concealed under the leaves; these never open nor develop petals, but are
fertilized in the bud, and are far more fruitful than the ordinary
blossoms. (The ancient Latin name of the genus.)

Sec. 1. _Perennials; stipules never leaf-like, the lower more or less
scarious._

[*] _Stemless, the leaves and scapes directly from a rootstock or from
runners._

[+] _Stigma large, naked, not beaked; stolons none; rootstock short and
thick._

1. V. pedata, L. (BIRD-FOOT V.) Nearly smooth; rootstock erect, not
scaly; _leaves all 3--5-divided_, or the earliest only parted, the
lateral divisions 2--3-parted, all linear or narrowly spatulate,
sometimes 2--3-toothed or cut at the apex; flower large, 1' broad, pale
or deep lilac-purple or blue.--Sandy or gravelly soil, New Eng. to
Minn., and southward.--Var. BICOLOR, Pursh, a very handsome variety,
with the two upper petals deep violet, and as it were velvety, occurs
sparingly from Mass. to Md.; most common in N. J., on shale.

[+][+] _Stigma small, naked, often beaked or pointed._

[++] _Rootstock fleshy and thickened, never filiform nor producing
runners; flowers violet or purple (rarely white); lateral petals
bearded._

2. V. pedatifida, G. Don. Leaves all palmately or pedately 5--7-parted;
divisions 2--3-cleft; lobes linear; otherwise like n. 3. (V.
delphinifolia, _Nutt._)--Rich prairies, or more often in dry poor land,
Ill. to Kan. and Minn.

3. V. palmata, L. (COMMON BLUE V.) Glabrous to villous-pubescent; early
leaves roundish-cordate or reniform and merely crenate, the sides rolled
inward when young, the later very various, palmately or pedately or
hastately lobed or parted, the segments obovate to linear. (V.
cucullata, var. palmata, _Gray_.)--Moist or dryish, especially sterile,
ground; very common.

Var. cucullata, Gray. Later leaves merely crenate, not lobed. (V.
cucullata, _Ait._)--Low grounds; common everywhere. Both forms are very
variable in the size and shape of the leaves and sepals, and in the size
and color of the flowers, which are deep or pale violet-blue or purple,
sometimes white or variegated with white.

4. V. sagittata, Ait. (ARROW-LEAVED V.) Smoothish or hairy; leaves on
short and margined, or the later often on long and naked petioles,
varying from oblong-heart-shaped to halberd-shaped, arrow-shaped,
oblong-lanceolate or ovate, denticulate, sometimes cut-toothed near the
base, the lateral or occasionally all the (rather large purple-blue)
petals bearded; spur short and thick; stigma beaked.--Dry or moist sandy
places, New Eng. to Minn., and southward. Some forms pass into the last.

[++][++] _Rootstocks long and filiform, extensively creeping._

[=] _Flowers blue or purple._

5. V. Selkirkii, Pursh. (GREAT-SPURRED V.) Small and delicate; the
filiform rootstock fibrose-rooted, no runners above ground; smooth,
except the round-heart-shaped crenate leaves, which are minutely hairy
on the upper surface and have a deep narrowed sinus; _spur very large_,
thickened at the end, almost as long as the beardless pale violet
petals.--Damp and shady soil, N. Maine to W. Mass., central N. Y.,
L. Superior (_Robbins_), and northward; rare.--Scapes and petioles
1--2', the leaf 1/2--11/4' long, thin; the spur 3'' long. (Eu.)

6. V. palustris, L. (MARSH V.) Smooth; leaves round-heart-shaped and
kidney-form, slightly crenate; flowers (small) pale lilac with purple
streaks, nearly beardless; _spur very short_ and obtuse.--Alpine summits
of the White Mountains, N. H., and high northward. June. (Eu.)

V. ODORATA, L. (SWEET VIOLET), cultivated in gardens, from Europe,
belongs near this group, and is sparingly spontaneous in some places.

[=][=] _Flowers white (small, short-spurred), mostly with brown-purple
veins; lateral petals bearded or beardless. Species apparently
confluent._

7. V. blanda, Willd. (SWEET WHITE V.) Commonly glabrous; leaves
round-heart-shaped or kidney-form; petals mostly beardless, the lower
strongly veined.--Damp places, everywhere. Flowers faintly
sweet-scented.

Var. palustriformis, Gray. The larger form; upper surface of the leaves
sparsely and finely hairy; petals 5'' long, oftener bearded, less
distinctly veined.--Shaded mossy ground, N. Eng. to Del., and westward.

Var. renifolia, Gray. Slightly or strongly pubescent with soft spreading
hairs; leaves round-reniform; petals usually beardless. (V. renifolia,
_Gray_.)--Maine to Mass., western N. Y., Lake Superior, etc.

8. V. primulaefolia, L. (PRIMROSE-LEAVED V.) Smooth or a little
pubescent; leaves oblong or ovate, abrupt or somewhat heart-shaped at
the base; petals often acute, the lateral ones usually sparingly
bearded.--Damp or dry soil, N. Eng. to Fla., toward the coast.

9. V. lanceolata, L. (LANCE-LEAVED VIOLET.) Smooth; leaves lanceolate,
erect, blunt, tapering into a long-margined petiole, almost entire;
petals beardless.--Damp soil; common, especially eastward.

[=][=][=] _Flowers yellow._

10. V. rotundifolia, Michx. (ROUND-LEAVED VIOLET.) Leaves round-ovate,
heart-shaped, slightly crenate; lateral petals bearded and marked with
brown lines; spur very short.--Cold woods, Maine to Minn., and south
along the Alleghanies.--Smoothish; leaves 1' broad at flowering,
increasing to 3 or 4' in the summer, then lying flat on the ground,
shining above.

[*][*] _Leafy-stemmed; all perennial with short rootstocks._

[+] _Low, at first nearly stemless; flowers yellow; stigma concave,
bearded._

11. V. Nuttallii, Pursh. Pubescent or nearly glabrous; leaves ovate to
oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, entire or slightly crenate, decurrent on the
petiole.--Central Kansas and westward.

[+][+] _Stems erect, without root-leaves; stipules entire; spur very
short; stigma beakless, pubescent._

[++] _Stems naked below; flowers yellow._

12. V. pubescens, Ait. (DOWNY YELLOW V.) Softly pubescent (6--12' high);
_leaves very broadly heart-shaped_, toothed, somewhat pointed; stipules
ovate or ovate-lanceolate, large; lower petals veined with purple,
capsule oblong to globular, glabrous or tomentose.--Woods; common.--Var.
SCABRIUSCULA, Torr. & Gray, smaller and greener, slightly pubescent
(4--10' high).--R. I. to Ky., and southwestward.

13. V. hastata, Michx. (HALBERD-LEAVED V.) Nearly glabrous, slender
(4--10' high); _stem-leaves halberd-shaped_ or oblong-heart-shaped,
slightly serrate, acute; stipules ovate, small.--Woods, N. Ohio (near
Painesville, _Miss Shattuck_), mountains of Penn., and southward; rare.

[++][++] _Stems more leafy and prolonged; flowers white or purplish._

14. V. Canadensis, L. (CANADA V.) Upright (1--2 deg. high); leaves
heart-shaped, pointed, serrate; stipules ovate-lanceolate, entire;
petals white or whitish inside, the upper ones mostly tinged with violet
beneath, the lateral bearded.--Rich woods; common northward and along
the Alleghanies. May--Aug.

[+][+][+] _Stems erect or spreading (at first nearly acaulescent);
stipules fringe-toothed; spur oblong to cylindrical; stigma naked._

15. V. striata, Ait. (PALE V.) Stems angular, ascending (6--10' high);
leaves heart-shaped, finely serrate, often acute; stipules
oblong-lanceolate, large; _spur thickish, much shorter than the
cream-colored or white petals_, the lateral ones bearded, the lower
striped with purplish lines; stigma beaked.--Low grounds, W. New Eng. to
Minn. and Mo., and southward in the mountains. April--Oct.

16. V. rostrata, Pursh. (LONG-SPURRED V.) Stems ascending (3--6' high);
leaves roundish-heart-shaped, serrate, the upper acute; stipules
lanceolate, large; _spur slender_ (1/2' long), _longer than the pale
violet beardless petals_; style straight and slender; stigma terminal,
beakless.--Shaded hillsides, N. New Eng. to Mich., and southward in the
Alleghanies; rather rare. June, July.

17. V. canina, L., var. Muhlenbergii, Gray. (DOG V.) Low (3--8' high),
mostly glabrous; stems ascending, mostly simple, from the base at length
producing creeping branches; leaves heart-shaped, or the lowest
kidney-form, crenate, the uppermost slightly pointed; stipules
lanceolate; _spur cylindrical, half the length of the light violet
petals_, the lateral ones slightly bearded; stigma beaked.--Damp or wet
shady places; common. May--July. (Eu.)--Var. PUBERULA, Watson in herb.
Finely puberulent; leaves mostly ovate and acutish with a cordate base,
often small; flowers small and mostly cleistogamous.--Sandy or stony
shores and islands of Lakes Huron and Superior. (_Robbins, Engelmann,
etc._)--Var. MULTICAULIS, Gray. Depressed and stoloniferous; flowers
mostly cleistogamous; leaves small, suborbicular to reniform.--Ky. to
Fla. and Tex.

Sec. 2. _Leaf-bearing throughout from an annual, biennial, or sometimes
short-lived perennial root; the stipules large, leaf-like and
lyrate-pinnatifid._

V. TRICOLOR, L. (PANSY. HEART'S-EASE.) Stem angled and branched; leaves
roundish, or the upper oval and the lowest heart-shaped, crenate or
entire; petals variable in color or variegated (yellow, whitish,
violet-blue and purple);--in var. ARVENSIS shorter or little longer than
the calyx.--Dry or sandy soil, N. Y. to Iowa, Kan., and southward; the
variety sometimes seeming like a native plant. April--Sept. (Nat. from
Eu.)


2. SOLEA, Spreng., in part. GREEN VIOLET.

Sepals not prolonged at the base. Petals nearly equal in length, but the
lower one larger and gibbous or saccate at the base, more notched than
the others at the apex. Stamens completely united into a sheath
enclosing the ovary, and bearing a broad gland on the lower side. Style
hooked at the summit.--A homely perennial herb, with stems leafy to the
top, and 1--3 small greenish-white flowers in the axils, on short
recurved pedicels. (Named in honor of _W. Sole_, author of an essay on
the British Mints.)

1. S. concolor, Ging. Plant 1--2 deg. high; leaves oblong, pointed at both
ends, entire; pod 1' long.--Woods, N. Y. to Kan., and southward. June.


3. IONIDIUM, Vent.

Sepals not prolonged at base. Petals very unequal, the two upper
shorter, the lower longest and largest, concave at base, contracted in
the middle. Filaments distinct, the two lower with a scale-like gland or
spur at base; anthers merely connivent.--Perennials, branching and
leafy, with alternate and opposite leaves, and small axillary flowers.
(Name from [Greek: i)/on], _violet_, and [Greek: ei)~dos],
_appearance_.)

1. I. polygalaefolium, Vent. Stems low, from a woody base; leaves linear
to oblanceolate, or the lower obovate, entire, the stipules leaf-like or
small or none; flowers solitary, nodding, 2'' long, white. (I. lineare,
_Torr._)--Kan. and southwestward.


ORDER 15. CARYOPHYLLACEAE. (PINK FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with opposite entire leaves, symmetrical 4--5-merous flowers,
with or without petals, the distinct stamens no more than twice the
number of the sepals, either hypogynous or perigynous, styles 2--5 (or
rarely united into one); seeds several or usually many, attached to the
base or to the central column of the 1-celled (rarely 3--5-celled) pod,
with a slender embryo coiled or curved around the outside of mealy
albumen_, in Dianthus nearly straight.--Bland herbs; the stems usually
swollen at the joints; uppermost leaves rarely alternate. Leaves often
united at the base. Calyx persistent. Styles stigmatic along the
inside. Seeds amphitropous or campylotropous.

Tribe I. SILENEAE. Sepals united into a tube or cup. Petals (mostly
convolute in the bud) and stamens (10) borne on the stipe or stalk of
the ovary, the former with slender claws, to the base of which the
corresponding filaments often adhere, included in the calyx tube. Seeds
numerous.--Stipules none. Flowers often large and showy.

[*] Calyx with scaly bractlets or small leaves at the base. Seeds
flattened on the back, attached by their face; embryo nearly straight.

1. Dianthus. Calyx terete, mostly cylindrical. Styles 2.

[*][*] Calyx naked. Seeds globular or kidney-shaped; embryo curved or
coiled.

2. Gypsophila. Calyx top-shaped or campanulate. Pod deeply 4-valved.
Styles 2.

3. Saponaria. Calyx oblong-cylindrical, obscurely nerved, terete or
5-angled. Pod shortly 4-valved. Styles 2.

4. Silene. Calyx 5-toothed, 10-nerved. Styles 3.

5. Lychnis. Calyx 5-toothed, 10-nerved. Styles 5, rarely 4.

Tribe II. ALSINEAE. Sepals distinct or nearly so, imbricated in the bud.
Petals when present without claws, mostly imbricated, and with the
stamens inserted at the base of the sessile ovary, or into a little
disk. Pod splitting into valves or teeth several--many-seeded. Stamens
opposite the sepals, when not more in number.--Low herbs.

[*] Stipules none.

[+] Styles opposite the sepals, or, when fewer, opposite those which are
exterior in the bud.

[++] Pod short, splitting into as many valves as styles; valves often
bifid or 2-parted.

6. Arenaria. Petals entire. Styles usually 3. Valves of the pod entire,
bifid or 2-parted.

7. Stellaria. Petals 2-cleft or none. Styles usually 3. Valves bifid or
2-parted.

[++][++] Pod cylindrical, dehiscent by twice as many equal teeth as
styles.

8. Holosteum. Petals denticulate or notched. Styles usually 3. Seeds
fixed by the face.

9. Cerastium. Petals notched or 2-cleft. Styles 5 or 4. Seeds fixed
edgewise.

[+][+] Styles alternate with the sepals. Stamens as many, or twice as
many.

10. Sagina. Petals 4 or 5, entire, or none. Styles 4 or 5. Pod short,
4--5-valved.

[*][*] Stipules present. Pod short.

11. Buda. Styles 3. Pod 3-valved. Leaves opposite.

12. Spergula. Styles 5. Valves of the pod opposite the sepals. Leaves
whorled.


1. DIANTHUS, L. PINK. CARNATION.

Calyx cylindrical, nerved or striate, 5-toothed, subtended by 2 or
more imbricated bractlets. Stamens 10. Styles 2. Pod 1-celled,
4-valved at the apex. Seeds flattish on the back; embryo scarcely
curved.--Ornamental plants, of well-known aspect and value in
cultivation. (Name from [Greek: Dio/s], _of Jupiter_, and [Greek:
a)/nthos] _flower_, i.e., Jove's own flower.)

D. ARMERIA, L. (DEPTFORD PINK.) Annual; flowers clustered; bractlets of
the calyx and _bracts lance-awl-form_, herbaceous, downy, as long as the
tube; leaves linear, _hairy_; petals small, rose-color with white dots,
crenate.--Fields, etc., eastward. July. (Adv. from Eu.)

D. PROLIFER, L. Annual, _smooth_, slender; flowers clustered; _bractlets
ovate, dry_, concealing the calyx; leaves few, narrow, linear, erect;
petals small, pink.--N. J. and E. Penn. (Adv. from Eu.)

D. DELTOIDES, L. (MAIDEN PINK.) Perennial; leaves short, narrowly
lanceolate, downy and roughish; flowers solitary; bracts ovate, half as
long as the tube; petals rose-color or white, toothed.--Mich., _L. H.
Bailey_. (Nat. from Eu.)

D. BARBATUS, L. (SWEET WILLIAM.) Perennial; flowers fascicled; leaves
large, lanceolate; bracts filiform-attenuate, equalling the
calyx.--Sparingly spontaneous. (Adv. from Eu.)


2. GYPSOPHILA, L.

Calyx narrowly top shaped or campanulate, 5-nerved, 5-toothed, naked at
base. Petals not crowned. Stamens 10. Styles 2. Pod 1-celled, 4-valved
at the apex, sessile.--Slender glaucous annuals or perennials, with
numerous small flowers. (Name from [Greek: gy/psos], _gypsum_, and
[Greek: philei~n], _to love_.)

G. MURALIS, L. Annual, much branched; leaves very narrowly linear;
flowers on slender pedicels, solitary in the forks; calyx turbinate, the
teeth short, obtuse; petals purplish, crenate or emarginate.--Sparingly
naturalized. (Nat. from Eu.)


3. SAPONARIA, L.

Calyx narrowly ovoid or oblong, 5-toothed, obscurely nerved, naked.
Stamens 10. Styles 2. Pod 1-celled, or incompletely 2--4-celled at base,
4-toothed at the apex.--Coarse annuals or perennial, with large flowers.
(Name from _sapo_, soap, the mucilaginous juice forming a lather with
water.)

S. OFFICINALIS, L. (SOAPWORT. BOUNCING BET.) Flowers in corymbed
clusters; calyx terete; petals crowned with an appendage at the top of
the claw; leaves oval-lanceolate.--Roadsides, etc. July--Sept.--A stout
perennial, with large rose-colored flowers, commonly double. (Adv. from
Eu.)

S. VACCARIA, L. Annual, glabrous; flowers in corymbed cymes; calyx
5-angled, enlarged and wing-angled in fruit; petals pale red,
not crowned; leaves ovate-lanceolate. (Vaccaria vulgaris,
_Host._)--Occasionally spontaneous. (Adv. from Eu.)


4. SILENE, L. CATCHFLY. CAMPION.

Calyx 5-toothed, 10--many-nerved, naked at the base. Stamens 10. Styles
3, rarely 4. Pod 1-celled, sometimes 3-celled at least at the base,
opening by 3 or 6 teeth at the apex.--Flowers solitary or in cymes.
Petals mostly crowned with a scale at the base of the blade. (Name from
[Greek: si/alon], _saliva_, from the viscid exudation on the stems and
calyx of many species. The English name _Catchfly_ alludes to the same
peculiarity.)

[*] _Dwarf, alpine, tufted, smooth, perennial; flowering shoots
1-flowered._

1. S. acaulis, L. (MOSS CAMPION.) Tufted like a moss (1--2' high);
leaves linear, crowded; flowers almost sessile, or rarely on a naked
peduncle; petals purple or rarely white, notched or entire,
crowned.--Alpine summits of the White Mountains, N. H. July. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Calyx bladdery-inflated; perennial; flowers panicled, white, in
summer._

2 S. Stellata, Ait. (STARRY CAMPION.) _Leaves in whorls of 4,
ovate-lanceolate_, taper-pointed; calyx bell-shaped; _petals cut into a
fringe, crownless_.--Wooded banks, R. I. to Minn., and southward.--Stem
3 deg. high, with a large and open pyramidal panicle. Corolla 3/4' broad.

3. S. nivea, Otth. _Leaves opposite, lanceolate or oblong_,
taper-pointed; calyx oblong; _petals wedge-form, 2-cleft, minutely
crowned_.--Penn. to Iowa and Minn.; rare.--Stem 1--2 deg. high, almost
smooth. Flowers few, larger than in the last.

S. CUCUBALUS, Wibel. (BLADDER CAMPION.) _Glaucous; leaves opposite,
ovate-lanceolate; calyx globular, much inflated_, elegantly veined;
petals 2-cleft, nearly crownless. (S. inflata, _Smith_.)--Fields and
roadsides, E. New Eng. to Ill.--A foot high. Flowers loosely cymose.
(Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Calyx elongated or club-shaped, not inflated except by the
enlarging pod; flowers cymose or clustered; perennial, pubescent with
viscid hairs, especially the calyx; petals crowned, red or rose-color._

4. S. Pennsylvanica, Michx. (WILD PINK.) Stems low (4--8'); root-leaves
narrowly spatulate, nearly glabrous, tapering into hairy petioles;
_stem-leaves_ (2 or 3 pairs) _lanceolate; flowers clustered_,
short-stalked; calyx club-shaped; _petals wedge-form, slightly notched
and eroded, pink_.--Gravelly places, E. New Eng. to N. Y., Ky., and
southward. April--June.

5. S. Virginica, L. (FIRE PINK. CATCHFLY.) Steins slender (1--2 deg. high);
_leaves thin, spatulate, or the upper oblong-lanceolate; flowers few and
loosely cymose_, peduncled; calyx oblong-cylindrical, soon obconical;
_petals oblong, 2-cleft, deep crimson_; the limb 1' long.--Open woods,
western N. Y. to Minn., and southward. June--Aug.

6. S. regia, Sims. (ROYAL CATCHFLY.) Stem roughish, erect (3--4 deg. high);
_leaves thickish, ovate-lanceolate_, acute; _flowers numerous,
short-stalked_, in clusters, forming a strict panicle; calyx
ovoid-club-shaped in fruit; _petals spatulate-lanceolate, mostly
undivided, deep scarlet_.--Prairies, Ohio to Mo., and southward. July.

7. S. rotundifolia, Nutt. (ROUND-LEAVED CATCHFLY.) Viscid-hairy; stems
weak, branched, decumbent (2 deg. long); _leaves thin, round, abruptly
pointed_, the lower obovate; flowers few, loosely cymose, stalked; calyx
elongated; _petals 2-cleft and cut-toothed, deep scarlet_.--Shaded banks
of the Ohio, and in Ky. June--Aug.--Leaves and flowers large.

[*][*][*][*] _Calyx not inflated, except by the enlarging pod; annuals._

[+] _Glabrous, a portion of each joint of the stem glutinous; flowers
pink._

8. S. antirrhina, L. (SLEEPY C.) Stem slender (8--30' high); _leaves
lanceolate or linear_; flowers small, paniculate; _calyx ovoid_; petals
obcordate, crowned, opening transiently in sunshine.--Dry soil; common
in waste places. June--Sept.

S. ARMERIA, L. (SWEET-WILLIAM CATCHFLY.) Glaucous; _leaves
ovate-lanceolate_; flowers in flat cymes, open in sunshine; _calyx
club-shaped_; petals notched, crowned with awl-shaped scales.--Escaped
from gardens; rare. (Adv. from Eu.)

[+][+] _Viscid-pubescent; flowers white or nearly so, opening at night,
sweet-scented._

S. NOCTURNA, L. (NIGHT C.) Leaves short, the lower spatulate, the upper
linear; _flowers small, alternate in a 1-sided spike_; petals
2-parted.--Introduced sparingly in Pa., according to _Schweinitz_. (Adv.
from Eu.)

S. NOCTIFLORA, L. (NIGHT-FLOWERING C.) _Viscid-hairy_, tall (1--3 deg.
high); lower leaves large and spatulate, the upper lanceolate; _flowers
few, peduncled_; calyx-tube elongated (over 1' long), soon ovoid, with
awl-shaped teeth; petals rather large, 2-parted, crowned.--Cultivated
grounds.


5. LYCHNIS, Tourn. COCKLE.

Styles 5, rarely 4, and pod opening by as many or twice as many teeth;
otherwise nearly as in Silene. Calyx in one species with leaf-like
lobes. (Ancient Greek name for a scarlet or flame-colored species, from
[Greek: ly/chnos], _a light_ or _lamp_.)

L. VESPERTINA, Sibth. (EVENING L.) Biennial, usually dioecious,
_viscid-pubescent_, in foliage, etc., like Silene noctiflora; but 5
styles, calyx much shorter (7--9'' long), with lance-linear teeth, and
_flowers white_ or pinkish, opening at evening.--Cult. or waste grounds;
scarce. (Adv. from En.)

L. DIURNA, Sibth. (RED LYCHNIS.) Resembling L. vespertina, but less
viscid, the calyx usually shorter (4--6'' long), and the flowers red,
opening in the morning.--Rarely spontaneous. (Adv. from Eu.)

L. GITHAGO, Lam. (CORN COCKLE.) Annual, clothed with long soft appressed
hairs; flowers long-peduncled; _calyx-lobes similar to the long and
linear leaves_, surpassing the broad and crownless _purple-red petals_,
falling off in fruit. (Agrostemma Githago, _L._)--In wheat-fields. (Adv.
from Eu.)

L. FLOS-CUCULI, L. (RAGGED ROBIN.) Perennial, erect, slightly downy
below, viscid above; leaves narrowly lanceolate; flowers in loose
panicles; calyx short, glabrous; petals red, 4-lobed, lobes
linear.--Moist or marshy places; New Eng. and N. Y. (Adv. from Eu.)


6. ARENARIA, L. SANDWORT.

Sepals 5. Petals 5, entire, sometimes barely notched, rarely wanting.
Stamens 10. Styles 3, rarely more or fewer, opposite as many sepals. Pod
short, splitting into as many or twice as many valves as there are
styles, few--many-seeded.--Low, usually tufted herbs, with sessile
exstipulate leaves and small white flowers. (Name from _arena_, sand, in
which many of the species grow.)--The following sections are by many
botanists taken for genera.

Sec. 1. ARENARIA proper. _Pod splitting wholly or part-way down into 3 or
at length into 6 valves; seeds many, naked at the hilum._

A. SERPYLLIFOLIA, L. (THYME-LEAVED SANDWORT.) Diffusely branched,
roughish (2--6' high); leaves ovate, acute, small; cymes leafy; sepals
lanceolate, pointed, 3--5-nerved, about equalling the petals and
6-toothed pod.--A low annual; sandy waste places. June--Aug. (Nat. from
Eu.)

Sec. 2. ALSINE. _Pod splitting to the base into 3 entire valves; seeds
many, usually rough, naked at the hilum; flowers solitary and terminal
or cymose; root in our species perennial, except in n. 4._

[*] _Leaves small, rigid, awl-shaped or bristle-shaped._

1. A. Caroliniana, Walt. (PINE-BARREN S.) Densely tufted from a deep
perpendicular root; _leaves closely imbricated_, but spreading,
_awl-shaped, short, channelled_; branches naked and minutely glandular
above, several-flowered; _sepals obtuse_, ovate, shorter than the pod.
(A. squarrosa, _Michx._)--In pure sand, S. New York, N. J., and
southward along the coast. May--July.

2. A. Michauxii, Hook. f. Erect, or usually diffusely spreading from a
small root, smooth; _leaves slender, between awl-shaped and
bristle-form_, with many others _clustered_ in the axils; cyme diffuse,
naked, many-flowered; _sepals pointed, 3-ribbed_, ovate, as long as the
pod. (A. stricta, _Michx._)--Rocks and dry wooded banks, Vt. and Penn.
to Minn., Mo., and southwestward. July.

3. A. verna, L. Dwarf, alpine, densely matted, glabrous or (var. HIRTA)
somewhat pubescent, 1--3' high; leaves narrowly linear or awl-shaped;
flowers loosely cymose; sepals lanceolate, pointed, 3-nerved, shorter
than the pod.--Smuggler's Notch, Vt. (_Pringle_); north and westward.
(Eu.)

[*][*] _Leaves soft and herbaceous, filiform-linear; petals retuse or
notched._

4. A. patula, Michx. Diffusely branched from the slender root; stems
filiform (6--10' long); branches of the cyme diverging; peduncles long;
_sepals lanceolate, acuminate, 3--5-nerved_. (A. Pitcheri,
_Nutt._)--S. W. Va. to Ky., Ill., Kan., and southward.

5. A. Groenlandica, Spreng. (MOUNTAIN S.) Densely tufted from slender
roots, smooth; flowering stems filiform, erect (2--4' high),
few-flowered; _sepals oblong, obtuse, nerveless_.--Summit of the
Shawangunk, Catskill, and Adirondack Mountains, N. Y., of the higher
mountains of New Eng., and northward; alpine or subalpine. At Bath,
Maine, on river-banks near the sea, and near Middletown, Ct.
June--Aug.--Leaves and peduncles 3--6'' long; flowers large in
proportion. (Addendum)--Arenaria Groenlandica. Found on Mt. Desert
Island, Maine (_Rand_).

Sec. 3. MOEHRINGIA. _Parts of the flower sometimes in fours; pod as in Sec. 1,
but the young ovary 3-celled; seeds rather few, smooth, with a thickish
appendage (strophiole) at the hilum; perennials, with flaccid broadish
leaves._

6. A. lateriflora, L. Sparingly branched, erect, minutely pubescent;
leaves oval or oblong, obtuse (1/2--1' long); peduncles 2--(rarely 3--4)
flowered, soon becoming lateral; sepals oblong, obtuse.--Gravelly
shores, etc., New Eng. to Penn., Mo., Minn., and northward. May, June.
(Eu.)

Sec. 4. AMMADENIA. _Styles, cells of the ovary, and valves of the fleshy
pod 3, rarely 4 or 5; seeds few, smooth, short-beaked at the naked
hilum; disk under the ovary more prominent than usual, glandular,
10-lobed; flowers almost sessile in the axils, sometimes dioecious or
polygamous; root perennial._

7. A. peploides, L. Stems (simple or forking from long rootstocks,
6--10' high) and ovate partly-clasping leaves (8--10'' long) very
fleshy. (Honkenya peploides, _Ehrh._)--Sands of the sea-shore, N. J. to
Maine and northward. June. (Eu.)


7. STELLARIA, L. CHICKWEED. STARWORT.

Sepals 4--5. Petals 4--5, deeply 2-cleft, sometimes none. Stamens 8, 10,
or fewer. Styles 3, rarely 4 or 5, opposite as many sepals. Pod ovoid,
1-celled, opening by twice as many valves as there are styles,
several--many-seeded. Seeds naked.--Flowers (white) solitary or cymose,
terminal, or appearing lateral by the prolongation of the stem from the
upper axils. (Name from _stella_, a star, in allusion to the star-shaped
flowers.)

[*] _Stems spreading, flaccid, marked longitudinally with one or two
pubescent lines; leaves ovate or oblong, 1/2--21/2' long._

S. MEDIA, Smith. (COMMON CHICKWEED.) Annual or nearly so; _lower leaves
on hairy petioles, petals shorter than the calyx_, 2-parted, stamens
3--10.--Everywhere in damp grounds. (Nat. from Eu.)

1. S. pubera, Michx. (GREAT CHICKWEED.) Root perennial; _leaves all
sessile; petals longer than the calyx_, deeply 2-cleft; stamens
10.--Shaded rocks, Penn. to Ind., and southward. May.

[*][*] _Stems erect or spreading; wholly glabrous perennials, with
sessile and narrow or small leaves; stamens usually 10, perigynous._

[+] _Scaly-bracted; petals 2-parted, equalling or surpassing the calyx._

2. S. longifolia, Muhl. (LONG-LEAVED STITCHWORT.) Stem erect, weak,
often with rough angles (8--18' high); _leaves linear, acutish at both
ends, spreading; cymes naked and at length lateral, peduncled_,
many-flowered, the slender _pedicels spreading_; petals 2-parted, longer
than the calyx; seeds smooth.--Grassy places; common, especially
northward. June, July. (Eu.)

3. S. longipes, Goldie. (LONG-STALKED S.) Shining or somewhat glaucous,
very smooth; _leaves ascending, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate_, acute,
_broadest at the base_, rather rigid; cyme terminal, few-flowered, the
long _pedicels strictly erect_; petals longer than the calyx; seeds
smooth.--Maine to Minn., rare; common farther north. (Eu.)

S. GRAMINEA, L. Resembling the last; leaves linear-lanceolate, _broadest
above the base; pedicels widely spreading; seeds_ strongly but minutely
_rugose_.--Becoming rather frequent. (Int. from Eu.)

4. S. uliginosa, Murr. (SWAMP S.) Stems weak, decumbent or diffuse, at
length prolonged, leaving the naked and usually _sessile cymes lateral;
leaves lanceolate or oblong_, veiny; petals and ripe _pods as long as
the calyx; seeds roughened_.--Swamps and rills, Md. to N. Eng., and
northward; rare. (Eu.)

[+][+] _Flowers terminal or in the forks of the stem or of leafy
branches; bracts foliaceous; petals 2-parted, small or often none;
styles 3--4; pod longer than the calyx._

5. S. crassifolia, Ehrh. Stems diffuse or erect, flaccid; _leaves rather
fleshy_, varying from linear-lanceolate to oblong; _petals longer than
the calyx_, or wanting; _seeds rugose-roughened_.--Springy places,
eastern Ky. (_Short_), Ringwood, Ill. (_Vasey_), and northward.
April--June. (Eu.)

6. S. borealis, Bigel. (NORTHERN S.) Stems erect or spreading, flaccid,
many times forked, at length resolved into a leafy cyme; leaves varying
from broadly lanceolate to ovate-oblong; _petals 2--5, shorter than the
calyx, or oftener none_; sepals acute; styles usually 4; _seeds
smooth_.--Shaded or wet places, R. I. to Minn., and northward.
June--Aug.--Var. ALPESTRIS has the later flowers more cymose, and their
bracts small and partly scarious, also the seeds obscurely reticulated
or roughish.--Lake Superior, _Dr. Robbins_. (Eu.) (Addendum)--Stellaria
borealis. In the mountains of northern N. J.

7. S. humifusa, Rottb. Spreading or _creeping_; stems or branches (2'
high) 1--3-flowered; _leaves fleshy, ovate or oblong_ (2--3'' long);
_petals a little longer than the calyx_; seeds smooth.--Northern border
of Maine on the St. John's (_G. L. Goodale_), and high northward. June.
(Eu.) (Addendum) S. humifusa. This species has also been found on
Cranberry Island, near Mt. Desert, Maine, by _J. H. Redfield_.


8. HOLOSTEUM, L. JAGGED CHICKWEED.

Sepals 5. Petals 5, usually jagged or denticulate at the point. Stamens
3--5, rarely 10. Styles mostly 3. Pod ovoid, 1-celled, many-seeded,
opening at the top by 6 teeth. Seeds rough, flattened on the back,
attached by the inner face.--Annuals or biennials, with several (white)
flowers in an umbel, borne on a long terminal peduncle. (Name composed
of [Greek: o(/los], _all_, and [Greek: o)ste/on], _bone_, by
antiphrasis, these plants being soft and tender.)

H. UMBELLATUM, L. Leaves oblong; peduncle and upper part of the stem
glandular-pubescent; pedicels reflexed after flowering.--Hills around
Lancaster, Penn., _Prof. Porter_, and Morris Co., N. J., _C. F. Austin_.
(Nat. from Eu.)

9. CERASTIUM, L. MOUSE-EAR CHICKWEED.

Sepals 5, rarely 4. Petals as many, 2-lobed or cleft, rarely entire.
Stamens twice as many, or fewer. Styles equal in number to the sepals
and opposite them. Pod 1-celled, usually elongated, membranaceous,
opening at the apex by twice as many teeth as there were styles,
many-seeded. Seeds rough.--Flowers white, in terminal cymes. Our species
have the petals 2-cleft or obcordate, the parts of the flower always in
fives, and the exserted pods more or less curved. (Name from [Greek:
ke/ras], _a horn_, alluding to the shape of the pod in many species.)

C. VISCOSUM, L. (MOUSE-EAR CHICKWEED.) _Annual_, hairy and rather
clammy, nearly erect (4--9' high); _leaves ovate or obovate to
oblong-spatulate_; bracts herbaceous; _flowers small_ in close clusters
at first, _pedicels even in fruit not longer than the acute sepals;
petals shorter than the calyx_. (C. vulgatum, _L. Herb._, and _Man._ The
names of this and the next were transposed in the Linnaean herbarium,
which has caused much confusion. They are here applied as originally by
Linnaeus, and by many recent botanists. Others substitute for this the
later name, C. glomeratum, _Thuill._)--Grassy places, eastward and
southward; not common. May--July.--Stamens often 5. (Nat. from Eu.)

C. VULGATUM, L. (LARGER M.) Perennial; stems clammy-hairy, spreading
(6--15' long); _leaves oblong_; upper bracts scarious-margined; _flowers
larger_ (sepals 2--3'' long), at first clustered, the fruiting
_pedicels_ longer, the earlier ones mostly much _longer than the obtuse
sepals_; petals equalling the calyx. (C. viscosum, _L. Herb._, and
_Man._ C. triviale, _Link._)--Fields and copses; common, perhaps
indigenous. May--July. (Nat. from Eu.)

1. C. nutans, Raf. Annual, very clammy-pubescent; stems erect, slender,
grooved, diffusely branched (6--20' high); cyme loose and open,
_many-flowered; leaves oblong-lanceolate_, acute, the lowest spatulate;
peduncles mostly elongated; petals longer than the calyx; _pods nodding
on the stalks, curved upward, thrice the length of the calyx_.--Moist
places, Vt. to Minn., and southward. May--July.

2. C. arvense, L. (FIELD CHICKWEED.) Perennial; stems ascending or
erect, tufted, downy or nearly smooth, slender (4--8' high), naked and
_few--several-flowered_ at the summit; _leaves linear or narrowly
lanceolate_; petals obcordate, more than twice the length of the calyx;
_pods scarcely longer than the calyx_.--Dry or rocky places. May--July.
(Eu.)

Var. oblongifolium, Holl. & Britt. Usually taller, pubescent; leaves
narrowly or broadly oblong or oblong-lanceolate; pod about twice longer
than the calyx. (C. oblongifolium, _Torr._)--Rocky places, N. Y. to
Minn., and southward.--Var. VILLOSUM, Holl. & Britt. Similar but densely
villous-pubescent, and the leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate.--E.
Penn.

10. SAGINA, L. PEARLWORT.

Sepals 4 or 5. Petals 4 or 5, undivided, or often none. Stamens as many
as the sepals, rarely twice as many. Styles as many as the sepals and
alternate with them. Pod many-seeded, 4--5-valved to the base; valves
opposite the sepals.--Little, matted herbs, with thread-like or
awl-shaped leaves, no stipules, and small flowers terminating the stems
or branches; in summer. (Name from _sagina_, fattening; previously
applied to the spurry.)

[*] _Parts of the flower in fours, rarely with some few in fives._

1. S. procumbens, L. Annual or perennial, _depressed or spreading_ on
the ground, glabrous; leaves linear-thread-shaped; _apex of the peduncle
often hooked_ soon after flowering; _petals shorter than the_ broadly
ovate obtuse _sepals_, sometimes none.--Springy places and damp rocks,
coast of Maine to Penn. (Eu.)

2. S. apetala, L. _Annual, erect_ or ascending; leaves ciliate at base
or glabrous; _petals none_ or very small; _peduncles always erect_.--Dry
soil, Mass. to Penn.; scarce, seemingly native? (Eu.)

[*][*] _Parts of the flower in fives, the stamens not rarely 10._

3. S. decumbens, Torr. & Gray. Annual, ascending; the peduncles
and calyx with the margins of the upper leaves _at first
glandular-pubescent_; leaves short, often bristly-tipped, not fascicled
in the axils; peduncles slender; _petals equalling or shorter than the
calyx_; pod oblong-ovate, nearly twice longer than the acutish sepals.
(S. subulata, _Man._, not _Wimm._)--E. Mass., to Ill., Mo., and
southward.--Var. SMITHII, a slender form, _apetalous_, at least in the
later flowers.--Near Philadelphia, in waste ground, and in sandy fields
at Somers' Point, N. J., _C. E. Smith._ Seeds minutely roughened.

4. S. nodosa, Fenzl. Perennial, tufted, glabrous, or glandular above;
stems ascending (3--5' high); lower leaves thread-form, the upper short
and awl-shaped, with minute ones _fascicled in their axils so that the
branchlets appear knotty, petals much longer than the calyx._--Wet sandy
soil, along the coast of Maine and N. H., also Lake Superior, and
northward. (Eu.)

11. BUDA, Adans. SAND-SPURREY.

Sepals 5. Petals 5, entire. Stamens 2--10. Styles and valves of the
many-seeded pod 3, very rarely 5, when the valves alternate with the
sepals! Embryo not coiled into a complete ring.--Low herbs, mostly on or
near the seacoast, with filiform or linear somewhat fleshy opposite
leaves, and smaller ones often clustered in the axils; stipules
scaly-membranaceous; flowering all summer. (Named probably for the city
so called.)--Genus also known as TISSA, Adans., SPERGULARIA, Presl., and
LEPIGONUM, Wahlb. The species are very variously understood by European
botanists, and are much confused, as well as the synonymy. Our forms are
annual, or at the most biennial.

1. B. rubra, Dumort. Nearly glabrous, the summit of the prostrate
or ascending slender stems, peduncles, and sepals usually
glandular-pubescent; leaves linear, flat, scarcely fleshy; stipules
lanceolate, entire or cleft; pedicels longer than the bracts; _pods_ and
pink-red corolla small (11/2''), _hardly equalling or exceeding
the calyx; seeds rough with projecting points, semi-obovate_ or
_gibbous-wedge-shaped, wingless_. (Spergularia rubra, _Presl._)--Dry
sandy soil, New Eng. to Va., along and near the coast, but rarely
maritime. (Eu.)

2. B. marina, Dumort. More decidedly fleshy than the preceding, erect or
ascending, usually pubescent, with ovate stipules, terete leaves, and
pedicels 2--4'' long; sepals usually becoming 2--21/2'' long, little
shorter than the pod; petals pale; _seeds obovate-rounded and roughened
with points_, wingless or narrow-winged. (Spergularia salina, _Presl._
Tissa marina, _Britt._)--Brackish sands, etc., coast of N. Eng. to Va.,
and southward. A form with smooth seeds is var. LEIOSPERMA, N. E. Brown.
(S. media, _Presl._) (Eu.)

Var.(?) minor, Watson. Small, ascending or decumbent; flowers smaller,
on shorter pedicels (rarely 2'' long), the sepals and pod 1--11/2'' long;
seeds wingless, usually papillose.--Coast of N. H. and Mass.

3. B. borealis, Watson. Diffusely branched, glabrous; pedicels usually
2--4'' long; petals white; pod ovate, 2'' long, about twice longer than
the sepals; seeds usually wingless, smooth or nearly so. (Tissa salina,
_Britt._)--On the coast, E. Maine to Labrador.

12. SPERGULA, L. SPURREY.

Stamens 5 or 10. Styles 5. The 5 valves of the pod opposite the sepals.
Embryo spirally annular. Leaves in whorls. Otherwise as in Buda. (Name
from _spargo_, to scatter, from the seeds.)

S. ARVENSIS, L. (CORN SPURREY.) Annual; leaves numerous in the whorls,
thread-shaped (1--2' long); stipules minute; flowers white, in a stalked
panicled cyme; seeds rough.--Grain-fields. (Adv. from Eu.)


ORDER 16. PORTULACACEAE. (PURSLANE FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with succulent leaves, and regular but unsymmetrical flowers_;
viz., _sepals fewer than the petals; the stamens opposite the petals
when of the same number, but often indefinite, otherwise nearly as_
Chickweeds.--Sepals 2. Petals 5, or sometimes none. Stamens mostly
5--20. Styles 2--8, united below, or distinct, stigmatic along the
inside. Pod 1-celled, with few or many campylotropous seeds rising on
stalks from the base. Embryo curved around mealy albumen.--Insipid and
innocent herbs, with entire leaves. Corolla opening only in sunshine,
mostly ephemeral, then shrivelling.

1. Portulaca. Stamens 7--20, on the partly adherent calyx. Pod opening
by a lid.

2. Talinum. Stamens more numerous than the petals, hypogynous. Calyx
deciduous. Pod many-seeded.

3. Claytonia. Stamens as many as the hypogynous petals, and attached to
their base. Calyx persistent. Pod 3--6-seeded.

1. PORTULACA, Tourn. PURSLANE.

Calyx 2-cleft; the tube cohering with the ovary below. Petals 5, rarely
6, inserted on the calyx with the 7--20 stamens, fugacious. Style mostly
3--8-parted. Pod 1-celled, globular, many-seeded, opening transversely,
the upper part (with the upper part of the calyx) separating as a
lid.--Fleshy annuals, with mostly scattered leaves. (An old Latin name,
of unknown meaning.)

P. OLERACEA, L. (COMMON PURSLANE.) Prostrate, very smooth; leaves
obovate or wedge-form; flowers sessile (opening only in sunny mornings);
sepals keeled; petals pale yellow; stamens 7--12; style deeply
5--6-parted; flower-bud flat and acute.--Cultivated and waste grounds;
common. Seemingly indigenous west and southwestward. (Nat. from Eu.)

1. P. retusa, Engelm. Leaves often retuse; calyx-lobes obtuse in the
bud; petals small or minute; style shorter, 3--4-cleft; seeds larger,
sharply tuberculate; otherwise like the last.--Ark. to Tex. and
westward; reported from Kan., Iowa, and Minn.

2. P. pilosa, L. Ascending or spreading, copiously hairy in the axils;
leaves linear-subulate, nearly terete, 3--6'' long; petals red or
purple.--Kan. to Tex., etc.

2. TALINUM, Adans.

Sepals 2, distinct and free, deciduous. Petals 5, ephemeral. Stamens
10--30. Style 3-lobed at the apex. Pod 3-celled at the base when young,
3-valved, with many seeds on a globular stalked placenta. (Derivation
obscure.)

1. T. teretifolium, Pursh. Perennial; leafy stems low, tuberous at base;
leaves linear, cylindrical; peduncle long (3--6') and naked, bearing an
open cyme of pink flowers ({2/3}' broad); stamens 15--20.--Serpentine
rocks, Penn., to Ind., Minn., and southward. June--Aug. (Addendum)
Style equalling the stamens.

(Addendum) 2. T. calycinum, Engelm. Leaves somewhat broader; flowers and
capsules larger; stamens 30 or more; style twice longer than the
stamens, declined.--Central Kan. to W. Tex.


3. CLAYTONIA, Gronov. SPRING-BEAUTY.

Sepals 2, ovate, free, persistent. Stamens 5, adhering to the short
claws of the petals. Style 3-cleft at the apex. Pod 1-celled, 3-valved,
3--6-seeded.--Our two species are perennials, sending up simple stems in
early spring from a small deep tuber, bearing a pair of opposite leaves,
and a loose raceme of pretty flowers. Corolla rose-color with deeper
veins, opening for more than one day! (Named in honor of _Dr. John
Clayton_, one of our earliest botanists, who contributed to Gronovius
the materials for the Flora Virginica.)

1. C. Virginica, L. Leaves linear-lanceolate, elongated (3--6'
long).--Moist open woods; common, especially westward and southward.

2. C. Caroliniana, Michx. Flowers rather smaller and fewer; leaves
spatulate-oblong or oval-lanceolate (1--2' long).--Maine to Minn., and
southward along the Alleghanies.

(Addendum) 3. C. Chamissonis, Esch. Weak, procumbent or ascending,
rooting below and perennial by lateral and terminal filiform runners;
leaves several pairs, oblong-spatulate, 1--2' long; inflorescence
racemosely 1--9-flowered; petals pale rose-color; capsule small,
1--3-seeded.--In a cold ravine, Winona Co., Minn.; in the mountains from
Colorado north and westward.


ORDER 17. ELATINACEAE. (WATER-WORT FAMILY.)

_Little marsh annuals, with membranaceous stipules between the opposite
dotless leaves, minute axillary flowers like those of the_ Chickweeds,
_but the pod 2--5-celled, and the seeds as in_ St. John's-wort. The
principal genus is

1. ELATINE, L. WATER-WORT.

Sepals 2--4, persistent. Petals 2--4, hypogynous. Stamens as many,
rarely twice as many, as the petals. Styles, or sessile capitate
stigmas, 2--4. Pod membranaceous, globose, 2--4-celled,
several--many-seeded, 2--4-valved; the partitions left attached to the
axis, or evanescent. Seeds cylindrical, straightish or curved, marked by
both longitudinal and transverse lines.--Dwarf glabrous plants, usually
rooting at the nodes, aquatic or terrestrial. (A Greek name for some
obscure herb.)

1. E. Americana, Arn. Tufted, 1' high; leaves obovate, obtuse, 1--3''
long; flowers sessile, rarely opening in the aquatic form; sepals,
petals, stamens, and stigmas 2, rarely 3; seeds 5 or 6 in each cell,
rising from the base, marked by 9 or 10 longitudinal lines and 20--30
crossbars.--Margin of ponds, etc., N. H. to Ill., Va., and
southwestward. Pod very thin and delicate; the seeds large in
proportion, straightish.

2. E. triandra, Schkuhr. Leaves oblanceolate or nearly lanceolate;
petals and stamens commonly 3; seeds more slender, covering the
axis.--Ponds, Ill., Neb., and westward. (Eu.)

3. E. brachysperma, Gray. Leaves oblong or oval with narrowed base;
flowers mostly dimerous; seeds short-oblong, with 6 or 7 longitudinal
lines and 10--12 crossbars.--Ill. and southwestward.


ORDER 18. HYPERICACEAE. (ST. JOHN'S-WORT FAMILY.)

_Herbs or shrubs, with opposite entire dotted leaves and no stipules,
regular hypogynous flowers, the petals mostly oblique and convolute in
the bud, and many or few stamens commonly collected in 3 or more
clusters or bundles. Pod 1-celled with 2--5 parietal placentae, and as
many styles, or 3--7-celled by the union of the placentae in the centre;
dehiscence mostly septicidal._--Sepals 4 or 5, imbricated in the bud,
herbaceous, persistent. Petals 4 or 5, mostly deciduous. Styles
persistent, at first sometimes united. Seeds numerous, small,
anatropous, with no albumen. Embryo cylindrical.--Plants with a resinous
juice, dotted with pellucid or dark glands, usually smooth. Leaves
mostly sessile. Flowers solitary or cymose.

[*] Petals oblique, convolute, yellow; hypogynous glands none.

1. Ascyrum. Sepals 4, in 2 very unequal pairs. Petals 4. Stamens many,
distinct.

2. Hypericum. Sepals 5, alike. Petals 5. Stamens usually many and in 3
or 5 clusters.

[*][*] Petals equal, imbricate, purplish; glands alternating with the 3
stamen-clusters.

3. Elodes. Sepals and petals 5. Stamens usually 9. Ovary 3-celled.


1. ASCYRUM, L. ST. PETER'S-WORT.

Sepals 4; the two outer very broad and leaf-like; the inner much
smaller. Petals 4, oblique, very deciduous, convolute in the bud.
Stamens numerous; the filaments distinct and scarcely in clusters. Pod
strictly 1-celled, 2--4-valved.--Low, rather shrubby, smooth plants,
with pale black-dotted leaves, and nearly solitary light yellow flowers.
(An ancient Greek name of some plant, from [Greek: a-], _without_, and
[Greek: sky/ros], _roughness_.)

1. A. stans, Michx. (ST. PETER'S-WORT.) Stem rather simple, 2-edged,
1--2 deg. high, stout; _leaves oval or oblong, somewhat clasping_, thickish;
flowers showy; outer sepals round-cordate, inner lanceolate; _petals
obovate_; styles 3 or 4.--Pine barrens, Long Island to Penn., and
southward. July, Aug.

2. A. Crux-Andreae, L. (ST. ANDREW'S CROSS.) Low, much branched and
decumbent; _leaves narrowly obovate-oblong, contracted at the base_,
thin; _petals linear-oblong_; styles 2, very short; pod
flat.--Nantucket; pine barrens of N. J. to S. Ill., Neb., and southward.
July--Sept.--Petals scarcely exceeding the outer sepals, approaching
each other in pairs over them, in the form of a St. Andrew's cross.


2. HYPERICUM, Tourn. ST. JOHN'S-WORT.

Sepals 5, somewhat equal. Petals 5, oblique, convolute in the bud.
Stamens commonly united or clustered in 3--5 parcels; no interposed
glands. Pod 1-celled or 3--5-celled. Seeds usually cylindrical.--Herbs
or shrubs, with cymose yellow flowers. (An ancient Greek name, of
obscure meaning.)

Sec. 1. _Stamens very numerous, 5-adelphous; styles 5, united below, the
stigmas capitate; pod 5-celled, the placentae turned far back into the
cells; perennial herb; flowers very large._

1. H. Ascyron, L. (GREAT ST. JOHN'S-WORT.) Stems 2--5 deg. high; branches
2--4-angled; leaves (2--5' long) ovate-oblong, partly clasping; petals
narrowly obovate (1' long), not deciduous until after they wither; pod
3/4' long, conical. (H. pyramidatum, _Ait._)--Banks of rivers, New Eng.
and Penn. to Iowa and Minn. July.

Sec. 2. _Stamens very numerous, obscurely if at all clustered; styles 3
(n. 2 excepted), more or less united into one, the stigmas not capitate
except in n. 10; sepals mostly foliaceous._

[*] _Bushy shrubs, 1--6 deg. high, leafy to the top._

[+] _Styles 5; pod completely 5-celled._

2. H. Kalmianum, L. (KALM'S ST. JOHN'S-WORT.) Branches 4-angled;
branchlets 2-edged; leaves crowded, glaucous, linear to oblanceolate
(1--2' long); flowers few in a cluster (1' wide); pods ovate.--Wet
rocks, Niagara Falls and northern lakes. Aug.

[+][+] _Styles 3; pod completely 3-celled._

3. H. prolificum, L. (SHRUBBY ST. JOHN'S-WORT.) Branchlets 2-edged;
leaves narrowly oblong (1--2' long), mostly obtuse, narrowed at the
base; flowers numerous, in single or compound clusters; pods lanceolate
to ovate, 4--6'' long.--N. J. to Mich., Minn., and southward.
July--Sept.--Varies greatly in size, etc.

4. H. densiflorum, Pursh. Exceedingly branched above, 1--6 deg. high, the
branches slender and crowded with smaller leaves; flowers smaller
(1/2--{2/3}' in diameter) and more numerous, in crowded compound cymes;
pod 2--3'' long. (H. prolificum, var. densiflorum, _Gray_.)--Pine
barrens of N. J. to glades of Ky., Ark., and southward.

[*][*] _Perennial herbs or a little woody at the base._

[+] _Pod incompletely 3--4-celled_.

5. H. galioides, Lam. Slender, branching, woody below; _leaves
linear-oblanceolate_, narrowed downward, 1/2--3' long, mostly acute;
flowers small in terminal and axillary cymes; sepals very narrow,
11/2--3'' long; pod as long, ovate.--Del. to Ga. and E. Tenn.

6. H. adpressum, Barton. Stem simple, herbaceous, from a slightly woody
creeping base (1--2 deg. high), obscurely 4-angled below and 2-edged above;
_leaves ascending, lanceolate_ or linear-oblong, often acute, thin; cyme
terminal, leafy at the base, few-flowered; sepals linear-lanceolate,
pods ovoid-oblong.--Moist places, Nantucket and R. I. to Penn., and
southwestward. July--Aug.--Leaves 11/2' long. Petals bright yellow, 3--5''
long.

[+][+] _Pod 1-celled with 3 parietal placentae._

7. H. dolabriforme, Vent. Stems branched from the decumbent base, woody
below (6--20' high), terete; _leaves linear-lanceolate_, widely
spreading, veinless; cyme leafy, few-flowered; _sepals oblong or
ovate-lanceolate_, about the length of the very oblique petals (5--6''
long); _pods ovate-conical, pointed_, the walls very thick and
hard.--Dry hills and rocks, barrens of Ky. and Tenn. June--Aug.

8. H. cistifolium, Lam.! Stems mostly simple, herbaceous, with a
somewhat woody base, angled with 4 very narrow salient lines (1--2 deg.
high); leaves narrowly oblong to nearly linear (1--3' long), sessile
with a somewhat clasping base; the cyme naked, compound, usually
many-flowered; _sepals ovate; pods depressed-globular or ovoid-conical_;
seeds large, oblong, very rough-pitted. (H. sphaerocarpon,
_Michx._)--Rocky river-banks, S. W. Ohio, to Iowa and southward.
July--Sept.--Flowers small.

9. H. ellipticum, Hook. Stem simple, herbaceous (10--20' high),
obscurely 4-angled; _leaves spreading, elliptical-oblong_, obtuse,
usually narrower toward the subclasping base, thin; cyme nearly naked,
rather few-flowered; _sepals oblong; pods ovoid, very obtuse_; seeds
minutely striate.--Wet places, New Eng. and Penn. to Minn., and
northward. July, Aug.--Petals light yellow, 3'' long.

10. H. virgatum, Lam. Stem slender, strict, simple, sharply 4-angled,
herbaceous (1--2 deg. high); _leaves ascending_, opaque, ovate or
oblong-lanceolate, acute (1/2--1' long), closely sessile by a broad base;
cyme compound, naked, the scattered flowers racemose on its ascending
branches; _sepals herbaceous, erect_, enclosing the ovoid pod; _styles
3, separate_, with capitate stigmas. (H. angulosum, _Michx._)--Wet pine
barrens of N. J. and southward; Ky. July--Sept.--Petals copper-yellow,
4--5'' long.

Sec. 3. _Stamens very many, in 3 or 5 clusters; styles 3, separate and
usually diverging; pod 3-celled; calyx erect; petals and anthers with
black dots; perennials._

H. PERFORATUM, L. (COMMON ST. JOHN'S-WORT.) Stem much branched and
corymbed, somewhat 2-edged (producing runners from the base); leaves
elliptical-oblong or linear-oblong, with pellucid dots; petals (deep
yellow) twice the length of the _lanceolate acute sepals_; flowers
numerous, in open leafy cymes.--Fields, etc. June--Sept.--Too well known
as a pernicious weed, which it is difficult to extirpate. Juice very
acrid. (Nat. from Eu.)

11. H. maculatum, Walt. Conspicuously marked with both black and
pellucid dots; stem terete, sparingly branched; leaves oblong or
lance-ovate, the base either obtuse or somewhat clasping; _flowers
crowded_ (small); _petals pale yellow_, much longer than the _oblong
sepals_, styles mostly not longer than the pod. (H. corymbosum,
_Muhl._)--Damp places; common. July--Sept.--Leaves larger and flowers
much smaller than in the last; petals 2--3'' long, marked with black
lines as well as dots. The ordinary northern form differs from the
typical southern one in the shorter style and the more oblong less
clasping leaves.

Sec. 4. _Stamens 5--12, distinct or in 3 clusters; pod 1-celled, with 3
strictly parietal placentae; styles short, distinct, with capitate
stigmas; petals oblong or linear; sepals narrow, erect; slender annuals,
with 4-angular branches; flowering all summer._

[*] _Stem simple or loosely branched; leaves linear to ovate,
spreading._

12. H. multilum, L. Stem flaccid, widely branching (6--20' high);
_leaves ovate to narrowly oblong, obtuse, partly clasping, 5-nerved_;
cymes leafy; flowers 2'' broad; _pods ovate-conical, rather longer than
the calyx_.--Low grounds, everywhere.

13. H. gymnanthum, Engelm. & Gray. Almost simple, with strict stem and
branches (1--3 deg. high); leaves clasping, heart-shaped, acute or obtuse;
cyme naked, the floral leaves reduced to small awl-shaped bracts; in
aspect approaching the next. (H. mutilum, var. gymnanthum,
_Gray_.)--Del. and Penn. to Minn., and southward.

14. H. Canadense, L. Stem strict (6--15' high), with the branches erect;
_leaves linear, 3-nerved_ at the base, obtuse; cymes naked; flowers deep
yellow, 2--3'' broad when expanded; _pods conical-oblong, usually much
longer than the calyx_.--Wet, sandy soil; common. June--Oct.--Var.
MAJUS, Gray, is a large form, 1--2 deg. high, with lanceolate leaves 11/2'
long, 3'' wide, the upper acute. L. Superior, _Robbins_; S. New York and
southward.--Var. MINIMUM, Chois., a simple few-flowered form, 1--3'
high, with oblong obtuse leaves. On wet rocks, Wisc., and northward.

[*][*] _Stems fastigiately branched; leaves linear or bract-like,
ascending or appressed._

15. H. Drummondii, Torr. & Gray. Stem and the mostly alternate bushy
branches rigid, erect (10--18' high); _leaves linear-subulate_, nearly
erect, _1-nerved_ (3--9'' long); _flowers scattered_ along the upper
part of the leafy branches, _short-pedicelled; pods ovoid, not longer
than the calyx_.--W. Ill., Iowa, Kan., and southward, in dry soil.

16. H. nudicaule, Walt. (ORANGE-GRASS. PINE-WEED.) Stem and bushy
branches thread-like, wiry (4--9' high); _leaves minute awl-shaped
scales, appressed; flowers minute, mostly sessile_ and scattered along
the erect branches; _pods ovate-lanceolate_, acute, _much longer than
the calyx_. (H. Sarothra, _Michx._)--Sandy fields, N. Eng. to Ill., Mo.,
and southward; common. June--Oct.


3. ELODES, Adans. MARSH ST. JOHN'S-WORT.

Sepals 5, equal, erect. Petals 5, equal-sided, oblong, naked, imbricated
in the bud. Stamens 9 (rarely more), united in 3 sets; the sets
separated by as many large orange-colored glands. Pod 3-celled, oblong,
styles distinct.--Perennial herbs, in marshes or shallow water, with
small close clusters of flesh-colored flowers in the axils of the leaves
and at the summit of the stem. (Name [Greek: e(lo/des], _growing in
marshes_, accidentally changed to ELODEA by Jussieu, who was followed by
Pursh, etc.)

1. E. campanulata, Pursh. _Leaves closely sessile or clasping by a broad
base_, oblong or ovate, very obtuse; filaments united below the middle.
(E. Virginica, _Nutt._)--Common in swamps; 1--2 deg. high. July, Aug.

2. E. petiolata, Pursh. Taller, more branching; _leaves tapering into a
short petiole, oblong_; filaments united beyond the middle.--From Va.
south and westward.


ORDER 19. TERNSTROEMIACEAE. (TEA OR CAMELLIA FAMILY.)

_Trees or shrubs, with alternate simple feather-veined leaves, and no
stipules, the regular flowers hypogynous and polyandrous, the sepals and
petals both imbricated in aestivation, the stamens more or less united at
the base with each other (monadelphous or 3--5-adelphous) and with the
base of the petals._--Anthers 2-celled, introrse. Fruit a woody
3--5-celled loculicidal pod. Seeds few, with little or no albumen.
Embryo large, with broad cotyledons.--A family with showy flowers, the
types of which are the well-known CAMELLIA and the more important TEA
PLANT,--represented in this country by the two following genera.

1. STUARTIA, L.

Sepals 5, rarely 6, ovate or lanceolate. Petals 5, rarely 6, obovate,
crenulate. Stamens monadelphous below. Pod 5-celled. Seeds 1 or 2 in
each cell, crustaceous, anatropous, ascending. Embryo straight, nearly
as long as the albumen; radicle longer than the cotyledons.--Shrubs with
membranaceous deciduous oblong-ovate serrulate leaves, soft-downy
beneath, and large short-peduncled flowers solitary in their axils.
(Named for _John Stuart_, Marquis of Bute.)

1. S. Virginica, Cav. Petals 5, white (1' long); sepals ovate; style 1;
stigma 5-toothed; pod globular, blunt; seeds not margined.--Woods, Va.,
and southward.

2. S. pentagyna, L'Her. Leaves larger, 5--6' long; sepals acute; petals
often 6; styles 5, distinct; pod angled, pointed; seeds
wing-margined.--Mountains of Ky., Car., and southward.

2. GORDONIA, Ellis. LOBLOLLY BAY.

Sepals 5, rounded, concave. Petals 5, obovate. Stamens 5-adelphous, one
cluster adhering to the base of each petal. Style 1. Pod ovoid,
5-valved; the valves separating from the persistent axis; cells
2--8-seeded. Seeds pendulous. Embryo straightish, with a short radicle,
and thin longitudinally plaited cotyledons.--Shrubs or small trees, with
large and showy white flowers on axillary peduncles. (Dedicated by Dr.
Garden to his "old master, _Dr. James Gordon_ of Aberdeen," and by Ellis
to a London nurseryman of the same name.)

1. G. Lasianthus, L. (LOBLOLLY BAY.) Leaves coriaceous and persistent,
lanceolate-oblong, narrowed at the base, minutely serrate, smooth and
shining; pod pointed; seeds winged above.--Swamps near the coast, Va.
and southward. May--July.--Petals 11/2' long.


ORDER 20. MALVACEAE. (MALLOW FAMILY.)

_Herbs or shrubs, with alternate stipulate leaves and regular flowers,
the calyx valvate and the corolla convolute in the bud, numerous stamens
monadelphous in a column, and united at base with the short claws of the
petals, 1-celled anthers, and kidney-shaped seeds._--Sepals 5, united at
base, persistent, often involucellate with a whorl of bractlets forming
a sort of exterior calyx. Petals 5. Anthers kidney-shaped, opening along
the top. Pistils several, the ovaries united in a ring or forming a
several-celled pod. Seeds with little albumen; embryo curved, the leafy
cotyledons variously doubled up.--Mucilaginous, innocent plants, with
tough bark and palmately-veined leaves. Flower-stalks with a joint,
axillary.

Tribe I. MALVEAE. Columns of stamens anther-bearing at the top. Ovaries
and carpels 5--20 or more, closely united in a ring around a central
axis, from which they separate after ripening.

[*] Stigmas occupying the inner face of the styles; carpels 1-seeded,
falling away separately.

1. Althaea. Involucel of 6 to 9 bractlets.

2. Malva. Involucel of 3 bractlets. Petals obcordate. Carpels rounded,
beakless.

3. Callirrhoe. Involucel of 1--3 bractlets or none. Petals truncate.
Carpels beaked.

4. Napaea. Involucel none. Flowers dioecious. Stamens few (15--20).
Carpels beakless.

[*][*] Stigmas terminal, capitate; carpels 1--few-seeded, usually
dehiscent.

5. Malvastrum. Involucel of 3 bractlets or none. Seed solitary, filling
the cell, ascending.

6. Sida. Involucel none. Seed solitary in the cells, pendulous.

7. Sphaeralcea. Bractlets 3. Seeds 2 or 3 in each cell.

8. Abutilon. Involucel none. Seeds 3--9 in each cell.

9. Modiola. Bractlets 3. Seeds 2 in each cell, with a transverse
partition between them.

Tribe II. HIBISCEAE. Column of stamens anther-bearing for a considerable
part of its length, naked and 5-toothed at the very apex. Pod mostly
5-celled, loculicidal, leaving scarcely any axis in the centre after
opening.

10. Kosteletzkya. Involucel of several bractlets. Pod 5-celled,
5-seeded.

11. Hibiscus. Involucel of many bractlets. Pod 5-celled, many-seeded.


1. ALTHAEA, L. MARSH-MALLOW.

Calyx surrounded by a 6--9-cleft involucel. Otherwise as in Malva. (Old
Greek and Latin name, from [Greek: a)/ltho], _to cure_, in allusion to
its healing properties.)

A. OFFICINALIS, L. (MARSH-MALLOW.) Stem erect, 2--4 deg. high; leaves ovate
or slightly heart-shaped, toothed, sometimes 3-lobed, velvety-downy;
peduncles axillary, many-flowered; flowers pale rose-color.--Salt
marshes, coast of N. Eng. and N. Y. Aug., Sept.--Perennial root thick,
abounding in mucilage, the bases of the _Pates de Guimauve_. (Nat. from
Eu.)


2. MALVA, L. MALLOW.

Calyx with a 3-leaved involucel at the base, like an outer calyx. Petals
obcordate. Styles numerous, stigmatic down the inner side. Fruit
depressed, separating at maturity into as many 1-seeded and indehiscent
round kidney-shaped blunt carpels as there are styles. Radicle pointing
downward. (An old Latin name, from the Greek name, [Greek: mala/che],
having allusion to the emollient leaves.)

[*] _Flowers fascicled in the axils._

M. ROTUNDIFOLIA, L. (COMMON MALLOW.) _Stems procumbent_ from a deep
biennial root; _leaves_ round-heart-shaped, on very long petioles,
crenate, _obscurely-lobed_; petals twice the length of the calyx,
whitish; carpels pubescent, even.--Waysides and cultivated grounds;
common. (Nat. from Eu.)

M. SYLVESTRIS, L. (HIGH M.) Biennial; _stem erect, branched_ (2--3 deg.
high); _leaves sharply 5--7-lobed_; petals thrice the length of the
calyx, large, purple and rose-color; carpels wrinkled-veiny.--Waysides.
(Adv. from Eu.)

M. CRISPA, L. (CURLED M.) A _tall, erect_ annual, with round and angled
toothed and _crisped leaves_, and small _sessile flowers_ crowded in the
axils.--Sparingly escaped from old gardens. (Adv. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Flowers only in the upper axils, somewhat racemose or
paniculate._

M. MOSCHATA, L. (MUSK M.) A low perennial, with the _stem-leaves
5-parted, and the divisions once or twice parted or cleft_ into linear
lobes, faintly musky-scented, the _flowers rose-color_ or white (11/2' in
diameter) on short peduncles crowded on the stem and branches, the fruit
downy.--Escaped from gardens to waysides. (Adv. from Eu.)

M. ALCEA, L., with the _stem-leaves only once 5-parted or cleft_, the
lobes incised, large flowers like the last, but the fruit smooth, and
bractlets of the involucel ovate, has escaped from gardens. (Adv. from
Eu.)


3. CALLIRRHOE, Nutt.

Calyx either naked or with a 3-leaved involucel at its base. Petals
wedge-shaped and truncate (usually red-purple). Styles, etc., as in
Malva. Carpels 10--20, straightish, with a short empty beak, separated
within from the 1-seeded cell by a narrow projection, indehiscent or
partly 2-valved. Radicle pointing downward. (Name drawn from Greek
mythology.)

[*] _Involucel 3-leaved._

1. C. triangulata, Gray. Hairy-pubescent; stems nearly erect (2 deg. high)
from a tuberous root; leaves triangular or halberd-shaped, or the lowest
rather heart-shaped, coarsely crenate; the upper incised or 3--5-cleft;
flowers panicled, short-pedicelled (purple); involucel as long as the
5-cleft 5-nerved calyx; carpels not rugose.--Dry prairies, Ind. to
Minn., and southward.

2. C. involucrata, Gray. Hirsute or hispid, procumbent; leaves rounded,
5--7-parted or -cleft, the segments incisely lobed; peduncles elongated,
1-flowered; calyx 5-parted, the lanceolate 3--5-nerved sepals twice as
long as the involucel; petals red or purplish, carpels indehiscent,
rugose-reticulated.--Minn. to Tex.

[*][*] _Involucel none; calyx 5-parted; carpels strongly rugose._

3. C. alcaeoides, Gray. Strigose-pubescent; stems slender (1 deg. high),
erect from a perennial root; lower leaves triangular-heart-shaped,
incised, the upper 5--7-parted, laciniate, the uppermost divided into
linear segments; flowers (rose-color or white) corymbose, on slender
peduncles--Barren oak-lands, S. Ky. to Kan. and Neb.

4. C. digitata, Nutt. Sparsely hirsute or glabrous, erect; leaves few,
round-cordate, 5--7-parted, the cauline commonly with linear divisions;
peduncles subracemose, long, filiform; flowers red-purple to
white.--Kan. to Tex.


4. NAPAEA, Clayt. GLADE MALLOW.

Calyx naked at the base, 5-toothed. Petals entire. _Flowers dioecious_;
the staminate flowers destitute of pistils, with 15--20 anthers; the
fertile with a short column of filaments but usually no anthers. Styles
8--10, stigmatic along the inside. Fruit depressed-globular, separating
when ripe into as many kidney-shaped 1-seeded beakless and scarcely
dehiscent carpels as there are styles. Radicle pointing downward.--A
tall roughish perennial herb, with very large 9--11-parted lower leaves,
the pointed lobes pinnatifid-cut and toothed, and with small white
flowers in panicled clustered corymbs. (Named from [Greek: na/pe], a
glade or dell, or, poetically, a nymph of the glades.)

1. N. dioica, L. Stems nearly simple, 5--9 deg. high.--Penn. to Va., and
west to Iowa and Minn.; rare. July.


5. MALVASTRUM, Gray. FALSE MALLOW.

Calyx with an involucel of 2 or 3 bractlets, or none. Petals notched at
the end or entire. Styles 5 or more; stigmas capitate. Carpels as in
Malva, or else as in Sida, but the solitary kidney-shaped seed ascending
and the radicle pointing downward, as in the former. (Name altered from
_Malva_.)

1. M. angustum, Gray. Annual, slightly hairy, erect (6'--1 deg. high);
leaves lance-oblong or linear, with scattered fine callous teeth;
flowers in the upper axils, on peduncles shorter than the broadly
ovate-triangular sepals; bractlets and stipules setaceous; petals
yellow, scarcely exceeding the calyx; carpels 5, kidney-shaped, smooth,
at length 2-valved.--W. Tenn. to Iowa and Kan. Aug.

2. M. coccineum, Gray. Perennial, low and hoary; leaves 5-parted or
pedate, flowers in short spikes or racemes, the pink-red petals very
much longer than the calyx; carpels 10 or more, reticulated on the sides
and indehiscent.--Minn. to W. Tex., and westward.


6. SIDA, L.

Calyx naked at the base, 5-cleft. Petals entire, usually oblique. Styles
5 or more, tipped with capitate stigmas; the ripe fruit separating into
as many 1-seeded carpels, which are closed, or commonly 2-valved at the
top, and tardily separate from the axis. Seed pendulous. Embryo abruptly
bent; the radicle pointing upward. (A name used by Theophrastus.)

1. S. Napaea, Cav. A smooth, tall (4--10 deg. high) perennial; _leaves
3--7-cleft_, the lobes oblong and pointed, toothed; _flowers (white)
umbellate-corymbed_, 1' wide; carpels 10, pointed.--Rocky river-banks,
along the Alleghanies, Penn. to Va., rare. (Cultivated in old gardens.)

2. S. Elliottii, Torr. & Gray. A smooth, erect perennial (1--4 deg. high);
_leaves linear_, serrate, short-petioled; peduncles axillary,
1-flowered, short; _flowers (yellow)_ rather large; _carpels 9--10,
slightly and abruptly pointed_, forming a depressed fruit.--Sandy soil,
S. Va. and southward. May--Aug.

S. SPINOSA, L. Annual weed, minutely and softly pubescent, low (10--20'
high), much branched; _leaves ovate-lanceolate or oblong_, serrate,
rather long-petioled; peduncles axillary, 1-flowered, shorter than the
petiole; _flowers (yellow)_ small; _carpels 5_, combined into an ovate
fruit, _each splitting at the top into 2 beaks_.--A little tubercle at
the base of the leaves on the stronger plants gives the specific name,
but it cannot be called a spine.--Waste places, S. New York to Iowa, and
common southward. (Nat. from the tropics.)


7. SPHAERALCEA, St. Hil.

Ovules and seeds usually 2 or 3 in each cell. Characters otherwise as in
Malvastrum. (Name from [Greek: sphai~ra], _a sphere_, and [Greek:
a)lke/a], _a mallow_--from the commonly spherical fruit.)

1. S. acerifolia, Nutt. Perennial, erect, 2--6 deg. high, stellately
pubescent or glabrate; leaves maple-shaped, 3--7-cleft; flowers
clustered in the upper axils and subspicate, rose-color to
white.--Kankakee Co., Ill., _E. J. Hill_; Dak. and westward.


8. ABUTILON, Tourn. INDIAN MALLOW.

Carpels 2--9-seeded, at length 2-valved. Radicle ascending or pointing
inward. Otherwise as in Sida. (Name of unknown origin.)

A. AVICENNAE, Gaertn. (VELVET-LEAF.) Tall annual (4 deg. high); leaves
roundish-heart-shaped, taper-pointed, velvety; peduncles shorter than
the leaf-stalks; corolla yellow; carpels 12--15, hairy, beaked.--Waste
places, escaped from gardens. (Adv. from India.)


9. MODIOLA, Moench.

Calyx with a 3-leaved involucel. Petals obovate. Stamens 10--20. Stigmas
capitate. Carpels 14--20, kidney-shaped, pointed, and at length 2-valved
at the top; the cavity divided into two by a cross partition, with a
single seed in each cell.--Humble, procumbent or creeping annuals or
biennials, with cut leaves and small purplish flowers solitary in the
axils. (Name from _modiolus_, the broad and depressed fruit resembling
in shape the Roman measure of that name.)

1. M. multifida, Moench. Hairy; leaves 3--5-cleft and incised; stamens
15--20; fruit hispid at the top.--Low grounds, Va. and southward.


10. KOSTELETZKYA, Presl.

Pod depressed, with a single seed in each cell. Otherwise as Hibiscus.
(Named after _V. F. Kosteletzky_, a Bohemian botanist.)

1. K. Virginica, Gray. Roughish-hairy perennial (2--4 deg. high); leaves
halberd-shaped and heart-shaped, the lower 3-lobed; corolla 2' wide,
rose-color; column slender.--Marshes on the coast, N. Y. and southward.
Aug.


11. HIBISCUS, L. ROSE-MALLOW.

Calyx involucellate at the base by a row of numerous bractlets, 5-cleft.
Column of stamens long, bearing anthers for much of its length. Styles
united, stigmas 5, capitate. Fruit a 5-celled loculicidal pod. Seeds
several or many in each cell.--Herbs or shrubs, usually with large and
showy flowers. (An old Greek and Latin name of unknown meaning.)

[*] _Indigenous tall perennials (4--8 deg. high), flowering late in summer._

1. H. Moscheutos, L. (SWAMP ROSE-MALLOW.) _Leaves ovate_, pointed,
toothed, the lower 3-lobed, the uppermost oblong-lanceolate, all
whitened underneath with a fine soft down, glabrous or slightly downy
above; the 1-flowered peduncles sometimes united at the base with the
petioles; bractlets not hairy; _calyx not inflated; pod and seeds
smooth_ or nearly so.--Brackish marshes along the coast, from E. Mass.
southward, and lake shores and swamps westward to Ill. and Mo.,
especially within the influence of salt springs.--Corolla 5--6' in
diameter, light rose-color or white, with or without a crimson eye.

2. H. lasiocarpus, Cav. Leaves soft-downy both sides, the lower broadly
ovate and heart-shaped; bractlets ciliate; pod hirsute;--otherwise
resembling the last. (H. grandiflorus, _Michx._)--Ind. to Mo., and
southward.

3. H. militaris, Cav. (HALBERD-LEAVED R.) _Smooth throughout_; lower
leaves ovate-heart-shaped, toothed, 3-lobed; _upper leaves
halberd-form_, the short lateral lobes spreading at the base, the middle
one prolonged and taper-pointed; peduncles slender; _fruiting calyx
inflated; seeds hairy_.--River-banks, Penn. to Minn., and
southward.--Corolla 2--3' long, flesh-color with purple base.

[*][*] _Escaped from gardens or grounds._

H. TRIONUM, L. (BLADDER KETMIA.) A low, rather _hairy annual_; upper
leaves 3-parted, with lanceolate divisions, the middle one much the
longest; fruiting _calyx inflated, membranaceous, 5-winged_; corolla
sulphur-yellow with a blackish eye, ephemeral; hence the name
_flower-of-an-hour_. (Adv. from Eu.)

H. SYRIACUS, L. (SHRUBBY ALTHAEA of gardeners.) _Tall shrub_, smooth;
leaves wedge-ovate, pointed, cut-toothed or lobed; corolla usually
rose-color.--Escaped rarely from cultivation, Penn., etc. Sept. (Adv.
from Eu.)


ORDER 21. TILIACEAE. (LINDEN FAMILY.)

_Trees (rarely herbs), with the mucilaginous properties, fibrous bark,
valvate calyx, etc., of the_ Mallow Family; _but the sepals deciduous,
petals imbricated in the bud, the stamens usually polyadelphous, and the
anthers 2-celled._ Represented in Northern regions only by the genus,


1. TILIA, Tourn. LINDEN. BASSWOOD.

Sepals 5. Petals 5, spatulate-oblong. Stamens numerous; filaments
cohering in 5 clusters with each other (in European species), or with
the base of a spatulate petal-like body placed opposite each of the real
petals. Pistil with a 5-celled ovary, and 2 half-anatropous ovules in
each cell, a single style, and a 5-toothed stigma. Fruit dry and woody,
indehiscent-globular, becoming 1-celled and 1--2-seeded. Embryo in hard
albumen; cotyledons broad and thin, 5-lobed, crumpled.--Fine trees, with
soft and white wood, very fibrous and tough inner bark, more or less
heart-shaped and serrate alternate leaves (oblique and often truncate at
the base), deciduous stipules, and small cymes of flowers, hanging on an
axillary peduncle which is united to a ligulate membranaceous bract.
Flowers cream-color, honey-bearing, fragrant. (The classical Latin
name.)

1. T. Americana, L. (BASSWOOD.) Leaves large, green and glabrous or
nearly so, thickish; floral bract usually tapering at base; fruit
ovoid.--Rich woods. May, June.--Here rarely called _Lime-tree_, oftener
_White-wood_, commonly _Basswood_; the latter name now obsolete in
England.

2. T. pubescens, Ait. Leaves smaller (2--3' long), thinner, and rather
pubescent beneath; floral bract usually rounded at base; fruit globose,
smaller (3'' broad). (T. Americana, var. pubescens, _Man._)--N. Y. to
Fla., and westward.

3. T. heterophylla, Vent. (WHITE BASSWOOD.) Leaves larger,
smooth and bright green above, silvery-whitened with a fine down
underneath.--Mountains of Penn. to S. Ill., and southward.

T. EUROPAEA, the EUROPEAN LINDEN, several varieties of which are planted
in and near our cities for shade, is at once distinguished from any
native species by the absence of the petal-like scales among the
stamens. This tree (the _Lin_) gave the family name to _Linnaeus_.


ORDER 22. LINACEAE. (FLAX FAMILY.)

_Herbs (rarely shrubs) with the regular and symmetrical hypogynous
flowers 4--6-merous throughout, strongly imbricated calyx and convolute
petals, 5 stamens monadelphous at base, and an 8--10-seeded pod, having
twice as many cells as there are styles._ Represented by the genus,


1. LINUM, Tourn. FLAX.

Sepals (persistent), petals, stamens, and styles 5, regularly alternate
with each other. Pod of 5 united carpels (into which it splits in
dehiscence) and 5-celled, with 2 seeds hanging from the summit of each
cell, which is partly or completely divided into two by a false
partition projecting from the back of the carpel, the pod thus becoming
10-celled. Seeds anatropous, mucilaginous, flattened, containing a large
embryo with plano-convex cotyledons.--Herbs, with tough fibrous bark,
simple and sessile entire leaves (alternate or often opposite), without
stipules, but often with glands in their place, and with corymbose or
panicled flowers. Corolla usually ephemeral. (The classical name of the
Flax.)

[*] _Flowers rather small, yellow; glabrous, 1--2 deg. high._

1. L. Virginianum, L. Stem erect from the base and with the corymbose
spreading or recurving _branches terete and even_; no stipular glands;
leaves oblong or lanceolate, or the lower spatulate and often opposite;
flowers scattered, small (barely 3'' long); sepals ovate, pointed,
smooth-edged or nearly so, equalling the depressed 10-celled pod; styles
distinct.--Dry woods; common.--Root apparently annual; but the plant
propagates by suckers from the base of the stem.

L. FLORIDANUM, Trelease, of rather stricter habit and the pods broadly
ovate and obtuse, appears to have been found in S. Ill.

2. L. striatum, Walt. Stems gregarious, erect or ascending from a
creeping or decumbent base, slightly viscid, and with the mostly
racemose short _branches striate with about 4 sharp wing-like angles_
decurrent from the leaves; these broader than in the last, and mostly
oblong, usually with all the lower ones opposite; flowers more crowded;
sepals scarcely equalling the very small subglobose brownish pod;
otherwise nearly as n. 1.--Wet or boggy grounds, E. Mass. to Lakes
Ontario and Huron, Ill., and southward.

3. L. sulcatum, Riddell. Stem strictly erect from an annual root, and
with the upright or ascending branches wing-angled or grooved; leaves
alternate, linear, acute, the upper subulate and glandular-serrulate; a
pair of _dark glands in place of stipules_; sepals ovate-lanceolate and
sharp-pointed, strongly 3-nerved and with rough-bristly-glandular
margins, scarcely longer than the ovoid-globose incompletely 10-celled
pod; _styles united_ almost to the middle.--Dry soils, E. Mass. to
Minn., and southwestward.--Flowers and pods twice as large as in the
preceding.

4. L. rigidum, Pursh. Glaucous, sometimes slightly puberulent, often low
and cespitose, the rigid branches angled; leaves narrow, erect, usually
with stipular glands; flowers large; sepals lanceolate,
glandular-serrulate; styles united; capsule ovoid, 5-valved.--Minn. to
Kan., and southward.

[*][*] _Flowers large, blue._

5. L. perenne, L., var. Lewisii, Eat. & Wright. Perennial, glabrous and
glaucous, 1--3 deg. high; leaves linear, acute; flowers rather few on long
peduncles; sepals obtuse or acutish, not glandular-serrulate; styles
distinct; pod ovate.--Minn. to Neb., and westward. (Eu., Asia.)

L. USITATISSIMUM, L. (COMMON FLAX.) Annual; stem corymbosely branched at
top; sepals acute, ciliate.--Occasionally spontaneous in fields. (Adv.
from Eu.)


ORDER 23. GERANIACEAE. (GERANIUM FAMILY.)

_Plants (chiefly herbs) with perfect and generally symmetrical
hypogynous flowers; the stamens, counting sterile filaments, as many or
commonly twice as many, and the lobes or cells (1--few-ovuled) of the
ovary as many, as the sepals, the axis of the dry fruit
persisting._--Seeds without albumen except in Oxalis. Flowers mostly
5-merous and the sepals usually distinct. Leaves never punctate. An
order not easily defined, and including several strongly marked tribes
or suborders which have been regarded by many botanists as distinct.

Tribe I. GERANIEAE. (GERANIUM FAMILY proper.) Flowers regular, 5-merous,
the sepals imbricate in the bud, persistent. Glands of the disk 5,
alternate with the petals. Stamens somewhat united. Ovary deeply lobed;
carpels 5, 2-ovuled, 1-seeded, separating elastically with their long
styles, when mature, from the elongated axis. Cotyledons plicate,
incumbent on the radicle.--Herbs (our species) with more or less lobed
or divided leaves, stipules, and astringent roots.

1. Geranium. Stamens with anthers 10, rarely 5. The recurving bases of
the styles or tails of the carpels in fruit naked inside.

2. Erodium. Stamens with anthers only 5. Tails of the carpels in fruit
bearded inside, often spirally twisted.

Tribe II. LIMNANTHEAE. Flowers regular, 3-merous (in Floerkea), the
persistent sepals valvate. Glands alternate with the petals. Stamens
distinct. Carpels nearly distinct, with a common style, 1-ovuled,
1-seeded, at length fleshy and indehiscent, not beaked, separating from
the very short axis. Embryo straight, cotyledons very thick, radicle
very short.--Low tender annuals, with alternate pinnate leaves and no
stipules.

3. Floerkea. Sepals, minute pistils, and lobes of the ovary 3,
stamens 6.

Tribe III. OXALIDEAE. (SORREL FAMILY.) Flowers regular, 5-merous, the
persistent sepals imbricate. Glands none. Stamens 10, often united at
base. Stigmas capitate. Fruit a 5-celled loculicidal pod (in Oxalis);
cells 2--several-seeded. Embryo straight, in a little fleshy
albumen.--Leaves compound (3-foliolate in our species); juice sour.

4. Oxalis. Styles 5, separate. Pod oblong, the valves not falling away.
Leaflets usually obcordate.

Tribe IV. BALSAMINEAE. (BALSAM FAMILY.) Flowers irregular (5-merous as to
the stamens and pistil); the petals and colored sepals fewer in number,
deciduous, the larger sepal with a large sac or spur. Glands none.
Stamens 5, distinct, short. Fruit a fleshy 5-celled pod (in Impatiens),
cells several-seeded. Embryo straight.--Tender and very succulent herbs,
with simple leaves and no stipules.

5. Impatiens. Lateral petals unequally 2-lobed. Pod bursting elastically
into 5 valves.


1. GERANIUM, Tourn. CRANESBILL.

Stamens 10 (sometimes only 5 in n. 3), all with perfect anthers, the 5
longer with glands at their base (alternate with the petals). Styles
smooth inside in fruit when they separate from the axis.--Stems forking.
Peduncles 1--3-flowered. (An old Greek name from [Greek: ge/ranos], _a
crane_, the long fruit bearing beak thought to resemble the bill of that
bird.)

[*] _Rootstock perennial._

1. G. maculatum, L. (WILD CRANESBILL.) Stem erect, hairy; leaves about
5-parted, the wedge-shaped divisions lobed and cut at the end, sepals
slender-pointed, petals entire, light purple, bearded on the claw (1/2'
long).--Open woods and fields. April--July.--Leaves somewhat blotched
with whitish as they grow old.

[*][*] _Root biennial or annual; flowers small._

[+] _Leaves ternately much dissected, heavy-scented._

2. G. Robertianum, L. (HERB ROBERT.) Sparsely hairy, diffuse,
strong-scented, leaves 3-divided or pedately 5-divided, the divisions
twice pinnatifid; sepals awned, shorter than the (red-purple) petals;
carpels wrinkled; seeds smooth.--Moist woods and shaded ravines; N. Eng.
to Mo., and northward. June--Oct. (Eu.)

[+][+] _Leaves palmately lobed or dissected._

3. G. Carolinianum, L. Stems at first erect, diffusely branched from the
base, hairy; leaves about 5-parted, the divisions cleft and cut into
numerous oblong-linear lobes; peduncles and pedicels short; _sepals
awn-pointed_, as long as the emarginate (pale rose-colored) petals;
carpels hairy; _seeds ovoid-oblong, very minutely reticulated._--Barren
soil and waste places; common. May--Aug.--Depauperate forms, except by
the seeds, are hardly distinguishable from

G. DISSECTUM, L. More slender and spreading, with narrower lobes to the
crowded leaves, and smaller red-purple petals notched at the end; _seeds
short-ovoid or globular, finely and deeply pitted._--Waste grounds,
rare. (Nat. from Eu.)

G. ROTUNDIFOLIUM, L. With the habit of the next but the fruit and seed
of the last; villous with long white hairs tipped with purple glands,
leaves short-lobed.--Rare. (Nat. from Eu.)

G. PUSILLUM, L. Stems procumbent, slender, minutely pubescent; _leaves
rounded kidney-form_, 5--7-parted, the divisions wedge-shaped, mostly
3-lobed, _sepals awnless_, about as long as the (purplish) petals;
stamens 5; fruit pubescent; _seeds smooth._--Waste places, Mass. to
Penn.; rare. (Nat. from Eu.)

G. MOLLE, L. Like the last; more pubescent; flowers dark purple; stamens
10; carpels transversely wrinkled, seed slightly striate.--Occasionally
spontaneous. (Nat. from Eu.)

G. COLUMBINUM. (LONG-STALKED C.) Minutely hairy, with very slender
decumbent stems; leaves 5--7-parted and cut into narrow linear lobes;
_peduncles and pedicels filiform and elongate_; sepals awned, about
equalling the purple petals, enlarging after flowering; _carpels
glabrous_; seeds nearly as in G. dissectum.--Rarely introduced; Penn.
and southward. June, July. (Nat. from Eu.)

G. SIBIRICUM, L. Slender, repeatedly forked, short-villous; leaves
3-cleft with serrate divisions; flowers dull-white, mostly solitary;
sepals awned; seeds minutely reticulate.--Rare. (Nat. from Eu.)


2. ERODIUM, L'Her. STORKSBILL.

The 5 shorter stamens sterile or wanting. Styles in fruit twisting
spirally, bearded inside. Otherwise as Geranium. (Name from [Greek:
e(rodio/s], _a heron_.)

E. CICUTARIUM, L'Her. Annual, hairy; stems low, spreading; stipules
acute; leaves pinnate, the leaflets sessile, 1--2-pinnatifid; peduncles
several-flowered.--N. Y., Penn., etc.; scarce. (Adv. from Eu.)


3. FLOERKEA, Willd. FALSE MERMAID.

Sepals 3. Petals 3, shorter than the calyx, oblong. Stamens 6. Ovaries
3, opposite the sepals, united only at the base; the style rising in the
centre; stigmas 3. Fruit of 3 (or 1--2) roughish fleshy achenes. Seed
anatropous, erect, filled by the large embryo with its hemispherical
fleshy cotyledons.--A small and inconspicuous annual, with minute
solitary flowers on axillary peduncles. (Named after _Floerke_, a German
botanist.)

1. F. proserpinacoides, Willd. Leaflets 3--5, lanceolate, sometimes
2--3-cleft.--Marshes and river-banks, W. New Eng. to Penn., Ky., Wisc.,
and westward. April--June. Taste slightly pungent.


4. OXALIS, L. WOOD-SORREL.

Sepals 5, persistent. Petals 5, sometimes united at base, withering
after expansion. Stamens 10, usually monadelphous at base, alternately
shorter. Styles 5, distinct. Pod oblong, membranaceous, 5-celled, more
or less 5-lobed, each cell opening on the back; valves persistent, being
fixed to the axis by the partitions. Seeds 2 or more in each cell,
pendulous from the axis, anatropous, their outer coat loose and
separating. Embryo large and straight in fleshy albumen; cotyledons
flat.--Herbs, with sour watery juice, alternate or radical leaves,
mostly of 3 obcordate leaflets, which close and droop at nightfall.
Several species produce small peculiar flowers, precociously fertilized
in the bud and particularly fruitful; and the ordinary flowers are often
dimorphous or even trimorphous in the relative length of the stamens and
styles. (Name from [Greek: o)xy/s], _sour_.)

[*] _Stemless perennials; leaves and scapes arising from a rootstock or
bulb; leaflets broadly obcordate; flowers nearly 1' broad; cells of the
pod few-seeded._

1. O. Acetosella, L. (COMMON WOOD-SORREL.) _Rootstock creeping_ and
scaly-toothed; _scape 1-flowered_ (2--5' high); petals white with
reddish veins, often notched.--Deep cold woods, Mass. to Penn.,
L. Superior, and northward; also southward in the Alleghanies. June.
(Eu.)

2. O. violacea, L. (VIOLET W.) Nearly smooth; _bulb scaly; scapes
umbellately several-flowered_ (5--9' high), longer than the leaves;
petals violet.--Rocky places and open woods; most common southward. May,
June.

[*][*] _Stems leafy, branching; peduncles axillary; flowers yellow;
cells several-seeded._

3. O. corniculata, L. (YELLOW W.) Annual or perennial by running
subterranean shoots, erect or procumbent, strigose-pubescent; stipules
round or truncate, ciliate; peduncles 2--6-flowered, longer than the
leaves; pods elongated, erect in fruit.--Rare; on ballast, etc.;
indigenous in Mo. (_Bush_), and southwestward. (Cosmopolitan.)

Var. stricta, Sav. Stem erect, somewhat glabrous to very villous;
stipules none. (O. stricta, _L._)--Common. May--Sept. Varies greatly.

4. O. recurva, Ell. Like var. stricta of n. 3; leaflets larger (1/2--11/2'
broad), usually with a brownish margin; flowers larger (6--8''
long).--Penn. to S. Ill., and southward.


5. IMPATIENS, L. BALSAM. JEWEL-WEED.

Calyx and corolla colored alike and not clearly distinguishable. Sepals
apparently only 4; the anterior one notched at the apex and probably
consisting of two combined; the posterior one (appearing anterior as the
flower hangs on its stalk) largest, and forming a spurred sac. Petals 2,
unequal-sided and 2-lobed (each consisting of a pair united). Stamens 5,
short; filaments appendaged with a scale on the inner side, the 5 scales
connivent and united over the stigma; anthers opening on the inner face.
Ovary 5-celled; stigma sessile. Pod with evanescent partitions, and a
thick axis bearing several anatropous seeds, 5-valved, the valves
coiling elastically and projecting the seeds in bursting. Embryo
straight; albumen none.--Leaves simple, alternate, without stipules, in
our species ovate or oval, coarsely toothed, petioled. Flowers axillary
or panicled, often of two sorts, viz.,--the larger ones, which seldom
ripen seeds;--and very small ones, which are fertilized early in the
bud; their floral envelopes never expand, but are forced off by the
growing pod and carried upward on its apex. (Name from the sudden
bursting of the pods when touched, whence also the popular appellation,
_Touch-me-not_, or _Snap-weed_.)

1. I. pallida, Nutt. (PALE TOUCH-ME-NOT.) _Flowers pale-yellow,
sparingly dotted_ with brownish-red; sac dilated and very obtuse,
broader than long, tipped with a short incurved spur.--Moist shady
places and along rills, in rich soil; most common northward.
July--Sept.--Larger and greener than the next, with larger flowers, and
less frequent.

2. I. fulva, Nutt. (SPOTTED TOUCH-ME-NOT.) _Flowers orange-color,
thickly spotted with reddish-brown_; sac longer than broad, acutely
conical, tapering into a _strongly inflexed spur_ half as long as the
sac.--Rills and shady moist places; common, especially southward.
June--Sept.--Plant 2--4 deg. high; the flowers loosely panicled, hanging
gracefully on their slender nodding stalks, the open mouth of the
cornucopiae-shaped sepal upward. Spur rarely wanting. Spotless forms of
both species occur.


ORDER 24. RUTACEAE. (RUE FAMILY.)

_Plants with simple or compound leaves, dotted with pellucid glands and
abounding with a pungent or bitter-aromatic acrid volatile oil,
producing hypogynous almost always regular 3--5-merous flowers, the
stamens as many or twice as many as the sepals (rarely more numerous);
the 2--5 pistils separate or combined into a compound ovary of as many
cells, raised on a prolongation of the receptacle (gynophore) or
glandular disk._--Embryo large, curved or straight, usually in fleshy
albumen. Styles commonly united or cohering, even when the ovaries are
distinct. Fruit usually capsular. Leaves alternate or opposite.
Stipules none.--A large family, chiefly of the Old World and the
southern hemisphere; our two indigenous genera are

1. Xanthoxylum. Flowers dioecious; ovaries 3--5, separate, forming
fleshy pods.

2. Ptelea. Flowers polygamous; ovary 2-celled, forming a samara, like
that of Elm.


1. XANTHOXYLUM, L. PRICKLY ASH.

Flowers dioecious. Sepals 4 or 5, obsolete in one species. Petals 4 or
5, imbricated in the bud. Stamens 4 or 5 in the sterile flowers,
alternate with the petals. Pistils 2--5, separate, but their styles
conniving or slightly united. Pods thick and fleshy, 2-valved,
1--2-seeded. Seed-coat crustaceous, black, smooth and shining. Embryo
straight, with broad cotyledons.--Shrubs or trees, with mostly pinnate
leaves, the stems and often the leafstalks prickly. Flowers small,
greenish or whitish. (From [Greek: xantho/s], _yellow_, and [Greek:
xy/lon], _wood_.)

1. X. Americanum, Mill. (NORTHERN PRICKLY ASH. TOOTHACHE-TREE.) Leaves
and flowers in sessile axillary umbellate clusters; leaflets 2--4 pairs
and an odd one, ovate-oblong, downy when young; calyx none; petals 4--5;
pistils 3--5, with slender styles; pods short-stalked.--Rocky woods and
river-banks; common, especially northward. April, May.--A shrub, with
yellowish-green flowers appearing before the leaves. Bark, leaves, and
pods very pungent and aromatic.

2. X. Clava-Herculis, L. (SOUTHERN P.) Glabrous; leaflets 3--8 pairs and
an odd one, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, oblique, shining above; flowers
in an ample terminal cyme, appearing after the leaves; sepals and petals
5; pistils 2--3, with short styles; pods sessile. (X. Carolinianum,
_Lam._)--Sandy coast of Virginia, and southward. June.--A small tree
with very sharp prickles.


2. PTELEA, L. SHRUBBY TREFOIL. HOP-TREE.

Flowers polygamous. Sepals 3--5. Petals 3--5, imbricated in the bud.
Stamens as many. Ovary 2-celled; style short; stigmas 2. Fruit
a 2-celled and 2-seeded samara, winged all round, nearly
orbicular.--Shrubs, with 3-foliolate leaves, and greenish-white small
flowers in compound terminal cymes. (The Greek name of the Elm, here
applied to a genus with similar fruit.)

1. P. trifoliata, L. Leaflets ovate, pointed, downy when young.--Rocky
places, Long Island to Minn., and southward. June.--A tall shrub. Fruit
bitter, used as a substitute for hops. Odor of the flowers disagreeable.

       *        *       *       *       *

AILANTHUS GLANDULOSUS, Desf., called TREE OF HEAVEN,--but whose
blossoms, especially the staminate ones, are redolent of anything but
"airs from heaven,"--is much planted as a shade-tree, especially in
towns, and is inclined to spread from seed. It belongs to the order
SIMARUBACEAE, which differs from Rutaceae in the absence of dots in the
leaves. The tree is known by its very long pinnate leaves of many
leaflets, and small polygamous greenish flowers in panicles, the female
producing 2--5 thin, linear-oblong, veiny samaras. (Adv. from China.)


ORDER 25. ILICINEAE. (HOLLY FAMILY.)

_Trees or shrubs, with small axillary 4--8-merous flowers, a minute
calyx free from the 4--8-celled ovary and the 4--8-seeded berry-like
drupe, the stamens as many as the divisions of the almost or quite
4--8-petalled corolla and alternate with them, attached to their very
base._--Corolla imbricated in the bud. Anthers opening lengthwise.
Stigmas 4--8, or united into one, nearly sessile. Seeds suspended and
solitary in each cell, anatropous, with a minute embryo in fleshy
albumen. Leaves simple, mostly alternate. Flowers white or greenish.--A
small family, nearly related to the Gamopetalous order _Ebenaceae_.

1. Ilex. Petals or corolla-lobes oval or obovate. Pedicels mostly
clustered.

2. Nemopanthes. Petals linear. Pedicels solitary.


1. ILEX, L. HOLLY.

Flowers more or less dioeciously polygamous. Calyx 4--6-toothed. Petals
4--6, separate, or united only at the base, oval or obovate, obtuse,
spreading. Stamens 4--6. The berry-like drupe containing 4--6 little
nutlets.--Leaves alternate. Fertile flowers inclined to be solitary, and
the sterile or partly sterile flowers to be clustered in the axils. (The
ancient Latin name of the Holly-Oak, rather than of the Holly.)

Sec. 1. AQUIFOLIUM. _Parts of the flower commonly in fours, sometimes in
fives or sixes; drupe red, its nutlets ribbed, veiny, or 1-grooved on
the back; leaves (mostly smooth) coriaceous and evergreen._

[*] _Leaves armed with spiny teeth; trees._

1. I. opaca, Ait. (AMERICAN HOLLY.) Leaves oval, flat, the wavy margins
with scattered spiny teeth; flowers in loose clusters along the base of
the young branches and in the axils; calyx-teeth acute.--Moist
woodlands, Maine to Va., near the coast, and more common southward.
June.--Tree 20--40 deg. high; the deep green foliage less glossy than in the
European Holly (I. AQUIFOLIUM, _L._), the berries not so bright red, and
nutlets not so veiny.

[*][*] _Leaves serrate or entire, not spiny; shrubs._

2. I. Cassine, L. (CASSENA. YAUPON.) _Leaves lance-ovate or elliptical,
crenate_ (1--11/2' long); flower-clusters nearly sessile, smooth;
_calyx-teeth obtuse_.--Virginia and southward along the coast.
May.--Leaves used for tea by the people along the coast, as they were to
make the celebrated _black drink_ of the North Carolina Indians.

3. I. Dahoon, Walt. (DAHOON HOLLY.) _Leaves oblanceolate or oblong,
entire, or sharply serrate_ toward the apex, with revolute margins
(2--3' long), the _midrib and peduncles pubescent; calyx-teeth
acute_.--Swamps, coast of Va. and southward. May, June.

Var. myrtifolia, Chapm. Leaves smaller (1' long or less) and narrower.
(I. myrtifolia, _Walt._)--Same habitat. May.

Sec. 2. PRINOIDES. _Parts of the (polygamous or dioecious) flowers in fours
or fives (rarely in sixes); drupe red or purple, the nutlets
striate-many-ribbed on the back; leaves deciduous; shrubs._

4. I. decidua, Walt. _Leaves wedge-oblong or lance-obovate, obtusely
serrate, downy on the midrib_ beneath, shining above, becoming thickish;
peduncles of the sterile flowers longer than the petioles, of the
fertile short; calyx-teeth smooth, acute.--Wet grounds, Va. to Mo.,
Kan., and southward. May.

5. I. monticola, Gray. _Leaves ovate or lance-oblong, ample_ (3--5'
long), taper-pointed, thin-membranaceous, _smooth, sharply serrate_;
fertile flowers very short-peduncled; calyx ciliate.--Damp woods,
Taconic and Catskill Mountains, and Cattarangus Co., N. Y., through
Penn. (east to Northampton Co.), and southward along the Alleghanies.
May.

6. I. mollis, Gray. _Leaves soft downy beneath_, oval, ovate, or oblong,
taper-pointed at both ends, especially at the apex, thin-membranaceous,
sharply serrulate; sterile flowers very numerous in umbel-like clusters,
the pedicels shorter than the petiole and (with the calyx) soft-downy,
the fertile peduncles very short.--Burgoon's Gap, Alleghanies of Penn.
(_J. R. Lowrie, Porter_), and along the mountains in the Southern
States.--Resembles the last.

Sec. 3. PRINOS. _Parts of the sterile flowers commonly in fours, fives, or
sixes, those of the fertile flowers commonly in sixes (rarely in fives,
sevens, or eights); nutlets smooth and even; shrubs._

[*] _Leaves deciduous; flowers in sessile clusters, or the fertile
solitary; fruit bright red._

7. I. verticillata, Gray. (BLACK ALDER. WINTERBERRY.) _Leaves_ oval,
obovate, or wedge-lanceolate, pointed, acute at base, serrate, _downy on
the veins beneath; flowers all very short-peduncled_.--Low grounds;
common. May, June.

8. I. laevigata, Gray. (SMOOTH WINTERBERRY.) Leaves lanceolate or
oblong-lanceolate, pointed at both ends, appressed-serrulate, shining
above, beneath mostly _glabrous; sterile flowers long-peduncled_.--Wet
grounds, Maine to the mountains of Va. June.--Fruit larger than in the
last, ripening earlier in the autumn.

[*][*] _Leaves coriaceous, evergreen and shining, often black-dotted
beneath; fruit black._

9. I. glabra, Gray. (INKBERRY.) Leaves wedge-lanceolate or oblong,
sparingly toothed toward the apex, smooth; peduncles (1/2' long) of the
sterile flowers 3--6-flowered, of the fertile 1-flowered; calyx-teeth
rather blunt.--Sandy grounds, Cape Ann, Mass., to Va., and southward
near the coast. June.--Shrub 2--3 deg. high.


2. NEMOPANTHES, Raf. MOUNTAIN HOLLY.

Flowers polygamo-dioecious. Calyx in the sterile flowers of 4--5 minute
deciduous teeth, in the fertile ones obsolete. Petals 4--5,
oblong-linear, spreading, distinct. Stamens 4--5; filaments slender.
Drupe with 4--5 bony nutlets, light red.--A much-branched shrub, with
ash-gray bark, alternate and oblong deciduous leaves on slender
petioles, entire or slightly toothed, smooth. Flowers on long slender
axillary peduncles, solitary or sparingly clustered. (Name said by the
author to mean "flower with a filiform peduncle," therefore probably
composed of [Greek: ne~ma], _a thread_, [Greek: poy/s], _foot_, and
[Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_.)

1. N. fascicularis, Raf. (N. Canadensis, _DC._)--Damp cold woods, from
the mountains of Va. to Maine, Ind., Wisc., and northward. May.


ORDER 26. CELASTRACEAE. (STAFF-TREE FAMILY.)

_Shrubs with simple leaves, and small regular flowers, the sepals and
the petals both imbricated in the bud, the 4 or 5 perigynous stamens as
many as the petals and alternate with them, inserted on a disk which
fills the bottom of the calyx and sometimes covers the ovary. Seeds
arilled._--Ovules one or few (erect or pendulous) in each cell,
anatropous; styles united into one. Fruit 2--5-celled, free from the
calyx. Embryo large, in fleshy albumen; cotyledons broad and thin.
Stipules minute and fugacious. Pedicels jointed.

[*] Leaves alternate. Flowers in terminal racemes.

1. Celastrus. A shrubby climber. Fruit globose, orange, 3-valved. Aril
scarlet.

[*][*] Leaves opposite. Flowers in axillary cymes or solitary.

2. Euonymus. Erect shrubs. Leaves deciduous. Fruit 3--5-lobed.
3--5-valved. Aril red.

3. Pachystima. Dwarf evergreen shrub. Flowers very small. Fruit oblong,
2-valved. Aril white.


1. CELASTRUS, L. STAFF-TREE. SHRUBBY BITTER-SWEET.

Flowers polygamo-dioecious. Petals (crenulate) and stamens 5, inserted
on the margin of a cup-shaped disk which lines the base of the calyx.
Pod globose (orange-color and berry-like), 3-celled, 3-valved,
loculicidal. Seeds 1 or 2 in each cell, erect, enclosed in a pulpy
scarlet aril.--Leaves alternate. Flowers small, greenish, in raceme-like
clusters terminating the branches. (An ancient Greek name for some
evergreen, which our plant is not.)

1. C. scandens, L. (WAX-WORK. CLIMBING BITTER-SWEET.) Twining shrub;
leaves ovate-oblong, finely serrate, pointed.--Along streams and
thickets. June.--The opening orange-colored pods, displaying the scarlet
covering of the seeds, are very ornamental in autumn.


2. EUONYMUS, Tourn. SPINDLE-TREE.

Flowers perfect. Sepals 4 or 5, united at the base, forming a short and
flat calyx. Petals 4--5, rounded, spreading. Stamens very short,
inserted on the edge or face of a broad and flat 4--5-angled disk, which
coheres with the calyx and is stretched over the ovary, adhering to it
more or less. Style short or none. Pod 3--5-lobed, 3--5-valved,
loculicidal. Seeds 1--4 in each cell, enclosed in a red aril.--Shrubs,
with 4-sided branchlets, opposite serrate leaves, and loose cymes of
small flowers on axillary peduncles. (Derivation from [Greek: eu~)],
_good_, and [Greek: o)/noma], _name_, because it has the bad reputation
of poisoning cattle. _Tourn._)

1. E. atropurpureus, Jacq. (BURNING-BUSH. WAAHOO.) Shrub tall (6--14 deg.
high) and upright; _leaves petioled_, oval-oblong, pointed; parts of the
(dark-purple) flower commonly in fours; _pods smooth, deeply
lobed_.--N. Y. to Wisc., Neb., and southward; also cultivated.
June.--Ornamental in autumn, by its copious crimson fruit, drooping on
long peduncles.

2. E. Americanus, L. (STRAWBERRY BUSH.) Shrub low, upright or straggling
(2--5 deg. high); _leaves almost sessile, thickish_, bright green, varying
from ovate to oblong-lanceolate, acute or pointed; parts of the
greenish-purple flowers mostly in fives; _pods rough-warty, depressed_,
crimson when ripe; the aril and dissepiments scarlet.--Wooded
river-banks, N. Y. to Ill., and southward. June.

Var. obovatus, Torr. & Gray. Trailing, with rooting branches; flowering
stems 1--2 deg. high; leaves thin and dull, obovate or oblong.--Low or wet
places; the commoner form.


3. PACHYSTIMA, Raf.

Flowers perfect. Sepals and petals 4. Stamens 4, on the edge of the
broad disk lining the calyx-tube. Ovary free; style very short. Pod
small, oblong, 2-celled, loculicidally 2-valved. Seeds 1 or 2, enclosed
in a white membranaceous many-cleft aril.--Low evergreen shrubs, with
smooth serrulate coriaceous opposite leaves and very small green flowers
solitary or fascicled in the axils. (Derivation obscure.)

1. P. Canbyi, Gray. Leaves linear to linear-oblong or oblong-obovate,
obtuse, 3''--1' long; pedicels very slender, often solitary, shorter
than the leaves; fruit 2'' long.--Mountains of S. W. Va.


ORDER 27. RHAMNACEAE. (BUCKTHORN FAMILY.)

_Shrubs or small trees, with simple leaves, small and regular flowers
(sometimes apetalous), with the 4 or 5 perigynous stamens as many as the
valvate sepals and alternate with them, accordingly opposite the petals!
Drupe or pod with only one erect seed in each cell, not
arilled._--Petals folded inwards in the bud, hooded or concave, inserted
along with the stamens into the edge of the fleshy disk which lines the
short tube of the calyx and sometimes unites it to the lower part of the
2--5-celled ovary. Ovules solitary, anatropous. Stigmas 2--5. Embryo
large, with broad cotyledons, in sparing fleshy albumen.--Flowers often
polygamous, sometimes dioecious. Leaves mostly alternate; stipules small
or obsolete. Branches often thorny. (Slightly bitter and astringent;
the fruit often mucilaginous, commonly rather nauseous or drastic.)

[*] Calyx and disk free from the ovary.

1. Berchemia. Petals sessile, entire, as long as the calyx. Drupe with
thin flesh and a 2-celled bony putamen.

2. Rhamnus. Petals small, short-clawed, notched, or none. Drupe
berry-like, with 2--4 separate seed-like nutlets.

[*][*] Calyx with the disk adherent to the base of the ovary.

3. Ceanothus. Petals long-clawed, hooded. Fruit dry, at length
dehiscent.


1. BERCHEMI, Necker. SUPPLE-JACK.

Calyx with a very short and roundish tube; its lobes equalling the 5
oblong sessile acute petals, longer than the stamens. Disk very thick
and flat, filling the calyx-tube and covering the ovary. Drupe oblong,
with thin flesh and a bony 2-celled putamen.--Woody high-climbing
twiners, with the pinnate veins of the leaves straight and parallel, the
small greenish-white flowers in small panicles. (Name unexplained,
probably personal.)

1. B. volubilis, DC. Glabrous; leaves oblong-ovate, acute, scarcely
serrulate; style short.--Damp soils, Va. to Ky. and Mo., and southward.
June.--Ascending tall trees. Stems tough and very lithe, whence the
popular name.


2. RHAMNUS, Tourn. BUCKTHORN.

Calyx 4--5-cleft; the tube campanulate, lined with the disk. Petals
small, short-clawed, notched at the end, wrapped around the short
stamens, or sometimes none. Ovary free, 2--4-celled. Drupe berry-like
(black), containing 2--4 separate seed-like nutlets, of cartilaginous
texture.--Shrubs or small trees, with loosely pinnately veined leaves,
and greenish polygamous or dioecious flowers, in axillary clusters. (The
ancient Greek name.)

Sec. 1. RHAMNUS proper. _Flowers usually dioecious; nutlets and seeds
deeply grooved on the back; rhaphe dorsal; cotyledons foliaceous, the
margins revolute._

[*] _Calyx-lobes and stamens 5; petals wanting._

1. R. alnifolia, L'Her. A low shrub; leaves oval, acute, serrate, nearly
straight-veined; fruit 3-seeded.--Swamps, Maine to Penn., Neb., and
northward. June.

[*][*] _Calyx-lobes, petals, and stamens 4._

R. CATHARTICA, L. (COMMON BUCKTHORN.) _Leaves ovate_, minutely serrate;
_fruit 3--4-seeded_; branchlets thorny.--Cultivated for hedges;
sparingly naturalized eastward. May, June. (Nat. from Eu.)

2. R. lanceolata, Pursh. _Leaves oblong-lanceolate_ and acute, or on
flowering shoots oblong and obtuse, finely serrulate, smooth or minutely
downy beneath; petals deeply notched; _fruit 2-seeded_.--Hills and
river-banks, Penn. (Mercersburg, _Green_) to Ill., Tenn., and westward.
May.--Shrub tall, not thorny; the yellowish-green flowers of two forms
on distinct plants, both perfect; one with short pedicels clustered in
the axils and with a short included style; the other with pedicels
oftener solitary, the style longer and exserted.

Sec. 2. FRANGULA. _Flowers perfect; nutlets and seeds not furrowed;
cotyledons flat, thick; rhaphe lateral._

3. R. Caroliniana, Walt. Thornless shrub or small tree; leaves (3--5'
long) oblong, obscurely serrulate, nearly glabrous, deciduous; flowers
5-merous, in one form umbelled, in another solitary in the axils, short
peduncled; drupe globose, 3-seeded. (Frangula Caroliniana,
_Gray._)--Swamps and river banks, N. J., Va. to Ky., and southward.
June.

3. CEANOTHUS, L. NEW JERSEY TEA. RED-ROOT.

Calyx 5-lobed, incurved; the lower part cohering with the thick disk to
the ovary, the upper separating across in fruit. Petals hooded,
spreading, on slender claws longer than the calyx. Filaments elongated.
Fruit 3-lobed, dry and splitting into its 3 carpels when ripe. Seed as
in Sec. Frangula.--Shrubby plants; flowers in little umbel-like clusters,
forming dense panicles or corymbs at the summit of naked
flower-branches; calyx and pedicels colored like the petals. (An obscure
name in Theophrastus, probably misspelled.)

1. C. Americanus, L. (NEW JERSEY TEA.) Leaves ovate or oblong-ovate,
3-ribbed, serrate, more or less pubescent, often slightly heart-shaped
at base; common peduncles elongated.--Dry woodlands. July.--Stems 1--3 deg.
high from a dark red root; branches downy. Flowers in pretty white
clusters, on leafy shoots of the same year. The leaves were used for tea
during the American Revolution.

2. C. ovatus, Desf. Leaves narrowly oval or elliptical-lanceolate,
finely glandular-serrate, glabrous or nearly so, as well as the short
common peduncles. (C. ovalis, _Bigel._)--Dry rocks, W. Vt. and Mass. to
Minn., Ill., and southwestward; rare eastward. May.


ORDER 28. VITACEAE. (VINE FAMILY.)

_Shrubs with watery juice, usually climbing by tendrils, with small
regular flowers, a minute or truncated calyx, its limb mostly obsolete,
and the stamens as many as the valvate petals and opposite them! Berry
2-celled, usually 4-seeded._--Petals 4--5, very deciduous, hypogynous or
perigynous. Filaments slender; anthers introrse. Pistil with a short
style or none, and a slightly 2-lobed stigma; ovary 2-celled, with 2
erect anatropous ovules from the base of each cell. Seeds bony, with a
minute embryo at the base of the hard albumen, which is grooved on one
side.--Stipules deciduous. Leaves alternate, palmately veined or
compound; tendrils and flower-clusters opposite the leaves. Flowers
small, greenish, commonly polygamous. (Young shoots, foliage, etc.,
acid.)

[*] Ovary surrounded by a nectariferous or glanduliferous disk; plants
climbing by the coiling of naked-tipped tendrils.

1. Vitis. Corolla caducous without expanding. Hypogynous glands 5,
alternate with the stamens. Fruit pulpy. Leaves simple.

2. Cissus. Corolla expanding. Disk cupular. Berry with scanty pulp,
inedible. Leaves simple or pinnately compound.

[*][*] No distinct hypogynous disk; plants climbing by the adhesion of
the dilated tips of the tendril-branches.

3. Ampelopsis. Corolla expanding. Leaves digitate.


1. VITIS, Tourn. GRAPE.

Flowers polygamo-dioecious (some plants with perfect flowers, others
staminate with at most a rudimentary ovary), 5-merous. Calyx very
short, usually with a nearly entire border or none at all. Petals
separating only at base and falling off without expanding. Hypogynous
disk of 5 nectariferous glands alternate with the stamens. Berry pulpy.
Seeds pyriform, with beak-like base.--Plants climbing by the coiling of
naked-tipped tendrils. Flowers in a compound thyrse, very fragrant;
pedicels mostly umbellate-clustered. Leaves simple, rounded and
heart-shaped. (The classical Latin name.)

Sec. 1. VITIS proper. _Bark loose and shreddy; tendrils forked; nodes
solid._

[+] _A tendril (or inflorescence) opposite each leaf._

1. V. Labrusca, L. (NORTHERN FOX-GRAPE.) Branchlets and young leaves
very woolly; leaves large, entire or deeply lobed, slightly dentate,
continuing rusty-woolly beneath; fertile panicles compact; berries
large.--Moist thickets, N. Eng. to the Alleghany Mountains, and south to
S. Car. June. Fruit ripe in Sept. or Oct., dark purple or amber-color,
with a tough musky pulp. Improved by cultivation, it has given rise to
the Isabella, Catawba, Concord and other varieties.

[+][+] _Tendrils intermittent (none opposite each third leaf)._

[++] _Leaves pubescent and floccose, especially beneath and when young._

2. V. aestivalis, Michx. (SUMMER GRAPE.) Branchlets terete; leaves large,
entire or more or less deeply and obtusely 3--5-lobed, with short broad
teeth, very woolly and mostly red or rusty when young; berries
middle-sized, black with a bloom, in compact bunches.--Thickets; common.
May, June. Berries pleasant, ripe in Sept.--V. BICOLOR, LeConte, has
its leaves smoothish when old and pale or glaucous beneath; common north
and westward.

3. V. cinerea, Engelm. (DOWNY GRAPE.) Branchlets angular; pubescence
whitish or grayish, persistent; leaves entire or slightly 3-lobed;
inflorescence large and loose; berries small, black without
bloom.--Central Ill. to Kan. and Tex.

[++][++] _Leaves glabrous and mostly shining, or short-hairy especially
on the ribs beneath, incisely lobed or undivided._

4. V. cordifolia, Michx. (FROST or CHICKEN GRAPE.) Leaves 3--4' wide,
not lobed or slightly 3-lobed, cordate with a deep acute sinus,
acuminate, coarsely and sharply toothed; stipules small; inflorescence
ample, loose; berries small, black and shining, very acerb, ripening
after frosts; seeds 1 or 2, rather large, with a prominent
rhaphe.--Thickets and stream-banks, New Eng. to central Ill., Mo.,
Neb., and southward. May, June.

5. V. riparia, Michx. Differing from the last in the larger and more
persistent stipules (2--3'' long), more shining and more usually 3-lobed
leaves with a broad rounded or truncate sinus and large acute or
acuminate teeth, smaller compact inflorescence, and berries (4--5''
broad) with a bloom, sweet and very juicy, ripening from July to Sept.;
seeds very small; rhaphe indistinct. (V. cordifolia, var. riparia,
_Gray._)--Stream-banks or near water, W. New Eng. to Penn., west to
Minn. and Kan. Eastward the berries are sour and ripen late.

6. V. palmata, Vahl. Branches bright red; leaves dark green and dull,
3--5-lobed, with a broad sinus, the lobes usually long-acuminate;
inflorescence large and loose; berries black, without bloom, ripening
late; seeds very large and rounded; otherwise like n. 5. (V. rubra,
_Michx._)--Ill. and Mo.

7. V. rupestris, Scheele. (SAND or SUGAR GRAPE.) Usually low and bushy,
often without tendrils; leaves rather small, shining, broadly cordate,
abruptly pointed, with broad coarse teeth, rarely slightly lobed;
berries rather small, sweet, in very small close bunches, ripe in
Aug.--Mo. to Tex.; also found in Tenn., and reported from banks of the
Potomac, near Washington.

Sec. 2. MUSCADINIA. _Bark closely adherent on the branches; pith continuous
through the nodes; tendrils simple, intermittent; seeds with transverse
wrinkles on both sides._

8. V. rotundifolia, Michx. (MUSCADINE, BULLACE, or SOUTHERN FOX-GRAPE.)
Leaves shining both sides, small, rounded with a heart-shaped base, very
coarsely toothed with broad and bluntish teeth, seldom lobed; panicles
small, densely flowered; berries large (1/2--3/4' in diameter), musky,
purplish without a bloom, with a thick and tough skin, ripe early in
autumn. (V. vulpina, _Man._, not _L._?)--River-banks, Md. to Ky., Mo.,
Kan., and southward. May.--Branchlets minutely warty. This is the
original of the Scuppernong Grape, etc.


2. CISSUS, L.

Flowers perfect or sometimes polygamous, 4-merous or (in ours) 5-merous.
Petals expanding. Disk cup-shaped, surrounding the base of
the ovary. Berry inedible, with scanty pulp. Seeds usually
triangular-obovate.--Tendrils in our species few and mostly in the
inflorescence. A vast genus, mainly tropical. (Greek name of the Ivy.)

1. C. Ampelopsis, Pers. Nearly glabrous; _leaves heart-shaped_ or
truncate at the base, coarsely and sharply toothed, acuminate, not
lobed; panicle small and loose; style slender; berries of the
size of a pea, 1--3-seeded, bluish or greenish. (Vitis indivisa,
_Willd._)--River-banks, Va. to Ill., and southward. June.

2. C. stans, Pers. Nearly glabrous, bushy and rather upright; _leaves
twice pinnate or ternate_, the leaflets cut-toothed; flowers cymose;
calyx 5-toothed; disk very thick, adherent to the ovary; berries black,
obovate. (Vitis bipinnata, _Torr. & Gray._)--Rich soils, Va. to Mo.,
and southward.


3. AMPELOPSIS, Michx. VIRGINIAN CREEPER.

Calyx slightly 5-toothed. Petals concave, thick, expanding before they
fall. Disk none.--Leaves digitate, with 5 (3--7) oblong-lanceolate
sparingly serrate leaflets. Flower-clusters cymose. Tendrils fixing
themselves to trunks or walls by dilated sucker-like disks at their
tips. (Name from [Greek: a)/mpelos], _a vine_, and [Greek: o)/psis],
_appearance_.)

1. A. quinquefolia, Michx. A common woody vine, in low or rich grounds,
climbing extensively, sometimes by rootlets as well as by its
disk-bearing tendrils, blossoming in July, ripening its small blackish
berries in October. Also called _American Ivy_, and still less
appropriately, _Woodbine_. Leaves turning bright crimson in autumn.


ORDER 29. SAPINDACEAE. (SOAPBERRY FAMILY.)

_Trees or shrubs, with simple or compound leaves, mostly unsymmetrical
and often irregular flowers; the 4--5 sepals and petals imbricated in
aestivation; the 5--10 stamens inserted on a fleshy (perigynous or
hypogynous) disk; a 2--3-celled and -lobed ovary, with 1--2 (rarely
more) ovules in each cell; and the embryo_ (except Staphylea) _curved or
convolute, without albumen._--A large and diverse order.

SUBORDER I. Sapindeae. Flowers (often polygamous) mostly unsymmetrical
and irregular. Stamens commonly more numerous than the petals, rarely
twice as many. Ovules 1 or 2 in each cell. Embryo curved or convolute,
rarely straight; cotyledons thick and fleshy.--Leaves alternate or
sometimes opposite, without stipules, mostly compound.

1. AEsculus. Flowers irregular. Calyx 5-lobed. Petals 4 or 5. Stamens
commonly 7. Fruit a leathery 3-valved pod. Leaves opposite, digitate.

2. Sapindus. Flowers regular. Sepals 4--5, in two rows. Petals 4--5.
Stamens 8--10. Fruit a globose or 2--3-lobed berry. Leaves alternate,
pinnate.

SUBORDER II. Acerineae. (MAPLE FAMILY.) Flowers (polygamous or dioecious)
small, regular, but usually unsymmetrical. Petals often wanting. Ovary
2-lobed and 2-celled, with a pair of ovules in each cell. Fruits winged,
1-seeded. Embryo coiled or folded; the cotyledons long and thin.--Leaves
opposite, simple or compound.

3. Acer. Flowers polygamous. Leaves simple.

4. Negundo. Flowers dioecious. Leaves pinnate, with 3--5 leaflets.

SUBORDER III. Staphyleae. (BLADDER-NUT FAMILY.) Flowers (perfect)
regular; stamens as many as the petals. Ovules 1--8 in each cell. Seeds
bony, with a straight embryo in scanty albumen.--Shrubs with opposite
pinnately compound leaves, both stipulate and stipellate.

5. Staphylea. Lobes of the colored calyx and petals 5, erect. Stamens 5.
Fruit a 3-celled bladdery-inflated pod.


1. AESCULUS, L. HORSE-CHESTNUT. BUCKEYE.

Calyx tubular, 5-lobed, often oblique or gibbous at base. Petals 4--5,
more or less unequal, with claws, nearly hypogynous. Stamens 7 (rarely 6
or 8); filaments long, slender, often unequal. Style 1; ovary 3-celled,
with 2 ovules in each cell. Fruit a leathery pod, 3-celled and 3-seeded,
or usually by abortion 1-celled and 1-seeded, loculicidally 3-valved.
Seed very large, with thick shining coat, and a large round pale scar.
Cotyledons very thick and fleshy, their contiguous faces coherent,
remaining under ground in germination; plumule 2-leaved; radicle
curved.--Trees or shrubs. Leaves opposite, digitate; leaflets serrate,
straight-veined, like a Chestnut-leaf. Flowers in a terminal thyrse or
dense panicle, often polygamous, most of them with imperfect pistils and
sterile; pedicels jointed. Seeds farinaceous, but imbued with a bitter
and narcotic principle. (The ancient name of some Oak or other
mast-bearing tree.)

Sec. 1. AESCULUS proper. _Fruit covered with prickles when young._

AE. HIPPOCASTANUM, L. (COMMON HORSE-CHESTNUT.) Corolla spreading, white
spotted with purple and yellow, of 5 petals; stamens declined; leaflets
7.--Commonly planted. (Adv. from Asia via Eu.)

1. AE. glabra, Willd. (FETID or OHIO BUCKEYE.) Stamens curved, longer
than the pale yellow corolla of 4 upright petals; leaflets usually
5.--River-banks, W. Penn. to Mich., Mo., Kan., and southward. June.--A
large tree; the bark exhaling an unpleasant odor, as in the rest of the
genus. Flowers small, not showy.

Sec. 2. PAVIA. _Fruit smooth; petals 4, conniving; the 2 upper smaller and
longer than the others, with a small rounded blade on a very long claw._

2. AE. flava, Ait. (SWEET BUCKEYE.) _Stamens included_ in the yellow
corolla; _calyx oblong-campanulate_; leaflets 5, sometimes 7, glabrous,
or often minutely downy underneath.--Rich woods, Va. to Ohio, Mo., and
southward. May. A large tree or a shrub.

Var. purpurascens, Gray. Calyx and corolla tinged with flesh-color or
dull purple; leaflets commonly downy beneath.--From W. Va., south and
westward.

3. AE. Pavia, L. (RED BUCKEYE.) Stamens not longer than the corolla,
which is bright red, as well as the _tubular calyx_; leaflets glabrous
or soft-downy beneath.--Fertile valleys, Va., Ky., Mo., and southward.
May. A shrub or small tree.


2. SAPINDUS, L. SOAP-BERRY.

Flowers regular, polygamous. Sepals 4--5, imbricated in 2 rows. Petals
4--5, with a scale at the base. Stamens 8--10, upon the hypogynous disk.
Ovary 3-celled, with an ascending ovule in each cell. Fruit a globose or
2--3-lobed berry, 1--3-seeded. Seed crustaceous, globose.--Trees or
shrubs, with alternate abruptly pinnate leaves, and small flowers in
terminal or axillary racemes or panicles. (Name a contraction of _Sapo
Indicus, Indian soap_, having reference to the saponaceous character of
the berries.)

1. S. acuminatus, Raf. A tree 20--60 deg. high; leaflets 4--9 pairs,
obliquely lanceolate, sharply acuminate, entire, 11/2--3' long; the
rhachis of the leaf not winged; flowers white, in a large panicle, fruit
mostly globose, 6'' broad. (S. marginatus of authors, not
_Willd._)--S. Kan. to La., Fla., and Mex.


3. ACER, Tourn. MAPLE.

Flowers polygamo-dioecious. Calyx colored, 5- (rarely 4--12-) lobed or
parted. Petals either none or as many as the lobes of the calyx, equal,
with short claws if any, inserted on the margin of the lobed disk, which
is either perigynous or hypogynous. Stamens 3--12. Ovary 2-celled, with
a pair of ovules in each cell; styles 2, long and slender, united only
below, stigmatic down the inside. From the back of each carpel grows a
wing, converting the fruit into two 1-seeded, at length separable
samaras or keys. Embryo variously coiled or folded, with large and thin
cotyledons.--Trees, or sometimes shrubs, with opposite palmately-lobed
leaves, and small flowers. Pedicels not jointed. (The classical name,
from the Celtic _ac_, hard.)

[*] _Flowers in terminal racemes, greenish, appearing after the leaves;
stamens 6--8._

1. A. Pennsylvanicum, L. (STRIPED MAPLE.) Leaves 3-lobed at the apex,
finely and sharply doubly serrate, the short lobes taper-pointed and
also serrate; _racemes drooping, loose; petals obovate_; fruit with
large diverging wings.--Rich woods, Maine to Minn., and southward to
Va., Ky., and Mo. June.--A small and slender tree, with light-green bark
striped with dark lines, and greenish flowers and fruit. Also called
_Striped Dogwood_ and _Moose-Wood_.

2. A. spicatum, Lam. (MOUNTAIN M.) Leaves downy beneath, 3- (or slightly
5-) lobed, coarsely serrate, the lobes taper-pointed; _racemes upright,
dense_, somewhat compound; _petals linear-spatulate_; fruit with small
erect or divergent wings.--Moist woods, with the same range as n. 1.
June.--A tall shrub, forming clumps.

[*][*] _Flowers in nearly sessile terminal and lateral
umbellate-corymbs, greenish-yellow, appearing with the leaves._

3. A. saccharinum, Wang. (SUGAR or ROCK M.) Leaves 3--5-lobed, with
rounded sinuses and pointed sparingly sinuate toothed lobes, either
heart-shaped or nearly truncate at the base, whitish and smooth or a
little downy on the veins beneath; flowers from terminal leaf-bearing
and lateral leafless buds, drooping on very slender hairy pedicels;
calyx hairy at the apex; petals none; wings of the fruit broad, usually
slightly diverging.--Rich woods, especially northward and along the
mountains southward. April, May.--A large and handsome tree.

Var. nigrum, Torr. & Gray. (BLACK SUGAR-M.) Leaves scarcely paler
beneath, but often minutely downy, the lobes wider, often shorter and
entire, the sinus at the base often closed.--With the ordinary form;
quite variable, sometimes appearing distinct.

[*][*][*] _Flowers in umbel-like clusters arising from separate lateral
buds, and much preceding the leaves; stamens 3--6._

4. A. dasycarpum, Ehrh. (WHITE or SILVER M.) _Leaves very deeply
5-lobed_ with the sinuses rather acute, silvery-white (and when young
downy) underneath, the divisions narrow, cut-lobed and toothed; flowers
(greenish-yellow) on short pedicels; _petals none; fruit woolly when
young_, with large divergent wings.--River-banks; most common southward
and westward. March--April.--A fine ornamental tree.

5. A. rubrum, L. (RED or SWAMP M.) _Leaves 3--5 lobed_, with acute
sinuses, whitish underneath; the lobes irregularly serrate and notched,
acute, the middle one usually longest; _petals linear-oblong_; flowers
(scarlet, crimson, or sometimes yellowish) on very short pedicels; but
the _smooth fruit_ on prolonged drooping pedicels.--Swamps and wet
woods. April.--A small tree, with reddish twigs; the leaves varying
greatly in shape, turning bright crimson in early autumn.


4. NEGUNDO, Moench. ASH-LEAVED MAPLE. BOX-ELDER.

Flowers dioecious. Calyx minute, 4--5-cleft. Petals none. Stamens 4--5.
Disk none.--Sterile flowers in clusters on capillary pedicels, the
fertile in drooping racemes, from lateral buds. Leaves pinnate, with 3
or 5 leaflets. Fruit as in Acer. (Name unmeaning.)

1. N. aceroides, Moench. Leaflets smoothish when old, very veiny, ovate,
pointed, toothed; fruit smooth, with large rather incurved
wings.--River-banks, W. New Eng. to Dak., south and westward. April.--A
small but handsome tree, with light-green twigs, and very delicate
drooping clusters of small greenish flowers, rather earlier than the
leaves.


5. STAPHYLEA, L. BLADDER-NUT.

Calyx deeply 5-parted, the lobes erect, whitish. Petals 5, erect,
spatulate, inserted on the margin of the thick perigynous disk which
lines the base of the calyx. Stamens 5, alternate with the petals.
Pistil of 3 several-ovuled carpels, united in the axis, their long
styles lightly cohering. Pod large, membranaceous, inflated, 3-lobed,
3-celled, at length bursting at the summit; the cells containing 1--4
bony anatropous seeds. Aril none. Embryo large and straight, in scanty
albumen, cotyledons broad and thin.--Upright shrubs, with opposite
pinnate leaves of 3 or 5 serrate leaflets, and white flowers in drooping
raceme-like clusters, terminating the branchlets. Stipules and stipels
deciduous. (Name from [Greek: staphyle/], _a cluster_.)

1. S. trifolia, L. (AMERICAN BLADDER-NUT.) Leaflets 3, ovate,
pointed.--Thickets, in moist soil. May.--Shrub 10 deg. high, with greenish
striped branches.


ORDER 30. ANACARDIACEAE. (CASHEW FAMILY.)

_Trees or shrubs, with resinous or milky acrid juice, dotless alternate
leaves, and small, often polygamous, regular, 5-merous flowers, but the
ovary 1-celled and 1-ovuled, with 3 styles or stigmas._--Petals
imbricated in the bud. Fruit mostly drupaceous. Seed without albumen,
borne on a curved stalk that rises from the base of the cell. Stipules
none. Juice or exhalations often poisonous.


1. RHUS, L. SUMACH.

Calyx small, 5-parted. Petals 5. Stamens 5, inserted under the edge or
between the lobes of a flattened disk in the bottom of the calyx. Fruit
small and indehiscent, a sort of dry drupe.--Leaves usually compound.
Flowers greenish-white or yellowish. (The old Greek and Latin name.)

Sec. 1. RHUS proper. _Fruit symmetrical, with the styles terminal._

[*] _Flowers polygamous, in a terminal thyrsoid panicle; fruit globular,
clothed with acid crimson hairs; stone smooth; leaves odd-pinnate. (Not
poisonous.)_--(Sec. SUMAC, DC.)

1. R. typhina, L. (STAGHORN SUMACH.) _Branches and stalks densely
velvety-hairy_; leaflets 11--31, pale beneath, oblong-lanceolate,
pointed, serrate, rarely laciniate.--Hillsides. June.--Shrub or tree
10--30 deg. high, with orange-colored wood. Apparently hybridizes with the
next.

2. R. glabra, L. (SMOOTH S.) _Smooth, somewhat glaucous_; leaflets
11--31, whitened beneath, lanceolate-oblong, pointed, serrate.--Rocky or
barren soil. June, July.--Shrub 2--12 deg. high. A var. has laciniate
leaflets.

3. R. copallina, L. (DWARF S.) _Branches and stalks downy; petioles
wing-margined_ between the 9--21 oblong or ovate-lanceolate (often
entire) leaflets, which are oblique or unequal at the base, smooth and
shining above.--Rocky hills. July.--Shrub 1--7 deg. high, with running
roots.

[*][*] _Flowers polygamous, in loose and slender axillary panicles;
fruit globular, glabrous, whitish or dun-colored; the stone
striate; leaves odd-pinnate or 3-foliolate, thin.
(Poisonous.)_--(Sec. TOXICODENDRON, DC.)

4. R. venenata, DC. (POISON S. or DOGWOOD.) Smooth, or nearly so;
_leaflets 7--13, obovate-oblong_, entire.--Swamps. June.--Shrub 6--18 deg.
high. The most poisonous species; also called _Poison Elder_.

5. R. Toxicodendron, L. (POISON IVY. POISON OAK.) Climbing by rootlets
over rocks, etc., or ascending trees, or sometimes low and erect;
_leaflets 3, rhombic-ovate_, mostly pointed, and rather downy beneath,
variously notched, sinuate, or cut-lobed,--high-climbing plants (R.
radicans, _L._) having usually more entire leaves.--Thickets, low
grounds, etc. June.

[*][*][*] _Flowers polygamo-dioecious, in small solitary or clustered
spikes or heads which develop in spring before the leaves; leaves
3-foliolate; fruit as in first group. (Not poisonous)._--(Sec. LOBADIUM,
Torr. & Gray.)

6. R. Canadensis, Marsh. Leaves soft-pubescent when young, becoming
glabrate; leaflets rhombic-obovate or ovate, unequally cut-toothed,
1--3' long, the terminal one cuneate at base and sometimes 3-cleft;
flowers pale yellow. (R. aromatica, _Ait._)--Dry rocky banks, W. Vt. to
Minn., and southward.--A straggling bush, 3--7 deg. high; the crushed leaves
not unpleasantly scented.

Var. trilobata, Gray. With smaller leaflets (1/2--1' long), crenately
few-lobed or incised toward the summit.--Long Pine, Neb., and common
westward. Unpleasantly scented.

Sec. 2. COTINUS. _Ovary becoming very gibbous in fruit, with the remains of
the styles lateral; flowers in loose ample panicles, the pedicels
elongating and becoming plumose; leaves simple, entire._

7. R. cotinoides, Nutt. Glabrous or nearly so; leaves thin, oval, 3--6'
long; flowers and fruit as in the cultivated _Smoke-tree_ (R.
Cotinus).--Mo. to Tenn., and southward.--A tree, 25--40 deg. high.


ORDER 31. POLYGALACEAE. (MILKWORT FAMILY.)

_Plants with irregular hypogynous flowers, 4--8 diadelphous or
monadelphous stamens, their 1-celled anthers opening at the top by a
pore or chink, the fruit a 2-celled and 2-seeded pod._


1. POLYGALA, Tourn. MILKWORT.

Flower very irregular. Calyx persistent, of 5 sepals, of which 3 (the
upper and the 2 lower) are small and often greenish, while the two
lateral or inner (called _wings_) are much larger, and colored like the
petals. Petals 3, hypogynous, connected with each other and with the
stamen-tube, the middle (lower) one keel-shaped and often crested on the
back. Stamens 6 or 8; their filaments united below into a split sheath,
or into 2 sets, cohering more or less with the petals, free above;
anthers 1-celled, often cup-shaped, opening by a hole or broad chink at
the apex. Ovary 2-celled, with a single anatropous ovule pendulous in
each cell; style prolonged and curved; stigma various. Fruit a small,
loculicidal 2-seeded pod, usually rounded and notched at the apex, much
flattened contrary to the very narrow partition. Seeds carunculate.
Embryo large, straight, with flat and broad cotyledons, in scanty
albumen.--Bitter plants (low herbs in temperate regions), with simple
entire often dotted leaves, and no stipules; sometimes (as in the first
two species) bearing cleistogamous flowers next the ground. (An old name
composed of [Greek: poly/s], _much_, and [Greek: ga/la], _milk_, from a
fancied property of its increasing this secretion.)

[*] _Perennial or biennial; flowers purple or white; leaves alternate._

[+] _Flowers showy, rose-purple, conspicuously crested; also bearing
inconspicuous colorless cleistogamous flowers on subterranean branches._

1. P. paucifolia, Willd. _Perennial_; flowering stems short (3--4'
high), from long slender prostrate or subterranean shoots, which also
bear concealed fertile flowers; lower leaves small and scale-like,
scattered, the _upper ovate, petioled, crowded_ at the summit; _flowers
1--3, large_, peduncled; wings obovate, rather shorter than the
fringe-crested keel; stamens 6; caruncle of 2 or 3 awl-shaped lobes
longer than the seed.--Woods, in light soil, N. Eng. to Minn., Ill., and
southward along the Alleghanies. May.--A delicate plant, with very
handsome flowers, 9'' long, rose-purple, or rarely pure white. Sometimes
called _Flowering Wintergreen_, but more appropriately FRINGED POLYGALA.

2. P. polygama, Walt. Stems numerous from the _biennial_ root, mostly
simple, ascending, very leafy (6--9' high); _leaves oblanceolate or
oblong_; terminal _raceme loosely many-flowered_, the broadly obovate
wings longer than the keel; stamens 8; radical flowers racemed on short
subterranean runners; lobes of the caruncle 2, scale-like, shorter than
the seed.--Dry sandy soil; common. July.

[+][+] _Flowers white, in a solitary close spike; none cleistogamous._

3. P. Senega, L. (SENECA SNAKEROOT.) Stems several from thick and hard
knotty rootstocks, simple (6--12' high); leaves lanceolate or
oblong-lanceolate, with rough margins; wings round-obovate, concave;
crest short; caruncle nearly as long as the seed.--Rocky soil, W. New
Eng. to Minn., and southward. May, June.

Var. latifolia, Torr. & Gray. Taller, sometimes branched; leaves ovate
or ovate-lanceolate, 2--4' long, tapering to each end.--Md. to Mich. and
Ky.

4. P. alba, Nutt. Stems several from a hard rootstock, 1 deg. high; leaves
narrowly linear, 3--12'' long, acute; wings oblong-obovate; crest small;
lobes of the caruncle half the length of the appressed-silky seed.--Neb.
and Kan. to Tex.

[*][*] _Annuals, with all the leaves alternate; flowers in terminal
spikes, heads or racemes, purple or rose-color, in summer; none
subterranean._

[+] _Keel conspicuously crested; claws of the true petals united into a
long and slender cleft tube much surpassing the wings._

5. P. incarnata, L. Glaucous; stem slender, sparingly branched; leaves
minute and linear-awl-shaped; spike cylindrical; flowers flesh-color;
caruncle longer than the narrow stalk of the hairy seed.--Dry soil,
Penn. to Wisc., Iowa, Neb., and southward; rather rare.

[+][+] _Keel minutely or inconspicuously crested; the true petals not
longer but mostly shorter than the wings; seed pear-shaped._

6. P. sanguinea, L. Stem sparingly branched above, leafy to the top;
_leaves oblong-linear; heads globular, at length oblong_, very dense
(4--5'' thick), bright red-purple (rarely paler or even white); pedicels
scarcely any; _wings broadly ovate, closely sessile_, longer than the
pod; the 2-parted _caruncle almost equalling the seed_.--Sandy and moist
ground; common.

7. P. fastigiata, Nutt. Stem slender, at length corymbosely branched;
_leaves narrowly linear_, acute, 3--8'' long; _spikes short and dense_
(3'' in diameter); the small rose-purple flowers on _pedicels of about
the length of the pod_; wings obovate- or oval-oblong, narrowed at the
base, scarcely exceeding the pod; _bracts deciduous_ with the flowers or
fruits, caruncle as long as and nearly enveloping the stalk-like base of
the minutely hairy seed.--Pine barrens of N. J. and Del. to Ky., and
southward.

8. P. Nuttallii, Torr. & Gray. Resembles the last, but usually lower;
spikes cylindrical, narrow; flowers duller or greenish purple, on very
short _pedicels_; the awl-shaped scaly _bracts persistent_ on the axis
after the flowers or fruits fall; seed very hairy, the caruncle
smaller.--Dry sandy soil, coast of Mass. to Mo., and southward.--Spike
sometimes rather loose.

9. P. Curtissii, Gray. Slender (9' high), leaves, etc., as in the two
preceding, flowers rose-purple, in usually short racemes; pedicels about
equalling or exceeding the persistent bracts; _the narrow oblong erect
wings fully twice the length of the pod_; caruncle small, on one side of
the stalk-like base of the very hairy _seed_, which is _conspicuously
apiculate at the broader end_.--Md. to Ga.--The species was founded upon
an abnormal form with elongated racemes and pedicels.

[*][*][*] _Annuals with at least the lower stem-leaves whorled in fours,
sometimes in fives; spikes terminating the stem and branches; fl. summer
and autumn._

[+] _Spikes short and thick (4--9'' in diameter); bracts persisting
after the fall of the (middle-sized) rose or greenish purple flowers;
crest small._

10. P. cruciata, L. Stems (3--10' high) almost winged at the angles,
with spreading opposite branches; leaves nearly all in fours, linear and
somewhat spatulate or oblanceolate; _spikes sessile or nearly so; wings
broadly deltoid-ovate, slightly heart-shaped, tapering to a bristly
point_ or rarely pointless; caruncle nearly as long as the seed.--Margin
of swamps, Maine to Va. and southward near the coast, and west to Minn.
and Neb.

11. P. brevifolia, Nutt. Rather slender, branched above; leaves
scattered on the branches, narrower; _spikes peduncled; wings
lanceolate-ovate, pointless or barely mucronate_.--Margin of sandy bogs,
R. I., N. J. and southward.

[+][+] _Spikes slender (about 2'' thick), the bracts falling with the
flowers, which are small, greenish-white or barely tinged with purple,
the crest of the keel larger._

12. P. verticillata, L. Slender (6--10' high), much branched;
stem-leaves all whorled, those of the (mostly opposite) branches
scattered, linear, acute; spikes peduncled, usually short and dense,
acute; wings round, clawed; the 2-lobed caruncle half the length of the
seed.--Dry soil; common.

Var. ambigua. Leaves (and branches) all scattered or the lowest in
fours; spikes long-peduncled, more slender, the flowers often purplish
and scattered. (P. ambigua, _Nutt._)--N. Y. to Mo., and southward.

[*][*][*][*] _Biennials or annuals, with alternate leaves, and yellow
flowers, which are disposed to turn greenish in drying; crest small;
flowering all summer._

13. P. lutea, L. Low; _flowers (bright orange-yellow) in solitary ovate
or oblong heads_ (3/4' thick) terminating the stem or simple branches;
leaves (1--2' long) obovate or spatulate; lobes of the _caruncle nearly
as long as the seed._--Sandy swamps, N. J. and southward, near the
coast.

14. P. ramosa, Ell. _Flowers (citron-yellow) in numerous short and dense
spike-like racemes_ collected in a flat-topped _compound cyme_; leaves
oblong-linear, the lowest spatulate or obovate; _seeds_ ovoid, minutely
hairy, _twice the length of the caruncle_.--Damp pine-barrens, Del. and
southward.

15. P. cymosa, Walt. Stem short, naked above, the numerous racemes in a
usually nearly simple cyme, leaves narrow, acuminate; seeds globose,
without caruncle.--Del. and southward.


ORDER 32. LEGUMINOSAE. (PULSE FAMILY.)

_Plants with papilionaceous or sometimes regular flowers, 10 (rarely 5
and sometimes many) monadelphous, diadelphous, or rarely distinct
stamens, and a single simple free pistil, becoming a legume in fruit.
Seeds mostly without albumen. Leaves alternate, with stipules, usually
compound._ One of the sepals inferior (i.e. next the bract); one of the
petals superior (i.e. next the axis of the inflorescence).--A very
large order (nearly free from noxious qualities), of which the principal
representatives in northern temperate regions belong to the first of the
three suborders it comprises.

SUBORDER I. Papilionaceae. Calyx of 5 sepals, more or less united, often
unequally so. Corolla inserted into the base of the calyx, of 5
irregular petals (or very rarely fewer), more or less distinctly
_papilionaceous_, i.e. with the upper or odd petal (_vexillum_ or
_standard_) larger than the others and enclosing them in the bud,
usually turned backward or spreading; the two lateral ones (_wings_)
oblique and exterior to the two lower, which last are connivent and
commonly more or less coherent by their anterior edges, forming the
_carina_ or _keel_, which usually encloses the stamens and pistil.
Stamens 10, very rarely 5, inserted with the corolla, monadelphous,
diadelphous (mostly with 9 united into a tube which is cleft on the
upper side, and the tenth or upper one separate), or occasionally
distinct. Ovary 1-celled, sometimes 2-celled by an intrusion of one of
the sutures, or transversely 2--many-celled by cross-division into
joints; style simple; ovules amphitropous, rarely anatropous.
Cotyledons large, thick or thickish; radicle incurved.--Leaves simple or
simply compound, the earliest ones in germination usually opposite, the
rest alternate; leaflets almost always quite entire. Flowers perfect,
solitary and axillary, or in spikes, racemes, or panicles.

I. Stamens (10) distinct.

[*] Leaves palmately 3-foliolate or simple; calyx 4--5-lobed; herbs.
(PODALYRIEAE.)

1. Baptisia. Pod inflated.

2. Thermopsis. Pod flat, linear.

[*][*] Leaves pinnate; calyx-teeth short. (SOPHOREAE.)

3. Cladrastis. Flowers panicled, white. Pod flat. A tree.

4. Sophora. Flowers racemose, white. Pod terete, moniliform. Herbaceous.

II. Stamens monadelphous, or diadelphous (9 and 1, rarely 5 and 5);
nearly distinct in n. 14.

[*] Anthers of two forms; stamens monadelphous; leaves digitate or
simple; leaflets entire. (GENISTEAE.)

5. Crotalaria. Calyx 5-lobed. Pod inflated. Leaves simple.

6. Genista. Calyx 2-lipped. Pod flat. Seed estrophiolate. Leaves simple.
Shrubby.

7. Cytisus. Calyx 2-lipped. Pod flat. Seed strophiolate. Leaves
1--3-foliolate. Shrubby.

8. Lupinus. Calyx deeply 2-lipped. Pod flat. Leaves 7--11-foliolate.

[*][*] Anthers uniform (except in n. 13 and 29).

[+] Leaves digitately (rarely pinnately) 3-foliolate; leaflets
denticulate or serrulate; stamens diadelphous, pods small,
1--few-seeded, often enclosed in the calyx or curved or coiled.
(TRIFOLIEAE.)

9. Trifolium. Flowers capitate. Pods membranaceous, 1--6-seeded. Petals
adherent to the stamen-tube.

10. Melilotus. Flowers racemed. Pod coriaceous, wrinkled, 1--2-seeded.

11. Medicago. Flowers racemed or spiked. Pods curved or coiled,
1--few-seeded.

[+][+] Leaves unequally pinnate (or digitate in n. 13); pod not jointed;
not twining nor climbing (except n. 20).

[++] Flowers umbellate (solitary in ours) on axillary peduncles.
(LOTEAE.)

12. Hosaekia. Leaves 1--3-foliolate. Peduncle leafy-bracteate. Pod
linear.

[++][++] Flowers in spikes, racemes, or heads. (GALEGEAE.)

[=] Herbage glandular-dotted; stamens mostly monadelphous; pod small,
indehiscent, mostly 1-seeded; leaves pinnate (except in n. 13).

13. Psoralea. Corolla truly papilionaceous. Stamens 10, half of the
anthers often smaller or less perfect. Leaves mostly palmately
3--5-foliolate.

14. Amorpha. Corolla of one petal! Stamens 10, monadelphous at base.

15. Dalea. Corolla imperfectly papilionaceous. Stamens 9 or 10; the
cleft tube of filaments bearing 4 of the petals about its middle.

16. Petalostemon. Corolla scarcely at all papilionaceous. Stamens 5; the
cleft tube of filaments bearing 4 of the petals on its summit.

[=][=] Herbage not glandular-dotted (except in n. 23); stamens mostly
diadelphous; pod 2-valved, several-seeded; leaves pinnately
several-foliolate; flowers racemose.

[a.] Wings cohering with the keel; pod flat or 4-angled; hoary perennial
herbs.

17. Tephrosia. Standard broad. Pod flat. Leaflets pinnately veined.

18. Indigofera. Calyx and standard small. Pod 4-angled. Leaflets
obscurely veined.

[b.] Flowers large and showy; standard broad; wings free; woody;
leaflets stipellate.

19. Robinia. Pod flat, thin, margined on one edge. Trees or shrubs.

20. Wistaria. Pod tumid, marginless. Woody twiners; leaflets obscurely
stipellate.

[c.] Standard narrow, erect; pod turgid or inflated; perennial herbs.

21. Astragalus. Keel not tipped with a point or sharp appendage. Pod
with one or both the sutures turned in, sometimes dividing the cell
lengthwise into two.

22. Oxytropis. Keel tipped with an erect point; otherwise as Astragalus.

23. Glycyrrhiza. Flowers, etc., of Astragalus. Anther-cells confluent.
Pod prickly or muricate, short, nearly indehiscent.

[+][+][+] Herbs with pinnate or pinnately 1--3-foliolate leaves; no
tendrils; pod transversely 2--several-jointed, the reticulated 1-seeded
joints indehiscent, or sometimes reduced to one such joint. (HEDYSAREAE.)

[=] Leaves pinnate, with several leaflets, not stipellate.

24. AEschynomene. Stamens equally diadelphous (5 and 5). Calyx 2-lipped.
Pod several-jointed; joints square.

25. Coronilla. Stamens unequally diadelphous (9 and 1). Calyx 5-toothed.
Joints oblong, 4-angled. Flowers umbellate.

26. Hedysarum. Stamens unequally diadelphous (9 and 1). Calyx 5-cleft.
Pod several-jointed; joints roundish.

[=][=] Leaves pinnately 3-foliolate, rarely 1-foliolate.

27. Desmodium. Stamens diadelphous (9 and 1) or monadelphous below.
Calyx 2-lipped. Pod several-jointed. Flowers all of one sort and
complete. Leaflets stipellate.

28. Lespedeza. Stamens diadelphous (9 and 1); anthers uniform. Pod
1--2-jointed. Flowers often of 2 sorts, the more fertile ones apetalous.
Leaflets not stipellate.

29. Stylosanthes. Stamens monadelphous; anthers of 2 sorts. Pod
1--2-jointed. Calyx deciduous, the tube narrow and stalk-like. Leaflets
not stipellate.

[+][+][+][+] Herbs with abruptly pinnate leaves, terminated by a tendril
or bristle; stamens diadelphous; pod continuous, 2-valved,
few--several-seeded. (VICIEAE.)

30. Vicia. Wings adherent to the keel. Style filiform, bearded with a
tuft or ring of hairs at the apex.

31. Lathyrus. Wings nearly free. Style somewhat dilated and flattened
upwards, bearded down the inner face.

[+][+][+][+][+] Twining (sometimes only trailing) herbs, leaves
pinnately 3- (rarely 1- or 5--7-) foliolate; no tendrils; peduncles or
flowers axillary, pod not jointed, 2-valved. (PHASEOLEAE.)

[=] Leaves pinnate.

32. Apios. Herbaceous twiner; leaflets 5--7. Keel slender and much
incurved or coiled.

[=][=] Leaves 3-foliolate. Ovules and seeds several. Flowers not yellow.

33. Phaseolus. Keel spirally coiled; standard recurved-spreading. Style
bearded lengthwise. Flowers racemose. Seeds round-reniform.

34. Strophostyles. Keel long, strongly incurved. Style bearded
lengthwise. Flowers sessile, capitate, few. Seeds oblong, mostly
pubescent.

35. Centrosema. Calyx short, 5-cleft. Standard with a spur at the base;
keel broad, merely incurved. Style minutely bearded next the stigma.

36. Clitoria. Calyx tubular, 5-lobed. Standard erect, spurless; keel
scythe-shaped. Style bearded down the inner face.

37. Amphicarpaea. Calyx tubular, 4--5-toothed. Standard erect; keel
almost straight. Style beardless. Some nearly apetalous fertile flowers
next the ground.

38. Galactia. Calyx 4 cleft, the upper lobe broadest and entire. Style
beardless. Bract and bractlets minute, mostly deciduous.

[=][=][=] Leaves 1--3-foliolate. Ovules and seeds only one or two.
Flowers yellow.

39. Rhynchosia. Keel scythe shaped. Calyx 4--5-parted. Pod short.

SUBORDER II. Caesalpinieae. (BRASILETTO FAMILY.) Corolla perfectly or not
at all papilionaceous, sometimes nearly regular, imbricated in the bud,
the upper or odd petal inside and enclosed by the others, Stamens 10 or
fewer, commonly distinct, inserted on the calyx. Seeds anatropous, often
with albumen. Embryo straight.

[*] Flowers imperfectly papilionaceous, perfect. Trees.

40. Cercis. Calyx campanulate, 5-toothed. Pod flat, wing-margined.
Leaves simple.

[*][*] Flowers not at all papilionaceous, perfect. Calyx 5-parted.
Herbs.

41. Cassia. Leaves simply and abruptly pinnate, not glandular-punctate.

42. Hoffmanseggia. Leaves bipinnate, glandular-punctate.

[*][*][*] Flowers not at all papilionaceous, polygamous or dioecious.
Trees.

43. Gymnocladus. Leaves all doubly pinnate. Calyx-tube elongated, at its
summit bearing 5 petals resembling the calyx lobes. Stamens 10.

44. Gleditschia. Thorny; leaves simply and doubly pinnate. Calyx tube
short; its lobes, petals, and the stamens 3--5.

SUBORDER III. Mimoseae. (MIMOSA FAMILY.) Flower regular, small. Corolla
valvate in aestivation, often united into a 4--5-lobed cup, hypogynous,
as are the (often very numerous) exserted stamens. Embryo straight.
Leaves twice pinnate.

45. Desmanthus. Petals distinct. Stamens 5 or 10. Pod smooth.

46. Schrankia. Petals united below into a cup. Stamens 8 or 10. Pod
covered with small prickles or rough projections.


1. BAPTISIA, Vent. FALSE INDIGO.

Calyx 4--5-toothed. Standard not longer than the wings, its sides
reflexed; keel-petals nearly separate, and, like the wings, straight.
Stamens 10, distinct. Pod stalked in the persistent calyx, roundish or
oblong, inflated, pointed, many seeded.--Perennial herbs, with palmately
3-foliolate (rarely simple) leaves, which generally blacken in drying,
and racemed flowers. (Named from [Greek: bapti/zo], _to dye_, from the
economical use of some species, which yield a poor indigo.)

[*] _Racemes many, short and loose, terminal, often leafy at base,
flowers yellow._

1. B. tinctoria, R. Br. (WILD INDIGO.) Smooth and slender (2--3 deg. high),
rather glaucous; leaves almost sessile, leaflets rounded wedge-obovate
(1/2--11/2' long), stipules and bracts minute and deciduous, pods
oval-globose, on a stalk longer than the calyx.--Sandy dry soil, N. Eng.
to Fla., west to Minn. and La.

[*][*] _Racemes fewer, opposite the leaves._

[+] _Flowers yellow._

2. B. villosa, Ell. Sometimes soft-hairy, usually minutely pubescent
when young, erect (2--3 deg. high) with divergent branches; leaves almost
sessile, leaflets wedge-lanceolate or obovate, lower stipules lanceolate
and persistent, on the branchlets often small and subulate, racemes
many-flowered; pedicels short; bracts subulate, mostly deciduous; pods
ovoid-oblong and taper-pointed, minutely pubescent.--Va. to N. C. and
Ark.

[+][+] _Flowers white or cream-color._

3. B. leucophaea, Nutt. _Hairy, low_ (1 deg. high), with _divergent
branches_; _leaves almost sessile_, leaflets narrowly oblong-obovate or
spatulate; _stipules and bracts large and leafy, persistent; racemes
long_ (often 1 deg.), _reclined; flowers on elongated pedicels,
cream-color_; pods pointed at both ends, hoary.--Mich. to Minn., south
to Tex. April, May.

4. B. leucantha, Torr. & Gray. _Smooth_; stems, leaves, and racemes as
in n. 6; _stipules early deciduous; flowers white; pods oval-oblong,
raised on a stalk fully twice the length of the calyx_.--Alluvial soil,
Ont. and Ohio to Minn., south to Fla. and La.

5. B. alba, R. Br. _Smooth_ (1--3 deg. high), _the branches slender and
widely spreading; petioles slender; stipules and bracts minute_ and
deciduous; leaflets oblong or oblanceolate; racemes slender on
a long naked peduncle; _pods linear-oblong_ (1--11/2' long),
_short-stalked_.--Dry soil, S. Ind. and Mo., to La., N. C., and Fla.
July.

[+][+][+] _Flowers indigo-blue._

6. B. australis, R. Br. (BLUE FALSE-INDIGO.) Smooth, tall and stout
(4--5 deg.); leaflets oblong-wedge-form, obtuse; stipules lanceolate, as
long as the petioles, rather persistent; raceme elongated (1--2 deg.) and
many-flowered, erect; bracts deciduous; stalk of the oval-oblong pods
about the length of the calyx.--Alluvial soil, Penn. to Ga., west to
S. Ind., Mo., and Ark.


2. THERMOPSIS, R. Br.

Pod sessile or shortly stipitate in the calyx, flat, linear, straight or
curved. Otherwise nearly as Baptisia.--Perennial herbs, with palmately
3-foliolate leaves and foliaceous stipules, not blackening in drying,
and yellow flowers in terminal racemes. (Name from [Greek: the/rmos],
_the lupine_, and [Greek: o)/psis] _resemblance_.)

1. T. mollis, M. A. Curtis. Finely appressed-pubescent, 2--3 deg. high;
leaflets rhombic-lanceolate, 1--3' long; stipules narrow, mostly shorter
than the petiole; raceme elongated; pods narrow, short stipitate,
somewhat curved, 2--4' long.--Mountains of S. Va. and N. C.

2. T. rhombifolia, Nutt. Low, with smaller leaves and broad conspicuous
stipules; racemes short, few-flowered; pods broadly linear, spreading,
usually strongly curved.--Sask. to E. Col., near or in the mountains,
reported from central Kan.


3. CLADRASTIS, Raf. YELLOW-WOOD.

Calyx 5-toothed. Standard large, roundish, reflexed; the distinct
keel-petals and wings straight, oblong. Stamens 10, distinct; filaments
slender, incurved above. Pod short-stalked above the calyx, linear,
flat, thin, marginless, 4--6-seeded, at length 2-valved.--A handsome
tree, with yellow wood, smooth bark, nearly smooth pinnate leaves of
7--11 oval or ovate leaflets, and ample panicled racemes (10--20' long)
of showy white flowers drooping from the ends of the branches. Stipules
obsolete. Base of the petioles hollow, enclosing the leaf buds of the
next year. Bracts minute and fugacious. (Name from [Greek: kla/dos], _a
branch_, and [Greek: thraysto/s], _brittle_.)

1. C. tinctoria, Raf. Sometimes 50 deg. high; pods 3--4' long.--Rich
hillsides, central Ky. and Tenn. to N. C. Also in cultivation. The wood
yields a yellow dye.


4. SOPHORA, L.

Calyx bell-shaped, shortly 5-toothed. Standard rounded; keel nearly
straight. Stamens distinct or nearly so. Pod coriaceous, stipitate,
terete, more or less constricted between the seeds, indehiscent. Seeds
subglobose.--Shrubby or ours an herbaceous perennial, the leaves pinnate
with numerous leaflets, and flowers white or yellow in terminal racemes.
(Said by Linnaeus to be the ancient name of an allied plant.)

1. S. sericea, Nutt. Silky canescent, erect, 1 deg. high or less; leaflets
oblong-obovate, 3--6'' long; flowers white; pods few-seeded.--Central
Kan. to Col., Tex., and Ariz.


5. CROTALARIA, L. RATTLE-BOX.

Calyx 5-cleft, scarcely 2-lipped. Standard large, heart-shaped; keel
scythe-shaped. Sheath of the monadelphous stamens cleft on the upper
side; 5 of the anthers smaller and roundish. Pod inflated, oblong,
many-seeded.--Herbs with simple leaves. Flowers yellow. (Name from
[Greek: kro/talon], _a rattle_; the loose seeds rattling in the
coriaceous inflated pods.)

1. C. sagittalis, L. Annual, hairy (3--6' high); leaves oval or
oblong-lanceolate, scarcely petioled, stipules united and decurrent on
the stem, so as to be inversely arrow-shaped; peduncles few-flowered;
corolla not longer than the calyx; pod blackish.--Sandy soil; Maine to
Ill., Minn., Kan., and southward.


6. GENISTA, L. WOAD-WAXEN. WHIN.

Calyx 2-lipped. Standard oblong-oval, spreading; keel oblong, straight,
deflexed. Stamens monadelphous, the sheath entire; 5 alternate anthers
shorter. Pod mostly flat and several-seeded.--Shrubby plants, with
simple leaves, and yellow flowers. (Name from the Celtic _gen_, a bush.)

G. TINCTORIA, L. (DYER'S GREEN-WEED.) Low, not thorny, with
striate-angled erect branches; leaves lanceolate; flowers in spiked
racemes.--Established on sterile hills, eastern N. Y. and Mass. (Adv.
from Eu.)


7. CYTISUS, Tourn. BROOM.

Calyx campanulate, with 2 short broad lips. Petals broad, the keel
obtuse and slightly incurved. Stamens monadelphous. Pod flat, much
longer than the calyx. Seeds several, with a strophiole at the
hilum.--Shrubs, with stiff green branches, leaves mostly digitately
3-foliolate, and large bright yellow flowers. (The ancient Roman name of
a plant, probably a Medicago.)

C. SCOPARIUS, Link. (SCOTCH BROOM.) Glabrous or nearly so (3--5 deg. high);
leaflets small, obovate, often reduced to a single one; flowers solitary
or in pairs, on slender pedicels, in the axils of the old leaves,
forming leafy racemes along the upper branches; style very long and
spirally incurved.--Va. and southward. (Nat. from Eu.)


8. LUPINUS, Tourn. LUPINE.

Calyx very deeply 2-lipped. Sides of the standard reflexed; keel
scythe-shaped, pointed. Sheath of the monadelphous stamens entire;
anthers alternately oblong and roundish. Pod oblong, flattened, often
knotty by constrictions between the seeds. Cotyledons thick and
fleshy.--Herbs, with palmately 1--15-foliolate leaves, stipules adnate
to base of the petiole, and showy flowers in terminal racemes or spikes.
(Name from _Lupus_, a wolf, because these plants were thought to devour
the fertility of the soil.)

1. L. perennis, L. (WILD LUPINE.) Perennial, somewhat hairy; stem erect
(1--2 deg.); leaflets 7--11, oblanceolate; flowers in a long raceme, showy,
purplish-blue (rarely pale); pods broad, very hairy, 5--6-seeded.--Sandy
soil, N. Eng. to Minn., Mo., and south to the Gulf.--Var. OCCIDENTALIS,
Watson, has stems and petioles more villous.--Mich. and Wisc.

2. L. pusillus, Pursh. Annual, low, villous; leaflets usually 5; racemes
short, sessile; flowers purple or rose-color; pods oval, hirsute,
2-seeded.--Central Dak. and Kan., and westward.


9. TRIFOLIUM, Tourn. CLOVER. TREFOIL.

Calyx persistent, 5-cleft, the teeth bristle-form. Corolla mostly
withering or persistent; the claws of all the petals, or of all except
the oblong or ovate standard, more or less united below with the
stamen-tube; keel short and obtuse. Tenth stamen more or less separate.
Pods small and membranous, often included in the calyx, 1--6-seeded,
indehiscent, or opening by one of the sutures.--Tufted or diffuse herbs.
Leaves mostly palmately, sometimes pinnately 3-foliolate; leaflets
usually toothed. Stipules united with the petiole. Flowers in heads or
spikes. (Name from _tres_, three, and _folium_, a leaf.)

[*] _Flowers sessile in dense heads; corolla purple or purplish,
withering away after flowering, tubular below, the petals more or less
coherent with each other._

[+] _Calyx-teeth silky-plumose, longer than the whitish corolla; root
annual._

T. ARVENSE, L. (RABBIT-FOOT or STONE CLOVER.) Silky, branching (5--10'
high); leaflets oblanceolate; heads becoming very soft-silky and
grayish, oblong or cylindrical.--Old fields, etc. (Nat. from Eu.)

[+][+] _Calyx scarcely hairy except a bearded ring in the throat,
shorter than the rose-purple elongated-tubular corolla. (Short-lived
perennials; flowers sweet-scented.)_

T. PRATENSE, L. (RED C.) Stems ascending, somewhat hairy; _leaflets oval
or obovate, often notched_ at the end and marked on the upper side with
a pale spot; _stipules broad, bristle-pointed; heads ovate,
sessile_.--Fields and meadows; largely cultivated. (Adv. from Eu.)

T. MEDIUM, L. (ZIGZAG C.) Stems zigzag, smoothish; _leaflets oblong,
entire_, and spotless; _heads mostly stalked_; flowers deeper purple,
otherwise too like the last.--Dry hills, N. Scotia to E. Mass. (Adv.
from Eu.)

[*][*] _Flowers pedicelled in umbel-like round heads on a naked
peduncle, their short pedicels reflexed when old; corolla white or
rose-color, withering-persistent and turning brownish in fading; the
tubular portion short._

1. T. reflexum, L. (BUFFALO C.) Annual or biennial; _stems ascending,
downy; leaflets obovate-oblong_, finely toothed; stipules thin, ovate;
standard rose-red, wings and keel whitish; calyx-teeth hairy; pods
3--5-seeded.--Western N. Y. and Ont. to Iowa, Kan., and southward.

2. T. stoloniferum, Muhl. (RUNNING BUFFALO-C.) Smooth, _perennial; stems
with long runners_ from the base; _leaflets broadly obovate or
obcordate_, minutely toothed; heads loose; flowers white, tinged with
purple; pods 2-seeded.--Open woodlands and prairies, Ohio and Ky., west
to Iowa and Kan.

3. T. repens, L. (WHITE C.) Smooth, perennial; the slender _stems
spreading and creeping; leaflets inversely heart-shaped_ or merely
notched, obscurely toothed; stipules scale-like, narrow; petioles and
especially the peduncles very long; heads small and loose; _calyx much
shorter than the white corolla_; pods about 4-seeded.--Fields and
copses, everywhere. Indigenous only in the northern part of our range,
if at all.

4. T. Carolinianum, Michx. Somewhat pubescent small perennial,
_procumbent, in tufts_; leaflets wedge-obovate and slightly notched;
stipules ovate, foliaceous; heads small on slender peduncles;
_calyx-teeth_ lanceolate, nearly _equalling the purplish corolla;
standard pointed_; pods 4-seeded.--Waste ground near Philadelphia, south
to Va., Fla., and Tex.

T. HYBRIDUM, L. (ALSIKE C.) Resembling T. repens, but the stems erect or
ascending, not rooting at the nodes; flowers rose-tinted.--Becoming
common. (Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Flowers short-pedicelled in close heads, reflexed when old;
corolla yellow, persistent, turning dry and chestnut-brown with age, the
standard becoming hood-shaped; annuals, fl. in summer._

T. AGRARIUM, L. (YELLOW or HOP-C.) Smoothish, somewhat upright (6--12'
high); _leaflets obovate-oblong, all three from the same point_
(palmate) and nearly sessile; _stipules narrow, cohering with the
petiole for more than half its length_.--Sandy fields and roadsides; N.
Scotia to Va.; also in western N. Y. (Nat. from Eu.)

T. PROCUMBENS, L. (LOW HOP-C.) Stems spreading or ascending, pubescent
(3--6' high); _leaflets wedge-obovate_, notched at the end, _the lateral
at a small distance from the other_ (pinnately 3-foliolate); _stipules
ovate, short_.--Sandy fields and roadsides, common.--Var. MINUS, Gray,
has smaller heads, the standard not much striate with age. (Nat. from
Eu.)


10. MELILOTUS, Tourn. MELILOT. SWEET CLOVER.

Flowers much as in Trifolium, but in spike-like racemes, small; corolla
deciduous, free from the stamen-tube. Pod ovoid, coriaceous, wrinkled,
longer than the calyx, scarcely dehiscent, 1--2-seeded.--Annual or
biennial herbs, fragrant in drying, with pinnately 3-foliolate leaves,
leaflets toothed. (Name from [Greek: me/li], _honey_, and [Greek:
loto/s], some leguminous plant.)

M. OFFICINALIS, Willd. (YELLOW MELILOT.) Upright (2--4 deg. high); leaflets
obovate-oblong, obtuse; _corolla yellow_; the petals nearly of equal
length.--Waste or cultivated grounds. (Adv. from Eu.)

M. ALBA, Lam. (WHITE M.) Leaflets truncate; _corolla white_; the
standard longer than the other petals.--In similar places. (Adv. from
Eu.)


11. MEDICAGO, Tourn. MEDICK.

Flowers nearly as in Melilotus. Pod 1--several-seeded, scythe-shaped,
incurved, or variously coiled.--Leaves pinnately 3-foliolate; leaflets
toothed; stipules often cut. ([Greek: Medike/], the name of Lucerne,
because it came to the Greeks from Media.)

M. SATIVA, L. (LUCERNE. ALFALFA.) Upright, smooth, perennial; leaflets
obovate-oblong, toothed; _flowers (purple) racemed_; pods spirally
twisted.--Cultivated for green fodder; spontaneous from Mass. to Minn.
and Kan. (Adv. from Eu.)

M. LUPULINA, L. (BLACK MEDICK. NONESUCH.) Procumbent, pubescent, annual;
leaflets wedge-obovate, toothed at the apex; _flowers in short spikes_
(yellow); _pods kidney-form_, 1-seeded.--Waste places, N. Eng. to Fla.,
west to Mich., Iowa, and Mo. (Adv. from Eu.)

M. MACULATA, Willd. (SPOTTED MEDICK.) Spreading or procumbent annual,
somewhat pubescent; leaflets obcordate, with a purple spot, minutely
toothed; _peduncles 3--5-flowered_; flowers yellow; _pods compactly
spiral_, of 2 or 3 turns, compressed, _furrowed on the thick edge_, and
fringed with a double row of curved prickles.--N. Brunswick to Mass.
(Adv. from Eu.)

M. DENTICULATA, Willd. Nearly glabrous; _pods loosely spiral, deeply
reticulated_, and with a _thin keeled edge_; otherwise like the last,
and with the same range. (Adv. from Eu.)


12. HOSACKIA, Douglas.

Calyx-teeth nearly equal. Petals free from the diadelphous stamens;
standard ovate or roundish, its claw often remote from the others; wings
obovate or oblong; keel incurved. Pod linear, compressed or somewhat
terete, sessile, several-seeded.--Herbs, with pinnate leaves (in ours
1--3-foliolate, with gland-like stipules), and small yellow or reddish
flowers in umbels (ours solitary) upon axillary leafy-bracteate
peduncles. (Named for _Dr. David Hosack_, of New York.)

1. H. Purshiana, Benth. Annual, more or less silky-villous or glabrous,
often 1 deg. high or more; leaves nearly sessile, the 1--3 leaflets ovate to
lanceolate (3--9'' long); peduncles often short, bracteate with a single
leaflet.--N. C.; S. W. Minn. to Ark., and west to the Pacific. Very
variable.


13. PSORALEA, L.

Calyx 5-cleft, persistent, the lower lobe longest. Stamens diadelphous
or sometimes monadelphous. Pod seldom longer than the calyx, thick,
often wrinkled, indehiscent, 1-seeded.--Perennial herbs, usually
sprinkled all over or roughened (especially the calyx, pods, etc.) with
glandular dots or points. Leaves mostly 3--5-foliolate. Flowers spiked
or racemed, white or mostly blue-purplish. Root sometimes tuberous and
farinaceous. (Name, [Greek: psorale/os], _scurfy_, from the glands or
dots.)

[*] _Leaves pinnately 3-foliolate._

1. P. Onobrychis, Nutt. Nearly smooth and free from glands, _erect_
(3--5 deg. high); _leaflets lanceolate-ovate, taper-pointed_ (3' long);
_stipules and bracts awl-shaped_; racemes elongated; peduncle shorter
than the leaves; pods roughened and wrinkled.--River-banks, Ohio to Ill.
and Mo.; also south and east to S. C. July.

2. P. stipulata, Torr. & Gray. Nearly smooth and glandless; _stems
diffuse; leaflets ovate-elliptical_, reticulated; _stipules ovate;
flowers in heads_ on rather short peduncles; _bracts broadly ovate,
sharp-pointed_.--Rocks, S. Ind. and Ky. June, July.

3. P. melilotoides, Michx. Somewhat pubescent, more or less glandular;
_stems erect_ (1--2 deg. high), slender; _leaflets lanceolate or narrowly
oblong; spikes oblong_, long-peduncled; _stipules awl-shaped_; bracts
ovate or lanceolate, taper-pointed; pods strongly wrinkled
transversely.--Dry soil, Fla. to Tenn., S. Ind. and Kan. June.

[*][*] _Leaves palmately 3--5-foliolate; roots not tuberous._

4. P. tenuiflora, Pursh. Slender, erect, much branched and bushy (2--4 deg.
high), _minutely hoary-pubescent_ when young; leaflets varying from
linear to obovate-oblong (1/2--11/2' long), glandular-dotted; _flowers_
(2--3'' long) _in loose racemes_; lobes of the calyx and bracts ovate,
acute; pod glandular. (P. floribunda, _Nutt._)--Prairies, Minn. to
Ill., Tex., and westward. June--Sept.

5. P. argophylla, Pursh. _Silvery silky-white_ all over, erect,
divergently branched (1--3 deg. high); leaflets _elliptical-lanceolate;
spikes interrupted_; lobes of the calyx and _bracts lanceolate_.--High
plains, N. Wisc. to Iowa, Kan., and westward. June.--Flowers 4--5''
long.

6. P. digitata, Nutt. More slender and less hoary, 1--2 deg. high; leaflets
linear-oblanceolate; bracts of the interrupted spike obcordate;
calyx-lobes oblong, acute.--Central Kan. to Col. and Tex.

7. P. lanceolata, Pursh. Glabrous or nearly so, yellowish green, densely
punctate; leaflets 3, linear to oblanceolate; flowers small, in very
short spikes; calyx 1'' long, with short broad teeth.--Central Kan. to
the Sask. and westward.

[*][*][*] _Leaves palmately 5-foliolate; root tuberous; spike-like
racemes dense._

8. P. esculenta, Pursh. Roughish hairy all over; stem stout (5--15'
high) and erect from a tuberous or turnip-shaped farinaceous root;
leaflets obovate- or lanceolate-oblong; spikes oblong, long-peduncled;
lobes of the calyx and bracts lanceolate, nearly equalling the corolla
(1/2' long).--High plains, Sask. to Wisc., Iowa, and Tex. June. The POMME
BLANCHE, or POMME DE PRAIRIE, of the voyageurs.

9. P. hypogaea, Nutt. Tuber small; nearly acaulescent, hoary with
appressed hairs; leaflets linear; spikes short-capitate, on peduncles
1/2--2' long; calyx narrow, 3--6'' long.--Central Kan. to Col. and Tex.

10. P. cuspidata, Pursh. Stout, tall, from a deep-seated tuber, hoary
with appressed hairs; leaflets usually broadly oblanceolate, obtuse;
flowers large, the petals (6--8'' long) exceeding the lanceolate-lobed
calyx.--Central Kan. to Col. and Tex.


14. AMORPHA, L. FALSE INDIGO.

Calyx inversely conical, 5-toothed, persistent. Standard (the other
petals entirely wanting!) wrapped around the stamens and style. Stamens
10, monadelphous at the very base, otherwise distinct. Pod
oblong, longer than the calyx, 1--2-seeded, roughened, tardily
dehiscent.--Shrubs, with odd-pinnate leaves; the leaflets marked with
minute dots, usually stipellate, the midvein excurrent. Flowers violet
or purple, crowded in clustered terminal spikes. (Name, [Greek:
a)/morphos], _deformed_, from the absence of four of the petals.)

[*] _Pods 1-seeded; leaflets small_ (1/2' long or less), _crowded_.

1. A. canescens, Nutt. (LEAD-PLANT.) _Whitened with hoary down_ (1--3 deg.
high); leaflets 15--25 pairs, oblong-elliptical, becoming smoothish
above; spikes usually clustered at the summit.--Sask. to Ind. and Tex.,
west to the Rocky Mts.; also eastward to Ga.

2. A. microphylla, Pursh. _Nearly glabrous_ throughout, 1 deg. high or less;
leaflets rather rigid; spikes usually solitary.--Sask. to Minn. and
Iowa, west to the Rocky Mts.

[*][*] _Pods 2-seeded; leaflets larger, scattered._

3. A. fruticosa, L. (FALSE INDIGO.) A tall shrub, rather
pubescent or smoothish, leaflets 8--12 pairs, oblong to broadly
elliptical.--River-banks, S. Penn. to Fla., west to Sask., Tex., and the
Rocky Mts. Very variable.


15. DALEA, L.

Calyx 5-cleft or toothed. Corolla imperfectly papilionaceous; petals all
on claws; the standard heart-shaped, inserted in the bottom of the
calyx; the keel and wings borne on the middle of the monadelphous sheath
of filaments, which is cleft down one side. Stamens 10, rarely 9. Pod
membranaceous, 1-seeded, indehiscent, enclosed in the persistent
calyx.--Mostly herbs, more or less glandular-dotted, with minute
stipules; the small flowers in terminal spikes or heads. (Named for
_Samuel Dale_, an English botanist.)

[*] _Glabrous; flowers white or rose-color; leaflets 4--20 pairs;
annuals._

1. D. alopecuroides, Willd. Erect (1--2 deg. high); leaflets 10--20 pairs,
linear-oblong; flowers light rose-color or whitish, in cylindrical
spikes; bracts ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, deciduous; calyx very
villous, with long slender teeth.--Alluvial soil, Minn. to Ill. and
Ala., west to the Rocky Mts.

2. D. laxiflora, Pursh. Erect (1--4 deg. high), branching; leaflets 3--5
pairs, linear, 2--3'' long; spikes loosely-flowered; bracts conspicuous,
persistent, almost orbicular and very obtuse; petals white; calyx
densely villous, the long teeth beautifully plumose.--Iowa and Mo. to
Tex., west to Col.

[*][*] _Pubescent; leaflets 3--4 pairs; perennial herbs._

3. D. aurea, Nutt. Stems erect and simple, 1--3 deg. high; leaflets
oblong-obovate to linear-oblong, more or less silky-pubescent; spikes
solitary, oblong-ovate, very compact and densely silky; bracts short,
rhombic-ovate; petals yellow.--On the plains, Mo. to Tex., and westward.

4. D. lanata, Spreng. Very pubescent throughout, 1--2 deg. high, branching;
leaflets obovate to oblong-obovate, 2--3'' long; spikes slender, rather
loose, the obovate acute bracts equalling the small short-toothed calyx;
petals short, purple.--Central Kan. to Tex., and westward.


16. PETALOSTEMON, Michx. PRAIRIE CLOVER.

Calyx 5-toothed. Corolla indistinctly papilionaceous; petals all on
thread-shaped claws, 4 of them nearly similar and spreading, borne on
the top of the monadelphous and cleft sheath of filaments, alternate
with the 5 anthers; the fifth (standard) inserted in the bottom of the
calyx, heart-shaped or oblong. Pod membranaceous, enclosed in the
calyx, indehiscent, 1--2 seeded.--Chiefly perennial herbs, upright,
glandular-dotted, with crowded odd-pinnate leaves, minute stipules, and
small flowers in very dense terminal and peduncled heads or spikes.
(Name combined of the two Greek words for petal and stamen, alluding to
the peculiar union of these organs in this genus.)

1. P. violaceus, Michx. _Smoothish; leaflets 5, narrowly linear; heads
globose-ovate_, or oblong-cylindrical when old; bracts pointed, not
longer than the silky-hoary calyx; _corolla rose-purple_.--Dry prairies,
Minn. to Ind. and Tex., west to the Rocky Mts. July.

2. P. candidus, Michx. _Smooth; leaflets 7--9, lanceolate or
linear-oblong; heads oblong_, when old cylindrical; bracts awned, longer
than the nearly glabrous calyx; _corolla white_.--With n. 1.

3. P. villosus, Nutt. _Soft-downy or silky_ all over; _leaflets 13--17,
linear or oblong_, small (4--5'' long); _spikes cylindrical_ (1--5'
long), short-peduncled, soft-villous; _corolla rose-color_.--Wisc. to
Mo., west to the Rocky Mts.

4. P. foliosus, Gray. _Smooth_, very leafy; _leaflets 15--29,
linear-oblong; spikes cylindrical_, short-peduncled; bracts
slender-awned from a lanceolate base, exceeding the glabrous calyx;
_petals rose-color_.--River-banks, Ill. and Tenn.

5. P. multiflorus, Nutt. _Glabrous_ throughout, erect, branching;
leaflets 3--9, linear to oblong; _spikes globose_, the subulate
setaceous bracts much shorter than the acutely toothed calyx, petals
white.--Kan. to Tex.


17. TEPHROSIA, Pers. HOARY PEA.

Calyx about equally 5-cleft. Standard roundish, usually silky outside,
turned back, scarcely longer than the coherent wings and keel. Stamens
monadelphous or diadelphous. Pod linear, flat, several seeded,
2-valved.--Hoary perennial herbs, with odd-pinnate leaves, and white or
purplish racemed flowers. Leaflets mucronate, veiny. (Name from [Greek:
tephro/s], _ash-colored_ or _hoary_.)

1. T. Virginiana, Pers. (GOAT'S RUE. CATGUT.) _Silky-villous_ with
whitish hairs when young; _stem erect and simple_ (1--2 deg. high), _leafy_
to the top; leaflets 17--29, linear-oblong; flowers large and numerous,
clustered in a terminal _oblong dense raceme or panicle_,
yellowish-white marked with purple.--Dry sandy soil. June, July.--Roots
long and slender, very tough.

2. T. spicata, Torr. & Gray. _Villous with rusty hairs_; stems branched
below, straggling or ascending (2 deg. long), _few-leaved_; leaflets 9--15,
obovate or oblong-wedge-shaped, often notched; _flowers few_, in a loose
and interrupted _very long-peduncled spike_, reddish.--Dry soil, from
Del. and Va. to Fla. and Miss. July.

3. T. hispidula, Pers. Hairy with some long and rusty or only minute and
appressed pubescence; stems slender (9--24' long), divergently branched,
straggling; leaflets 5--15, oblong, varying to obovate-wedge-shaped and
oblanceolate; _peduncles longer than the leaves, 2--4-flowered_, flowers
reddish-purple.--Dry sandy soil, Va. to Fla. and Ala.


18. INDIGOFERA, L. INDIGO.

Calyx small, equally 5-cleft. Standard roundish, silky outside, wings
coherent; keel erect, gibbous or spurred at base. Stamens diadelphous;
connective gland-like. Pod 1--several-seeded, septate within between the
seeds.--Herbs or shrubs, mostly canescent with appressed hairs fixed by
the middle, with odd-pinnate faintly-nerved leaves, and pink or purplish
flowers in naked axillary spikes. (So named because some of the species
yield the indigo of commerce.)

1. I. leptosepala, Nutt. A perennial herb, 1/2--2 deg. high; leaflets 5--9,
oblanceolate; spikes very loose; pods linear, 6--9 seeded, obtusely
4-angled, reflexed, 1' long.--Kan. to Tex. and Fla.


19. ROBINIA, L. LOCUST-TREE.

Calyx short, 5-toothed, slightly 2-lipped. Standard large and rounded,
turned back, scarcely longer than the wings and keel. Stamens
diadelphous. Pod linear, flat, several-seeded, margined on the
seed-bearing edge, at length 2-valved.--Trees or shrubs, often with
prickly spines for stipules. Leaves odd-pinnate, the ovate or oblong
leaflets stipellate. Flowers showy, in hanging axillary racemes. Base of
the leaf-stalks covering the buds of the next year. (Named in honor of
_John Robin_, herbalist to Henry IV. of France, and his son _Vespasian
Robin_, who first cultivated the Locust-tree in Europe.)

1. R. Pseudacacia, L. (COMMON LOCUST or FALSE ACACIA.) Branches naked;
_racemes slender, loose_; flowers white, fragrant; pod smooth.--S. Penn.
to Ind., Iowa, and southward. Commonly cultivated as an ornamental tree,
and for its valuable timber; naturalized in many places. June.

2. R. viscosa, Vent. (CLAMMY L.) _Branchlets and leaf-stalks clammy;
flowers crowded in oblong racemes_, tinged with rose-color, nearly
inodorous; pod glandular-hispid.--Va. to N. C. and Ga., in the
mountains. Cultivated, like the last, and often escaped. June.

3. R. hispida, L. (BRISTLY L. or ROSE ACACIA.) Shrub 3--8 deg. high;
_branchlets and stalks bristly_; flowers large and deep rose-color,
inodorous; pods glandular-hispid.--Varies with less bristly or nearly
naked branchlets; also with smaller flowers, etc.--Mts. of Va. to N. C.
and Ga. May, June.


20. WISTARIA, Nutt.

Calyx campanulate, somewhat 2-lipped; upper lip of 2 short teeth, the
lower of 3 longer ones. Standard roundish, large, turned back, with 2
callosities at its base; keel scythe-shaped; wings doubly auricled at
the base. Stamens diadelphous. Pods elongated, thickish, knobby,
stipitate, many-seeded, at length 2-valved. Seeds large.--Woody twiners,
climbing high, with minute stipules, pinnate leaves of 9--13
ovate-lanceolate leaflets, with or without minute stipels, and dense
racemes of large and showy lilac-purple flowers. (Dedicated to the late
_Professor Wistar_, of Philadelphia.)

1. W. frutescens, Poir. Downy or smoothish when old; wings of the
corolla with one short auricle and an awl-shaped one as long as the
claw.--Alluvial grounds, Va. to Fla., west to S. Ind., Kan. and La.
May.--Sometimes cultivated for ornament, as is the still handsomer
Chinese species.


21. ASTRAGALUS, Tourn. MILK-VETCH.

Calyx 5-toothed. Corolla usually long and narrow; standard narrow,
equalling or exceeding the wings and blunt keel, its sides reflexed or
spreading. Stamens diadelphous. Pod several--many-seeded, various,
mostly turgid, one or both sutures usually projecting into the cell,
either slightly or so as to divide the cavity lengthwise into
two.--Chiefly herbs (ours perennials), with odd-pinnate leaves and
spiked or racemed flowers. Mature pods are usually necessary for certain
identification of the species. (The ancient Greek name of a leguminous
plant, as also of the ankle-bone; but the connection between the two is
past all guess.)

I. _Pod turgid, completely or imperfectly 2-celled by the intrusion of
the dorsal suture, the ventral suture being not at all or less deeply
inflexed._--ASTRAGALUS proper.

[*] _Pod plum-shaped, succulent, becoming thick and fleshy, indehiscent,
not stipitute, completely 2-celled._

1. A. caryocarpus, Ker. (GROUND PLUM.) Pale and minutely
appressed-pubescent; leaflets narrowly oblong; flowers in a short
spike-like raceme; _corolla violet-purple; fruit glabrous,
ovate-globular, more or less pointed_, about {2/3}' in diameter, _very
thick-walled_, cellular or corky when dry.--Sask. and Minn. to Mo.,
Col., and Tex. May.

2. A. Mexicanus, A. DC. Smoother, or pubescent with looser hairs,
larger; leaflets roundish, obovate, or oblong; flowers larger (10--12''
long); calyx softly hairy; _corolla cream-color, bluish only at the tip;
fruit globular, very obtuse_ and pointless, 1' or more in diameter;
otherwise like the last.--Prairies and open plains, Ill. to Kan., south
to Tex. The unripe fruits of both resemble green plums--whence the
popular name--and are eaten, raw or cooked, by travellers.

3. A. Plattensis, Nutt. Loosely villous; stipules conspicuous; leaflets
oblong, often glabrous above; flowers crowded in a short spike or oblong
head, cream-color often tinged or tipped with purple; _fruit ovate,
pointed_, and with the calyx _villous_.--Gravelly or sandy banks, Minn.
to Ind. and Ala., west to Col. and Tex.--Var. TENNESSEENSIS, Gray, has
the pod oblong and slightly curved, and much less fleshy. May.

[*][*] _Pod dry, coriaceous, cartilaginous or membranous, dehiscent._

[+] _Pod completely 2-celled, sessile._

4. A. mollissimus, Torr. _Stout, decumbent, densely silky-villous
throughout and tomentose_; leaflets 19--29, ovate-oblong; peduncles
elongated; spikes dense, with rather _large violet flowers_ (6--12''
long); pod narrow-oblong (5--9'' long), glabrous, somewhat obcompressed
and _sulcate at both sutures_, at length incurved.--Neb. to Kan. and
Tex., west to Col. The most common "loco"-plant, and said to be very
poisonous to cattle.

5. A. Canadensis, L. _Tall and erect_ (1--4 deg. high), _somewhat pubescent
or glabrate_; leaflets 21--27, oblong; _flowers greenish cream-color_,
very numerous, in long dense spikes, pods crowded, oblong (6'' long),
glabrous, _terete, scarcely sulcate_ and only on the back, nearly
straight.--River-banks, western N. Y. to N. Ga., and far westward.

6. A. adsurgens, Pall. Ascending or decumbent (4--18' high), cinereous
with minute appressed pubescence or glabrate; leaflets about 21,
narrowly or linear-oblong; spike dense, with medium-sized pale or
purplish flowers; _pubescence of calyx appressed_; pod oblong (4--5''
long), _finely pubescent, triangular-compressed, with a deep dorsal
furrow, straight_.--Red River valley, Minn., to W. Kan., and westward.
(Asia.)

7. A. hypoglottis, L. _Slender_ (6'--2 deg. long), diffusely procumbent or
ascending, _with a rather loose pubescence_ or nearly glabrous; leaflets
15--21, oblong, obtuse or retuse; _flowers violet, capitate; calyx
loosely pubescent; pod_ as in the last, but _ovate_ and
_silky-villous_.--Red River valley, Minn., to central Kan. and westward.

[+][+] _Pod not completely 2-celled._

[++] _Pod stipitate, pendent._

8. A. alpinus, L. _Diffuse_ (6--12' high), smooth or slightly hairy;
leaflets 13--25; flowers _violet-purple_, or at least the keel tipped
with violet or blue; calyx campanulate; pod narrowly oblong,
short-acuminate, _black-pubescent_, triangular-turgid, deeply grooved on
the back, straight or curved, its stipe usually rather exceeding the
calyx.--Rocky banks, Lab. to Maine and N. Vt.

9. A. Robbinsii, Gray. Nearly smooth and _erect_ (1 deg. high), slender;
leaflets 7--11; calyx more oblong; _flowers white_; pod oblong (6''
long), obtuse or acutish, _minutely darkish-pubescent_, somewhat
laterally compressed, _not dorsally sulcate_ or obsoletely so, straight
or somewhat incurved, rather abruptly narrowed at base into the often
included stipe.--Rocky ledges, Vt.

10. A. racemosus, Pursh. Stout (1--2 deg. high), erect or ascending,
appressed-pubescent or glabrate; leaflets 13--25; flowers numerous,
white, pendent; calyx campanulate, gibbous, white-pubescent; pod
straight, narrow, 1' long, acute at both ends, triangular-compressed,
deeply grooved on the back, the ventral edge acute.--Neb. to Mo., and
westward.

[++][++] _Pod sessile._

11. A. gracilis, Nutt. Subcinereous, slender (1 deg. high or more); leaflets
11--17, linear, obtuse or retuse; racemes loose; flowers small (3''
long); _pods pendent_, 2--3'' long, coriaceous, elliptic-ovate, _concave
on the back_, the ventral suture prominent, _white-hairy_, at length
glabrous, _transversely veined_.--Minn. to Neb. and Mo., and westward.

12. A. distortus, Torr. & Gray. Low, diffuse, many-stemmed, subglabrous;
leaflets 17--25, oblong, emarginate; flowers in a short spike,
pale-purple; pod ovate- or lance-oblong, curved, 6--9'' long, glabrous,
thick-coriaceous, somewhat grooved on the back, the ventral suture
nearly flat.--Ill. to Iowa, Mo., Ark. and Tex.

13. A. lotiflorus, Hook. Hoary or cinereous with appressed hairs; stems
very short; leaflets 7--13, lance-oblong; flowers yellowish, in
few-flowered heads, with peduncles exceeding the leaves or very short;
_calyx campanulate, the subulate teeth exceeding the tube_; pod
oblong-ovate, 9--12'' long, acuminate, _acute at base_, canescent, the
back more or less impressed, the acute ventral suture nearly
straight.--Sask. to Neb. and Tex., west to the mountains.

14. A. Missouriensis, Nutt. Short-caulescent, hoary with a closely
appressed silky pubescence; leaflets 5--15, oblong, elliptic or obovate;
flowers few, capitate or spicate, 5--8'' long, violet; _calyx oblong,
the teeth very slender_; pod oblong (1' long), acute, _obtuse at base_,
pubescent, nearly straight, obcompressed or obcompressed-triangular,
depressed on the back and the ventral suture more or less prominent,
transversely rugulose.--Sask. to Neb. and N. Mex.

II. _Pod 1-celled, neither suture being inflexed or the ventral more
intruded than the dorsal._--PHACA.

15. A. Cooperi, Gray. Nearly smooth, erect (1--2 deg. high); leaflets
11--21, elliptical or oblong, somewhat retuse, minutely hoary beneath;
flowers white, rather numerous in a short spike; calyx dark-pubescent;
pod coriaceous, _inflated, ovate-globose_ (6--9'' long), _acute,
glabrous, slightly sulcate on both sides_, cavity webby.--Ont. and
western N. Y. to Minn. and Iowa.

16. A. flexuosus, Dougl. Ashy-puberulent, ascending (1--2 deg. high);
leaflets 11--21, mostly narrow; flowers small, in loose racemes; pod
thin-coriaceous, _cylindric_ (8--11'' long, 2'' broad), pointed,
straight or curved, puberulent, very shortly stipitate.--Red River
Valley, Minn., to Col.


22. OXYTROPIS, DC.

Keel tipped with a sharp projecting point or appendage; otherwise as in
Astragalus. Pod often more or less 2-celled by the intrusion of the
ventral suture.--Our species are low, nearly acaulescent perennials,
with tufts of numerous very short stems from a hard and thick root or
rootstock, covered with scaly adnate stipules; pinnate leaves of many
leaflets; peduncles scape-like, bearing a head or short spike of
flowers. (Name from [Greek: o)xy/s], _sharp_, and [Greek: tro/pis],
_keel_.)

[*] _Leaves simply pinnate._

1. O. campestris, DC., var. caerulea, Koch. _Pubescent or smoothish_;
leaflets lanceolate or oblong; flowers violet or blue, sometimes pure
white; _pods_ ovate or oblong-lanceolate, of a _thin or papery_
texture.--N. Maine to Labrador.

2. O. Lamberti, Pursh. _Silky with fine appressed hairs_; leaflets
mostly linear; flowers larger, purple, violet, or sometimes white; _pods
cartilaginous or firm-coriaceous_ in texture, silky-pubescent, strictly
erect, cylindraceous-lanceolate and long-pointed, almost 2-celled by
intrusion of the ventral suture.--Dry plains, Sask. and Minn. to Mo. and
Tex., west to the mountains.

[*][*] _Leaflets numerous, mostly in fascicles of 3 or 4 or more along
the rhachis._

3. O. splendens, Dougl. Silvery silky-villous (6--12' high); scape
spicately several to many-flowered; flowers erect-spreading; pod ovate,
erect, 2-celled, hardly surpassing the very villous calyx.--Plains of
Sask. and W. Minn., to N. Mex. and the Rocky Mts.


23. GLYCYRRHIZA, Tourn. LIQUORICE.

Calyx with the two upper lobes shorter or partly united. Anther-cells
confluent at the apex, the alternate ones smaller. Pod ovate or
oblong-linear, compressed, often curved, clothed with rough glands or
short prickles, scarcely dehiscent, few-seeded. The flower, etc.,
otherwise as in Astragalus.--Long perennial root sweet (whence the name,
from [Greek: glyky/s], _sweet_, and [Greek: r(i/za], _root_); herbage
glandular-viscid; leaves odd-pinnate, with minute stipules; flowers in
axillary spikes, white or bluish.

1. G. lepidota, Nutt. (WILD LIQUORICE.) Tall (2--3 deg. high); leaflets
15--19, oblong-lanceolate, mucronate-pointed, sprinkled with little
scales when young, and with corresponding dots when old; spikes
peduncled, short; flowers whitish; pods oblong, beset with hooked
prickles, so as to resemble the fruit of Xanthium on a smaller
scale.--Minn. to Iowa and Mo., and westward; Ft. Erie, Ont.


24. AESCHYNOMENE, L. SENSITIVE JOINT-VETCH.

Calyx 2-lipped; the upper lip 2-, the lower 3-cleft. Standard roundish;
keel boat-shaped. Stamens diadelphous in two sets of 5 each. Pod
flattened, composed of several easily separable joints.--Leaves
odd-pinnate with several pairs of leaflets, sometimes sensitive, as if
shrinking from the touch (whence the name, from [Greek: ai)schynome/ne],
_being ashamed_.)

1. AE. hispida, Willd. Erect, rough-bristly annual; leaflets 37--51,
linear; racemes few-flowered; flowers yellow, reddish externally; pod
stalked, 6--10-jointed.--Along rivers, S. Penn. to Fla. and Miss. Aug.


25. CORONILLA, L.

Calyx 5-toothed. Standard orbicular; keel incurved. Stamens diadelphous,
9 and 1. Pod terete or 4-angled, jointed; the joints oblong.--Glabrous
herbs or shrubs, with pinnate leaves, and the flowers in umbels
terminating axillary peduncles. (Diminutive of _corona_, a _crown_,
alluding to the inflorescence.)

C. VARIA, L. A perennial herb with ascending stems; leaves sessile;
leaflets 15--25, oblong; flowers rose-color; pods coriaceous,
3--7-jointed, the 4 angled joints 3--4'' long.--Conn. to N. J. (Nat.
from Eu.)


26. HEDYSARUM, Tourn.

Calyx 5-cleft, the lobes awl-shaped and nearly equal. Keel nearly
straight, obliquely truncate, not appendaged, longer than
the wings. Stamens diadelphous, 5 and 1. Pod flattened, composed
of several equal-sided separable roundish joints connected in the
middle.--Perennial herbs; leaves odd-pinnate. (Name composed of [Greek:
e(dy/s], _sweet_, and [Greek: a)/roma], _smell_.)

1. H. boreale, Nutt. Leaflets 13--21, oblong or lanceolate, nearly
glabrous; stipules scaly, united opposite the petiole; raceme of many
deflexed purple flowers; standard shorter than the keel; joints of the
pod 3 or 4, smooth, reticulated.--Lab. to northern Maine and Vt.; north
shore of L. Superior, and north and westward.


27. DESMODIUM, Desv. TICK-TREFOIL.

Calyx usually more or less 2 lipped. Standard obovate; wings adherent to
the straight or straightish and usually truncate keel, by means of a
little transverse appendage on each side of the latter. Stamens
diadelphous, 9 and 1, or monadelphous below. Pod flat, deeply lobed on
the lower margin, separating into few or many flat reticulated joints
(mostly roughened with minute hooked hairs, by which they adhere to the
fleece of animals or to clothing).--Perennial herbs, with pinnately
3-foliolate (rarely 1-foliolate) leaves, stipellate. Flowers (in
summer) in axillary or terminal racemes, often panicled, and 2 or 3 from
each bract, purple or purplish, often turning green in withering.
Stipules and bracts scale-like, often striate. (Name from [Greek:
desmo/s], _a bond_ or _chain_, from the connected joints of the pods.)

Sec. 1. _Pod raised on a stalk (stipe) many times longer than the slightly
toothed calyx and nearly as long as the pedicel, straightish on the
upper margin, deeply sinuate on the lower; the 1--4 joints mostly
half-obovate and concave on the back; stamens monadelphous below; plants
nearly glabrous; stems erect or ascending; raceme terminal, panicled;
stipules bristle-form, deciduous._

1. D. nudiflorum, DC. _Leaves all crowded at the summit of sterile
stems_; leaflets broadly ovate, bluntish, whitish beneath; _raceme
elongated on an ascending mostly leafless stalk or scape from the root_,
2 deg. long.--Dry woods, common.

2. D. acuminatum, DC. _Leaves all crowded at the summit of the stem from
which arises the elongated naked raceme or panicle_; leaflets
round-ovate, taper-pointed, green both sides, the end one round (4--5'
long).--Rich woods, from Canada to the Gulf.

3. D. pauciflorum, DC. _Leaves scattered_ along the low (8--15' high)
ascending stems; leaflets rhombic-ovate, bluntish, pale beneath; _raceme
few-flowered_, terminal.--Woods, Ont. to Penn., Mich., Kan., and
southward.

Sec. 2. _Pod raised on a stalk (stipe) little if at all surpassing the
deeply deft calyx; stems long and prostrate or decumbent; racemes
axillary and terminal._

[*] _Stipules conspicuous, ovate, attenuate, striate, persistent;
racemes mostly simple._

4. D. rotundifolium, DC. _Soft-hairy all over_, truly prostrate;
_leaflets orbicular_, or the odd one slightly rhomboid; _flowers
purple_; pods almost equally sinuate on both edges, 3--5-jointed; the
joints rhomboid-oval.--Dry rocky woods, N. Eng. to Fla., west to Minn.,
Mo., and La.

Var. glabratum, Gray, is almost glabrous, otherwise nearly as the
ordinary form.--Mass. and N. Y.

5. D. ochroleucum, M. A. Curtis. _Stems sparsely hairy_, decumbent;
leaflets nearly glabrous, ovate, acute or obtuse, transversely
reticulated beneath, the lateral ones smaller or sometimes wanting;
racemes much elongated; _corolla whitish; pods twisted_, 2--4-jointed,
the large rhomboid joints smooth and reticulated but the margins
downy.--Woodlands, Md. and Va.

[*][*] _Stipules smaller, lanceolate and awl-shaped, less persistent;
racemes panicled._

6. D. humifusum, Beck. _Glabrous or nearly so_, procumbent; _leaflets
ovate or ovate-oblong_, rather obtuse, much smaller than in the two
preceding (11/4--2' long), corolla purple; pods 2--4-jointed, flat, the
oval-rhomboid joints minutely scabrous throughout.--Dry sandy soil,
S. Penn. to Md.

Sec. 3. _Pod slightly if at all stalked in the calyx; racemes panicled._

[*] _Stems tall (3--5 deg.) and erect; the persistent stipules and deciduous
bracts large and conspicuous, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, taper-pointed;
flowers rather large._

[+] _Pods of 4--7 unequal-sided rhombic joints, which are considerably
longer than broad (about 6'' long)._

7. D. canescens, DC. Stem loosely branched, _hairy; leaflets ovate,
bluntish, about the length of the petioles, whitish and reticulated
beneath_, both sides roughish with a close fine pubescence; joints of
the pod very adhesive.--Moist grounds, Mass. and Vt. to Minn. and
southward, chiefly westward. Branches clothed with both minute and
hooked, and longer, spreading, rather glutinous hairs.--Var.
VILLOSISSIMUM, Torr. & Gray, has the panicle and upper part of the stem
very villous, and leaflets oblong-ovate.--Mo.

8. D. cuspidatum, Torr. & Gray. _Very smooth_ except the panicle; stem
straight; _leaflets lanceolate-ovate and taper-pointed_, green both
sides, longer than the petiole (3--5'); joints of the pod
rhomboid-oblong, smoothish.--Thickets, common. The conspicuous bracts
and stipules 3/4' long.

[+][+] _Pods of 3--5 oval joints (not over 3'' long)._

9. D. Illinoense, Gray. Erect (3--5 deg. high); stem and leaves with short
rough pubescence; leaflets ovate-oblong or ovate-lanceolate (2--4'
long), obtuse, subcoriaceous, cinereous beneath, veins and veinlets
prominent, strongly reticulated, the lower leaflets nearly equalling the
petiole; pods scarcely over 1' long, sinuate on both margins (deeper
below).--Dry ground, Ill. to Iowa and Kan.

[*][*] _Stems (2--5 deg. high) erect; stipules and bracts mostly deciduous,
small and inconspicuous; joints of the pod 3--5, triangular or
half-rhombic or very unequal-sided rhomboidal, longer than broad, 3'' or
less in length; flowers middle-sized._

10. D. laevigatum, DC. _Smooth_ or nearly so throughout; stem straight;
_leaflets ovate_, bluntish, pale beneath (2--3' long); panicles minutely
rough-pubescent.--Pine woods, N. J. to Fla., west to Mo. and Tex.

11. D. viridiflorum, Beck. Stem _very downy_, rough at the summit;
_leaflets broadly ovate_, very obtuse, rough above, _whitened with a
soft velvety down underneath_ (2--3' long).--Southern N. Y. to N. J. and
Fla., west to Mich., Mo., and Tex.

12. D. Dillenii, Darlingt. Stem pubescent; _leaflets oblong or
oblong-ovate_, commonly bluntish, pale beneath, _softly and finely
pubescent_, mostly thin (2--3' long).--Open woodlands, common.

13. D. paniculatum, DC. _Nearly smooth_ throughout; stem slender, tall;
_leaflets oblong-lanceolate, or narrowly lanceolate, tapering to a blunt
point, thin_ (3--5' long); racemes much panicled.--Copses, common.

14. D. strictum, DC. Stem very straight and slender, simple (2--3 deg.
high), the upper part and narrow panicle rough-glandular; _leaflets
linear, blunt, strongly reticulated, thickish, very smooth_ (1--2' long,
1/4' wide); joints of the pod 1--3, semi-obovate or very gibbous (only 2''
long).--Pine woods, N. J. to Fla. and La.

[*][*][*] _Stipules small and inconspicuous, mostly deciduous; pods of
few roundish or obliquely oval or sometimes roundish-rhomboidal joints,
11/2--21/2'' long._

[+] _Stems erect; bracts before flowering conspicuous; racemes densely
flowered._

15. D. Canadense, DC. Stem hairy (3--6 deg. high); _leaflets
oblong-lanceolate_ or ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, with numerous
straightish veins, _much longer than the petiole_ (11/2--3' long);
_flowers showy_, larger than in any other species (1/2--{1/3}' long).--Dry
rich woods, N. Brunswick to N. C., Minn., and Kan.

16. D. sessilifolium, Torr. & Gray. Stem pubescent (2--4 deg. high); _leaves
nearly sessile; leaflets linear_ or linear-oblong, blunt, thickish,
reticulated, rough above, downy beneath; branches of the panicle long;
_flowers small_.--Copses, Penn. and Ky., west to Mich., Iowa, Mo., and
Tex.

[+][+] _Stems ascending (1--3 deg. high); bracts small; racemes or panicles
elongated and loosely flowered; flowers small._

17. D. rigidum, DC. Stem branching, _somewhat hoary_, like the lower
surface of the leaves, with a close roughish pubescence; _leaflets
ovate-oblong_, blunt, thickish, reticulated-veiny, rather rough above,
_the lateral ones longer than the petiole_.--Dry hillsides, Mass. to
Fla., west to Mich., Mo., and La.

18. D. ciliare, DC. Stem slender, _hairy or rough-pubescent; leaves
crowded, on very short hairy petioles; leaflets round-ovate or oval_,
thickish, more or less hairy on the margins and underneath (1/2--1'
long).--Dry hills and sandy fields, N. Eng. to Fla., west to Mich., Mo.,
and Tex.

19. D. Marilandicum, F. Boott. _Nearly smooth_ throughout, slender;
_leaflets ovate or roundish_, very obtuse, thin, _the lateral ones about
the length of the slender petiole_; otherwise resembling the
preceding.--Copses, N. Eng. to Fla., west to Mich., Mo., and La.

[+][+][+] _Stems reclining or prostrate; racemes loosely flowered._

20. D. lineatum, DC. Stem minutely pubescent, striate-angled; leaflets
orbicular, smoothish (1/2--1' long), much longer than the petiole; pod
scarcely stalked in the calyx.--Dry soil, Md. and Va. to Fla. and La.


28. LESPEDEZA, Michx. BUSH-CLOVER.

Calyx 5-cleft; the lobes nearly equal, slender. Stamens diadelphous (9
and 1); anthers all alike. Pods of a single 1-seeded joint (sometimes 2
jointed, with the lower joint empty and stalk-like), oval or roundish,
flat, reticulated.--Herbs with pinnately 3-foliolate leaves, not
stipellate. Flowers often polygamous, in summer and autumn. (Dedicated
to _Lespedez_, the Spanish governor of Florida in the time of Michaux.)

Sec. 1. _Stipules subulate-setaceous; bracts minute; calyx-lobes attenuate;
perennial._

[*] _Flowers of two sorts, the larger (violet-purple) perfect, but
seldom fruitful, panicled or clustered; with smaller pistillate and
fertile but mostly apetalous ones intermixed or in small subsessile
clusters; calyx 1--2'' long; pod exserted._

1. L. procumbens, Michx. _Slender, trailing and prostrate_, minutely
appressed-hairy to soft-downy; leaflets oval or obovate-elliptical,
3--9'' long; _peduncles very slender, few-flowered_; keel equalling the
wings; pod small, roundish, obtuse or acute. (Incl. L. repens,
_Bart._)--Dry sandy soil; common.

2. L. violacea, Pers. _Stems upright_ or spreading, slender, branched,
rather _sparsely leafy_ and sparingly pubescent; _leaflets thin, broadly
oval or oblong_, finely appressed-pubescent beneath; _peduncles very
slender, loosely few-flowered_, mostly longer than the leaves; flowers
3--4'' long, the keel often the longest; _pod ovate_, 2--3'' long,
nearly glabrous.--Dry copses, N. Eng. to Minn. and E. Kan., south to
Fla. and La.

3. L. reticulata, Pers. Stouter, _erect, very leafy; leaflets thickish,
linear to linear-oblong_, 6--15'' long, finely appressed-pubescent;
_flowers_ (scarcely 3'' long) _clustered on peduncles much shorter than
the leaves_, the keel shorter than the standard; _pods ovate, acute_,
2'' long, appressed-subpubescent. (L. violacea, var. angustifolia,
_Torr. & Gray_.)--Mass. to Minn., and southward.

4. L. Stuvei, Nutt. _Stems_ upright-spreading, _very leafy_, simple or
somewhat branched, _downy with spreading pubescence; leaflets oval or
roundish_ varying to oblong or rarely linear-oblong, _silky or
white-woolly beneath_ and sometimes above; flowers as in the last, often
numerous and crowded; _pods ovate, acuminate_, mostly 3'' long,
_downy_.--Mass. to Mich., and south to Va. and Tex.

Var. intermedia, Watson. Pubescence more scanty and usually fine and
appressed as in n. 3, but the leaflets oval to oblong; inflorescence
often more open; pod of n. 4 or of n. 3. (L. violacea, var.
sessiliflora, of _Man._, mainly.)--Mass. to Fla., and west to Mich.,
Ill., E. Kan., and Ark.

[*][*] _Flowers all alike and perfect, in close spikes or heads; corolla
whitish or cream-color with a purple spot on the standard, about the
length of the downy 5-parted calyx; pod included; stems upright,
wand-like (2--4 deg. high)._

5. L. polystachya, Michx. Stem with mostly spreading pubescence;
_petioles 2--6'' long; leaflets from orbicular to oblong-ovate_, hairy;
_spikes oblong, on elongated peduncles; pod_ (at maturity) oblong-ovate,
pubescent, nearly 3'' long, _hardly shorter than the calyx_. (L. hirta,
_Ell._)--Dry hills, common.

6. L. capitata, Michx. _Stems rigid, woolly; petioles very short;
leaflets oblong to narrowly oblong_, thickish, reticulated and mostly
smooth above, silky or sometimes downy beneath; _heads of flowers
globular, on peduncles shorter than the leaves; pod oblong-ovate,
pubescent, much shorter than the calyx_.--Dry and sandy soil, N. Eng. to
Fla., west to Minn., Mo., and La.

7. L. angustifolia, Ell. Like the last, but mostly appressed-silky, the
_leaflets linear, the smaller often oblong heads on distinct and
sometimes slender peduncles, the pod round-ovate_, acutish, 11/2--2''
long, _hardly shorter than the calyx_. (L. capitata, var. angustifolia,
_Pursh._)--N. J. to Fla., west to Mich., Iowa, and La.

8. L. leptostachya, Gray. Clothed with appressed silky pubescence; stems
often branched, slender; _leaflets linear_ to narrowly oblong; _spikes
slender, somewhat loosely-flowered_, on peduncles as long as the leaves;
_pod ovate, small_ (11/2'' long), _about equalling the calyx_, densely
pubescent.--Ill., Iowa, and Minn.

Sec. 2. _Stipules and bracts broad and scarious; calyx-lobes broad;
annual._

L. STRIATA, Hook. & Arn. Diffusely branched, decumbent, subpubescent;
petioles very short; leaflets oblong-obovate, 6'' long or less;
peduncles very short, 1--5-flowered; pod small, little exceeding the
calyx.--Common in the Southern States, extending into Mo. (Nat. from E.
Asia.)


29. STYLOSANTHES, Swartz.

Calyx early deciduous; tube slender and stalk-like; limb unequally
4--5-cleft, the lower lobe more distinct. Corolla and monadelphous
stamens inserted at the summit of the calyx-tube; standard orbicular;
keel incurved. Anthers 10, the 5 longer ones fixed near their base, and
the 5 alternate shorter ones fixed by the middle. Style filiform, its
upper part falling off after flowering, the lower part incurved or
hooked, persistent on the 1--2-jointed small and short reticulated pod;
the lower joint when present empty and stalk-like.--Low perennials,
branched from the base, with wiry stems, pinnately 3-foliolate leaves,
the sheathing stipules united to the petiole, no stipels, and small,
yellow flowers in terminal heads or short spikes. (Name composed of
[Greek: sty/los], _a column_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _a flower_, from
the stalk-like calyx-tube.)

1. S. elatior, Swartz. Tufted; leaflets lanceolate, strongly
straight-veined; heads or clusters small and few-flowered.--Pine
barrens, Long Island and N. J. to Fla., west to S. Ind., Kan., and Ark.


30. VICIA, Tourn. VETCH. TARE.

Calyx 5-cleft or 5-toothed, the 2 upper teeth often shorter, or the
lowest longer. Wings of the corolla adhering to the middle of the keel.
Stamens more or less diadelphous (9 and 1); the orifice of the tube
oblique. Style filiform, hairy all round or only on the back at the
apex. Pod flat, 2-valved, 2--several-seeded. Seeds globular. Cotyledons
very thick, remaining under ground in germination.--Herbs, mostly
climbing more or less by the tendril at the end of the pinnate leaves.
Stipules half-sagittate. Flowers or peduncles axillary. (The classical
Latin name.)

[*] _Annual; flowers 1 or 2 in the axils, nearly sessile, large,
violet-purple._

V. SATIVA, L. (COMMON VETCH or TARE.) Somewhat pubescent; stem simple;
leaflets 5--7 pairs, varying from obovate-oblong to linear, notched and
mucronate at the apex; pod linear, several-seeded.--Cultivated fields
and waste places, N. Eng. to N. J. and southward, west to Mich. and
Minn.--Var. ANGUSTIFOLIA, Seringe, has longer and narrow leaflets.
(Adv. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Annual, slender; peduncles elongated; flowers small._

V. TETRASPERMA, L. _Peduncles 1--2-flowered_; leaflets 4--6 pairs,
linear-oblong, obtuse; calyx-teeth unequal; corolla whitish; _pods
narrow, 4-seeded, smooth_.--Waste places, near the coast, N. Scotia to
N. J. (Nat. from Eu.)

V. HIRSUTA, Koch. _Peduncles 3--6-flowered_; leaflets 6--8 pairs,
truncate; calyx-teeth equal; corolla bluish; _pods oblong, 2-seeded,
hairy_.--N. Brunswick to Mass. and Va. (Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Perennial; peduncles elongated; calyx-teeth unequal; pod
several-seeded._

1. V. Cracca, L. Downy-pubescent; _leaflets 20--24, oblong-lanceolate,
strongly mucronate; spikes densely many-flowered_, 1-sided; flowers
blue, turning purple, 6'' long, reflexed; calyx-teeth shorter than the
tube.--Borders of thickets, Newf. to N. J., west to Ky., Iowa, and Minn.
(Eu.)

2. V. Caroliniana, Walt. Nearly smooth; _leaflets 8--24, oblong, obtuse,
scarcely mucronate; peduncles loosely-flowered_; flowers small, more
scattered than in the preceding, whitish, the keel tipped with blue;
calyx-teeth very short.--River-banks, Ont. and N. Y. to Ga., west to
Minn. and Kan.

3. V. Americana, Muhl. Glabrous; _leaflets 10--14, elliptical or
ovate-oblong_, very obtuse, many-veined; _peduncles 4--8-flowered_;
flowers purplish (8'' long).--Moist soil, N. Y. and N. J., to Kan.,
Minn., and westward.--Var. LINEARIS, Watson, a low form with linear
leaflets, occurs in Kan. and Neb., and is common westward.


31. LATHYRUS, Tourn. VETCHLING. EVERLASTING PEA.

Style flattish, dilated and flattish (not grooved) above, hairy along
the inner side (next the free stamen). Sheath of the filaments scarcely
oblique at the apex. Otherwise nearly as in Vicia.--Our species are
perennial and mostly smooth plants, the rhachis of the leaves in some
not produced into a tendril. ([Greek: La/thyros], a leguminous plant of
Theophrastus.)

[*] _Tendrils present; stipules large and broad; leaflets 3--5 pairs._

1. L. maritimus, Bigelow. (BEACH PEA.) Stout (1 deg. high or more);
_stipules broadly ovate and halberd-shaped, nearly as large as the
leaflets_, the lower lobe larger and usually coarsely toothed; leaflets
_thick_, ovate-oblong (1--2' long); peduncles a little shorter than the
leaves, 6--10-flowered, _flowers large_ (9'' long), _purple_.--Seashore
from N. J. and Oregon to the Arctic Sea; also on the Great Lakes. (Eu.)

2. L. ochroleucus, Hook. Stem slender (1--3 deg. high); _stipules
semi-cordate, half as large as the thin ovate leaflets_; peduncles
7--10-flowered; _flowers smaller, yellowish-white_.--Hillsides, N. Eng.
to Minn., Iowa, and westward.

[*][*] _Tendrils present; stipules narrow, semi-sagittate, acuminate._

[+] _Flowers purple; leaflets several pairs._

3. L. venosus, Muhl. _Stout_, climbing, usually somewhat downy; stipules
very small and mostly slender; _leaflets 4--6 pairs, oblong ovate_,
mostly obtuse (about 2' long); _peduncles many-flowered_; flowers 6--8''
long.--Shady banks, Penn. to Ga., west to Kan. and Minn.

4. L. palustris, L. _Slender_, glabrous or somewhat pubescent; stem
often winged; stipules lanceolate, sharp-pointed at both ends; _leaflets
2--4 pairs, narrowly oblong to linear, acute_ (1--2' long); _peduncles
2--6-flowered_; flowers 6'' long.--Moist places, N. Scotia to N. J., and
westward across the continent. (Eu.)

Var. myrtifolius, Gray. Stipules usually broader and larger; leaflets
ovate to oblong (1' long or less).--Same range, and extending south to
N. C.

[+][+] _Flowers yellow; leaflets a single pair._

L. PRATENSIS, L. Low and straggling; leaflets narrowly lanceolate to
linear, acute; peduncles several-flowered.--Spontaneous in Mass., N. Y.,
and Ont. (Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Tendrils usually wanting; low, mostly erect; stipules
semi-sagittate; flowers very large, purple; pod stipitate in the calyx._

5. L. polymorphus, Nutt. Leaflets 3--6 pairs, narrowly oblong to linear,
thick and strongly nerved, 1--2' long; seeds with a narrow footstalk and
short hilum.--Mo., Kan., and westward.

6. L. ornatus, Nutt. Like the last, but leaflets always narrow, 3--12''
long; seeds with a very broad footstalk and long hilum.--Kan. to Col.
and Dak. Scarcely 1 deg. high.


32. APIOS, Boerhaave. GROUND-NUT. WILD BEAN.

Calyx somewhat 2-lipped, the 2 lateral teeth being nearly obsolete, the
upper very short, the lower one longest. Standard very broad, reflexed;
the long scythe-shaped keel strongly incurved, at length coiled. Stamens
diadelphous. Pod straight or slightly curved, linear, elongated,
thickish, many-seeded.--A perennial herb (with some milky juice!),
twining and climbing over bushes, and bearing edible tubers on
underground shoots. Leaflets 3--7, ovate-lanceolate, obscurely
stipellate. Flowers in dense and short, often branching racemes. (Name
from [Greek: a)/pion], _a pear_, from the shape of the tubers.)

1. A. tuberosa, Moench. Flowers brown-purple or chocolate-color,
violet-scented.--Low grounds, N. Brunswick to Fla., west to Minn., Kan.,
and La.


33. PHASEOLUS, Tourn. KIDNEY BEAN.

Calyx 5-toothed or 5-cleft, the two upper teeth often higher united.
Keel of the corolla, with the included stamens and style, spirally
coiled. Stamens diadelphous. Style bearded along the upper side; stigma
oblique or lateral. Pod scythe-shaped, several--many-seeded, tipped with
the hardened base of the style. Seeds round-reniform, with very short
hilum. Cotyledons thick and fleshy, rising out of the ground nearly
unchanged in germination.--Twining herbs, with pinnately 3-foliolate
stipellate leaves. Flowers racemose, produced in summer and autumn. (The
ancient name of the Kidney Bean.)

1. P. perennis, Walt. (WILD BEAN.) Stem climbing high from a perennial
root; leaflets roundish-ovate, short-pointed; flowers purple, handsome,
but small; pods drooping, strongly curved, 4--5-seeded.--Copses, N. Eng.
to Fla., west to Minn. and La.


34. STROPHOSTYLES, Ell.

Keel of the corolla with the included stamens and style elongated,
strongly incurved, not spirally coiled. Pod linear, terete or flattish,
straight or nearly so. Seeds quadrate or oblong with truncate ends,
mealy-pubescent or glabrate; hilum linear. Flowers few, sessile and
capitate clustered on the mostly long peduncles. Otherwise as
Phaseolus.--Stems prostrate or climbing, more or less retrorsely hairy.
Stipules and bracts striate. (Name from [Greek: strophe/], _a turning_,
and [Greek: sty~los], _a style_.)

1. S. angulosa, Ell. _Annual_; stems branched, 1--6 deg. long; leaflets
ovate to oblong-ovate (rarely linear-oblong), _with a more or less
prominent rounded lobe toward the base (the terminal 2-lobed)_, or some
or all often entire, about 1' (6--20'') long; corolla greenish-white and
purplish; pod terete, 2--3' long by 3'' wide, 4--8-seeded, nearly
glabrous; _seeds oblong, about 3'' long_, usually very pubescent.
(Phaseolus diversifolius, _Pers._ P. helvolus, _L._)--Sandy shores and
river-banks; coast of Mass. and southward, along the Great Lakes to
Minn., and south to Kan. and Tex.

Var. Missouriensis, Watson in herb. Climbing high (10--30 deg.); leaves
often 3' long, rhombic-ovate, rarely at all lobed; seeds 3--4''
long.--River-bottoms near Independence, Mo.; nearly two months later.
(_F. Bush._)

2. S. peduncularis, Ell. Stems _more slender_, from a _perennial_
rootstock, 2--4 deg. long; leaflets ovate to oblong-linear, _rarely at all
lobed_, 1' long or less; pod 11/2--2' long and _scarcely 2'' wide_; seeds
_much smaller_, 11/2--2'' long, short-oblong to quadrate. (Phaseolus
helvolus, _Man._, etc., not _L._)--Sandy ground, Long Island and N. J.
to Fla., west to S. Ind., Ky., and La.

3. S. pauciflorus, Watson in herb. _Annual_, slender, low-climbing,
pubescent; leaflets oblong-lanceolate or ovate-oblong to linear, not
lobed, 1' long; pod pubescent, 1' long, flattish; seeds as in the last,
very finely mealy, soon glabrate. (Phaseolus pauciflorus,
_Benth._)--River-banks, Ind. to Minn., south to Miss. and Tex.


35. CENTROSEMA, DC. SPURRED BUTTERFLY-PEA.

Calyx short, 5-cleft. Corolla, etc., much as in Clitoria, but the
spreading standard with a spur-shaped projection on the back near the
base; keel broad. Style bearded at the apex around the terminal stigma.
Pod long and linear, flat, pointed with the awl-shaped style,
many-seeded, thickened at the edges, the valves marked with a raised
line on each side next the margin.--Twining perennials, with 3-foliolate
stipellate leaves, and large showy flowers. Stipules, bracts, and
bractlets striate, the latter longer than the calyx. (Name from [Greek:
ke/ntron], _a spur_, and [Greek: se/ma], _a standard_.)

1. C. Virginianum, Benth. Rather rough with minute hairs; leaflets
varying from oblong-ovate to lanceolate and linear, very veiny, shining;
peduncles 1--4-flowered; calyx-teeth linear-awl-shaped; corolla violet,
1' long; pods straight, 4--5' long.--Sandy woods, Md. to Fla. and Ark.
(Trop. Am.)


36. CLITORIA, L. BUTTERFLY-PEA.

Calyx tubular, 5-toothed. Standard much larger than the rest of the
flower, erect, rounded, notched at the top, not spurred on the back;
keel small, shorter than the wings, incurved, acute. Stamens
monadelphous below. Style bearded down the inner face. Pod
linear-oblong, flattish, knotty, several-seeded, pointed with the base
of the style.--Erect or twining perennials, with mostly pinnately
3-foliolate stipellate leaves, and very large flowers. Peduncles
1--3-flowered; bractlets opposite, striate. (Derivation recondite.)

1. C. Mariana, L. Low, ascending or twining, smooth; leaflets
oblong-ovate or ovate-lanceolate; stipules and bracts awl-shaped;
peduncles short; the showy pale-blue flowers 2' long.--Dry banks, N. Y.
to Va. and Fla., west to Mo. and Tex.


37. AMPHICARPAEA, Ell. HOG PEA-NUT.

Flowers of 2 kinds; those of the racemes from the upper branches
perfect, but seldom ripening fruit; those near the base and on filiform
creeping branches with the corolla none or rudimentary, and few free
stamens, but fruitful. Calyx about equally 4- (rarely 5-) toothed;
bractlets none or minute. Keel and wing-petals similar, almost straight;
the standard partly folded round them. Stamens diadelphous. Style
beardless. Pods of the upper flowers, when formed, somewhat
scymetar-shaped, stipitate, 3--4-seeded; of the lower ones commonly
subterranean and fleshy, obovate or pear-shaped, ripening usually but
one large seed.--Low and slender perennials; the twining stems clothed
with brownish hairs. Leaves pinnately 3-foliolate; leaflets
rhombic-ovate, stipellate. Flowers in simple or compound racemes,
purplish. Bracts persistent, round, partly clasping, striate, as well as
the stipules. (Name from [Greek: a)mphi/], _both_, and [Greek: karpo/s],
_fruit_, in allusion to the two kinds of pods.)

1. A. monoica, Nutt. Leaflets thin, 1/2--2' long; racemes nodding; calyx
of upper flowers 2'' long, the ovary glabrous except the hairy margin;
pod 1' long; ovary and pod of the rudimentary flowers hairy.--Rich damp
woodlands, common. Aug., Sept.

2. A. Pitcheri, Torr. & Gray. Leaflets usually 2--4' long; rhachis of
the racemes usually villous; calyx 3'' long, the teeth acuminate; ovary
hairy.--Western N. Y. to Ill., Mo., La., and Tex. The upper flowers more
commonly fertile; apparently producing subterranean fruit but rarely.


38. GALACTIA, P. Browne. MILK-PEA.

Calyx 4-cleft; the lobes acute, the upper one broadest, entire. Keel
scarcely incurved. Stamens diadelphous or nearly so. Style beardless.
Pod linear, flat, several-seeded (some few of them rarely partly
subterranean and fleshy or deformed).--Low, mostly prostrate or twining
perennial herbs. Leaflets usually 3, stipellate. Flowers in somewhat
interrupted or knotty racemes, purplish; in summer. (Name from [Greek:
ga/la], -[Greek: aktos], _milk_; some species being said to yield a
milky juice, which is unlikely.)

1. G. glabella, Michx. _Stems nearly smooth_, prostrate; leaflets
elliptical or ovate-oblong, sometimes slightly hairy beneath; racemes
short, 4--8-flowered; _pods somewhat hairy_.--Sandy woods, southern
N. Y. to Va., Fla., and Miss.

2. G. pilosa, Ell. _Stems_ (decumbent and somewhat twining) and _leaves
beneath soft-downy and hoary_; leaflets oval; racemes many-flowered,
_pods very downy_. (G. mollis, _Gray_, Manual; not _Michx._)--Penn. to
Fla. and Miss.


39. RHYNCHOSIA, Lour.

Calyx somewhat 2-lipped, or deeply 4--5-parted. Keel scythe-shaped, or
incurved at the apex. Stamens diadelphous. Ovules only 2. Pod
1--2-seeded, short and flat, 2-valved.--Usually twining or trailing
perennial herbs, pinnately 3-foliolate, or with a single leaflet, not
stipellate. Flowers yellow, racemose or clustered. (Name from [Greek:
r(y/nchos], _a beak_, from the shape of the keel.)

1. R. tomentosa, Hook. & Arn. _Trailing and twining_, the stem and
leaves more or less _pubescent with spreading hairs_; leaflets 3,
_roundish or round-rhombic_, acute or acutish; _racemes_ few-flowered,
almost _sessile in the axils_; calyx about as long as the corolla,
4-parted, the upper lobe 2-cleft; pod oblong. (R. tomentosa, var.
volubilis, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Dry soil, Va. to Fla. and Tex.

2. R. erecta, DC. _Erect_, 1--2 deg. high; stem and leaves _more or less
tomentose; leaflets 3, oval to oblong_, obtuse or acutish; racemes short
and shortly pedunculate. (R. tomentosa, var. erecta, _Torr. &
Gray_.)--Del. to Fla. and Miss.

3. R. reniformis, DC. _Dwarf and upright_, 3--8' high; _pubescence
spreading; leaflets solitary_ (rarely 3), _round-reniform_, very obtuse
or apiculate; racemes few-flowered, sessile in the axils. (R. tomentosa,
var. monophylla, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Va. to Fla. and Miss.


40. CERCIS, L. RED-BUD. JUDAS-TREE.

Calyx 5-toothed. Corolla imperfectly papilionaceous; standard smaller
than the wings, and enclosed by them in the bud; the keel-petals larger
and not united. Stamens 10, distinct, declined. Pod oblong, flat,
many-seeded, the upper suture with a winged margin. Embryo
straight.--Trees, with rounded heart-shaped simple leaves, caducous
stipules, and red-purple flowers in umbel-like clusters along the
branches of the last or preceding years, appearing before the leaves,
acid to the taste. (The ancient name of the Oriental _Judas-tree_.)

1. C. Canadensis, L. (RED-BUD.) Leaves pointed; pods nearly sessile
above the calyx.--Rich soil, N. Y. and N. J. to Fla., west to S. Minn.,
Kan., and La. A small ornamental tree, often cultivated.


41. CASSIA, Tourn. SENNA.

Sepals 5, scarcely united at base. Petals 5, little unequal, spreading.
Stamens 5--10, unequal, and some of them often imperfect, spreading;
anthers opening by 2 pores or chinks at the apex. Pod many-seeded, often
with cross partitions.--Herbs (in the United States), with simply and
abruptly pinnate leaves, and mostly yellow flowers. (An ancient name of
obscure derivation.)

[*] _Leaflets large; stipules deciduous; the three upper anthers
deformed and imperfect; flowers in short axillary racemes, the upper
ones panicled; herbage glabrous_.

1. C. Marilandica, L. (WILD SENNA.) Stem 3--4 deg. high; _leaflets 6--9
pairs, lanceolate-oblong, obtuse_; petiole with a club-shaped gland near
the base; pods linear, slightly curved, flat, at first hairy (2--4'
long); root perennial.--Alluvial soil, N. Eng. to Fla., west to Mich.,
S. E. Neb., Kan., and La.

2. C. Tora, L. Annual; _leaflets 3 or rarely 2 pairs, obovate, obtuse_,
with an elongated gland between those of the lower pairs or lowest pair;
pods slender, 6' long, curved. (C. obtusifolia, _L._)--River-banks,
S. Va. to Fla., west to S. Ind., Mo., and Ark.

C. OCCIDENTALIS, L. Annual; _leaflets 4--6 pairs, ovate-lanceolate,
acute_; an ovate gland at the base of the petiole; pods long linear (5'
long) with a tumid border, glabrous.--Va., S. Ind., and southward. (Adv.
from Trop. Amer.)

[*][*] _Leaflets small, somewhat sensitive to the touch; stipules
striate, persistent; a cup-shaped gland beneath the lowest pair of
leaflets; anthers all perfect; flowers in small clusters above the
axils; pods flat; root annual._

3. C. Chamaecrista, L. (PARTRIDGE PEA.) Stems spreading (1 deg. long);
leaflets 10--15 pairs, linear-oblong, oblique at the base; _flowers
(large) on slender pedicels_, 2 or 3 of the showy yellow petals often
with a purple spot at base; _anthers 10, elongated, unequal_ (4 of them
yellow, the others purple); style slender.--Sandy fields; common,
especially southward.

4. C. nictitans, L. (WILD SENSITIVE-PLANT.) Leaflets 10--20 pairs,
oblong-linear; _flowers (very small) on very short pedicels; anthers 5,
nearly equal_; style short.--Sandy fields, N. Eng. to Fla., west to
Ind., Kan., and La.


42. HOFFMANSEGGIA, Cav.

Calyx 5-parted. Petals 5, nearly equal, oblong or oval. Stamens 10,
distinct, slightly declined; anthers dehiscing longitudinally. Pod flat,
oblong, often falcate, few--several-seeded.--Low perennial herbs, or
woody at base, punctate with black glands, with bipinnate leaves, and
naked racemes of yellow flowers opposite the leaves or terminal. (Named
for _Count von Hoffmansegg_, a German botanist.)

1. H. Jamesii, Torr. & Gray. Herbaceous, finely pubescent; pinnae 2 or 3
pairs with an odd one, the small oblong leaflets 5--9 pairs; pods broad,
falcate, 1' long, 2--3-seeded.--Central Kan. to Tex., Ariz., and Mex.


43. GYMNOCLADUS, Lam. KENTUCKY COFFEE-TREE.

Flowers dioecious or polygamous, regular. Calyx elongated-tubular below,
5-cleft. Petals 5, oblong, equal, inserted on the summit of the
calyx-tube. Stamens 10, distinct, short, inserted with the petals. Pod
oblong, flattened, hard, pulpy inside, several seeded. Seeds
flattish.--A large tall tree, with rough bark, stout branchlets, not
thorny, and large unequally twice-pinnate leaves; the leaflets standing
vertically.--Flowers whitish, in terminal racemes. (Name from [Greek:
gymno/s], _naked_, and [Greek: kla/dos], _a branch_, alluding to the
stout branches destitute of spray.)

1. G. Canadensis, Lam. Leaves 2--3 deg. long, with several large partial
leafstalks bearing 7--13 ovate stalked leaflets, the lowest pair with
single leaflets; stipules wanting; pod 6--10' long, 2' broad; the seeds
over 1/2' across.--Rich woods, western N. Y. and Penn. to Minn., E. Neb.,
and Ark.


44. GLEDITSCHIA, L. HONEY-LOCUST.

Flowers polygamous. Calyx short, 3--5-cleft, the lobes spreading. Petals
as many as the sepals and equalling them, the 2 lower sometimes united.
Stamens 3--10, distinct, inserted with the petals on the base of the
calyx. Pod flat, 1--many-seeded. Seeds flat.--Thorny trees, with
abruptly once or twice pinnate leaves, and inconspicuous greenish
flowers in small spikes. Thorns above the axils. (Named in honor of
_J. G. Gleditsch_, a botanist contemporary with Linnaeus.)

1. G. triacanthos, L. (THREE-THORNED ACACIA, or HONEY-LOCUST.) Thorns
stout, often triple or compound; _leaflets lanceolate-oblong_, somewhat
serrate; _pods linear, elongated_ (1--11/2 deg. long), often twisted, filled
with sweet pulp between the seeds.--Rich woods, western N. Y. and Penn.
to Ga., west to Mich., E. Neb., Kan., and La. A large tree, common in
cultivation, with very hard and heavy wood.

2. G. aquatica, Marsh. (WATER-LOCUST.) Thorns slender, mostly simple;
_leaflets ovate or oblong; pods oval, 1-seeded_, pulpless. (G.
monosperma, _Walt._)--Deep swamps, Mo. to S. Ind., S. Car., and
southward. A smaller tree, 30--40 deg. high.


45. DESMANTHUS, Willd.

Flowers perfect or polygamous, regular. Calyx campanulate, 5-toothed.
Petals 5, distinct. Stamens 5 or 10. Pod flat, membranaceous or somewhat
coriaceous, several-seeded, 2-valved, smooth.--Herbs, with twice-pinnate
leaves of numerous small leaflets, and with one or more glands on the
petiole, setaceous stipules, and axillary peduncles bearing a head of
small greenish-white flowers. (Name composed of [Greek: de/sma], _a
bond_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_.)

1. D. brachylobus, Benth. Nearly glabrous perennial, erect (1--4 deg. high);
pinnae 6--15 pairs; leaflets 20--30 pairs; peduncles 1--3' long; stamens
5; pods _numerous in dense globose heads, oblong or lanceolate_, curved,
scarcely 1' long, 2--6-seeded.--Prairies and alluvial banks, Ind. and
Ky. to Minn., Mo., and Tex.; also in Fla.

2. D. leptolobus, Torr. & Gray. Pinnae 5--8 pairs; leaflets 10--20 pairs;
peduncles 1' long or less; heads rather loose, stamens 5; _pods usually
few, narrowly linear, erect_, 1--2' long.--Central Kan. to Tex.


46. SCHRANKIA, Willd. SENSITIVE BRIAR.

Flowers polygamous, regular. Calyx minute, 5-toothed. Petals united into
a funnel-form 5-cleft corolla. Stamens 10--12, distinct, or the
filaments united at base. Pods long and narrow, rough-prickly,
several-seeded, 4-valved, i.e., the two narrow valves separating on each
side from a thickened margin.--Perennial herbs, nearly related to the
true Sensitive Plants (Mimosa); the procumbent stems and petioles
recurved-prickly, with twice-pinnate sensitive leaves of many small
leaflets, and axillary peduncles bearing round heads of small
rose-colored flowers. (Named for _F. P. Schrank_, a German botanist.)

1. S. uncinata, Willd. Prickles hooked; pinnae 4--6 pairs; _leaflets
elliptical, reticulated_ with strong veins beneath; pods oblong-linear,
nearly terete-short-pointed, densely prickly (2' long).--Dry sandy soil,
Va. to Fla., west to S. Ill., Kan., and Tex.

2. S. angustata, Torr. & Gray. _Leaflets oblong-linear, scarcely
veined_; pods slender, taper-pointed, sparingly prickly (about 4'
long).--S. Va. (?) to Fla., Tenn., and Tex.


ORDER 33. ROSACEAE. (ROSE FAMILY.)

_Plants with regular flowers, numerous (rarely few) distinct stamens
inserted on the calyx, and 1--many pistils, which are quite distinct, or
(in the last tribe) united and combined with the calyx tube. Seeds
(anatropous) 1--few in each ovary, almost always without albumen. Embryo
straight, with large and thick cotyledons. Leaves alternate, with
stipules_, these sometimes caducous, rarely obsolete or wanting.--Calyx
of 5 or rarely 3--4--8 sepals (the odd one superior), united at the
base, often appearing double by a row of bractlets outside. Petals as
many as the sepals (rarely wanting), mostly imbricated in the bud, and
inserted with the stamens on the edge of a disk that lines the calyx
tube. Trees, shrubs, or herbs.--A large and important order, almost
destitute of noxious qualities, and producing the most valuable fruits.
Very intimately connected with Leguminosae on one hand, and with
Saxifragaceae on the other.

I. Ovary superior and not enclosed in the calyx tube at maturity.

[*] Calyx deciduous, without bractlets, pistil solitary, becoming a
drupe.

Tribe I. PRUNEAE. Trees or shrubs, with simple mostly serrate leaves.
Ovules 2, pendulous, but seed almost always solitary. Style terminal.

1. Prunus. Flowers perfect. Lobes of calyx and corolla 5. Stone of the
drupe bony.

[*][*] Calyx mostly persistent; pistils few to many (rarely solitary).

[+] Calyx without bractlets; ovules 2--many.

Tribe II. SPIRAEEAE. Pistils mostly 5, becoming 2--several seeded
follicles. Shrubs or perennial herbs.

[a.] Calyx short, 5 cleft. Petals obovate, equal.

2. Spiraea. Flowers perfect or dioecious. Pods 1-valved. Herbs or shrubs;
leaves simple or pinnate.

3. Physocarpus. Pods inflated, 2-valved. Shrub; leaves palmately lobed.

[b.] Calyx elongated, 5-toothed. Petals slender, unequal.

4. Gillenia. Herbs; leaves 3-foliolate.

Tribe III. RUBEAE. Pistils several or numerous, becoming drupelets in
fruit. Ovules 2 and pendulous, but seed solitary. Perennials, herbaceous
or with biennial soft-woody stems.

5. Rubus. Pistils numerous, fleshy in fruit, crowded upon a spongy
receptacle.

6. Dalibarda. Pistils 5--10 in the bottom of the calyx, nearly dry in
fruit.

[+][+] Calyx lobes mostly with bractlets; ovule solitary.

Tribe IV. POTENTILLEAE. Pistils few--many, 1-ovuled, becoming dry
achenes. Herbs.

[a.] Styles persistent and elongated after anthesis, often plumose or
jointed.

7. Geum. Calyx lobes usually with 5 alternating small bractlets. Stamens
and carpels numerous, styles becoming plumose or hairy tails, or naked
and straight or jointed.

[b.] Styles not elongated after anthesis, mostly deciduous.

8. Waldsteinia. Petals and calyx lobes 5; small or no bractlets. Stamens
numerous. Achenes 2--6; styles deciduous from the base.

9. Fragaria. Flower as in Potentilla. Receptacle much enlarged and pulpy
in fruit.

10. Potentilla. Petals 5 (rarely 4) conspicuous. Calyx lobes as many,
with an alternating set of bractlets. Stamens and achenes numerous; the
latter heaped on a dry receptacle. Styles commonly more or less
lateral, deciduous or not enlarging in fruit.

11. Sibbaldia. Petals minute; stamens and achenes 5--10; otherwise as
Potentilla.

II. Ovaries inferior or enclosed in the calyx-tube.

Tribe V. POTERIEAE. Pistils 1--4, becoming achenes, completely enclosed
in the dry and firm calyx-tube, which is constricted or nearly closed at
the throat. Herbs with compound or lobed leaves. Petals often none.

12. Alchemilla. Calyx urceolate, bracteolate. Petals none. Stamens 1--4.
Flowers minute, clustered.

13. Agrimonia. Calyx turbinate, with a margin of hooked prickles.
Stamens 5--12. Flowers yellow, in long racemes.

14. Poterium. Calyx lobes petaloid; tube 4-angled, naked. Petals none.
Flowers densely capitate or spicate.

Tribe VI. ROSEAE. Pistils many, becoming bony achenes, enclosed in the
globose or urn-shaped fleshy calyx-tube, which resembles a pome. Petals
conspicuous. Stamens numerous.

15. Rosa. The only genus. Prickly shrubs with pinnate leaves.

Tribe VII. POMEAE. Carpels 2--5, enclosed in and coalescent with the
fleshy or berry-like calyx, in fruit becoming a 2--several-celled pome.
Trees or shrubs, with stipules free from the petiole.

[a.] Cells of the compound ovary as many as the styles (2--5), each
2- (rarely several-) ovuled.

16. Pyrus. Pome containing 2--5 papery or cartilaginous carpels.

17. Crataegus. Pome drupe-like, with 1--5 bony stones or kernels. Usually
thorny.

[b.] Cells of the compound ovary becoming twice as many as the styles,
each 1-ovuled.

18. Amelanchier. Pome usually of 5 carpels; each becomes incompletely
2-celled by a projection from its back; otherwise as Pyrus.


1. PRUNUS, Tourn. PLUM, CHERRY, ETC.

Calyx 5-cleft, the tube bell-shaped, urn-shaped, or tubular-obconical,
deciduous after flowering. Petals 5, spreading. Stamens 15--20. Pistil
solitary, with 2 pendulous ovules. Drupe fleshy, with a bony
stone.--Small trees or shrubs, with mostly edible fruit. (The ancient
Latin name.)

Sec. 1. PRUNUS proper (and CERASUS). _Drupe smooth, and the stone smooth or
somewhat rugged; flowers (usually white) from separate lateral scaly
buds in early spring, preceding or coetaneous with the leaves; the
pedicels few or several in simple umbel-like clusters._

1. P. Americana, Marshall. (WILD YELLOW or RED PLUM.) Tree thorny,
8--20 deg. high; _leaves ovate_ or somewhat obovate, _conspicuously pointed,
coarsely or doubly serrate; very veiny, glabrous when mature_; fruit
nearly destitute of bloom, roundish oval, yellow, orange, or red,
1/2--{2/3}' in diameter, with the turgid stone more or less acute on both
margins, or in cultivated states 1' or more in diameter, the flattened
stone with broader margins; pleasant-tasted, but with a tough and acerb
skin.--Woodlands and river banks, common.

2. P. maritima, Wang. (BEACH PLUM.) Low and straggling (1--5 deg.); _leaves
ovate or oval, finely serrate, softly pubescent underneath_; pedicels
short, pubescent; fruit globular, purple or crimson with a bloom (1/2--1'
in diameter); the stone very turgid, _acute on one edge_, rounded and
minutely grooved on the other.--Sea beaches and the vicinity,
N. Brunswick to Va. It varies, when at some distance from the coast
(N. J. and southward), with the leaves smoother and thinner and the
fruit smaller.

3. P. Alleghaniensis, Porter. A low straggling shrub or small tree
(3--15 deg. high), seldom thorny; _leaves lanceolate to oblong-ovate, often
long-acuminate, finely and sharply serrate_, softly pubescent when
young, glabrate with age; _fruit globose-ovoid, very dark purple with a
bloom_ (less than 1/2' in diameter); stone turgid, a shallow groove on one
side and a broad flat ridge on the other.--Bluffs of the Alleghany Mts.,
Penn.

4. P. Chicasa, Michx. (CHICKASAW PLUM.) Stem scarcely thorny (8--15 deg.
high); _leaves nearly lanceolate, finely serrulate, glabrous_; fruit
globular, _red, nearly destitute of bloom_ (1/2--{2/3}' in diameter); the
ovoid stone almost as thick as wide, rounded at both sutures, one of
them minutely grooved.--Md. to Fla., west to S. Ind., Kan., and Tex.

5. P. gracilis, Engelm. & Gray. _Soft-pubescent_, 1--4 deg. high; _leaves
oblong-lanceolate to ovate, acute, sharply serrate_, becoming nearly
glabrous above, 1--2' long; _pedicels and calyx pubescent_; fruit less
than 1/2' in diameter; stone rather turgid, suborbicular.--Prairies and
sandy places, S. Kan. to Tex. and Tenn.

6. P. pumila, L. (DWARF CHERRY. SAND C.) Smooth, depressed and trailing
(6'--6 deg. high); _leaves obovate-lanceolate, tapering to the base_,
somewhat toothed near the apex, _pale underneath_; flowers 2--4
together; fruit ovoid, dark red or nearly black when ripe, without
bloom; stone ovoid, marginless, of the size of a large pea.--Rocks or
sandy banks, N. Brunswick to Va., west to Minn. and Kan. Fruit usually
sour and astringent.

7. P. Pennsylvanica, L. f. (WILD RED CHERRY.) Tree 20--30 deg. high, with
light red-brown bark; _leaves oblong-lanceolate, pointed, finely and
sharply serrate, shining, green and smooth both sides_; flowers many in
a cluster, on long pedicels; fruit globose, light red, very small, with
thin and sour flesh; stone globular.--Rocky woods, Newf. to N. C., west
to Minn. and Mo.

P. SPINOSA, L. (SLOE. BLACK THORN.) Branches thorny; _leaves
obovate-oblong or ovate-lanceolate, sharply serrate, at length
glabrous_; pedicels glabrous; fruit small, globular, black with
a bloom, the stone turgid, acute on one edge.--Var. INSITITIA
(BULLACE-PLUM), is less spiny, the pedicels and lower side of the leaves
pubescent.--Roadsides and waste places, N. Eng. to Penn. and N. J. (Adv.
from Eu.)

Sec. 2. PADUS. _Drupe small, globose, without bloom; the stone
turgid-ovate, marginless; flowers in racemes terminating leafy branches,
therefore appearing after the leaves, late in spring._

8. P. Virginiana, L. (CHOKE-CHERRY.) A tall shrub, with grayish bark;
_leaves oval, oblong, or obovate, abruptly pointed, very sharply (often
doubly) serrate with slender teeth_, thin; petals roundish; fruit red
turning to dark crimson; stone smooth.--River-banks, Newf. to Ga., west
to Minn., E. Neb., and Tex.--Fruit very austere and astringent. A
variety with very short dense racemes and sweeter yellowish fruit has
been found at Dedham, Mass.

9. P. serotina, Ehrh. (WILD BLACK CHERRY.) A large tree, with
reddish-brown branches; _leaves oblong or lanceolate-oblong,
taper-pointed, serrate with incurved short and callous teeth_, thickish,
shining above; racemes elongated; petals obovate; fruit
purplish-black.--Woods, N. Scotia to Fla., west to Minn., E. Neb., and
La.--Fruit slightly bitter, but with a pleasant vinous flavor.

10. P. demissa, Walp. Low but tree-like in habit, 3--12 deg. high, resembling
n. 8 in foliage, but the leaves rather thick and the teeth less slender;
racemes often elongated; fruit purplish-black, sweet and but slightly
astringent.--Central Kan. and Neb. to New Mex., Dak., and westward.


2. SPIRAEA, L. MEADOW-SWEET.

Calyx 5-cleft, short, persistent. Petals 5, obovate, equal, imbricated
in the bud. Stamens 10--50. Pods (follicles) 5--8, not inflated,
few--several-seeded. Seeds linear, with a thin or loose coat and no
albumen.--Shrubs or perennial herbs, with simple or pinnate leaves, and
white or rose-colored flowers in corymbs or panicles. (The Greek name,
from [Greek: speira/o], _to twist_, from the twisting of the pods in the
original species.)

Sec. 1. SPIRAEA proper. _Erect shrubs, with simple leaves; stipules
obsolete; pods mostly 5, several-seeded._

1. S. betulaefolia, Pall., var. corymbosa, Watson. Nearly smooth (1--2 deg.
high); leaves oval or ovate, cut-toothed toward the apex; _corymbs
large, flat_, several times compound; _flowers white_. (S. corymbosa,
_Raf._)--Mountains of Penn. and N. J. to Ga., west to Ky. and Mo.

2. S. salicifolia, L. (COMMON MEADOW-SWEET.) _Nearly smooth_ (2--3 deg.
high); leaves wedge-lanceolate, simply or doubly serrate; _flowers in a
crowded panicle_, white or flesh-color; pods smooth.--Wet or low
grounds, Newf. to the mountains of Ga., west to Minn. and Mo.; also to
the far northwest. (Eu.)

3. S. tomentosa, L. (HARDHACK. STEEPLE-BUSH.) _Stems and lower surface
of the_ ovate or oblong serrate _leaves very woolly_; flowers in short
racemes crowded in a dense panicle, rose-color, rarely white; pods
woolly.--Low grounds, N. Scotia to the mountains of Ga., west to Minn.
and Kan.

Sec. 2. ULMARIA. _Perennial herbs, with pinnate leaves and panicled cymose
flowers; stipules kidney-form; pods 5--8, 1--2-seeded._

4. S. lobata, Jacq. (QUEEN OF THE PRAIRIE.) Glabrous (2--8 deg. high);
leaves interruptedly pinnate; the terminal leaflet very large,
7--9-parted, the lobes incised and toothed; panicle compound-clustered,
on a long naked peduncle; flowers deep peach-blossom color, handsome,
the petals and sepals often in fours.--Meadows and prairies, Penn. to
Ga., west to Mich., Ky., and Iowa.

Sec. 3. ARUNCUS. _Perennial herbs, with dioecious whitish flowers in many
slender spikes, disposed in a long compound panicle; leaves thrice
pinnate; stipules obsolete; pods 3--5, several-seeded; pedicels reflexed
in fruit._

5. S. Aruncus, L. (GOAT'S-BEARD.) Smooth, tall; leaflets thin,
lanceolate-oblong, or the terminal ones ovate-lanceolate, taper-pointed,
sharply cut and serrate.--Rich woods, N. Y. and Penn. to Ga. in the
mountains, west to Iowa and Mo.


3. PHYSOCARPUS, Maxim. NINE-BARK.

Carpels 1--5, inflated, 2-valved; ovules 2--4. Seeds roundish, with a
smooth and shining crustaceous testa and copious albumen. Stamens
30--40. Otherwise as Spiraea.--Shrubs, with simple palmately-lobed leaves
and umbel-like corymbs of white flowers. (Name from [Greek: phy~sa], _a
bladder_, and [Greek: karpo/s], _fruit_.)

1. P. opulifolius, Maxim. Shrub 4--10 deg. high, with long recurved
branches, the old bark loose and separating in numerous thin layers;
leaves roundish, somewhat 3-lobed and heart-shaped; the purplish
membranaceous pods very conspicuous. (Spiraea opulifolia, _L._ Neillia
opulifolia, _Benth. & Hook._)--Rocky banks of streams, N. Eng. to Fla.,
west to Mo., and the Pacific northward. Often cultivated.


4. GILLENIA, Moench. INDIAN PHYSIC.

Calyx narrow, somewhat constricted at the throat, 5-toothed; teeth
erect. Petals 5, rather unequal, linear-lanceolate, inserted in the
throat of the calyx, convolute in the bud. Stamens 10--20, included.
Pods 5, included, at first lightly cohering with each other,
2--4-seeded. Seeds ascending, with a close coriaceous coat, and some
albumen.--Perennial herbs, with almost sessile 3-foliolate leaves; the
thin leaflets doubly serrate and incised. Flowers loosely
paniculate-corymbed, pale rose-color or white. (Dedicated to an obscure
German botanist or physician, _A. Gille_, or _Gillenius_.)

1. G. trifoliata, Moench. (BOWMAN'S ROOT.) Leaflets ovate-oblong,
pointed, cut-serrate; stipules small, awl-shaped, entire.--Rich woods,
N. Y. to N. J. and Ga., west to Mich., Ind., and Mo.

2. G. stipulacea, Nutt. (AMERICAN IPECAC.) Leaflets lanceolate, deeply
incised; stipules large and leaf-like, doubly incised.--Western N. Y.
and Penn. to S. Ind. and Kan., south to Ala. and La.


5. RUBUS, Tourn. BRAMBLE.

Calyx 5-parted, without bractlets. Petals 5, deciduous. Stamens
numerous. Achenes usually many, collected on a spongy or succulent
receptacle, becoming small drupes; styles nearly terminal.--Perennial
herbs, or somewhat shrubby plants, with white (rarely reddish) flowers,
and edible fruit. (The Roman name, kindred with _ruber_, red.)

Sec. 1. _Fruit, or collective mass of drupes, falling off whole
from the dry receptacle when ripe, or of few grains which fall
separately._--RASPBERRY.

[*] _Leaves simple; flowers large; prickles none; fruit and receptacle
flat and broad._

1. R. odoratus, L. (PURPLE FLOWERING-RASPBERRY.) _Stem shrubby_ (3--5 deg.
high); _branches, stalks, and calyx bristly with glandular clammy
hairs_; leaves 3--5-lobed, the lobes pointed and minutely toothed, the
middle one prolonged; peduncles many-flowered; flowers showy (2' broad);
calyx-lobes tipped with a long narrow appendage; _petals rounded, purple
rose-color_; fruit reddish.--N. Scotia to N. J. and Ga., west to Mich.

2. R. Nutkanus, Mocino. (SALMON-BERRY.) _Glandular_, scarcely bristly;
leaves almost equally 5-lobed, coarsely toothed; peduncles few-flowered;
_petals oval, white_.--Upper Mich., Minn., and westward.

3. R. Chamaemorus, L. (CLOUD-BERRY. BAKED-APPLE BERRY.) _Herbaceous, low,
dioecious; stem simple, 2--3-leaved, 1-flowered_; leaves
roundish-kidney-form, somewhat 5-lobed, serrate, wrinkled; calyx-lobes
pointless; _petals obovate, white_; fruit of few grains,
amber-color.--In sphagnous swamps, highest peaks of White Mts., coast of
E. Maine, and north and west to the Arctic regions. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Leaflets (pinnately or pedately) 3--5; petals small, erect,
white._

[+] _Stems annual, herbaceous, not prickly; fruit of few separate
grains._

4. R. triflorus, Richardson. (DWARF RASPBERRY.) Stems ascending (6--12'
high) or trailing, leaflets 3 (or pedately 5), rhombic-ovate or
ovate-lanceolate, acute at both ends, coarsely doubly serrate, thin,
smooth; peduncle 1--3-flowered.--Wooded hillsides, Lab. to N. J., west
to Minn. and Iowa. Sepals and petals often 6 or 7. This appears to be
more properly a blackberry.

[+][+] _Stems biennial and woody, prickly; receptacle oblong; fruit
hemispherical._

5. R. strigosus, Michx. (WILD RED RASPBERRY.) _Stems upright_, and with
the stalks, etc., _beset with stiff straight bristles_ (or a few
becoming weak hooked prickles), glandular when young, somewhat glaucous;
leaflets 3--5, oblong-ovate, pointed, cut-serrate, whitish-downy
underneath, the lateral ones sessile; petals as long as the sepals;
_fruit light red_.--Thickets and hills, Lab. to N. J., and south in the
mountains to N. C., west to Minn. and Mo.

6. R. occidentalis, L. (BLACK RASPBERRY. THIMBLEBERRY.) _Glaucous all
over; stems recurved, armed_ like the stalks, etc., _with hooked
prickles, not bristly_; leaflets 3 (rarely 5), ovate, pointed, coarsely
doubly serrate, whitened-downy underneath, the lateral ones somewhat
stalked; petals shorter than the sepals; _fruit purple-black_ (rarely a
whitish variety), ripe early in July.--Common, especially northward.--An
apparent hybrid (R. neglectus, _Peck_) between this and the last species
occurs, with characters intermediate between the two, and growing with
them.

Sec. 2. _Fruit, or collective drupes, not separating from the juicy
prolonged receptacle, mostly ovate or oblong, blackish; stems prickly
and flowers white._--BLACKBERRY.

7. R. villosus, Ait. (COMMON or HIGH BLACKBERRY.) Shrubby (1--6 deg. high),
furrowed, _upright or reclining, armed with stout curved prickles_;
branchlets, stalks, and lower surface of the leaves _hairy and
glandular_; leaflets 3 (or pedately 5), ovate, pointed, unequally
serrate, the terminal ones somewhat heart-shaped, conspicuously stalked;
_flowers racemed, numerous_; bracts short; sepals linear-pointed, much
shorter than the obovate-oblong spreading petals.--Borders of thickets,
etc., common, and very variable in size, aspect, and shape of
fruit.--Var. FRONDOSUS, Torr., is smoother and much less glandular, with
flowers more corymbose, leafy bracts and roundish petals. With the type,
more common at the north.--Var. HUMIFUSUS, Torr. & Gray, is smaller and
trailing, with peduncles few-flowered. More common southward, and
connecting with the next species.

8. R. Canadensis, L. (LOW BLACKBERRY. DEWBERRY.) _Shrubby, extensively
trailing, slightly prickly_; leaflets 3 (or pedately 5--7), oval or
ovate-lanceolate, mostly pointed, thin, _nearly smooth_, sharply
cut-serrate; flowers racemed, with leaf-like bracts.--Dry fields,
common; Newf. to Va., west to central Minn. and E. Kan.

9. R. hispidus, L. (RUNNING SWAMP-BLACKBERRY.) _Stems slender, scarcely
woody, extensively procumbent, beset with small reflexed prickles_;
leaflets 3 (or rarely pedately 5), _smooth, thickish, mostly
persistent_, obovate, obtuse, coarsely serrate, entire toward the base;
_peduncles leafless, several-flowered, often bristly; flowers small_;
fruit of few grains, black.--In low woods or swampy grassy ground,
N. Scotia to Ga., west to Minn. and E. Kan.

10. R. cuneifolius, Pursh. (SAND BLACKBERRY.) _Shrubby_ (1--3 deg. high),
_upright, armed with stout recurved prickles, branchlets and lower side
of the leaves whitish-woolly_; leaflets 3--5, wedge-obovate, thickish,
serrate above; peduncles 2--4-flowered; _petals large_.--Sandy woods,
southern N. Y. and Penn. to Fla., west to Mo. and La.

11. R. trivialis, Michx. (LOW BUSH-BLACKBERRY.) _Shrubby, procumbent_,
bristly and prickly; _leaves evergreen, coriaceous, nearly glabrous_;
leaflets 3 (or pedately 5), ovate-oblong or lanceolate, sharply serrate;
peduncles 1--3-flowered; petals large.--Sandy soil, Va. to Fla., west to
Mo. and Tex.


6. DALIBARDA, L.

Calyx deeply 5--6-parted, 3 of the divisions larger and toothed. Petals
5, sessile, deciduous. Stamens many. Ovaries 5--10, becoming
nearly dry seed-like drupes; styles terminal, deciduous.--Low
perennials, with creeping and densely tufted stems or rootstocks, and
roundish-heart-shaped crenate leaves on slender petioles. Flowers 1 or
2, white, on scape-like peduncles. (Named in honor of _Thomas Dalibard_,
a French botanist of the time of Linnaeus.)

1. D. repens, L. Downy; sepals spreading in the flower, converging and
enclosing the fruit.--Wooded banks; common northward. June--Aug.--In
aspect and foliage resembling a stemless Violet.


7. GEUM, L. AVENS.

Calyx bell-shaped or flattish, deeply 5-cleft, usually with 5 small
bractlets at the sinuses. Petals 5. Stamens many. Achenes numerous,
heaped on a conical or cylindrical dry receptacle, the long persistent
styles forming hairy or naked and straight or jointed tails. Seed erect;
radicle inferior.--Perennial herbs, with pinnate or lyrate leaves. (A
name used by Pliny, of unknown meaning.)

Sec. 1. GEUM proper. _Styles jointed and bent near the middle, the upper
part deciduous and mostly hairy, the lower naked and hooked, becoming
elongated; head of fruit sessile in the calyx; calyx-lobes reflexed._

[*] _Petals white or pale greenish-yellow, small, spatulate or oblong;
stipules small._

1. G. album, Gmelin. _Smoothish or softly pubescent; stem slender_ (2 deg.
high); root-leaves of 3--5 leaflets, or simple and rounded, with a few
minute leaflets on the petiole below; those of the stem 3-divided
or lobed, or only toothed; hairs upon the long slender peduncles
ascending or spreading; _receptacle of the fruit densely
bristly-hirsute._--Borders of woods, etc.; common. May--Aug.

2. G. Virginianum, L. _Bristly-hairy, especially the stout stem_; lower
and root-leaves pinnate, very various, the upper mostly 3-parted or
divided, incised; petals inconspicuous, shorter than the calyx; heads of
fruit larger, on short stout peduncles hirsute with reflexed hairs;
_receptacle glabrous_ or nearly so.--Borders of woods and low grounds;
common. June--Aug.

[*][*] _Petals golden-yellow, conspicuous, broadly-obovate, exceeding
the calyx; stipules larger and all deeply cut._

3. G. macrophyllum, Willd. Bristly-hairy, stout (1--3 deg. high);
root-leaves lyrately and interruptedly pinnate, with the _terminal
leaflet very large and round-heart-shaped_; lateral leaflets of the
stem-leaves 2--4, minute, the terminal roundish, 3-cleft, the _lobes
wedge-form and rounded; receptacle nearly naked_.--N. Scotia and N. Eng.
to Minn., Mo., and westward. June. (Eu.)

4. G. strictum, Ait. Somewhat hairy (3--5 deg. high); root-leaves
interruptedly pinnate, the leaflets wedge-obovate; _leaflets of the
stem-leaves 3--5, rhombic-ovate or oblong, acute; receptacle
downy._--Moist meadows, Newf. to N. J., west to Minn., Kan., and
westward. July, Aug. (Eu.)

Sec. 2. STYLIPUS. _Styles smooth; head of fruit conspicuously stalked in
the calyx; bractlets of the calyx none, otherwise nearly as Sec. 1._

5. G. vernum, Torr. & Gray. Somewhat pubescent; stems ascending,
few-leaved, slender; root-leaves roundish-heart-shaped, 3--5-lobed, or
some of them pinnate, with the lobes cut; petals yellow, about the
length of the calyx; receptacle smooth.--Thickets, Penn. to Ill., south
to Ky. and Tex. April--June.

Sec. 3. CARYOPHYLLATA. _Style jointed and bent in the middle, the upper
joint plumose; flowers large; calyx erect or spreading; petals erect._

6. G. rivale, L. (WATER, or PURPLE AVENS.)--Stems nearly simple,
several-flowered (2 deg. high); root-leaves lyrate and interruptedly
pinnate, those of the stem few, 3-foliolate or 3-lobed; petals
dilated-obovate, retuse, contracted into a claw, purplish-orange; head
of fruit stalked in the brown-purple calyx.--Bogs and wet meadows, Newf.
to N. J., west to Minn. and Mo.--Flowers nodding; pedicels erect in
fruit. (Eu.)

Sec. 4. SIEVERSIA. _Style not jointed, wholly persistent and straight; head
of fruit sessile; flowers large; calyx erect or spreading. (Flowering
stems simple, and bearing only bracts or small leaves.)_

7. G. triflorum, Pursh. Low, softly-hairy; root-leaves interruptedly
pinnate; leaflets very numerous and crowded, oblong-wedge-form, deeply
cut-toothed; flowers 3 or more on long peduncles; _bractlets linear,
longer than the purple calyx, as long as the oblong purplish erect
petals; styles very long (2'), strongly plumose in fruit_.--Rocks, Lab.
and northern N. Eng., to Minn. and Mo., rare. April--June.

8. G. radiatum, Michx. Hirsutely hairy or smoothish; _root-leaves
rounded-kidney-shaped_, radiate-veined (2--5' broad), doubly or
irregularly cut-toothed and obscurely 5--7-lobed, also a set of minute
leaflets down the long petiole; stems (8--18' high) 1--5-flowered;
_bractlets minute; petals yellow, round-obovate_ and more or less
obcordate, exceeding the calyx (1/2' long), _spreading; styles naked_
except the base. (High mountains of N. C.)

Var. Peckii, Gray. Nearly glabrous, or the stalks and veins of the
leaves sparsely hirsute.--Alpine tops of the White Mts.

       *        *       *       *       *

DRYAS OCTOPETALA, L., a dwarf matted slightly shrubby plant, with simple
toothed leaves and large white solitary flowers, has the characters of
this section excepting its 8--9-parted calyx and 8 or 9 petals. It was
said by Pursh to have been found on the White Mountains, N. H., ninety
years ago, but it is not known to have been seen there since.


8. WALDSTEINIA, Willd.

Calyx-tube inversely conical; the limb 5-cleft, with 5 often minute and
deciduous bractlets. Petals 5. Stamens many, inserted into the throat of
the calyx. Achenes 2--6, minutely hairy; the terminal slender styles
deciduous from the base by a joint. Seed erect; radicle inferior.--Low
perennial herbs, with chiefly radical 3--5-lobed or divided leaves, and
small yellow flowers on bracted scapes. (Named in honor of _Francis von
Waldstein_, a German botanist.)

1. W. fragarioides, Tratt. (BARREN STRAWBERRY.) Low; leaflets 3, broadly
wedge-form, cut-toothed, scapes several-flowered; petals longer than the
calyx.--Wooded hillsides, N. Eng. to Ga., west to Ind., Mich., and Minn.


9. FRAGARIA, Tourn. STRAWBERRY.

Flowers nearly as in Potentilla. Styles deeply lateral. Receptacle in
fruit much enlarged and conical, becoming pulpy and scarlet, bearing the
minute dry achenes scattered over its surface.--Stemless perennials,
with runners, and with white cymose flowers on scapes. Leaves radical;
leaflets 3, obovate-wedge-form, coarsely serrate, stipules cohering with
the base of the petioles, which with the scapes are usually hairy. (Name
from the fragrance of the fruit.)--Flowering in spring. (The species are
indiscriminately called WILD STRAWBERRY.)

1. F. Virginiana, Mill. _Achenes imbedded in the deeply pitted fruiting
receptacle_, which usually has a narrow neck, calyx becoming erect after
flowering and connivent over the hairy receptacle when sterile or
unfructified; _leaflets of a firm or coriaceous texture; the hairs of
the scapes_, and especially of the _pedicels, silky and
appressed_.--Moist or rich woodlands, fields, etc.; common.

Var. Illinoensis, Gray, is a coarser or larger plant, with flowers more
inclined to be polygamo-dioecious, and the _villous hairs of the scape
and pedicels widely spreading_.--Rich soil, western N. Y. to Minn., and
westward.

2. F. vesca, L. _Achenes superficial on the glabrous conical or
hemispherical fruiting receptacle_ (not sunk in pits); calyx remaining
spreading or reflexed; hairs on the scape mostly widely spreading, on
the pedicels appressed; _leaflets thin_, even the upper face strongly
marked by the veins.--Fields and rocky places; less common. (Eu.)

F. INDICA, L., differing from the true strawberries in having leafy
runners, a calyx with incised leafy bractlets larger than the sepals,
_yellow petals_, and _insipid fruit_, has become somewhat established
near Philadelphia and in the S. States; an escape from cultivation.
Flowers and fruit produced through the summer and autumn. (Adv. from
India.)


10. POTENTILLA, L. CINQUE-FOIL. FIVE-FINGER.

Calyx flat, deeply 5-cleft, with as many bractlets at the sinuses, thus
appearing 10-cleft. Petals 5, usually roundish. Stamens many. Achenes
many, collected in a head on the dry mostly pubescent or hairy
receptacle; styles lateral or terminal, deciduous. Radicle
superior.--Herbs, or rarely shrubs, with compound leaves, and solitary
or cymose flowers; their parts rarely in fours. (Name a diminutive from
_potens_, powerful, originally applied to P. Anserina, from its once
reputed medicinal powers.)

Sec. 1. _Styles thickened and glandular toward the base; achenes glabrous,
numerous; inflorescence cymose._

[*] _Style nearly basal; stamens 25--30; perennial glandular-villous
herbs, with pinnate leaves, and rather large white or yellow flowers._

1. P. arguta, Pursh. Stems erect, usually stout (1--4 deg. high),
brownish-hairy, clammy above; leaflets 7--11, oval or ovate,
cut-serrate, downy beneath; cyme strict and rather close; stamens mostly
30, on a thick glandular disk.--Rocky hills, N. Brunswick to N. J.,
Minn., Kan., and westward.

[*][*] _Style terminal; flowers small, yellow; leaves pinnate or
ternate._

[+] _Annual or biennial; leaflets incisely serrate, not white-tomentose;
stamens 5--20._

2. P. Norvegica, L. _Stout, erect, hirsute_ (1/2--2 deg. high); _leaves
ternate_; leaflets obovate or oblong-lanceolate; _cyme rather close_,
leafy; _calyx large_; stamens 15 (rarely 20).--Lab. to N. J., west to
Minn. and Kan. (Eu.)

3. P. rivalis, Nutt. _More slender and branched, softly villous; leaves
pinnate, with two pairs of closely approximate leaflets, or a single
pair and the terminal leaflet 3-parted_; leaflets cuneate-obovate or
-oblong; _cyme loose, often diffuse_, less leafy; _calyx small_; petals
minute; stamens 10--20 (rarely 5).--Neb. to Mo. and N. Mex., and
westward.

Var. millegrana, Watson. Leaves all ternate; stems erect, or weak and
ascending; achenes often small and light-colored.--Minn. to Mo.,
N. Mex., and westward.

Var. pentandra, Watson. Leaves ternate, the lateral leaflets of the
lower leaves parted nearly to the base; stamens 5, opposite to the
sepals.--Iowa, Mo., and Ark.

4. P. supina, L. _Stems decumbent at base_ or erect, often stout, leafy,
_subvillous; leaflets pinnately 5--11_, obovate or oblong; _cyme loose,
leafy_; stamens 20; _achenes strongly gibbous on the ventral side_. (P.
paradoxa, _Nutt._)--Minn. to Mo., and westward; also eastward along the
Great Lakes.--Var. NICOLLETII, Watson. Slender; leaflets mostly but 3;
inflorescence much elongated, leafy, and falsely racemose.--Devil's
Lake, Minn.

[+][+] _Herbaceous perennials, more or less white-tomentose; leaflets
incisely pinnatifid; bractlets and sepals nearly equal; stamens 20--25._

5. P. Pennsylvanica, L. Stems erect or decumbent at base (1/2--2 deg. high);
leaflets 5--9, white-tomentose beneath, short-pubescent and greener
above, oblong, obtuse, the linear segments slightly or not at all
revolute; cyme fastigiate but rather open.--Coast of Maine, N. H., and
the lower St. Lawrence, L. Superior, and westward. July, Aug.--Var.
STRIGOSA, Lehm. Stems 6--12' high; silky-tomentose throughout; leaflets
deeply pinnatifid, the margins of the narrow lobes revolute; cyme short
and close.--Minn. and westward.

Sec. 2. _Styles filiform, not glandular at base; inflorescence cymose._

[*] _Style terminal; achenes glabrous; stamens 20; herbaceous
perennials, with rather large yellow flowers._

[+] _Leaves pinnate._

6. P. Hippiana, Lehm. Densely white-tomentose and silky throughout, the
upper surface of the leaves a little darker; stems ascending (1--11/2 deg.
high), slender, branching above into a diffuse cyme; leaflets 5--11,
cuneate-oblong, _incisely toothed at least toward the apex, diminishing
uniformly down the petiole_; carpels 10--30.--N. W. Minn., and westward.

7. P. effusa, Dougl. Tomentose throughout, with scattered villous hairs;
stems ascending (4--12' high), diffusely branched above; leaflets 5--11,
_interruptedly pinnate, the alternate ones smaller_, cuneate-oblong,
_coarsely-incised-serrate or dentate_; carpels 10.--W. Minn. to Mont.
and Col.

[+][+] _Leaves palmate, of 3 or 5 leaflets; tomentose or villous._

8. P. argentea, L. (SILVERY CINQUE-FOIL.) Stems ascending, paniculately
branched at the summit, many-flowered, white-woolly; leaflets 5,
wedge-oblong, almost pinnatifid, entire toward the base, with revolute
margins, green above, white with silvery wool beneath.--Dry barren
fields, etc., N. Scotia to N. J., west to Dak. and E. Kan. June--Sept.
(Eu.)

9. P. frigida, Vill. Dwarf (1--3' high), tufted, villous when young;
leaflets 3, broadly cuneate-obovate, deeply 3--5-toothed at summit,
nearly glabrous above; flowers mostly solitary, small, on very slender
stems; bractlets and sepals equal.--Alpine summits of the White Mts.
(Eu.)

[*][*] _Style lateral; purple petals (shorter than the broad calyx)
somewhat persistent; disk thick and hairy; achenes glabrous; hairy
receptacle becoming large and spongy._

10. P. palustris, Scop. (MARSH FIVE-FINGER.) Stems stout, ascending from
a decumbent rooting perennial base (1/2--2 deg. long), glabrous below; leaves
pinnate; leaflets 5--7, oblong, serrate, lighter colored and more or
less pubescent beneath; flowers few in an open cyme; calyx (1' broad)
dark purple inside.--Cool bogs, N. J. to N. Ind., Ill., Minn., and
northward. (Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Style attached below the middle; achenes and receptacle
densely villous; woody perennials._

11. P. fruticosa, L. (SHRUBBY CINQUE-FOIL.) _Stem erect, shrubby_ (1--4 deg.
high), much branched; _leaves pinnate, leaflets 5--7_, crowded,
oblong-lanceolate, _entire_, silky, usually whiter beneath and the
margins revolute; _petals yellow, orbicular_.--Wet grounds, Lab. to
N. J., west to Minn., northern Iowa, and north and westward. June--Sept.
(Eu.)

12. P. tridentata, Ait. (THREE-TOOTHED C.) Stems low (1--10' high),
rather woody at base, tufted, ascending, cymosely several-flowered;
_leaves palmate; leaflets 3_, wedge-oblong, nearly smooth, thick,
_coarsely 3-toothed at the apex; petals white_; achenes and receptacle
very hairy.--Coast of N. Eng. from Cape Cod northward, Norfolk, Ct.
(_Barbour_), and mountain-tops of the Alleghanies; also shores of the
upper Great Lakes, and N. Iowa, Wisc., and Minn.

Sec. 3. _Styles filiform, lateral; peduncles axillary, solitary,
1-flowered; achenes glabrous; receptacle very villous; herbaceous
perennials, with yellow flowers._

13. P. Anserina, L. (SILVER-WEED.) _Spreading by slender many-jointed
runners, white-tomentose and silky-villous; leaves all radical,
pinnate_; leaflets 7--21, with smaller ones interposed, _oblong_,
sharply serrate, silky tomentose at least beneath; bractlets and
stipules often incisely cleft; peduncles elongated.--Brackish marshes,
river-banks, etc., New Eng. to N. J., N. Ind., Minn., and northward.
(Eu.)

14. P. Canadensis, L. (COMMON CINQUE-FOIL or FIVE-FINGER.) _Stems
slender and decumbent or prostrate_, or sometimes erect; _pubescence
villous, often scanty; leaves ternate, but apparently quinate_ by the
parting of the lateral leaflets; _leaflets cuneate-oblong or -obovate_,
incisely serrate, nearly glabrous above; bractlets entire.--Dry soil;
common and variable. Apr.--July.--Often producing summer runners.


11. SIBBALDIA, L.

Calyx flattish, 5-cleft, with 5 bractlets. Petals 5, linear-oblong,
minute. Stamens 5, inserted alternate with the petals into the margin of
the woolly disk which lines the base of the calyx. Achenes 5--10; styles
lateral.--Low and depressed mountain perennials; included by some in
Potentilla. (Dedicated to _Dr. Robert Sibbald_, professor at Edinburgh
at the close of the 17th century.)

1. S. procumbens, L. Leaflets 3, wedge-shaped, 3-toothed at the apex;
petals yellow.--Alpine summits of the White Mts., and northward. (Eu.)


12. ALCHEMILLA, Tourn. LADY'S MANTLE.

Calyx-tube inversely conical, contracted at the throat; limb 4-parted
with as many alternate accessory lobes. Petals none. Stamens 1--4.
Pistils 1--4; the slender style arising from near the base; achenes
included in the tube of the persistent calyx.--Low herbs, with palmately
lobed or compound leaves, and small corymbed greenish flowers. (From
_Alkemelyeh_, the Arabic name, having reference to the silky pubescence
of some species.)

A. ARVENSIS, Scop. (PARSLEY PIERT.) Small annual (3--8' high), leafy;
leaves 3-parted, with the wedge-shaped lobes 2--3-cleft, pubescent;
flowers fascicled opposite the axils.--Va. and N. C. (Adv. from Eu.)


13. AGRIMONIA, Tourn. AGRIMONY.

Calyx-tube top-shaped, contracted at the throat, beset with hooked
bristles above, indurated in fruit and enclosing the 2 achenes; the limb
5-cleft, closed after flowering. Petals 5. Stamens 5--15. Styles
terminal. Seed suspended.--Perennial herbs, with interruptedly pinnate
leaves, and yellow flowers in slender spiked racemes; bracts 3-cleft.
(Name a corruption of _Argemonia_, of the same derivation as Argemone,
p. 59.)

1. A. Eupatoria, L. (COMMON AGRIMONY.) _Leaflets 5--7 with minute ones
intermixed, oblong-obovate_, coarsely toothed; petals twice the length
of the calyx.--Borders of woods, common. July--Sept. (Eu.)

2. A. parviflora, Ait. (SMALL-FLOWERED A.) _Leaflets crowded, 11--19,
with smaller ones intermixed, lanceolate_, acute, deeply and regularly
cut-serrate, as well as the stipules; petals small.--Woods and glades,
N. Y. and N. J. to Ga., west to Mich., Kan., and La.


14. POTERIUM, L. BURNET.

Calyx with a top-shaped tube, constricted at the throat, persistent; the
4 broad petal-like spreading lobes imbricated in the bud, deciduous.
Petals none. Stamens 4--12 or more, with flaccid filaments and short
anthers. Pistils 1--3; the slender terminal style tipped with a tufted
or brush-like stigma. Achene (commonly solitary) enclosed in the
4-angled dry and thickish closed calyx-tube. Seed suspended.--Chiefly
perennial herbs, with unequally pinnate leaves, stipules coherent with
the petiole, and small, often polygamous or dioecious flowers crowded in
a dense head or spike at the summit of a long and naked peduncle, each
bracteate and 2-bracteolate. (Name [Greek: pote/rion], _a drinking-cup_,
the foliage of Burnet having been used in the preparation of some
medicinal drink.)

1. P. Canadense, Benth. & Hook. (CANADIAN BURNET.) Stamens 4,
long-exserted, club-shaped, white, as is the whole of the elongated and
cylindrical spike; stem 3--6 deg. high; leaflets numerous, ovate or
oblong-lanceolate, coarsely serrate, obtuse, heart shaped at base, as if
stipellate; stipules serrate.--Bogs and wet meadows, Newf. to mountains
of Ga., west to Mich.

P. SANGUISORBA, L. (GARDEN BURNET.) Stamens 12 or more in the lower
flowers of the globular greenish head, with drooping capillary
filaments, the upper flowers pistillate only; stems about 1 deg. high;
leaflets numerous, small, ovate, deeply cut.--Fields and rocks, N. Y. to
Md. (Adv. from Eu.)


15. ROSA, Tourn. ROSE.

Calyx-tube urn-shaped, contracted at the mouth, becoming fleshy in
fruit. Petals 5, obovate or obcordate, inserted with the many stamens
into the edge of the hollow thin disk that lines the calyx-tube and
within bears the numerous pistils below. Ovaries hairy, becoming bony
achenes in fruit.--Shrubby and usually spiny or prickly, with
odd-pinnate leaves, and stipules cohering with the petiole; stalks,
foliage, etc., often bearing aromatic glands. Many of the species are
very variable in their characters, and are often indeterminable upon
imperfect specimens. (The ancient Latin name.)

[*] _Styles cohering in a protruding column, as long as the stamens._

1. R. setigera, Michx. (CLIMBING or PRAIRIE ROSE.) Stems climbing, armed
with stout nearly straight scattered prickles, not bristly; leaflets
3--5, ovate, acute, sharply serrate, smooth or downy beneath; stalks and
calyx glandular; flowers corymbed; sepals pointed; petals deep
rose-color changing to white; fruit (hip) globular.--Borders of prairies
and thickets, Ont. to Ohio, S. C., and Fla., west to Wisc., Neb., and
Tex.; also cultivated. July.--The only American climbing rose, or with
united protruding styles; strong shoots growing 10--20 deg. in a season.

[*][*] _Styles distinct; sepals connivent after flowering and
persistent; pedicels and receptacles naked._

[+] _Fruit oblong-obovate to oblong; infrastipular spines usually none._

2. R. Engelmanni, Watson. Stems usually 3--4 deg. high or less;
infrastipular spines, when present, straight and slender; prickles often
abundant; leaflets 5--7, often somewhat resinous-puberulent beneath and
the teeth serrulate; flowers solitary; sepals entire, naked or hispid;
fruit 6--12'' long.--Whisky Island, L. Huron, shores of L. Superior, and
west to the Red River valley, and in the mountains from N. Mont, and
N. Idaho to Col.

[+][+] _Fruit globose; infrastipular spines none; acicular prickles
often present._

3. R. blanda, Ait. Stems 1--3 deg. high, _wholly unarmed_ (occasionally with
a few or very rarely numerous prickles); _stipules dilated_, naked and
entire, or slightly glandular-toothed; _leaflets 5--7_, usually
oblong-lanceolate, _cuneate at base and petiolulate, simply serrate, not
resinous_; flowers usually large, corymbose or solitary; _sepals hispid,
entire_.--On rocks and rocky shores, Newf. to N. Eng., central N. Y.,
Ill. (La Salle Co.), and the region of the Great Lakes.

4. R. Sayi, Schwein. Stems usually low (1--2 deg. high), _very prickly;
stipules usually dilated_, glandular-ciliate and resinous; _leaflets
3--7_, broadly elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, _sessile and obtuse or
subcordate at base, resinous-puberulent and teeth serrulate_; flowers
large, solitary (very rarely 2 or 3); outer sepals usually with 1 or 2
narrow lateral lobes, not hispid.--N. Mich. and Wisc. to Minn. and Col.

5. R. Arkansana, Porter. Stems low, _very prickly; stipules narrow_,
more or less glandular-toothed above (or even glandular-ciliate);
_leaflets 7--11_, broadly elliptical to oblong-oblanceolate, _subcuneate
at base_, sessile or petiolulate, _simply toothed, not resinous_;
flowers corymbose; _sepals rarely hispid, the outer lobed_.--Minn. to
Mo. and W. Tex., west to Col.

[+][+][+] _Fruit globose; infrastipular spines present._

6. R. Woodsii, Lindl. Stems usually low (1/4--3 deg. high), with slender
straight or recurved spines, sometimes with scattered prickles, or
wholly unarmed above; leaflets 5--7, obovate to oblong or lanceolate,
more or less toothed; flowers corymbose or solitary; sepals naked or
hispid, the outer usually lobed; fruit globose with a short neck.--Minn.
to Mo., west to Col.

[*][*][*] _Styles distinct; sepals spreading after flowering and
deciduous; infrastipular spines usually present, often with scattered
prickles; sepals, globose receptacle, and pedicel usually hispid; teeth
simple; pubescence not resinous._

[+] _Leaflets mostly finely many-toothed._

7. R. Carolina, L. Stems usually tall (1--7 deg. high), with stout straight
or usually more or less curved spines; stipules long and very narrow;
leaflets dull green, 5--9 (usually 7), usually narrowly oblong and acute
at each end and petiolulate, but often broader, usually pubescent
beneath.--Borders of swamps and streams, N. Scotia to Fla., west to
Minn. and Miss.

[+][+] _Leaflets coarsely toothed._

8. R. lucida, Ehrh. Stems often tall and stout (a few inches to 6 deg.
high), _with at length stout and usually more or less hooked spines;
stipules_ usually naked, _more or less dilated; leaflets_ (mostly 7)
dark green, rather thick, _smooth and often shining above_; flowers
corymbose or solitary; outer sepals frequently with 1 or 2 small
lobes.--Margins of swamps or moist places, Newf. to N. Eng., N. Y., and
E. Penn.

9. R. humilis, Marsh. Stems usually low (1--3 deg.) and more slender, less
leafy, with _straight slender spines_, spreading or sometimes reflexed;
_stipules narrow_, rarely somewhat dilated; leaflets as in the last, but
usually thinner and paler; flowers very often solitary; _outer sepals
always more or less lobed_. (R. lucida of most authors.)--Mostly in dry
soil or on rocky slopes, Maine to Ga., west to Minn., Mo., Ind. Terr.,
and La.

10. R. nitida, Willd. Low, nearly or quite _glabrous throughout, the
straight slender spines often scarcely stouter than the prickles which
usually thickly cover the stem and branches; stipules mostly dilated_;
leaflets bright green and shining, usually narrowly oblong and acute at
each end; flowers solitary (rarely 2 or 3); _sepals entire_.--Margins of
swamps, Newf. to N. Eng.

_Naturalized species._

R. CANINA, L. (DOG ROSE.) Stems armed with stout recurved spines,
without prickles, the branches sometimes unarmed; leaflets 5--7,
elliptical or oblong-ovate, glabrous or somewhat pubescent, simply
toothed, not resinous-puberulent; flowers solitary (or 2--4) on usually
naked pedicels; sepals pinnatifid, deciduous; fruit oblong-ovate to
nearly globular.--Roadsides, E. Penn., Tenn., etc. (Int. from Eu.)

R. RUBIGINOSA, L. (SWEETBRIER. EGLANTINE.) Resembling the last, but of
more compact habit, _the leaflets densely resinous beneath and aromatic,
and doubly serrate_; the short pedicels and pinnatifid sepals hispid.
(Incl. R. micrantha, _Smith_; less aromatic, with oblong fruit and
glabrous styles.)--N. Scotia and Ont. to S. C. and Tenn. (Int. from Eu.)


16. PYRUS, L. PEAR. APPLE.

Calyx-tube urn-shaped, the limb 5-cleft. Petals roundish or obovate.
Stamens numerous. Styles 2--5. Pome fleshy or berry-like; the 2--5
carpels or cells of a papery or cartilaginous texture, 2-seeded.--Trees
or shrubs, with handsome flowers in corymbed cymes. (The classical name
of the Pear-tree.)

Sec. 1. MALUS (APPLE). _Leaves simple; cymes simple and umbel-like; pome
fleshy, globular, sunk in at the attachment of the stalk._

1. P. coronaria, L. (AMERICAN CRAB-APPLE.) _Leaves ovate_, often rather
heart-shaped, _cut-serrate or lobed_, soon glabrous; _styles woolly and
united at base_.--Glades, Ont. and W. New York to N. C., west to Minn.,
Kan., and La. May.--Tree 20 deg. high, somewhat thorny, with large
rose-colored very fragrant blossoms, few in a corymb; fruit fragrant and
greenish.

2. P. angustifolia, Ait. Resembling the last, but with _leaves oblong or
lanceolate_, often acute at base, mostly toothed, glabrous; _styles
distinct_.--Glades, Penn. to Fla., west to S. Ind., Kan., and La. April.

Sec. 2. ADENORHACHIS. _Leaves simple, the midrib glandular along the upper
side; cymes compound; styles united at base; fruit berry-like, small._

3. P. arbutifolia, L. f. (CHOKE-BERRY.) A shrub usually 1--3 deg. high;
leaves oblong or oblanceolate, mostly acute or acuminate, finely
glandular-serrate, tomentose beneath; cyme tomentose; flowers white or
reddish; fruit pear-shaped, or globose when ripe, small, red or purple,
astringent.--Swamps and damp thickets; common, from N. Scotia to Fla.,
and west to Minn., Ill., Mo., and La.

Var. melanocarpa, Hook. Nearly smooth throughout, with larger black
fruit; leaves usually less acute.--Of apparently the same range.

Sec. 3. SORBUS. _Leaves odd-pinnate, with rather numerous leaflets; cymes
compound; styles separate; pome berry-like, small._

4. P. Americana, DC. (AMERICAN MOUNTAIN-ASH.) Tree or tall shrub,
_nearly glabrous_ or soon becoming so; _leaflets 13--15, lanceolate,
taper-pointed_, sharply serrate with pointed teeth, bright green; cymes
large and flat; berries globose, bright red, not larger than peas;
_leaf-buds pointed, glabrous_ and somewhat _glutinous_.--Swamps and
mountain-woods, Newf. to mountains of N. C., west to N. Mich, and Minn.
Often cultivated.

5. P. sambucifolia, Cham. & Schlecht. _Leaflets oblong, oval, or
lance-ovate, mostly obtuse_ or abruptly short-pointed, serrate (mostly
doubly) with more spreading teeth, often pale beneath; cymes smaller;
flowers and berries larger, the latter (4'' broad) when young ovoid, at
length globose; _leaf-buds sparingly hairy_; otherwise nearly as the
preceding.--Lab. to northern N. Eng. and Lake Superior, and westward.


17. CRATAEGUS, L. HAWTHORN. WHITE THORN.

Calyx-tube urn-shaped, the limb 5-cleft. Petals 5, roundish. Stamens
many, or only 10--15. Styles 1--5. Pome drupe-like, containing 1--5 bony
1-seeded stones.--Thorny shrubs or small trees, with simple and mostly
lobed leaves, and white (rarely rose-colored) blossoms. (Name from
[Greek: kra/tos], _strength_, on account of the hardness of the wood.)

[*] _Corymbs many-flowered._

[+] _Fruit small, depressed-globose (not larger than peas), bright red;
flowers mostly small; calyx-teeth short and broad (except in n. 3);
styles 5; glabrous (except_ C. Pyracantha_) and glandless._

C. PYRACANTHA, Pers. (EVERGREEN THORN.) _Leaves evergreen_, shining (1'
long), _oblong_ or spatulate-lanceolate, crenulate; the short petioles
and young branchlets pubescent; corymbs small.--Shrub, spontaneous near
Washington and Philadelphia. (Adv. from Eu.)

1. C. spathulata, Michx. Shrub or tree, 10--25 deg. high; _leaves thickish,
shining_, deciduous, _spatulate_ or oblanceolate, with a _long tapering
base, crenate_ above, rarely cut-lobed, _nearly sessile_.--Va. to Fla.,
west to Mo. and Tex.

2. C. cordata, Ait. (WASHINGTON THORN.) Trunk 15--25 deg. high; _leaves
broadly ovate or triangular_, mostly truncate or a little heart-shaped
at the base, on a _slender petiole, variously 3--5-cleft or cut,
serrate_.--Va. to Ga. in the mountains, west to Mo.

3. C. viridis, L. A small tree, often unarmed; leaves ovate to
ovate-oblong or lanceolate, or oblong-obovate, mostly acute at both
ends, on slender petioles, acutely serrate, often somewhat lobed, and
often downy in the axils; flowers larger, numerous; fruit bright red or
rarely orange. (C. arborescens, _Ell._)--Mississippi bottoms from
St. Louis to the Gulf, and from S. Car. to Tex.

[+][+] _Fruit small (1/4--{1/3}' long), ovoid, deep red; flowers rather
large; styles 1--3._

C. OXYACANTHA, L. (ENGLISH HAWTHORN.) Smooth; _leaves obovate_,
cut-lobed and toothed, _wedge-form_ at the base; calyx not glandular.
More or less spontaneous as well as cultivated. (Adv. from Eu.)

4. C. apiifolia, Michx. Softly pubescent when young; _leaves roundish_,
with a broad truncate or slightly heart-shaped base, _pinnately
5--7-cleft_, the crowded divisions cut-lobed and sharply serrate;
petioles slender; calyx-lobes glandular-toothed, slender.--S. Va. to
Fla., west to Mo. and Tex.

[+][+][+] _Fruit large (1/2--1' long), red; flowers large; styles and
stones even in the same species 1--3 (when the fruit is ovoid or
pear-shaped) or 4--5 (in globular fruit); stipules, calyx-teeth, bracts,
etc., often beset with glands; shrubs or low trees._ [Species as
characterized by Prof. C. S. SARGENT.]

5. C. coccinea, L. Branches reddish; spines stout, chestnut-brown;
villous-pubescent on the shoots, glandular peduncles, and calyx; leaves
on slender petioles, thin, pubescent beneath or often glabrous,
round-ovate, cuneate or subcordate at base, acutely glandular-toothed,
sometimes cut-lobed; flowers 1/2' broad; fruit coral-red, globose or
obovate, 1/2' broad.--Newf. to Minn. and southward.--Var. MACRACANTHA,
Dudley; spines longer; leaves thicker, cuneate at base, on stout
petioles, often deeply incised; cymes broader; flowers and fruit rather
larger.--From the St. Lawrence and E. Mass. to Minn.

Var. mollis, Torr. & Gray. Shoots densely pubescent; leaves large,
slender-petioled, cuneate, truncate or cordate at base, usually with
acute narrow lobes, often subscabrous above, more or less densely
pubescent beneath; flowers 1' broad, in broad cymes; fruit bright
scarlet with a light bloom, 1' broad. (C. tomentosa, var. mollis,
_Gray_. C. subvillosa, _Schrad._)--E. Mass, to Mo. and Tex. Sometimes
20--30 deg. high, blooming two weeks before the type.

6. C. tomentosa, L. Branches gray, rarely with stout gray spines;
shoots, peduncles, and calyx villous-pubescent; glands none; leaves
large, pale, prominently veined, densely pubescent beneath, ovate or
ovate-oblong, sharply serrate, usually incisely lobed, contracted into a
margined petiole; flowers small, ill-scented; fruit dull red, obovate,
rarely globose (1/2' broad), upright.--Western N. Y. to Mich., Mo., and
Ga. In flower 2--3 weeks after n. 3.

7. C. punctata, Jacq. Branches horizontal; glands none; leaves smaller,
mostly wedge-obovate, attenuate and entire below, unequally toothed
above, rarely lobed, villous-pubescent becoming smooth but dull, the
many veins more impressed, prominent beneath; fruit globose (1' broad),
red or bright yellow. (C. tomentosa, var. punctata, _Gray_.)--Quebec to
Ont. and south to Ga.

8. C. Crus-galli, L. (COCKSPUR THORN.) Branches horizontal, with slender
thorns often 4' long; _glabrous; leaves thick_, dark green, _shining
above, wedge-obovate and oblanceolate_, tapering into a very short
petiole, serrate above the middle; fruit globular, dull red ({1/3}'
broad).--Thickets, common.

[*][*] _Corymbs simple, few- (1--6-) flowered; calyx, bracts, etc.,
glandular._

9. C. flava, Ait. (SUMMER HAW.) Tree 15--20 deg. high, somewhat pubescent or
glabrous; _leaves wedge-obovate or rhombic-obovate_, narrowed into a
glandular petiole, _unequally toothed and somewhat cut_ above the
middle, _rather thin_, the teeth _glandular_; styles 4--5; fruit
somewhat pear-shaped, yellowish, greenish, or reddish (1/2' broad).--Sandy
soil, Va. to Mo., and southward.

Var. pubescens, Gray. Downy or villous-pubescent when young; leaves
thickish, usually obtuse or rounded at the summit; fruit larger (3/4'
broad), scarlet or sometimes yellow.--Va. to Fla.

10. C. parvifolia, Ait. (DWARF THORN.) Shrub 3--6 deg. high, downy; _leaves
thick, obovate-spatulate, crenate-toothed_ (1/2--11/2' long), almost
sessile, the upper surface at length shining; flowers solitary or 2--3
together on _very short peduncles; calyx-lobes as long as the petals_;
styles 5; fruit globular or pear-shaped, yellowish.--Sandy soil, N. J.
to Fla. and La.


18. AMELANCHIER, Medic. JUNE-BERRY.

Calyx 5-cleft; lobes downy within. Petals oblong, elongated. Stamens
numerous, short. Styles 5, united below. Ovary 5-celled, each cell
2-ovuled, but a projection grows from the back of each and forms a false
cartilaginous partition; the berry-like pome thus 10-celled, with one
seed in each cell (when all ripen).--Small trees or shrubs, with simple
sharply serrated leaves, and white racemose flowers. (_Amelancier_ is
the name of A. vulgaris in Savoy.)

1. A. Canadensis, Torr. & Gray. (SHAD-BUSH. SERVICE-BERRY.) A tree
10--30 deg. high, nearly or soon glabrous; leaves ovate to ovate-oblong,
usually somewhat cordate at base, pointed, very sharply serrate, 1--31/2'
long; bracts and stipules very long-silky-ciliate; flowers large, in
drooping nearly glabrous racemes; petals oblong, 6--8'' long; fruit on
elongated pedicels, globose, crimson or purplish, sweet and edible.
(Var. Botryapium, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Dry open woodlands; Newf. to Fla.,
west to Minn., E. Kan., and La. Fruit ripening in June.--Var.
ROTUNDIFOLIA, Torr. & Gray, appears to be only a broad-leaved form.

Var. (?) oblongifolia, Torr. & Gray. A smaller tree or shrub (6--10 deg.
high), the young leaves and racemes densely white-tomentose; leaves
oblong or sometimes rather broadly elliptical, acute, mostly rounded at
base, finely serrate, 1--2' long; flowers in denser and shorter racemes;
petals 3--4'' long, oblong-spatulate; fruit similar but more juicy, on
shorter pedicels.--Low moist grounds or swampy woods; N. Brunswick to
Va., west to Minn. and Mo.--A form of this with broader leaves (broadly
elliptical or rounded), often very obtuse at the summit, and rounded,
subcordate or acute at base, and usually coarsely toothed, is common
from Manitoba to Minn. and Iowa, and is sometimes cultivated for its
fruit.

2. A. oligocarpa, Roem. A low shrub 2--4 deg. high, soon glabrous; leaves
thin, _oblong, acute at both ends, finely serrate_, 1--2' long; _flowers
few_ (1--4), rather long-pedicelled; _petals oblong-obovate; fruit
broad-pyriform_, dark purple with a dense bloom. (A. Canadensis, var.
oligocarpa, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Cold swamps and mountain bogs; Lab. to
northern N. Eng. and N. Y., and the shores of Lake Superior.

3. A. alnifolia, Nutt. A shrub 3--8 deg. high, usually glabrate or nearly
so; leaves _somewhat glaucous_ and thickish, _broadly elliptical or
roundish_, very _obtuse or rarely acute_, often subcordate at base,
_coarsely toothed toward the summit_, 1/2--2' long; raceme short and
rather dense; petals cuneate-oblong, 3--8'' long; fruit globose, purple.
(A. Canadensis, var. alnifolia, _Torr. & Gray_.)--A western mountain
species, which occurs in Minn. and N. Mich., and which the broad-leaved
form of A. Canadensis sometimes closely simulates.


ORDER 34. CALYCANTHACEAE. (CALYCANTHUS FAMILY.)

_Shrubs with opposite entire leaves, no stipules, the sepals and petals
similar and indefinite, the anthers adnate and extrorse, and the
cotyledons convolute; the fruit like a rose-hip._ Chiefly represented by
the genus


1. CALYCANTHUS, L. CAROLINA ALLSPICE. SWEET-SCENTED SHRUB.

Calyx of many sepals, united below into a fleshy inversely conical cup
(with some leaf-like bractlets growing from it); the lobes lanceolate,
mostly colored like the petals, which are similar, in many rows,
thickish, inserted on the top of the closed calyx-tube. Stamens
numerous, inserted just within the petals, short; some of the inner ones
sterile (destitute of anthers). Pistils several or many, enclosed in the
calyx-tube, inserted on its base and inner face, resembling those of the
Rose; but the enlarged hip dry when ripe, enclosing the achenes.--The
lurid purple flowers terminating the leafy branches. Bark and foliage
aromatic; the crushed flowers exhaling more or less the fragrance of
strawberries. (Name composed of [Greek: ka/lyx], _a cup_ or _calyx_,
and [Greek: a/nthos], _flower_, from the closed cup which contains the
pistils.)

1. C. floridus, L. _Leaves oval, soft-downy underneath_.--Virginia(?)
and southward, on hillsides in rich soil. Common in gardens. April--Aug.

2. C. laevigatus, Willd. _Leaves oblong_, thin, either blunt or
taper-pointed, _bright green and glabrous_ or nearly so on both sides,
or rather pale beneath; flowers smaller.--Mountains of Franklin Co.,
Penn. (_Prof. Porter_), and southward along the Alleghanies. May--Aug.

3. C. glaucus, Willd. _Leaves_ oblong-ovate or ovate-lanceolate,
_conspicuously taper-pointed, glaucous-white beneath_, roughish above,
glabrous, large (4--7' long), probably a variety of the
preceding.--Virginia (?) near the mountains and southward. May--Aug.


ORDER 35. SAXIFRAGACEAE. (SAXIFRAGE FAMILY.)

_Herbs or shrubs, of various aspect, distinguishable from_ Rosaceae _by
having copious albumen in the seeds, opposite as well as alternate
leaves, and usually no stipules; the stamens mostly definite, and the
carpels commonly fewer than the sepals_, either separate or partly so,
or all combined into one compound pistil. Calyx either free or adherent,
usually persistent or withering away. Stamens and petals almost always
inserted on the calyx. Ovules anatropous.

Tribe I. SAXIFRAGEAE. Herbs. Leaves alternate (rarely opposite in n. 2
and 6). Fruit dry, capsular or follicular, the styles or tips of the
carpels distinct.

[*] Ovary 2- (rarely 3-) celled with axile placentas, or of as many
nearly distinct carpels.

1. Astilbe. Flowers polygamous, panicled. Stamens (8 or 10) twice as
many as the small petals. Seeds few. Leaves decompound.

2. Saxifraga. Flowers perfect. Petals 5. Stamens 10. Seeds numerous,
with a close coat.

3. Boykinia. Flowers perfect. Stamens only as many as the petals, which
are convolute in the bud and deciduous. Calyx-tube adherent to the
ovary. Seed-coat close.

4. Sullivantia. Flowers perfect. Stamens 5. Calyx nearly free. Seeds
wing-margined.

[*][*] Ovary 1-celled, with 2 parietal placentas alternate with the
stigmas. Sterile stamens none.

5. Tiarella. Calyx nearly free from the slender ovary. Petals entire.
Stamens 10. Placentas nearly basal.

6. Mitella. Calyx partly cohering with the depressed ovary. Petals
small, pinnatifid. Stamens 10.

7. Henchera. Calyx bell-shaped, coherent with the ovary below. Petals
small, entire. Stamens 5.

8. Chrysosplenium. Calyx-tube coherent with the ovary. Petals none.
Stamens 10.

[*][*][*] Ovary 1-celled, with 3--4 parietal placentas opposite the
sessile stigmas. A cluster of united sterile filaments at the base of
each petal.

9. Parnassia. Sepals, petals and proper stamens 5. Peduncle scape-like,
1-flowered.

Tribe II. HYDRANGEAE. Shrubs. Leaves opposite, simple. Ovary 2--5-celled;
the calyx coherent at least with its base. Fruit capsular.

[*] Stamens 8 or 10.

10. Hydrangea. Calyx-lobes minute in complete flowers. Petals valvate in
the bud.

[*][*] Stamens 20--40.

11. Decumaria. Calyx-lobes small. Petals 7--10, valvate in the bud.
Filaments subulate. Style 1.

12. Philadelphus. Calyx-lobes conspicuous. Petals 4--5, convolute in the
bud. Filaments linear. Styles 3--5.

Tribe III. ESCALLONIEAE. Shrubs. Leaves alternate and simple. Ovary
2--5-celled. Fruit capsular.

13. Itea. Calyx 5-cleft, free from the 2-celled ovary, which becomes a
septicidal capsule.

Tribe IV. RIBESIEAE. Shrubs. Leaves alternate and simple, with stipules
adnate to the petiole or wanting. Fruit a berry.

14. Ribes. Calyx-tube adnate to the 1-celled ovary. Placentas 2,
parietal, many-seeded.


1. ASTILBE, Don. FALSE GOATSBEARD.

Flowers dioeciously polygamous. Calyx 4--5-parted, small. Petals 4--5,
spatulate, small, withering-persistent. Stamens 8 or 10. Ovary 2-celled,
almost free, many-ovuled; styles 2, short. Capsule 2-celled, separating
into 2 follicles, each ripening few seeds. Seed-coat loose and thin,
tapering at each end.--Perennial herbs, with twice or thrice
ternately-compound ample leaves, cut-lobed and toothed leaflets, and
small white or yellowish flowers in spikes or racemes, which are
disposed in a compound panicle. (Name composed of [Greek: a)]- privative
and [Greek: sti/lbe], _a bright surface_, because the foliage is not
shining.)

1. A. decandra, Don. Somewhat pubescent (3--5 deg. high); leaflets mostly
heart-shaped; petals minute or wanting in the fertile flowers, stamens
10.--Rich woods; mountains of S. W. Va. to N. C. and Ga. Closely
imitating Spiraea Aruncus, but coarser.


2. SAXIFRAGA, L. SAXIFRAGE.

Calyx either free from or cohering with the base of the ovary, 5-cleft
or parted. Petals 5, entire, imbricated in the bud, commonly deciduous.
Stamens 10. Styles 2. Capsule 2-beaked, 2-celled, opening down or
between the beaks, or sometimes 2 almost separate follicles. Seeds
numerous, with a close coat.--Chiefly perennial herbs, with the
root-leaves clustered, those of the stem mostly alternate. (Name from
_saxum_, a rock, and _frango_, to break; many species rooting in the
clefts of rocks.)

[*] _Stems prostrate, in tufts, leafy; leaves opposite; calyx free from
the capsule._

1. S. oppositifolia, L. (MOUNTAIN SAXIFRAGE.) Leaves fleshy, ovate,
keeled, ciliate, imbricated on the sterile branches (1--2'' long);
flowers solitary, large; petals purple, obovate, much longer than the
5-cleft-calyx.--Rocks, Willoughby Mountain, Vt., and northward. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Stems ascending; leaves alternate; calyx coherent below with the
capsule._

2. S. rivularis, L. (ALPINE BROOK-S.) Small, stems weak, 3--5-flowered;
lower _leaves rounded, 3--5-lobed_, on slender petioles, the upper
lanceolate; _petals white, ovate_.--Alpine region of the White Mts., to
Lab. (Eu.)

3. S. aizoides, L. (YELLOW MOUNTAIN-S.) Low (3--5' high), in tufts, with
few or several corymbose flowers; _leaves linear-lanceolate, entire,
fleshy_, distantly spinulose-ciliate; _petals yellow, spotted with
orange, oblong_.--N. Vt. to S. W. New York, N. Mich., and northward.
June. (Eu.)

4. S. tricuspidata, Retz. Stems tufted (4--8' high), naked above;
flowers corymbose, _leaves oblong or spatulate, with 3 rigid sharp
teeth_ at the summit; _petals obovate-oblong, yellow_.--Shore of
L. Superior, and northward. (Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Leaves clustered at the root; scape many-flowered, erect,
clammy-pubescent._

[+] _Petals all alike._

5. S. Aizoon, Jacq. Scape 5--10' high; _leaves persistent, thick,
spatulate, with white cartilaginous toothed margins_; calyx partly
adherent; petals obovate, cream-color, often spotted at the base.--Moist
rocks, Lab. to N. Vt., L. Superior, and northward. (Eu.)

6. S. Virginiensis, Michx. (EARLY S.) Low (4--9' high); _leaves obovate
or oval-spatulate_, narrowed into a broad petiole, crenate-toothed,
thickish; flowers in a clustered cyme, which is at length open and
loosely panicled; lobes of the nearly free _calyx erect, not half the
length of the oblong obtuse (white) petals_; follicles united merely at
the base, divergent, purplish.--Exposed rocks and dry hillsides;
N. Brunswick to Ga., and west to Minn., Ohio, and Tenn.; common,
especially northward. April--June.

7. S. Pennsylvanica, L. (SWAMP S.) Large (1--2 deg. high); _leaves
oblanceolate, obscurely toothed_ (4--8' long), narrowed at base into a
short and broad petiole; cymes in a large oblong panicle, at first
clustered; lobes of the nearly free _calyx recurved, about the length of
the linear-lanceolate (greenish) small petals; filaments awl-shaped_,
follicles at length divergent.--Bogs, N. Eng. to Va., west to Minn. and
Iowa.

8. S. erosa, Pursh. (LETTUCE S.) _Leaves oblong or oblanceolate, obtuse,
sharply toothed_, tapering into a margined petiole (8--12' long); scape
slender (1--3 deg. high); panicle elongated, loosely flowered; pedicels
slender; _calyx reflexed, entirely free, nearly as long as the oval
obtuse (white) petals; filaments club-shaped_; follicles nearly
separate, diverging, _narrow, pointed_, 2--3'' long.--Cold mountain
brooks, Penn. to Va. and N. C.

9. S. Forbesii, Vasey. Stem stout, 2--4 deg. high; _leaves denticulate, oval
to elongated oblong_ (4--8' long); _filaments filiform; follicles short,
ovate_; otherwise as in the last.--Shaded cliffs, near Makanda, S. Ill.
(_Forbes_); E. Mo. (_Lettermann._)

[+][+] _Petals unequal, with claws, white, all or some of them with a
pair of yellow spots near the base; leaves oblong, wedge-shaped or
spatulate; calyx free and reflexed._

10. S. leucanthemifolia, Michx. Leaves coarsely toothed or cut, tapering
into a petiole; stems (5--18' high) bearing one or more leaves or leafy
bracts and a loose, spreading corymbose or paniculate cyme; _petals_
lanceolate, the _3 larger ones with a heart-shaped base_ and a pair of
spots, the 2 smaller with a tapering base and no spots.--Mts. of Va. to
N. C. and Ga.

11. S. stellaris, L., var comosa, Willd. Leaves wedge-shaped, more or
less toothed; scape (4--5' high) bearing a small contracted panicle,
many or most of the flowers changed into little tufts of green leaves,
_petals all lanceolate and tapering into the claw_.--Mt. Katahdin,
Maine, north to Lab. and Greenland. (Eu.)


3. BOYKINIA, Nutt.

Calyx-tube top-shaped, coherent with the 2-celled and 2-beaked capsule.
Stamens 5, as many as the deciduous petals, these mostly convolute in
the bud. Otherwise as in Saxifraga.--Perennial herbs, with alternate
palmately 5--7-lobed or cut petioled leaves, and white flowers in cymes.
(Dedicated to the late _Dr. Boykin_ of Georgia.)

1. B. aconitifolia, Nutt. Stem glandular (6--20' high); leaves deeply
5--7-lobed.--Mountains of southwestern Va. to Ga. and Tenn. July.


4. SULLIVANTIA, Torr. & Gray.

Calyx bell-shaped, cohering below only with the base of the ovary,
5-cleft. Petals 5, oblanceolate, entire, acutish, withering-persistent.
Stamens 5, shorter than the petals. Capsule 2-celled, 2-beaked,
many-seeded, opening between the beaks, the seeds wing-margined,
imbricated upward.--A low and reclined-spreading perennial herb, with
rounded and cut-toothed or slightly lobed smooth leaves, on slender
petioles, and small white flowers in a branched loosely cymose panicle,
raised on a nearly leafless slender stem (6--12' long). Peduncles and
calyx glandular; pedicels recurved in fruit. (Dedicated to the
distinguished bryologist who discovered our species.)

1. S. Ohionis, Torr. & Gray.--Limestone cliffs, Ohio to Ind., Iowa, and
Minn. June.


5. TIARELLA, L. FALSE MITRE-WORT.

Calyx bell-shaped, nearly free from the ovary, 5-parted. Petals 5, with
claws, entire. Stamens 10, long and slender. Styles 2. Capsule
membranaceous, 1-celled, 2-valved; the valves unequal. Seeds few, at the
base of each parietal placenta, globular, smooth.--Perennials; flowers
white. (Name a diminutive from [Greek: tia/ra], _a tiara_, or turban,
from the form of the pod, or rather pistil, which is like that of
Mitella, to which the name of _Mitre-wort_ properly belongs.)

1. T. cordifolia, L. Leaves from the rootstock or summer runners
heart-shaped, sharply lobed and toothed, sparsely hairy above, downy
beneath; stem leafless or rarely with 1 or 2 leaves (5--12' high);
raceme simple; petals oblong, often subserrate.--Rich rocky woods,
N. Eng. to Minn. and Ind., and southward in the mountains. April, May.


6. MITELLA, Tourn. MITRE-WORT. BISHOP'S-CAP.

Calyx short, coherent with the base of the ovary, 5-cleft. Petals 5,
slender, pinnatifid. Stamens 5 or 10, included. Styles 2, very short.
Capsule short, 2-beaked, 1-celled, with 2 parietal or rather basal
several-seeded placentae, 2-valved at the summit. Seeds smooth and
shining.--Low and slender perennials, with round heart-shaped alternate
leaves on the rootstock or runners, on slender petioles; those on the
flowering stems opposite, if any. Flowers small, in a simple slender
raceme or spike. Fruit soon widely dehiscent. (Diminutive of _mitra_, a
cap, alluding to the form of the young pod.)

1. M. diphylla, L. _Hairy; leaves heart-shaped, acute_, somewhat
3--5-lobed, toothed, _those on the many-flowered stem 2, opposite,
nearly sessile_, with interfoliar stipules; flowers white, in a raceme
6--8' long; stamens 10.--Hillsides in rich woods; N. Eng. to N. C., west
to Minn. and Mo. May.

2. M. nuda, L. Small and slender; _leaves rounded or kidney-form_,
deeply and doubly crenate; _stem usually leafless, few-flowered_, very
slender (4--6' high); flowers greenish; stamens 10.--Deep moist woods,
in moss, N. Eng. to N. Y., Mich., Minn., and northward. May--July.


7. HEUCHERA, L. ALUM-ROOT.

Calyx bell-shaped, the tube cohering at the base with the ovary,
5-cleft. Petals 5, spatulate, small, entire. Stamens 5. Styles 2,
slender. Capsule 1-celled, with 2 parietal many-seeded placentae,
2-beaked, opening between the beaks. Seeds oval, with a rough and close
seed-coat.--Perennials, with the round heart-shaped leaves principally
from the rootstock; those on the stems, if any, alternate. Petioles with
dilated margins or adherent stipules at their base. Flowers in small
clusters disposed in a prolonged and narrow panicle, greenish or
purplish. (Named in honor of _John Henry Heucher_, a German botanist of
the beginning of the 18th century.)

[*] _Flowers small, loosely panicled; stamens and styles exserted; calyx
regular._

1. H. villosa, Michx. Stems (1--3 deg. high), petioles, and veins of the
_acutely_ 7--9-lobed leaves _villous with rusty hairs_ beneath; calyx
11/2'' long; _petals spatulate-linear, about as long as the stamens_, soon
twisted.--Rocks, Md. to Ga., west to Ind. and Mo. Aug., Sept.

2. H. Rugelii, Shuttlw. Stems slender, 1/2--2 deg. high, glandular-hirsute, as
well as the petioles, etc.; _leaves round-reniform, with 7--9 short and
broad rounded lobes_; flowers very small (1'' long); petals
linear-spatulate, twice as long as the calyx-lobes; fruit
narrow.--Shaded cliffs, S. Ill. to Tenn. and N. C.

3. H. Americana, L. (COMMON ALUM-ROOT.) Stems (2--3 deg. high), etc.,
_glandular_ and more or less _hirsute with short hairs_; leaves
roundish, with short rounded lobes and crenate teeth; _calyx very
broad_, 2'' long, the _spatulate petals not longer than its
lobes_.--Rocky woodlands, Conn. to N. C., west to Minn., Mo., and Miss.

[*][*] _Flowers larger, in a very narrow panicle; calyx (3--4'' long)
more or less oblique; stamens short; leaves rounded, slightly
5--9-lobed._

4. H. hispida, Pursh. Stems 2--4 deg. high; _hispid or hirsute_ with long
spreading hairs (occasionally almost glabrous), scarcely glandular;
_stamens soon exserted, longer than the spatulate petals_.--Mountains of
Va. and N. C., west to Minn. and E. Kan. May, June.

5. H. pubescens, Pursh. Stem (1--3 deg. high) and petioles
_granular-pubescent or glandular above_, not hairy, below often
glabrous; _stamens shorter than the lobes of the calyx_ and the
spatulate petals.--Rich woods, in the mountains, from Penn. to Ky., and
southward. June, July.


8. CHRYSOSPLENIUM, Tourn. GOLDEN SAXIFRAGE.

Calyx-tube coherent with the ovary; the blunt lobes 4--5, yellow within.
Petals none. Stamens 8--10, very short, inserted on a conspicuous disk.
Styles 2. Capsule inversely heart-shaped or 2-lobed, flattened, very
short, 1-celled with 2 parietal placentae, 2-valved at the top,
many-seeded.--Low and small smooth herbs, with tender succulent leaves,
and small solitary or leafy-cymed flowers. (Name compounded of [Greek:
chryso/s], _golden_, and [Greek: sple/n], _the spleen_; probably from
some reputed medicinal qualities.)

1. C. Americanum, Schwein. Stems slender, _decumbent_ and forking;
_leaves principally opposite_, roundish or somewhat heart-shaped,
obscurely crenate-lobed; _flowers distant_, inconspicuous, _nearly
sessile_ (greenish tinged with yellow or purple).--Cold wet places,
N. Scotia to N. Ga., west to Minn.

2. C. alternifolium, L. _Stems erect; leaves alternate_,
reniform-cordate, doubly crenate or somewhat lobed; _flowers
corymbose_.--Decorah, Iowa, west to the Rocky Mts., and north through
Brit. Amer. (Eu., Asia.)


9. PARNASSIA, Tourn. GRASS OF PARNASSUS.

Sepals 5, imbricated in the bud, slightly united at the base, and
sometimes also with the base of the ovary, persistent. Petals 5, veiny,
spreading, at length deciduous, imbricated in the bud; a cluster of
somewhat united gland-tipped sterile filaments at the base of each.
Proper stamens 5, alternate with the petals, persistent; anthers
introrse or subextrorse. Ovary 1-celled, with 4 projecting parietal
placentae; stigmas 4, sessile, directly over the placentae. Capsule
4-valved, the valves bearing the placentae on their middle. Seeds very
numerous, anatropous, with a thick wing-like seed-coat and little if any
albumen. Embryo straight; cotyledons very short.--Perennial smooth
herbs, with entire leaves, and solitary flowers on long scape-like
stems, which usually bear a single sessile leaf. Petals white, with
greenish or yellowish veins. (Named from Mount Parnassus; called Grass
of Parnassus by Dioscorides.)

1. P. parviflora, DC. _Petals sessile_, little longer than the calyx
(3'' long); _sterile filaments about 7 in each set, slender; leaves
ovate or oblong_, tapering at base.--Sandy banks, Lab. to Mich.,
N. Minn., and westward.

2. P. palustris, L. Scapes 3--10' high; leaves heart-shaped; flower
nearly 1' broad; _petals sessile_, rather longer than the calyx,
few-veined; _sterile filaments 9--15 in each set, slender_.--Same range
as the last. (Eu.)

3. P. Caroliniana, Michx. Scapes 9'--2 deg. high; flower 1--11/2' broad;
_petals sessile_, more than twice as long as the calyx, many-veined;
_sterile filaments 3 in each set, stout, distinct almost to the base_;
leaves thickish, ovate or rounded, often heart shaped, usually but one
low down on the scape and clasping.--Wet banks, N. Brunswick to Fla.,
west to Minn., Iowa, and La.

4. P. asarifolia, Vent. _Petals abruptly contracted into a claw_ at
base; _sterile filaments 3 in each set; leaves rounded, kidney-shaped_;
otherwise as in the foregoing.--High mountains of Va. and N. C.


10. HYDRANGEA, Gronov.

Calyx-tube hemispherical, 8--10 ribbed, coherent with the ovary, the
limb 4--5-toothed. Petals ovate, valvate in the bud. Stamens 8--10,
slender. Capsule 15-ribbed, crowned with the 2 diverging styles,
2-celled below, many-seeded, opening by a hole between the
styles.--Shrubs, with opposite petioled leaves, no stipules, and
numerous flowers in compound cymes. The marginal flowers are usually
sterile and radiant, consisting merely of a showy membranaceous and
colored flat and dilated calyx. (Name from [Greek: y(/dor], _water_, and
[Greek: a)/ggos], _a vase_, from the shape of the capsule.)

1. H. arborescens, L. (WILD HYDRANGEA.) Glabrous or nearly so, 1--8 deg.
high; leaves ovate, rarely heart-shaped, pointed, serrate, _green both
sides_; cymes flat; flowers often all fertile, rarely all
radiant.--Rocky banks, Penn. to Fla., west to Iowa and Mo.

2. H. radiata, Walt. Leaves _densely tomentose and paler or white
beneath_.--S. C. and Ga. to Tenn. and Mo.


11. DECUMARIA, L.

Flowers all fertile. Calyx-tube turbinate, 7--10-toothed, coherent with
the ovary. Petals oblong, valvate in the bud. Stamens 20--30. Styles
united into one, persistent. Stigma thick, 7--10-rayed. Capsule
10--15-ribbed, 7--10-celled, many-seeded, bursting at the sides, the
thin partitions at length separating into numerous chaffy scales.--A
smooth climbing shrub, with opposite ovate or oblong entire or serrate
leaves, no stipules, and numerous fragrant white flowers in compound
terminal cymes. (Name said to be derived from _decem_, ten, referring to
the fact of its being often 10-merous.)

1. D. barbara, L. Leaves shining, sometimes pubescent; capsule with the
persistent style and stigma urn-shaped, pendulous.--Banks of streams;
Dismal Swamp, Va., to Fla. and La.


12. PHILADELPHUS, L. MOCK ORANGE or SYRINGA.

Calyx-tube top-shaped, coherent with the ovary; the limb 4--5-parted,
spreading, persistent, valvate in the bud. Petals rounded or obovate,
large, convolute in the bud. Stamens 20--40. Styles 3--5, united below
or nearly to the top. Stigmas oblong or linear. Capsule 3--5-celled,
splitting at length into as many pieces. Seeds very numerous, on thick
placentae projecting from the axis, pendulous, with a loose membranaceous
coat prolonged at both ends.--Shrubs, with opposite often toothed
leaves, no stipules, and solitary or cymose-clustered showy white
flowers. (An ancient name, applied by Linnaeus to this genus for no
obvious reason.)

1. P. inodorus, L. _Glabrous_; leaves ovate or ovate-oblong, pointed,
entire or with some spreading teeth; flowers single or few at the ends
of the diverging branches, pure white, scentless; _calyx-lobes acute_,
scarcely longer than the tube.--Mountains of Va. to Ga. and Ala.

2. P. grandiflorus, Willd. A tall shrub, with long and recurved
branches; like the last, but _somewhat pubescent_, with _larger
flowers_, and the _calyx-lobes long and taper-pointed_. (P. modorus,
var. grandiflorus, _Gray_.)--Along streams, Va. to Fla. Often
cultivated.

P. CORONARIUS, L., the common MOCK ORANGE or SYRINGA of cultivation,
from S. Eu., with cream-colored odorous flowers, has sometimes escaped.


13. ITEA, Gronov.

Calyx 5-cleft, free from the ovary or nearly so. Petals 5, lanceolate,
much longer than the calyx, and longer than the 5 stamens. Capsule
oblong, 2-grooved, 2-celled, tipped with the 2 united styles, 2-parted
(septicidal) when mature, several-seeded.--Shrubs, with simple,
alternate, petioled leaves, without stipules, and small white flowers in
simple racemes. (Greek name of the Willow.)

1. I. Virginica, L. Leaves deciduous, oblong, pointed, minutely serrate;
seeds oval, flattish, with a crustaceous coat.--Wet places, Penn. and
N. J. to Fla., west to Mo. and La.


14. RIBES, L. CURRANT. GOOSEBERRY.

Calyx 5-lobed, often colored; the tube coherent with the ovary. Petals
5, inserted in the throat of the calyx, small. Stamens 5, alternate with
the petals. Ovary 1-celled, with 2 parietal placentae and 2 distinct or
united styles. Berry crowned with the shrivelled remains of the calyx,
the surface of the numerous seeds swelling into a gelatinous outer coat
investing a crustaceous one. Embryo minute at the base of hard
albumen.--Low, sometimes prickly shrubs, with alternate and
palmately-lobed leaves, which are plaited in the bud (except in one
species), often fascicled on the branches; the small flowers from the
same clusters, or from separate lateral buds. (From _riebs_, a German
popular name for the currant. Grossularia was the proper name to have
been adopted for the genus.)

Sec. 1. GROSSULARIA. (GOOSEBERRY.) _Stems mostly bearing thorns at the base
of the leafstalks or clusters of leaves, and often with scattered
bristly prickles; berries prickly or smooth. (Our species are
indiscriminately called_ WILD GOOSEBERRY; _the flowers greenish.)_

[*] _Peduncles 1--3-flowered; calyx as high as broad; leaves
roundish-heart-shaped, 3--5-lobed._

[+] _Calyx-lobes decidedly shorter than the tube; berries apt to be
prickly._

1. R. Cynosbati, L. Stamens and undivided style not longer than the
broadly bell-shaped calyx; berries large, armed with long prickles or
rarely smooth.--Rocky woods, N. Brunswick to the mountains of N. C., and
west to Minn. and Mo.

[+][+] _Calyx-lobes decidedly longer than the short and rather narrow
tube; berries smooth, purple, sweet and pleasant._

2. R. gracile, Michx. (MISSOURI GOOSEBERRY.) Spines often long, stout
and red; _peduncles long and slender; flowers white_ or whitish;
filaments capillary, 4--6'' _long_, generally connivent or closely
parallel, soon _conspicuously longer than the oblong-linear
calyx-lobes_. (R. rotundifolium, _Man._, in part.)--Mich. to Tenn.,
west to Tex., Minn., and the Rocky Mts.

3. R. rotundifolium, Michx. Spines short; _peduncles short;
flowers greenish_ or the lobes dull purplish; filaments slender,
2--3'' _long, more or less exceeding the narrowly oblong-spatulate
calyx-lobes_.--W. Mass, and N. Y., south in the Alleghanies to N. C.

4. R. oxyacanthoides, L. _Peduncles very short, flowers greenish or dull
purplish; stamens usually scarcely equalling the rather broadly oblong
calyx-lobes_. (R. hirtellum, _Michx._)--Newf. to N. J., west to Ind.,
Minn., and westward. The common smooth-fruited gooseberry of the north,
the whitish spines often numerous.

[*][*] _Flowers several in a nodding raceme, small and flattish,
greenish._

5. R. lacustre, Poir. Young stems clothed with bristly prickles and with
weak thorns; leaves heart-shaped, 3--5-parted, with the lobes deeply
cut; calyx broad and flat; stamens and style not longer than the petals;
fruit bristly (small, unpleasant).--Cold woods and swamps, Newf. to
N. Eng., west to N. Y., Mich., and Minn.

Sec. 2. RIBESIA. (CURRANT.) _Thornless and prickless; racemes
few--many-flowered, stamens short._

6. R. prostratum, L'Her. (FETID CURRANT.) Stems reclined; leaves deeply
heart-shaped, 5--7-lobed, smooth, the lobes ovate, acute, doubly
serrate; _racemes erect_, slender, calyx flattish; _pedicels and the
(pale red) fruit glandular-bristly_.--Cold damp woods and rocks, Lab. to
mountains of N. C., west to Mich., Minn., and the Rocky Mts.

7. R. floridum, L'Her. (WILD BLACK CURRANT.) _Leaves sprinkled with
resinous dots_, slightly heart-shaped, sharply 3--5-lobed, doubly
serrate; _racemes drooping, downy; bracts longer than the pedicels_;
flowers large, whitish; calyx tubular-bell-shaped, smooth; _fruit
round-ovoid, black, smooth_.--Woods, N. Eng. to Va., west to Ky., Iowa,
and Minn.

8. R. rubrum, L., var. subglandulosum, Maxim. (RED CURRANT.) Stems
straggling or reclined; leaves somewhat heart-shaped, obtusely
3--5-lobed, serrate, downy beneath when young; _racemes from lateral
buds distinct from the leaf-buds, drooping_, calyx flat (green or
purplish); _fruit globose, smooth, red_.--Cold bogs and damp woods,
N. Eng. to N. J., west to Ind. and Minn.

Sec. 3. SIPHOCALYX. _Thornless and prickless; leaves convolute in the bud;
racemes several-flowered; calyx-tube elongated; berry naked and
glabrous._

9. R. aureum, Pursh. (MISSOURI or BUFFALO CURRANT.) Shrub 5--12 deg. high;
leaves 3--5-lobed, rarely at all cordate; racemes short; flowers
golden-yellow, spicy-fragrant; tube of salverform calyx (6'' long or
less) 3 or 4 times longer than the oval lobes; stamens short; berries
yellow or black.--Banks of streams, Mo. and Ark. to the Rocky Mts., and
westward. Common in cultivation.


ORDER 36. CRASSULACEAE. (ORPINE FAMILY.)

_Succulent herbs, with perfectly symmetrical flowers; viz., the petals
and pistils equalling the sepals in number (3--20), and the stamens the
same or double their number_,--technically different from Saxifrageae
only in this complete symmetry, and in the carpels (in most of the
genera) being quite distinct from each other. Also, instead of a
perigynous disk, there are usually little scales on the receptacle, one
behind each carpel. Fruit dry and dehiscent; the pods (follicles)
opening down the ventral suture, many-rarely few-seeded.--Stipules none.
Flowers usually cymose, small. Leaves mostly sessile, in Penthorum not
at all fleshy.

[*] Not succulent; the carpels united, forming a 5-celled capsule.

1. Penthorum. Sepals 5. Petals none. Stamens 10. Pod 5-beaked,
many-seeded.

[*][*] Leaves, etc., thick and succulent. Carpels distinct.

2. Tillaea. Sepals, petals, stamens, and pistils 3 or 4. Seeds few or
many.

3. Sedum. Sepals, petals, and pistils 4 or 5. Stamens 8--10. Seeds many.


1. PENTHORUM, Gronov. DITCH STONE-CROP.

Sepals 5. Petals rare, if any. Stamens 10. Pistils 5, united below,
forming a 5-angled, 5-horned, and 5-celled capsule, which opens by the
falling off of the beaks, many-seeded.--Upright weed-like perennials
(not fleshy like the rest of the family), with scattered leaves, and
yellowish-green flowers loosely spiked along the upper side of the naked
branches of the cyme. (Name from [Greek: pe/nte], _five_, and [Greek:
o(/ros], _a mark_, from the quinary order of the flower.)

1. P. sedoides, L. Leaves lanceolate, acute at both ends.--Open wet
places, N. Brunswick to Fla., west to Minn., E. Kan., and Tex.
July--Oct. Parts of the flower rarely in sixes or sevens.


2. TILLAEA, Mich.

Sepals, petals, stamens, and pistils 3 or 4. Pods 2--many-seeded.--Very
small tufted annuals, with opposite entire leaves and axillary flowers.
(Named in honor of _Michael Angelo Tilli_, an early Italian botanist.)

1. T. simplex, Nutt. Rooting at the base (1--2' high); leaves
linear-oblong; flowers solitary, nearly sessile; calyx half the length
of the (greenish-white) petals and the narrow 8--10-seeded pods, the
latter with a scale at the base of each.--Muddy river-banks, Mass. to
Md. July--Sept.


3. SEDUM, Tourn. STONE-CROP. ORPINE.

Sepals and petals 4 or 5. Stamens 8 or 10. Follicles many-seeded; a
little scale at the base of each.--Chiefly perennial, smooth, and
thick-leaved herbs, with the flowers cymose or one-sided. Petals almost
always narrow and acute or pointed. (Name from _sedeo_, to sit, alluding
to the manner in which these plants fix themselves upon rocks and
walls.)

[*] _Flowers perfect and sessile, as it were spiked along one side of
spreading flowering branches or of the divisions of a scorpioid cyme,
the first or central flower mostly 5-merous and 10-androus, the others
often 4-merous and 8-androus._

[+] _Flowers white or purple._

1. S. pulchellum, Michx. Stems ascending or trailing (4--12' high);
_leaves terete, linear-filiform_, much crowded; spikes of the cyme
several, densely flowered; _petals rose-purple_.--Va. to Ga., west to
Ky., E. Kan., and Tex.; also cultivated in gardens. July.

2. S. Nevii, Gray. Stems spreading, simple (3--5' high); _leaves all
alternate_, those of the sterile shoots _wedge-obovate or spatulate_, on
flowering stems _linear-spatulate_ and flattish; cyme about 3-spiked,
densely flowered; _petals white_, more pointed than in the next; the
flowering 3 or 4 weeks later; leaves and blossoms smaller.--Rocky
cliffs, mountains of Va. to Ala.

3. S. ternatum, Michx. Stems spreading (3--6' high); _leaves flat, the
lower whorled in threes, wedge-obovate_, the upper scattered, _oblong_;
cyme 3-spiked, leafy; _petals white_.--Rocky woods, N. Y. to Ga., west
to Ind. and Tenn.

[+][+] _Flowers yellow._

S. ACRE, L. (MOSSY STONE-CROP.) Spreading on the ground, moss-like;
leaves very small, alternate, almost imbricated on the branches, ovate,
very thick; petals yellow.--Escaped from cultivation to rocky roadsides,
etc. July. (Nat. from Eu.)

4. S. Torreyi, Don. Annual; stems simple or branched from the base
(2--4' high); _leaves flat_ or teretish, scattered, _oblong_, 2--3''
long; petals rather longer than the _ovate sepals_; carpels at length
widely divergent.--Mo. to Ark. and Tex.

[*][*] _Flowers in a terminal naked and regular cyme or cluster, more or
less peduncled; leaves flat, obovate or oblong, mostly alternate._

[+] _Flowers perfect, 5-merous, 10-androus._

5. S. telephioides, Michx. Stems ascending (6--12' high), stout, leafy
to the top; leaves oblong or oval, entire or sparingly toothed; cyme
small; _petals flesh-color_, ovate-lanceolate, taper-pointed; _follicles
tapering into a slender style_.--Dry rocks, N. J. to Ga., west to
western N. Y. and S. Ind. June.

S. TELEPHIUM, L. (GARDEN ORPINE or LIVE-FOR-EVER.) Stems erect (2 deg.
high), stout; leaves oval, obtuse, toothed; cymes compound; _petals
purple_, oblong-lanceolate; _follicles abruptly pointed with a short
style_.--Rocks and banks, escaped from cultivation in some places. July.
(Adv. from Eu.)

S. REFLEXUM, L. Glabrous, erect, 1 deg. high; _leaves crowded, cylindric,
subulate-tipped, spreading or reflexed; flowers yellow_,
pedicelled.--Coast of Mass.; western N. Y.; rare. (Nat. from Eu.)

[+][+] _Flowers dioecious, mostly 4-merous and 8-androus._

6. S. Rhodiola, DC. (ROSEROOT.) Stems erect (5--10' high); leaves oblong
or oval, smaller than in the preceding; flowers in a close cyme,
greenish-yellow, or the fertile turning purplish.--Throughout Arctic
America, extending southward to the coast of Maine, and cliffs of
Delaware River; also in the western mountains. May, June. (Eu.)


ORDER 37. DROSERACEAE. (SUNDEW FAMILY.)

_Bog-herbs, mostly glandular-haired, with regular hypogynous flowers,
pentamerous and withering-persistent calyx, corolla, and stamens, the
anthers fixed by the middle and turned outward, and a 1-celled capsule
with twice as many styles or stigmas as there are parietal
placentae._--Calyx imbricated. Petals convolute. Seeds numerous,
anatropous, with a short and minute embryo at the base of the
albumen.--Leaves circinate in the bud, i.e., rolled up from the apex to
the base as in Ferns. A small family of insectivorous plants.


1. DROSERA, L. SUNDEW.

Stamens 5. Styles 3, or sometimes 5, deeply 2-parted so that they are
taken for 6 or 10, slender, stigmatose above on the inner face. Capsule
3- (rarely 5-) valved; the valves bearing the numerous seeds on their
middle for the whole length.--Low perennials or biennials; the leaves
clothed with reddish gland-bearing bristles, in our species all in a
tuft at the base; the naked scape bearing the flowers in a 1-sided
raceme-like inflorescence, which nods at the undeveloped apex, so that
the fresh-blown flower (which opens only in sunshine) is always highest.
The plants yield a purple stain to paper. (The glands of the leaves
exude drops of a clear glutinous fluid, glittering like dew-drops,
whence the name, from [Greek: drosero/s], _dewy_.)

1. D. rotundifolia, L. (ROUND-LEAVED SUNDEW.) _Leaves orbicular_,
abruptly narrowed into the _spreading hairy petioles_; seeds
spindle-shaped, the coat loose and chaff-like; flowers white, the parts
sometimes in sixes.--Peat-bogs, Lab. to Minn., Ind., and southward;
common. July, Aug. (Eu.)

2. D. intermedia, Hayne, var. Americana, DC. _Leaves spatulate-oblong_,
tapering into the long rather _erect naked petioles_; seeds oblong, with
a rough close coat; flowers white. (D. longifolia, _Gray_,
Manual.)--Bogs, with the same range but less common. June--Aug.--Plant
raised on its prolonged caudex when growing in water. (Eu.)

3. D. linearis, Goldie. (SLENDER SUNDEW.) _Leaves linear_, obtuse, the
blade (2--3' long, scarcely 2'' wide) _on naked erect petioles_ about
the same length; seeds oblong, with a smooth and perfectly close coat;
flowers white.--Shore of L. Superior, Mich., and Minn.

4. D. filiformis, Raf. (THREAD-LEAVED SUNDEW.) _Leaves very long and
filiform_, erect, with no distinction between blade and stalk; seeds
spindle-shaped; flowers numerous, purple rose-color (1/2' broad).--Wet
sand, near the coast, Mass. to N. J. and Fla.

       *        *       *       *       *

DIONAEA MUSCIPULA, Ellis, the VENUS'S FLY-TRAP,--so noted for the
extraordinary irritability of its leaves, closing quickly at the
touch,--is a native of the sandy savannas of the eastern part of N. C.
It differs in several respects from the character of the order given
above; the stamens being 15, the styles united into one, and the seeds
all at the base of the pod.


ORDER 38. HAMAMELIDEAE. (WITCH-HAZEL FAMILY.)

_Shrubs or trees, with alternate simple leaves and deciduous stipules;
flowers in heads or spikes, often polygamous or monoecious; the calyx
cohering with the base of the ovary, which consists of 2 pistils united
below, and forms a 2-beaked, 2-celled woody capsule, opening at the
summit, with a single bony seed in each cell, or several, only one or
two of them ripening._--Petals inserted on the calyx, narrow, valvate or
involute in the bud, or often none at all. Stamens twice as many as the
petals, and half of them sterile and changed into scales, or numerous.
Seeds anatropous. Embryo large and straight, in scanty albumen;
cotyledons broad and flat.

[*] Flowers with a manifest calyx, or calyx and corolla, and a single
ovule suspended from the summit of each cell.

1. Hamamelis. Petals 4, strap-shaped. Stamens and scales each 4, short.

2. Fothergilla. Petals none. Stamens about 24, long; filaments thickened
upward.

[*][*] Flowers naked, with barely rudiments of a calyx and no corolla,
crowded into catkin-like heads. Ovules several or many in each cell.

3. Liquidambar. Monoecious or polygamous. Stamens very numerous.
Capsules consolidated by their bases in a dense head.


1. HAMAMELIS, L. WITCH-HAZEL.

Flowers in little axillary clusters or heads, usually surrounded by a
scale-like 3-leaved involucre. Calyx 4-parted, and with 2 or 3 bractlets
at its base. Petals 4, strap-shaped, long and narrow, spirally involute
in the bud. Stamens 8, very short; the 4 alternate with the petals
anther-bearing, the others imperfect and scale-like. Styles 2, short.
Capsule opening loculicidally from the top; the outer coat separating
from the inner, which encloses the single large and bony seed in each
cell, but soon bursts elastically into two pieces.--Tall shrubs, with
straight-veined leaves, and yellow, perfect or polygamous flowers. (From
[Greek: a(/ma], _at the same time with_, and [Greek: meli/s], _an
apple-tree_; a name anciently applied to the Medlar, or some similar
tree.)

1. H. Virginiana, L. Leaves obovate or oval, wavy-toothed, somewhat
downy when young; blossoming late in autumn, when the leaves are
falling, and maturing its seeds the next summer.--Damp woods, N. Scotia
to Fla., west to E. Minn. and La.


2. FOTHERGILLA, L.

Flowers in a terminal catkin-like spike, mostly perfect. Calyx
bell-shaped, the summit truncate, slightly 5--7-toothed. Petals none.
Stamens about 24, borne on the margin of the calyx in one row, all
alike; filaments very long, thickened at the top (white). Styles 2,
slender. Capsule cohering with the base of the calyx, 2-lobed, 2-celled,
with a single bony seed in each cell.--A low shrub; the oval or obovate
leaves smooth, or hoary underneath, toothed at the summit; the flowers
appearing rather before the leaves, each partly covered by a scale-like
bract. (Dedicated to the distinguished _Dr. John Fothergill_.)

1. F. Gardeni, L. (F. alnifolia, _L. f._)--Low grounds, Va. to N. C.
April, May.


3. LIQUIDAMBAR, L. SWEET-GUM TREE.

Flowers usually monoecious, in globular heads or catkins; the sterile
arranged in a conical cluster, naked; stamens very numerous, intermixed
with minute scales; filaments short. Fertile flowers consisting of many
2-celled 2-beaked ovaries, subtended by minute scales in place of a
calyx, all more or less cohering together and hardening in fruit,
forming a spherical catkin or head; the capsules opening between the 2
awl-shaped beaks. Styles 2, stigmatic down the inner side. Ovules many,
but only one or two perfecting. Seeds with a wing-angled
seed-coat.--Catkins racemed, nodding, in the bud enclosed by a 4-leaved
deciduous involucre. (A mongrel name, from _liquidus_, fluid, and the
Arabic _ambar_, amber; in allusion to the fragrant terebinthine juice
which exudes from the tree.)

1. L. Styraciflua, L. (SWEET GUM. BILSTED.) Leaves rounded, deeply
5--7-lobed, smooth and shining, glandular-serrate, the lobes
pointed.--Moist woods, from Conn. to S. Ill., and south to Fla. and Tex.
April.--A large and beautiful tree, with fine-grained wood, the gray
bark commonly with corky ridges on the branchlets. Leaves fragrant when
bruised, turning deep crimson in autumn. The woody pods filled mostly
with abortive seeds, resembling sawdust.


ORDER 39. HALORAGEAE. (WATER-MILFOIL FAMILY.)

_Aquatic or marsh plants (at least in northern countries), with the
inconspicuous symmetrical_ (perfect or unisexual) _flowers sessile in
the axils of leaves or bracts, calyx-tube coherent with the ovary_ (or
calyx and corolla wanting in Callitriche), _which consists of 2--4 more
or less united carpels_ (or in Hippuris of only one carpel), _the styles
or sessile stigmas distinct_. Limb of the calyx obsolete or very short
in fertile flowers. Petals small or none. Stamens 1--8. Fruit
indehiscent, 1--4-celled, with a single anatropous seed suspended from
the summit of each cell. Embryo in the axis of fleshy albumen;
cotyledons minute.

1. Myriophyllum. Flowers monoecious or polygamous, the parts in fours,
with or without petals. Stamens 4 or 8. Leaves often whorled, the
immersed pinnately dissected.

2. Proserpinaca. Flowers perfect, the parts in threes. Petals none.
Leaves alternate, the immersed pinnately dissected.

3. Hippuris. Flowers usually perfect. Petals none. Stamen, style, and
cell of the ovary only one. Leaves entire, in whorls.

4. Callitriche. Flowers monoecious. Calyx and petals none. Stamen 1.
Ovary 4-celled, with 2 filiform styles. Leaves entire, opposite.


1. MYRIOPHYLLUM, Vaill. WATER-MILFOIL.

Flowers monoecious or polygamous. Calyx of the sterile flowers 4-parted,
of the fertile 4-toothed. Petals 4, or none. Stamens 4--8. Fruit
nut-like, 4-celled, deeply 4-lobed; stigmas 4, recurved.--Perennial
aquatics. Leaves crowded, often whorled; those under water pinnately
parted into capillary divisions. Flowers sessile in the axils of the
upper leaves, usually above water in summer; the uppermost staminate.
(Name from [Greek: myri/os], _a thousand_, and [Greek: phy/llon], _a
leaf_, i.e., Milfoil.)

[*] _Stamens 8; petals deciduous; carpels even; leaves whorled in threes
or fours._

1. M. spicatum, L. Leaves all pinnately parted and capillary, except the
_floral ones or bracts_; these _ovate, entire or toothed, and chiefly
shorter than the flowers_, which thus form an interrupted spike.--Deep
water, Newf. to N. Eng. and N. Y., west to Minn., Ark., and the
Pacific. (Eu.)

2. M. verticillatum, L. _Floral leaves much longer than the flowers,
pectinate-pinnatifid_; otherwise nearly as n. 1.--Ponds, etc., common.
(Eu.)

[*][*] _Stamens 4; petals rather persistent; carpels 1--2-ridged and
roughened on the back; leaves whorled in fours and fives, the lower with
capillary divisions._

3. M. heterophyllum, Michx. Stem stout; _floral leaves ovate and
lanceolate_, thick, crowded, sharply serrate, the lowest pinnatifid;
_fruit obscurely roughened._--Lakes and rivers, Ont. and N. Y. to Fla.,
west to Minn. and Tex.

4. M. scabratum, Michx. Stem rather slender; lower leaves pinnately
parted with few capillary divisions; _floral leaves linear_ (rarely
scattered), _pectinate-toothed or cut-serrate; carpels strongly 2-ridged
and roughened on the back_.--Shallow ponds, S. New Eng. to S. C., west
to Mo. and La.

[*][*][*] _Stamens 4; petals rather persistent; carpels even on the
back, leaves chiefly scattered, or wanting on the flowering stems._

5. M. ambiguum, Nutt. _Immersed leaves pinnately parted_ into about 10
very delicate capillary divisions; _the emerging ones pectinate, or the
upper floral linear_ and sparingly toothed or entire; _flowers mostly
perfect_; fruit (minute) smooth.--Ponds and ditches, Mass. to N. J. and
Penn.; also in Ind.--Var. CAPILLACEUM, Torr. & Gray, has stems
floating, long and very slender, and leaves all immersed and capillary.
Var. LIMOSUM, Torr., is small, rooting in the mud, with leaves all
linear, incised, toothed, or entire.

6. M. tenellum, Bigelow. _Flowering stems nearly leafless and
scape-like_ (3--10' high), erect, simple; the sterile shoots creeping
and tufted, bracts small, entire; _flowers alternate, monoecious_; fruit
smooth.--Borders of ponds, Newf. to N. Eng., west to Mich.


2. PROSERPINACA, L. MERMAID-WEED.

Flowers perfect. Calyx-tube 3-sided, the limb 3-parted. Petals none.
Stamens 3. Stigmas 3, cylindrical. Fruit bony, 3-angled, 3-celled,
3-seeded, nut-like.--Low, perennial herbs, with the stems creeping at
base, alternate leaves, and small flowers sessile in the axils, solitary
or 3--4 together, in summer. (Name applied by Pliny to a Polygonum,
meaning _pertaining to Proserpine_.)

1. P. palustris, L. _Leaves lanceolate, sharply serrate_, the lower
pectinate when under water; fruit sharply angled.--Wet swamps, N. Eng.
to Fla., west to Minn. and Tex.

2. P. pectinacea, Lam. _Leaves all pectinate_, the divisions
linear-awl-shaped; fruit rather obtusely angled.--Sandy swamps, near the
coast, Mass. to Fla. and La.


3. HIPPURIS, L. MARE'S TAIL.

Flowers perfect or polygamous. Calyx entire. Petals none. Stamen one,
inserted on the edge of the calyx. Style single, thread-shaped,
stigmatic down one side, received in the groove between the lobes of the
large anther. Fruit nut-like, 1-celled, 1-seeded.--Perennial aquatics,
with simple entire leaves in whorls, and minute flowers sessile in the
axils in summer. (Name from [Greek: i(/ppos] _a horse_, and [Greek:
ou)ra/], _a tail_.)

1. H. vulgaris, L. Stems simple (1--2 deg. high); leaves in whorls of 8 or
12, linear, acute; fruit nearly 1'' long.--Ponds and springs, Penn. to
Ind. and Minn., and northward. (Eu.)


4. CALLITRICHE, L. WATER-STARWORT.

Flowers monoecious, solitary or 2 or 3 together in the axil of the same
leaf, wholly naked or between a pair of membranaceous bracts. Sterile
flower a single stamen; filament bearing a heart-shaped 4-celled anther,
which by confluence becomes 1-celled, and opens by a single slit.
Fertile flower a single 4-celled ovary, either sessile or pedicelled,
bearing 2 distinct and filiform sessile, usually persistent stigmas.
Fruit nut-like, compressed, 4-lobed, 4-celled, separating at maturity
into as many closed 1-seeded portions. Seed pendulous, filling the cell;
embryo slender, straight or slightly curved, nearly the length of the
oily albumen.--Low, slender and usually tufted, glabrous, or beset with
minute (microscopic) stellate scales, with spatulate or linear entire
leaves, both forms of leaves often occurring on the same stem. (Name
from [Greek: kalo/s], _beautiful_, and [Greek: thri/x], _hair_, from the
often almost capillary stems.)

[*] _Small annuals, forming tufts on moist soil, destitute of stellate
scales; leaves uniform, very small, obovate or oblanceolate, 3-nerved,
crowded; bracts none._

1. C. deflexa, Braun. var. Austini, Hegelm. Stems 1/2--1' high; fruit
small ({1/3}'' broad), broader than high, deeply notched above and
below, on a pedicel often nearly of its own length or nearly sessile;
lobes of the fruit narrowly winged and with a deep groove between them;
persistent stigmas shorter than the fruit, spreading or reflexed; leaves
1--2'' long. (C. Austini, _Engelm_)--On damp soil, N. Y. and N. J. to
Ill., Mo., and Tex. (S. Am.)

[*][*] _Amphibious perennials; leaves with stellate scales, the floating
ones obovate and 3-nerved, the submersed linear (all uniform and narrow
in terrestrial forms) flowers usually between a pair of bracts._

2. C. verna, L. Fruit (1/2'' long) higher than broad, obovate, slightly
obcordate, usually thickest at the base, sessile, its lobes sharply
keeled or very narrowly winged above, and with a wide groove between
them; stigmas shorter than the fruit, almost erect, usually deciduous;
floating leaves crowded in a tuft, obovate, narrowed into a
petiole.--Common in stagnant waters, Penn. and N. J. to Fla., west to
Minn., Tex., and the Pacific. (Eu.)

3. C. heterophylla, Pursh. Fruit smaller, as broad or broader than high,
deeply emarginate, thick, almost ventricose, sessile or nearly so, its
lobes obtusely angled, with a small groove between them; stigmas as long
as the fruit, erect, persistent; floating leaves crowded in a tuft,
broadly spatulate, often retuse, abruptly narrowed into a long
petiole.--Stagnant water, N. Y. and N. J. to S. Ind. and Mo.

[*][*][*] _Submersed perennial, with numerous uniform linear 1-nerved
leaves; flowers without bracts; carpels separate nearly to the axis._

4 C. autumnalis, L. Stems 3--6' high; fruit large (1'' wide or more),
flattened, circular, deeply and narrowly notched, sessile or nearly so,
its lobes broadly winged, and with a very deep and narrow groove between
them; stigmas very long, reflexed, deciduous; leaves all linear from a
broader base, retuse or notched at the tip (2--6'' long).--W. Mass.,
Lake Champlain and N. New York, Lake Superior, and westward. (Eu.)


ORDER 40. MELASTOMACEAE. (MELASTOMA FAMILY.)

_Plants with opposite 3--7-ribbed leaves, and definite stamens, the
anthers opening by pores at the apex; otherwise much as in the_
Onagraceae.--All tropical, except the genus


1. RHEXIA, L. DEER-GRASS. MEADOW-BEAUTY.

Calyx-tube urn-shaped, coherent with the ovary below, and continued
above it, persistent, 4-cleft at the apex. Petals 4, convolute in the
bud, oblique, inserted along with the 8 stamens on the summit of the
calyx-tube. Anthers long, 1-celled, inverted in the bud. Style 1; stigma
1. Capsule invested by the permanent calyx, 4-celled, with 4 many-seeded
placentae projecting from the central axis. Seeds coiled like a snail
shell, without albumen.--Low perennial herbs, often bristly, with mostly
sessile 3--5-nerved and bristly-edged leaves, and large showy cymose
flowers; in summer; the petals falling early. (A name in Pliny for some
unknown plant, probably from [Greek: r(e~xis], _a crevice_, from the
place of growth.)

[*] _Anthers linear, curved, with a minute spur on the back at the
attachment of the filament above its base; flowers cymose, peduncled._

1. R. Virginica, L. _Stem square_, with wing-like angles; _leaves
oval-lanceolate, sessile, acute_; calyx-tube and pedicels more or less
hispid with gland-tipped hairs; petals bright purple.--Sandy swamps;
coast of Maine to Fla., west to northern N. Y., Ind., Mo., and La.
Slender rootstocks tuberiferous.

2. R. aristosa, Britt. Branches somewhat wing-angled; leaves
linear-oblong, sessile, not narrowed at base, naked or very sparsely
hairy; hairs of the calyx mostly below the throat, not gland-tipped;
petals sparsely villous, bright purple.--Egg Harbor City, N. J. (_J. E.
Peters_); also Sumter Co., S. C. (_J. D. Smith_).

3. R. Mariana, L. _Stems cylindrical; leaves linear-oblong_, narrowed
below, mostly petiolate; petals paler.--Sandy swamps; N. J. to Fla.,
west to Mo. and La.

[*][*] _Anthers oblong, straight, without any spur; flowers few,
sessile._

4. R. ciliosa, Michx. Stem square, glabrous; leaves broadly ovate,
ciliate with long bristles; calyx glabrous.--Md. to Fla. and La.


ORDER 41. LYTHRACEAE. (LOOSESTRIFE FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with mostly opposite entire leaves, no stipules, the calyx
enclosing but free from the 1--4-celled many-seeded ovary and membranous
capsule, and bearing the 4--7 deciduous petals and 4--14 stamens on its
throat; the latter lower down. Style 1; stigma capitate, or rarely
2-lobed._--Flowers axillary or whorled, rarely irregular, perfect,
sometimes dimorphous or even trimorphous, those on different plants with
filaments and style reciprocally longer and shorter. Petals sometimes
wanting. Capsule often 1-celled by the early breaking away of the thin
partitions; placentae in the axis. Seeds anatropous, without
albumen.--Branches usually 4-sided.

[*] Flowers regular or nearly so.

[+] Flowers mostly solitary in the axils of the leaves, sessile or
nearly so.

1. Didiplis. Calyx short, without appendages. Petals none. Stamens 4.
Capsule indehiscent. Small aquatic.

2. Rotala. Calyx short, the sinuses appendaged. Petals and stamens 4.
Capsule septicidal, with 3--4 valves.

3. Ammannia. Flowers not trimorphous. Petals generally 4 or none.
Stamens 4. Capsule bursting irregularly.

[+][+] Flowers in 3--many-flowered axillary cymes (rarely solitary).

4. Lythrum. Calyx tubular. Petals usually 6. Stamens mostly 6 or 12.
Flowers cymose-spicate in one species.

5. Decodon. Flowers trimorphous. Petals 5 (rarely 4). Stamens 8--10.
Capsule 3--4-valved, loculicidal.

[*][*] Flowers irregular and unsymmetrical, with 6 petals and 11
stamens.

6. Cuphea. Calyx spurred or enlarged on one side at base. Petals
unequal.


1. DIDIPLIS, Raf. WATER PURSLANE.

Calyx short-campanulate or semiglobose, with no appendages at the
sinuses (or a mere callous point). Petals none. Stamens 4, short.
Capsule globular, indehiscent, 2-celled.--Submersed aquatic (sometimes
terrestrial), rooting in the mud, with opposite linear leaves, and very
small greenish flowers solitary in their axils. ("Didiplis means _two
doubling_;" from [Greek: dis], _twice_, and [Greek: diploos], _double_.)

1. D. linearis, Raf. Leaves when submersed elongated, thin, closely
sessile by a broad base, when emersed shorter and contracted at base;
calyx with broad triangular lobes; style very short; capsules very
small. (Ammannia Nuttallii, _Gray_.)--From Minn. and Wisc. to Tex., east
to N. C. and Fla.


2. ROTALA, L.

Calyx short-campanulate or semiglobose, with tooth-like appendages at
the sinuses (abnormally, in our species). Petals 4 (in ours). Stamens 4,
short. Capsule globular, 4-celled, septicidal, the valves (under a
strong lens) transversely and densely striate. (Name a diminutive of
_rota_, a wheel, from the whorled leaves of the original species.)

1. R. ramosior, Koehne. Leaves tapering at base or into a short petiole,
linear-oblanceolate or somewhat spatulate; flowers solitary (rarely 3)
in the axils and sessile; accessory teeth of calyx as long as the lobes
or shorter. (Ammannia humilis, _Michx._)--Low or wet ground, Mass. to
Fla., west to Ind., Kan., and Tex.--With Ammannia-like habit, an
exception in the genus.


3. AMMANNIA, Houston.

Flowers in 3--many-flowered axillary cymes. Calyx globular or
bell-shaped, 4-angled, 4-toothed, usually with a little horn-shaped
appendage at each sinus. Petals 4 (purplish), small and deciduous,
sometimes wanting. Stamens 4--8. Capsule globular, 2--4-celled,
bursting irregularly.--Low and inconspicuous smooth herbs, with opposite
narrow leaves, and small flowers in their axils, produced all summer.
(Named after _Paul Ammann_, a German botanist anterior to Linnaeus.)

1. A. coccinea, Rottb. Leaves linear-lanceolate (2--3' long), with a
broad auricled sessile base; cymes subsessile, dense; petals purplish;
stamens more or less exserted; style usually slender; capsule included.
(A. latifolia, _Gray_, Manual, not _L._)--N. J. to Fla., west to
S. Ind., Kan., and Tex. The style varies much in length, sometimes in
the same specimen. Apparently the more developed form of the southern A.
latifolium, L., which, as limited by Koehne, has apetalous flowers, with
included stamens and short style.


4. LYTHRUM, L. LOOSESTRIFE.

Calyx cylindrical, striate, 5--7-toothed, with as many little processes
in the sinuses. Petals 5--7. Stamens as many as the petals or twice the
number, inserted low down on the calyx, commonly nearly equal. Capsule
oblong, 2-celled.--Slender herbs, with opposite or scattered mostly
sessile leaves, and purple (rarely white) flowers; produced in summer.
(Name from [Greek: ly/thron], _blood_; perhaps from the styptic
properties of some species.)

[*] _Stamens and petals 5--7; flowers small, solitary and nearly sessile
in the axils of the mostly scattered upper leaves; proper calyx-teeth
often shorter than the intermediate processes; plants smooth._

1. L. Hyssopifolia, L. Low annual (6--10' high), pale; leaves
oblong-linear, obtuse, longer than the inconspicuous flowers; petals
pale-purple; stamens usually 4--6, included.--Marshes, near the coast,
Maine to N. J. (Eu.)

2. L. lineare, L. Stem slender and tall (3--4 deg. high), bushy at top,
_with 2 margined angles; leaves linear, chiefly opposite_; petals
whitish; flowers with 6 included stamens and a short style, or the
stamens exserted and style short; _ovary on a thick short stalk; no
fleshy hypogynous ring_.--Brackish marshes, N. J. to Fla. and Tex.

3. L. alatum, Pursh. Tall and wand-like perennial; _branches with
margined angles; leaves oblong-ovate to linear-lanceolate, acute, with a
cordate or rounded base_, the upper mostly _alternate; calyx 2--4''
long_; petals rather large, deep-purple; _stamens of the short-styled
flowers exserted; fleshy hypogynous ring prominent_.--Ont. to Minn.,
south to Ga., Ark., and Col.; also near Boston.

[*][*] _Stamens 12 (rarely 8 or 10), twice the number of the petals, 6
longer and 6 shorter; flowers large, crowded and whorled in an
interrupted spike._

L. SALICARIA, L. (SPIKED LOOSESTRIFE.) More or less downy and tall;
leaves lanceolate, heart-shaped at base, sometimes whorled in threes;
flowers purple, trimorphous in the relative lengths of the stamens and
style.--Wet meadows, N. Scotia to Del. (Nat. from Eu.)


5. DECODON, Gmel. SWAMP LOOSESTRIFE.

Calyx short, broadly bell-shaped or hemispherical, with 5--7 erect
teeth, and as many longer and spreading horn-like processes at the
sinuses. Petal 5. Stamens 10 (rarely 8), exserted, of two lengths.
Capsule globose, 3--5-celled, loculicidal.--Perennial herbs or slightly
shrubby plants, with opposite or whorled leaves, and axillary clusters
of trimorphous flowers. (Name from [Greek: de/ka], _ten_, and [Greek:
o)dou/s], _tooth_.)

1. D. verticillatus, Ell. Smooth or downy; stems recurved (2--8 deg. long),
4--6-sided; leaves lanceolate, nearly sessile, opposite or whorled, the
upper with clustered flowers in their axils on short pedicels; petals 5,
wedge-lanceolate, rose-purple (1/2' long); stamens 10, half of them
shorter. (Nesaea verticillata, _HBK._)--Swampy grounds, N. Eng. to Fla.,
west to Ont., Minn., and La. Bark of the lower part of the stem often
spongy-thickened.


6. CUPHEA, Jacq.

Calyx tubular, 12-ribbed, somewhat inflated below, gibbous or spurred at
the base on the upper side, 6-toothed at the apex, and usually with as
many little processes in the sinuses. Petals 6, very unequal. Stamens
mostly 12, approximate in 2 sets, included, unequal. Ovary with a curved
gland at the base next the spur of the calyx, 1--2-celled; style
slender; stigma 2-lobed. Capsule oblong, few-seeded, early ruptured
through one side.--Flowers solitary or racemose, stalked. (Name from
[Greek: kypho/s], _gibbous_, from the shape of the calyx.)

1. C. viscosissima, Jacq. (CLAMMY CUPHEA.) Annual, very viscid-hairy,
branching; leaves ovate-lanceolate; petals ovate, short-clawed, purple;
seeds flat, borne on one side of the placenta, which is early forced out
of the ruptured capsule.--Dry fields, R. I. to Ga., west to Kan. and La.


ORDER 42. ONAGRACEAE. (EVENING-PRIMROSE FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with 4-merous (sometimes 2--3- or 5--6-merous) perfect and
symmetrical flowers; the tube of the calyx cohering with the 2--4-celled
ovary, its lobes valvate in the bud, or obsolete, the petals convolute
in the bud, sometimes wanting; and the stamens as many or twice as many
as the petals or calyx-lobes_, inserted on the summit of the calyx-tube.
Style single, slender; stigma 2--4-lobed or capitate. Pollen grains
often connected by cobwebby threads. Seeds anatropous, small, without
albumen.--Mostly herbs, with opposite or alternate leaves. Stipules none
or glandular.

[*] Parts of the flower in fours or more.

[+] Fruit a many-seeded pod, usually loculicidal.

[++] Calyx-limb divided to the summit of the ovary, persistent.

1. Jussiaea. Petals 4--6. Stamens twice as many. Capsule elongated.

2. Ludwigia. Petals 4 or none. Stamens 4. Capsule short.

[++][++] Calyx-tube prolonged beyond the ovary (scarcely so in n. 3) and
deciduous from it. Flowers 4-merous.

3. Epilobium. Seeds silky-tufted. Flowers small, not yellow. Lower
leaves often opposite.

4. OEnothera. Seeds naked. Flowers mostly yellow. Leaves alternate.

[+][+] Fruit dry and indehiscent, 1--4-seeded. Leaves alternate.

5. Gaura. Calyx-tube obconical. Filaments appendaged at base.

6. Stenosiphon. Calyx-tube filiform. Filaments not appendaged.

[*][*] Parts of the flower in twos. Leaves opposite.

7. Circaea. Petals 2, obcordate or 2-lobed. Stamens 2. Fruit 1--2-seeded,
bristly.


1. JUSSIAEA, L.

Calyx-tube elongated, not at all prolonged beyond the ovary; the lobes
4--6, herbaceous and persistent. Petals 4--9. Stamens twice as many as
the petals. Capsule 4--6-celled, usually long, opening between the
ribs. Seeds very numerous.--Herbs (ours glabrous perennials), with
mostly entire and alternate leaves, and axillary yellow flowers, in
summer. (Dedicated to _Bernard de Jussieu_, the founder of the Natural
System of Botany.)

1. J. decurrens, DC. _Stem erect_ (1--2 deg. high), branching, _winged_ by
the decurrent lanceolate leaves; _calyx-lobes 4_, as long as the petals;
_capsule oblong-club-shaped, wing-angled_; seeds in several rows in each
cell.--Wet places, Va. to Fla., west to S. Ill., Ark., and La.

2. J. repens, L. _Stem creeping, or floating and rooting_; leaves
oblong, _tapering into a slender petiole_; flowers large,
long-peduncled; _calyx-lobes and obovate petals 5_; pod woody,
cylindrical, with a tapering base; seeds quadrate, in 1 row in each
cell, adherent to the spongy endocarp.--In water, Ill. and Ky. to
E. Kan., Ark., and Tex.


2. LUDWIGIA, L. FALSE LOOSESTRIFE.

Calyx-tube not at all prolonged beyond the ovary; the lobes 4, usually
persistent. Petals 4, often small or wanting. Stamens 4. Capsule short
or cylindrical, many-seeded. Seeds minute, naked.--Perennial herbs, with
axillary (rarely capitate) flowers, through summer and autumn. (Named
for _C. G. Ludwig_, Professor of Botany at Leipsic, contemporary with
Linnaeus.)

[*] _Leaves all alternate, sessile or nearly so._

[+] _Flowers peduncled in the upper axils, with conspicuous yellow
petals (4--8'' long), equalling the ovate or lanceolate foliaceous lobes
of the calyx._

1. L. alternifolia, L. (SEED-BOX.) _Smooth_ or nearly so, branched (3 deg.
high); _leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute or pointed at both
ends_; capsules cubical, rounded at base, wing-angled.--Swamps, E. Mass.
to Fla., west to Mich., E. Kan., and La.

2. L. hirtella, Raf. _Hairy_ all over; stems nearly simple (1--2 deg. high);
_leaves oblong, or the upper lanceolate, blunt at both ends_; capsules
nearly as in the last, but scarcely wing-angled.--Moist pine barrens,
N. J. to Fla. and Tex.

[+][+] _Flowers small, sessile (solitary or sometimes clustered) in the
axils, with very small greenish petals (in n. 5) or mostly none; leaves
mostly lanceolate or linear on the erect stems (1--3 deg. high) and numerous
branches; but prostrate or creeping sterile shoots often produced from
the base, thickly beset with shorter obovate or spatulate leaves. (Our
species glabrous, except n. 3.)_

3. L. sphaerocarpa, Ell. Minutely pubescent, especially the calyx, or
nearly glabrous; leaves lanceolate or linear, acute, tapering
at base, those of runners obovate with a wedge-shaped base and
glandular-denticulate; _bractlets minute, obsolete, or none; capsules
globular or depressed_ (sometimes acute at base), not longer than the
calyx-lobes (less than 2'' long).--Water or wet swamps, E. Mass. to Fla.
and La. Bark below often spongy-thickened.

4. L. polycarpa, Short & Peter. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, acute at
both ends, those of the runners oblong-spatulate, acute, entire;
_bractlets linear-awl-shaped and conspicuous on the base of the 4-sided
somewhat top-shaped capsule_, which is longer than the calyx-lobes.--Wet
places, E. Mass. and Conn. to Mich., Minn., E. Kan., and Ky.

5. L. linearis, Walt. Slender, mostly low; leaves narrowly linear, those
of the short runners obovate; minute petals usually present; _bractlets
minute at the base of the elongated top-shaped 4-sided capsule_, which
is 3'' long and much longer than the calyx-lobes.--Bogs, pine barrens of
N. J., and southward.

6. L. cylindrica, Ell. Much branched; leaves oblong- or
spatulate-lanceolate, much tapering at the base or even petioled;
_bractlets very minute at the base of the cylindrical capsule_, which is
3'' long, and several times exceeds the calyx-lobes.--Swamps, S. Ill. to
Fla. and Tex.

[*][*] _Leaves all opposite; stems creeping or floating._

7. L. palustris, Ell. (WATER PURSLANE.) Smooth; leaves ovate or oval,
tapering into a slender petiole; petals none, or small and reddish when
the plant grows out of water; calyx-lobes very short; capsules oblong,
4-sided, not tapering at base, sessile in the axils (2''
long).--Ditches, common. (Eu.)

8. L. arcuata, Walt. Smooth, small and creeping; leaves oblanceolate,
nearly sessile; flowers solitary, long-peduncled; petals yellow,
exceeding the calyx (3'' long); capsules oblong-club-shaped, somewhat
curved ({1/3}' long).--Swamps, Va. to Fla.


3. EPILOBIUM, L. WILLOW-HERB.

Calyx-tube not or scarcely prolonged beyond the ovary; the limb 4-cleft
or -parted, deciduous. Petals 4. Stamens 8; anthers short. Capsule
linear, many-seeded. Seeds with a tuft of long hairs at the end.--Mostly
perennials, with nearly sessile leaves, and violet, purple, or white
flowers; in summer. A large genus, many of its species of difficult
limitation. The following provisional arrangement has been made by Prof.
W. TRELEASE, mainly in accordance with Haussknecht's revision of the
genus. (Name composed of [Greek: e)pi/], _upon_, and [Greek: lo/bion],
_a little pod_.)

Sec. 1. _Flowers large, purple, in a long raceme; calyx-limb deeply parted;
petals entire; stamens and style successively deflexed; stigma of 4 long
lobes._

1. E. angustifolium, L. (GREAT WILLOW-HERB. FIRE-WEED.) Stem simple,
tall (4--7 deg.); leaves scattered, ample, lanceolate, nearly entire.--Low
grounds, especially in newly cleared lands; N. Eng. to N. C., west to
Minn. and E. Kan., and far north and westward. (Eu., Asia.)

Sec. 2. _Flowers mostly small and corymbed or panicled; calyx-limb 5-cleft;
petals mostly deeply notched; stamens and style erect._

[*] _Stigma 4-parted; stem terete._

E. HIRSURUM, L. Densely soft-hairy, stout, branching (3--5 deg. high);
leaves mostly opposite, lance-oblong, serrulate, sessile; flowers in the
upper axils or in a leafy short raceme; petals 6'' long,
rose-purple.--Waste grounds, Mass. to N. Y. and Ont. (Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Stigma clavate; stem terete, without decurrent lines (or with
traces in n. 2); leaves numerous, the lower opposite, subentire, with
revolute margins._

2. E. lineare, Muhl. Usually much branched above and minutely
hoary-pubescent, 1--2 deg. high; leaves linear-lanceolate, tapering to a
short but distinct petiole, acutish; flowers numerous, pale; capsules
hoary, on pedicels as long as the leaves. (E. palustre, var. lineare,
_Gray_, mainly.)--Bogs, N. Eng. to Penn., Iowa, and northward.

3. E. strictum, Muhl. Erect, 1--21/2 deg. high, densely beset with soft
spreading somewhat glandular white hairs; leaves broader, more obtuse
and with evident veins, very short-petioled or sessile; pubescence of
the capsule soft and spreading. (E. molle, _Torr._)--Bogs, Mass. to
Minn., south to Va. and Ill.

[*][*][*] _Stigma clavate; stem somewhat quadrangular with 2--4 ridges
or hairy lines decurrent from some of the leaves._

[+] _Tall and mostly branching, many-flowered; leaves rather large,
toothed, not revolute, the lower opposite; seeds papillose._

4. E. coloratum, Muhl. Somewhat hoary-pubescent above or glandular,
1--3 deg. high; leaves lanceolate, sharply serrulate or denticulate, acute,
narrowed to conspicuous petioles; flowers pale, more or less nodding;
peduncles shorter than the leaves; seeds dark, unappendaged; coma
cinnamon-color.--Wet places, common.

5. E. adenocaulon, Haussk. Differs in its more glandular pubescence
above, the often blunter and less toothed leaves abruptly contracted to
shorter petioles, flowers erect, paler seeds with a slight prolongation
at top, and a merely dingy coma.--Wet places through the Northern
States.

6. E. glandulosum, Lehm. Subsimple; pubescence above not glandular;
leaves ovate-lanceolate, mostly abruptly rounded to a sessile base and
more glandular-toothed; seeds larger.--Canada to the mountains of N. C.
(_fide_ Haussknecht). (Asia.)

[+][+] _Mostly low, slender and simple (except forms of n. 10); leaves
chiefly opposite, less toothed; flowers few, nodding; seeds appendaged
at the apex._

[++] _Seeds areolate but not papillose; leaves not revolute._

7. E. anagallidifolium, Lam. Glabrate, a span high or less; leaves erect
or ascending, about equalling the internodes, elliptical-oblong to
narrowly obovate, entire or the upper denticulate, tapering to short
petioles; flowers purple; sepals rather obtuse; capsules glabrous on
peduncles exceeding the leaves.--White Mts. and Adirondacks (_fide_
Haussknecht). (Eu.)

8. E. lactiflorum, Haussk. Glabrous except the pubescent lines, 6--12'
high, with elongated internodes; leaves elliptical or the lowest
round-obovate, slightly repand-denticulate, obtuse, tapering into mostly
elongated petioles; flowers smaller, white; sepals more acute; seeds
more prominently appendaged.--White Mts., and northward (_fide_
Haussknecht). (Eu.)

[++][++] _Seeds papillose-roughened._

9. E. Hornemanni, Reichenb. Glabrate, 8--18' high; leaves mostly
horizontal, ovate, the upper acutish, remotely denticulate, abruptly
contracted to winged petioles, not revolute; seeds often only
slightly roughened, short and shortly appendaged. (E. alpinum,
_Man._)--White Mts., dells of the Wisconsin River (_Lapham_), and
northward. (Eu.)

10. E. palustre, L. Slender, 1 deg. high or less, often branched, finely
pubescent; leaves erect or ascending, about equalling or longer than the
internodes, sessile, linear to linear-lanceolate or elliptic-oblong,
obtuse, with revolute margins; capsules pubescent to nearly glabrous,
mostly shorter than the slender peduncles; seeds fusiform, with long
beak. (E. palustre, var. lineare, _Man._, in part.)--Penn. to Minn. and
the White Mts., north and westward. (Eu.)


4. OENOTHERA, L. EVENING PRIMROSE.

Calyx-tube prolonged beyond the ovary, deciduous; the lobes 4, reflexed.
Petals 4. Stamens 8; anthers mostly linear and versatile. Capsule
4-valved, many-seeded. Seeds naked.--Leaves alternate. Flowers yellow,
white or rose-color. (An old name, of unknown meaning, for a species of
Epilobium.)

Sec. 1. _Stigma-lobes linear, elongated (except in n. 7); calyx-tube
linear, slightly dilated at the throat; anthers linear._

[*] _Caulescent annuals or biennials; flowers erect in the bud,
nocturnal, yellow, the calyx-tips free; capsules sessile, coriaceous;
seeds in two rows in each cell._

[+] _Flowers in a leafy spike; capsules stout, oblong, slightly narrowed
above._

1. OE. biennis, L. (COMMON EVENING PRIMROSE.) Rather stout, erect (1--5 deg.
high), usually simple, more or less pubescent and hairy; leaves
lanceolate to oblong- or rarely ovate-lanceolate (2--6' long), acute or
acuminate, repandly denticulate, the lowest petioled; calyx-tube 1--21/2'
long, the tips of the sepals contiguous; petals 1/2--3/4' long; capsule more
or less pubescent or hirsute.--Throughout the U. S.--Var. CRUCIATA,
Torr. & Gray, with small narrow petals, appears to be merely a rare
garden (?) sport. E. Mass.

Var. grandiflora, Lindl., has petals as long as the calyx-tube (1--21/2'
long).--Same range as the type, but not so common east.

2. OE. Oakesiana, Robbins. Annual, more slender, not hairy, the
puberulence mainly appressed; calyx-tips not contiguous at base;
otherwise nearly as in the typical form of the last. (OE. biennis, var.
Oakesiana, _Gray._)--Dry places, E. Mass., R. I., and Conn.

[+][+] _Flowers in a leafy spike or axillary; capsules linear._

3. OE. rhombipetala, Nutt. Rarely branching, appressed-puberulent and
subcanescent; leaves narrowly lanceolate, acuminate, denticulate, the
lowest attenuate to a petiole and rarely pinnatifid, diminishing upward
into the close, elongated, conspicuously bracted spike; calyx
silky-canescent (tube 11/2' long); petals rhombic-ovate (6--10'
long).--Ind. to Minn. and Ark.

4. OE. humifusa, Nutt. Stems decumbent or ascending (1/2--2 deg. long);
_hoary-pubescent with short dense appressed hairs; leaves_ narrowly
lanceolate or oblanceolate (1/4--1' long), _sparingly repand-dentate or
entire_, the radical leaves pinnatifid, the floral not reduced; capsule
1/2--1' long, silky, curved; seeds smooth.--On the sea-coast, N. J. to
Fla.

5. OE. sinuata, L. Stems ascending or decumbent, simple or branched (1 deg.
high or more), _more or less strigose-pubescent_ and puberulent;
_leaves_ oblong or lanceolate (1--2' long), _sinuately toothed or often
pinnatifid_, the floral similar; capsule 1--11/2' long; _seeds strongly
pitted_.--N. J. to Fla., west to E. Kan. and Tex. Very variable.

[*][*] _Caulescent perennial; flowers axillary, nodding in the bud,
white turning rose-color; capsules sessile, linear; seeds in a single
row._

6. OE. albicaulis, Nutt. Stems erect (1/2--4 deg. high), simple or branched,
white and often shreddy, glabrous or puberulent; leaves linear to
oblong-lanceolate (1--3' long), entire or repand-denticulate, or
sinuate-pinnatifid toward the base; calyx-tips free, throat naked; pods
1/2--2' long, often curved or twisted; seeds lance-linear,
smooth.--W. Minn. to N. Mex., and westward.

[*][*][*] _Caulescent; flowers diurnal, yellow and erect in the bud
(except in n. 11); capsules obovate or clavate, quadrangular, the valves
ribbed and the angles more or less strongly winged (except in n. 7)._

7. OE. linifolia, Nutt. Annual or biennial, erect, very slender, simple
or diffuse (6--15' high), glabrous, the branchlets and capsules
puberulent; radical leaves oblanceolate, _cauline linear-filiform_ 1/2--1'
long; spikes loosely flowered; corolla 2--3'' long; _stigmas short;
capsules_ obovate to oblong-clavate, 2--3'' long, _not winged_, nearly
sessile.--Ill. to E. Kan., La., and Tex.

8. OE. pumila, L. Biennial, puberulent, 1--2 deg. high; _leaves_ mostly
glabrous, _entire_, obtuse, the radical spatulate, the _cauline narrowly
oblanceolate_; _flowers loosely spiked_; corolla 4--12'' long; _capsule
glabrous_, oblong-clavate, 3--6'' long, sessile or on a short pedicel,
_slightly winged_. (Incl. OE. chrysantha, _Michx._)--Dry fields,
N. Scotia to N. J., west to Minn. and Kan. June.

9. OE. fruticosa, L. (SUNDROPS.) Biennial or perennial, erect, often
tall and stout (1--3 deg. high), villous-pubescent or puberulent or nearly
glabrous; leaves oblong- to linear-lanceolate, _mostly denticulate;
raceme corymbed or loose_; petals 9--12'' long; _capsule subsessile or
with a pedicel shorter than itself_, prominently ribbed and _strongly
winged_.--Common and very variable.

Var. linearis, Watson. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate; capsule
usually shorter than the pedicel, rather less broadly winged. (OE.
linearis of _Man._, in part. OE. riparia, _Nutt._)--Conn. to Fla., west
to Mo. and La.

Var. humifusa, Allen. Low, decumbent, somewhat woody, diffusely
branched, puberulent; branches slender, flexuous; leaves narrow; flowers
few, small; capsules pubescent, about equalling the pedicel. (OE.
linearis of _Man._, in part.)--Suffolk Co., L. Island.

10. OE. glauca, Michx. Perennial, erect (2--3 deg. high), _glabrous
and glaucous; leaves ovate to ovate-oblong_ (2--4' long),
repand-denticulate; _flowers in short leafy corymbs; petals 9--15''
long; capsule_ glabrous, ovoid-oblong, _very broadly winged_, usually
abruptly contracted into a pedicel equalling or shorter than
itself.--Mountains of Va. to Ala., west to Ky. and E. Kan.

11. OE. speciosa, Nutt. Perennial, erect or subdecumbent, finely
pubescent; leaves oblong-lanceolate to linear, repand-denticulate, or
more or less deeply sinuate-pinnatifid; _flowers large, white or rose_;
capsule clavate-obovate, strongly 8-ribbed, rigid, acute, stoutly
pedicelled.--Mo. to Kan. and Tex.

[*][*][*][*] _Capsule oblong to ovate or orbicular, broadly winged,
rigid and sessile._

[+] _Acaulescent or nearly so; flowers white or rose-color._

12. OE. triloba, Nutt. Biennial or perennial, nearly glabrous; leaves
2--10' long, somewhat ciliate, long-petioled, runcinate-pinnatifid or
oblanceolate and only sinuate-toothed; calyx-tips free, the tube slender
(2--4' long); petals 6--12'' long; capsule ovate, 1/2--1' long, strongly
winged, net-veined.--Ky. to Miss. and Tex., west to the Pacific.

Var. (?) parviflora, Watson. Flowers very small (1--2' long), fertilized
in the bud and rarely fully opening; fruit abundant, forming at length a
densely crowded hemispherical or cylindrical mass nearly 2' in diameter
and often 2--3' high.--Plains of Kan. and Neb.

[+][+] _Low caulescent perennials; flowers axillary, yellow._

13. OE. Missouriensis, Sims. Stems decumbent; pubescence short and
silky, closely appressed, sometimes dense or wholly wanting; leaves
thick, oval to linear, mostly narrowly lanceolate (2--5' long),
acuminate, entire or repand-denticulate; calyx-tube 2--5' long; petals
broad, 1--21/2' long; capsules orbicular, very broadly winged (1--3'
long).--Mo. and Kan. to Tex.

14. OE. Fremontii, Watson. Hoary with appressed silky pubescence; leaves
linear, pointed, entire; calyx-tube 1--2' long; petals 1/2--1' long;
capsule hoary, oblong, narrowed at base, 9'' long.--Central Kan.

Sec. 2. _Stigma discoid; calyx-tube more broadly dilated above; anthers
oblong-linear; capsule mostly sessile, linear-cylindric; perennial,
somewhat woody, with axillary yellow flowers._

15. OE. Hartwegi, Benth., var. lavandulaefolia, Watson. Stems numerous
from a woody base, 3--6' high; _leaves numerous, hoary-puberulent_,
mostly linear, 1/4--1' long; _calyx-tube 1--2' long_; capsule 8--10''
long.--Central Kan. to Col. and N. Mex.

16. OE. serrulata, Nutt. Slender (3--15' high), simple or branched,
canescent or glabrous; leaves linear to lanceolate (1--3' long),
_irregularly and sharply denticulate; calyx-tube broadly funnnelform
(2--4' long)_, strongly nerved; petals broadly obovate (3--4'' long),
crenulate; capsule 9--15'' long.--Wisc. and Minn. to Mo., Tex., and
N. Mex.


5. GAURA, L.

Calyx-tube much prolonged beyond the ovary, deciduous; the lobes 4
(rarely 3), reflexed. Petals clawed, unequal or turned to the upper
side. Stamens mostly 8, often turned down, as is also the long style. A
small scale-like appendage before the base of each filament. Stigma
4-lobed, surrounded by a ring or cup-like border. Fruit hard and
nut-like, 3--4-ribbed or angled, indehiscent or nearly so, usually
becoming 1-celled and 1--4-seeded. Seeds naked.--Leaves alternate,
sessile. Flowers rose-color or white, changing to reddish in fading, in
spikes or racemes, in our species quite small (so that the name, from
[Greek: gau~ros], _superb_, does not seem appropriate).

[*] _Fruit sessile or nearly so._

1. G. biennis, L. _Soft-hairy or downy_ (3--8 deg. high); _leaves
oblong-lanceolate_, denticulate; _spikes wand-like; fruit oval or
oblong_, acute at both ends; 2--3'' long, ribbed, downy.--Dry banks,
N. Y. to Minn., and southward. Aug.

2. G. parviflora, Dougl. Soft-villous and puberulent, 2--5 deg. high;
_leaves ovate-lanceolate_, repand-denticulate, _soft-pubescent; spikes
dense; fruit oblong-clavate_, narrowed to both ends, _4-nerved_,
obtusely angled above, 3--4'' long.--Mo. to La. and westward.

3. G. coccinea, Nutt. _Canescent, puberulent or glabrate_ (6--12' high),
very leafy; _leaves lanceolate, linear-oblong or linear_,
repand-denticulate or entire; flowers in simple spikes, rose-color
turning to scarlet; _fruit terete below, 4-sided and broader above_,
2--3'' long.--Minn. to Kan., and westward.

[*][*] _Fruit slender-pedicelled._

4. G. filipes, Spach. Nearly smooth; stem slender (2--4 deg. high); leaves
linear, mostly toothed, tapering at base; branches of the panicle very
slender, naked; fruit obovate-club-shaped, 4-angled at the summit.--Open
places, Va. to Fla., west to Ill., Kan., and Ark.


6. STENOSIPHON, Spach.

Calyx prolonged beyond the ovary into a filiform tube. Filaments (8) not
appendaged at base. Fruit 1-celled, 1-seeded. Otherwise as Gaura, which
it also resembles in habit. (From [Greek: steno/s], _narrow_, and
[Greek: si/phon], _a tube_.)

1. S. virgatus, Spach. Slender, 2--4 deg. high, glabrous, leafy, leaves
narrowly lanceolate to linear, pointed, entire, much reduced above;
flowers numerous in an elongated spike, white, 1/2' long; fruit pubescent,
oblong-ovate, 8-ribbed, small.--E. Kan. to Col. and Tex.


7. CIRCAEA, Tourn. ENCHANTER'S NIGHTSHADE.

Calyx-tube slightly prolonged, the end filled by a cup-shaped disk,
deciduous; lobes 2, reflexed. Petals 2, inversely heart-shaped. Stamens
2. Fruit indehiscent, small and bur-like, bristly with hooked hairs,
1--2-celled; cells 1-seeded.--Low and inconspicuous perennials, in cool
or damp woods, with opposite thin leaves on slender petioles, and small
whitish flowers in racemes, produced in summer. (Named from _Circe_, the
enchantress.)

1. C. Lutetiana, L. Taller (1--2 deg. high); _leaves ovate_, slightly
toothed; _bracts none_; hairs of the _roundish 2-celled fruit
bristly_.--Very common. (Eu.)

2. C. alpina, L. _Low_ (3--8' high), _smooth and weak; leaves
heart-shaped, thin, shining, coarsely toothed; bracts minute_; hairs of
the obovate-oblong _1-celled fruit_ soft and slender.--Deep woods,
N. Eng. to Ga., Ind., and Minn. (Eu.)


ORDER 43. LOASACEAE. (LOASA FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with a rough or stinging pubescence, no stipules, the
calyx-tube adherent to a 1-celled ovary with 2 or 3 parietal
placentae_;--represented here only by the genus


1. MENTZELIA, Plumier.

Calyx-tube cylindrical or club-shaped; the limb 5-parted, persistent.
Petals 5 or 10, regular, spreading, flat, convolute in the bud,
deciduous. Stamens indefinite, rarely few, inserted with the petals on
the throat of the calyx. Styles 3, more or less united into one; stigmas
terminal, minute. Capsule at length dry and opening by valves or
irregularly at the summit, few--many-seeded. Seeds flat, anatropous,
with little albumen.--Stems erect. Leaves alternate, very adhesive by
the barbed pubescence. Flowers terminal, solitary or cymose-clustered.
(Dedicated to _C. Mentzel_, an early German botanist.)

[*] _Seeds few, oblong, not winged; petals 5, not large; filaments all
filiform._

1. M. oligosperma, Nutt. Rough and adhesive (1--3 deg. high), much branched,
the brittle branches spreading; leaves ovate and oblong, cut-toothed or
angled, often petioled; flowers yellow (7--10'' broad), opening in
sunshine; petals wedge-oblong, pointed; stamens 20 or more; capsule
small, about 9-seeded.--Prairies and plains, Ill. to Kan. and Col.,
south to Tex.

[*][*] _Seeds numerous, rounded and wing-margined; petals 10, large and
showy; outer filaments petaloid in n. 3; capsule large, oblong; leaves
sessile._

2. M. ornata, Torr. & Gray. Stout, 1--2 deg. high; leaves oblong-lanceolate,
deeply repand-toothed or pinnatifid, the segments acute; calyx-tube
leafy-bracteate; petals 2--3' long, yellowish-white; filaments all
filiform or the outer dilated below; capsule 1{1/2}--2' long; seeds
narrowly margined.--On the plains, W. Dak. to central Kan. and Tex.

3. M. nuda, Torr. & Gray. More slender, 1--5 deg. high; leaves somewhat
lanceolate, rather bluntly or shortly repand-dentate; _flowers half as
large as in the last; calyx not bracteate; outer filaments narrowly
dilated_, sterile; _capsule about 1' long; seeds plainly
winged_.--Plains of Dak. to central Kan. and Tex.


ORDER 44. PASSIFLORACEAE. (PASSION-FLOWER FAMILY.)

_Herbs or woody plants, climbing by tendrils, with perfect flowers, 5
monadelphous stamens, and a stalked 1-celled ovary free from the calyx,
with 3 or 4 parietal placentae, and as many club-shaped styles._


1. PASSIFLORA, L. PASSION-FLOWER.

Calyx of 5 sepals united at the base into a short cup, imbricated in the
bud, usually colored like the petals, at least within; the throat
crowned with a double or triple fringe. Petals 5, on the throat of the
calyx. Stamens 5; filaments united in a tube which sheathes the long
stalk of the ovary, separate above; anthers large, fixed by the middle.
Berry (often edible) many-seeded; the anatropous albuminous seeds
invested by a pulpy covering. Seed-coat brittle, grooved.--Leaves
alternate, generally palmately lobed, with stipules. Peduncles axillary,
jointed. Ours are perennial herbs. (An adaptation of _flos passionis_, a
translation of _fior della passione_, the popular Italian name early
applied to the flower from a fancied resemblance of its parts to the
implements of the crucifixion.)

1. P. lutea, L. Smooth, slender; _leaves obtusely 3-lobed at the summit,
the lobes entire_; petioles glandless; flowers greenish-yellow (1'
broad); fruit 1/2' in diameter.--Damp thickets, S. Penn. to Fla., west to
Ill., Mo., and La.

2. P. incarnata, L. Pubescent; _leaves 3--5-cleft, the lobes serrate_,
the base bearing 2 glands; flower large (2' broad), nearly white, with a
triple purple and flesh-colored crown; involucre 3-leaved; fruit as
large as a hen's egg.--Dry soil, Va. to Fla., west to Mo. and Ark. Fruit
called _maypops_.


ORDER 45. CUCURBITACEAE. (GOURD FAMILY.)

_Mostly succulent herbs with tendrils, dioecious or monoecious (often
gamopetalous) flowers, the calyx-tube cohering with the 1--3-celled
ovary, and the 5 or usually 21/2 stamens_ (i.e., 1 with a 1-celled and 2
with 2-celled anthers) _commonly united by their often tortuous anthers,
and sometimes also by the filaments. Fruit_ (pepo) _fleshy, or sometimes
membranaceous_.--Limb of the calyx and corolla usually more or less
combined. Stigmas 2 or 3. Seeds large, usually flat, anatropous, with
no albumen. Cotyledons leaf-like. Leaves alternate, palmately lobed or
veined.--Mostly a tropical or subtropical order; represented in
cultivation by the GOURD (LAGENARIA VULGARIS), PUMPKIN and SQUASH
(species of CUCURBITA), MUSKMELON (CUCUMIS MELO), CUCUMBER (C. SATIVUS),
and WATERMELON (CITRULLUS VULGARIS).

[*] Fruit prickly. Seeds few, erect or pendulous. Flowers white. Annual.

[+] Ovary 1-celled. Seed solitary, pendulous.

1. Sicyos. Corolla of the sterile flowers flat and spreading, 5-lobed.
Fruit indehiscent.

[+][+] Ovary 2--3-celled. Seeds few, erect or ascending.

2. Echinocystis. Corolla of the sterile flowers flat and spreading,
6-parted. Anthers 3. Fruit bladdery, 2-celled, 4-seeded, bursting at
the top.

3. Cyclanthera. Corolla 5-parted. Anther 1, annular. Fruit oblique and
gibbous.

[*][*] Fruit smooth. Seeds numerous, horizontal, attached to the 3--5
parietal placentae. Perennial.

4. Melothria. Flowers small, greenish; corolla 5-parted. Slender,
climbing. Fruit small.

5. Cucurbita. Flowers large, yellow, tubular-campanulate. Prostrate.
Fruit large.


1. SICYOS, L. ONE-SEEDED BUR-CUCUMBER.

Flowers monoecious. Petals 5, united below into a bell-shaped or
flattish corolla. Anthers cohering in a mass. Ovary 1-celled, with a
single suspended ovule; style slender; stigmas 3. Fruit ovate, dry and
indehiscent, filled by the single seed, covered with barbed prickly
bristles which are readily detached.--Climbing annuals, with 3-forked
tendrils, and small whitish flowers; the sterile and fertile mostly from
the same axils, the former corymbed, the latter in a capitate cluster,
long-peduncled. (Greek name for the Cucumber.)

1. S. angulatus, L. Leaves roundish heart-shaped, 5-angled or lobed, the
lobes pointed; plant clammy-hairy.--River-banks, and a weed in damp
yards, N. H. and Quebec to Fla., west to Minn., E. Kan., and Tex.
July--Sept.


2. ECHINOCYSTIS, Torr. & Gray. WILD BALSAM-APPLE.

Flowers monoecious. Petals 6, lanceolate, united at the base into an
open spreading corolla. Anthers more or less united. Ovary 2-celled,
with 2 erect ovules in each cell; stigma broad. Fruit fleshy, at length
dry, clothed with weak prickles, bursting at the summit, 2-celled,
4-seeded, the inner part fibrous-netted. Seeds large, flat, with a
thickish hard and roughened coat.--Tall climbing annual, nearly smooth,
with 3-forked tendrils, thin leaves, and very numerous small
greenish-white flowers; the sterile in compound racemes often 1 deg. long,
the fertile in small clusters or solitary, from the same axils. (Name
composed of [Greek: e)chi nos], _a hedgehog_, and [Greek: ky/stis], _a
bladder_, from the prickly fruit.)

1. E. lobata, Torr. & Gray. Leaves deeply and sharply 5-lobed; fruit
oval (2' long); seeds dark-colored.--Rich soil along rivers, W. New Eng.
and Penn. to Minn., E. Kan., and Tex. Also cult. for arbors. July--Oct.


3. CYCLANTHERA, Schrad.

Flowers monoecious. Corolla rotate, deeply 5-parted. Stamens united into
a central column, the anther solitary in our species and annular. Ovary
(1--3-) usually 2-celled and 4-locellate with 4 erect or ascending
ovules. Fruit spiny, obliquely ovoid and gibbous, beaked, bursting
irregularly. Seeds flattened.--Slender glabrous climbing annuals or
perennials, with very small racemose or panicled white sterile flowers
and a solitary fertile one in the same axil. (Name from [Greek:
ky/klos], _a circle_, and [Greek: a)nthe/ra], _anther_.)

1. C. dissecta, Arn. Annual; leaves digitately 3--7-foliolate, the
oblong divisions somewhat lobed or toothed; tendrils simple or bifid;
fruit 1' long, on a short peduncle.--Central Kan. to Tex. and Mex.


4. MELOTHRIA, L.

Flowers polygamous or monoecious; the sterile campanulate, the corolla
5-lobed; the fertile with the calyx-tube constricted above the ovary,
then campanulate. Anthers more or less united. Berry small, pulpy,
filled with many flat and horizontal seeds.--Tendrils simple. Flowers
very small. (Altered from [Greek: me/lothron], an ancient name for a
sort of white grape.)

1. M. pendula, L. Slender, from a perennial root, climbing; leaves
small, roundish and heart-shaped, 5-angled or lobed, roughish; sterile
flowers few in small racemes; the fertile solitary, greenish or
yellowish; berry oval, green, 4--6'' long.--Copses, Va. to Fla., west to
S. Ind. and La.


5. CUCURBITA, L.

Flowers monoecious, mostly solitary. Calyx-tube campanulate; corolla
campanulate, 5-lobed to the middle. Filaments distinct; anthers linear,
united, sigmoid. Ovary oblong, with short thick style, 3--5 2-lobed
stigmas, and 3--5 parietal placentas; ovules numerous, horizontal. Fruit
smooth, fleshy with a hard rind, indehiscent.--Prostrate scabrous vines,
rooting at the joints, with large yellow flowers and large fruit. (The
Latin name for the Gourd.)

1. C. foetidissima, HBK. Root very large, fusiform; leaves thick,
triangular-cordate; flowers 3--4' long; fruit globose or obovoid, 2--3'
in diameter. (C. perennis, _Gray_.)--Central Neb. to Tex., and
westward.


ORDER 46. CACTACEAE. (CACTUS FAMILY.)

_Fleshy and thickened mostly leafless plants, of peculiar aspect,
globular or columnar and many-angled, or flattened and jointed, usually
with prickles. Flowers solitary, sessile; the sepals and petals
numerous, imbricated_ in several rows, the bases adherent to the
1-celled ovary.--Stamens numerous, with long and slender filaments,
inserted on the inside of the tube or cup formed by the union of the
sepals and petals. Style 1; stigmas numerous. Fruit a 1-celled berry,
with numerous campylotropous seeds on several parietal placentae.

1. Mamillaria. Globose or oval plants, covered with spine-bearing
tubercles. Flowers from between the tubercles. Ovary naked; berry
succulent.

2. Opuntia. Branching or jointed plants; the joints flattened or
cylindrical.


1. MAMILLARIA. Haw.

Flowers about as long as wide, the tube campanulate or funnel-shaped.
Ovary often hidden between the bases of the tubercles, naked, the
succulent berry exserted. Seeds yellowish-brown to black,
crustaceous.--Globose or oval plants, covered with spine-bearing
cylindrical, oval, or conical tubercles, the flowers from distinct
woolly or bristly areoles at their base. (Name from _mamilla_, a nipple,
referring to the tubercles.)

1. M. vivipara, Haw. Simple or cespitose, 1--5' high, the almost terete
tubercles bearing bundles of 5--8 reddish-brown spines (10'' long or
less), surrounded by 15--20 grayish ones in a single series, all
straight and very rigid; flowers purple, with lance-subulate petals and
fringed sepals; berry oval, green; seeds pitted, light brown.--Plains of
Dak. to Kan., and westward.

2. M. Missouriensis, Sweet. Smaller, globose, with fewer (10--20) weaker
ash-colored spines; flowers yellow, 1--2' broad; berry subglobose,
scarlet; seeds few, black, pitted. (M. Nuttallii, _Engelm._)--S. Dak. to
central Kan., Tex., and westward.


2. OPUNTIA, Tourn. PRICKLY PEAR. INDIAN FIG.

Sepals and petals not united into a prolonged tube, spreading, regular,
the inner roundish. Berry often prickly. Seeds flat and margined,
covered with a white bony arillus. Embryo coiled around albumen;
cotyledons large, foliaceous in germination.--Stem composed of joints
(flattened in ours), bearing very small awl-shaped and usually deciduous
leaves arranged in a spiral order, with clusters of barbed bristles and
often spines also in their axils. Flowers in our species yellow, opening
in sunshine for more than one day. (A name of Theophrastus, originally
belonging to some different plant.)

[*] _Spines small or none; fruit pulpy._

1. O. vulgaris, Mill. Prostrate or spreading, _light green_; joints
broadly obovate (2--4' long); _leaves minute_ (2--21/2'' long),
ovate-subulate, _generally appressed_, bristles short, greenish yellow,
rarely with a few small spines; flowers pale yellow (_about 2' broad),
with about 8 petals_; fruit 1' long.--Sandy fields and dry rocks,
Nantucket to S. C., near the coast; Falls of the Potomac.

2. O. Rafinesquii, Engelm. Prostrate, _deep green_; joints broadly
obovate or orbicular (3--5' long); _leaves_ (3--4'' long), _spreading_;
bristles bright red-brown, with a few small spines and a single strong
one (9--12'' long) or none; flowers yellow (_21/2--31/2' broad), sometimes
with a reddish centre; petals 10--12_; fruit 11/2' long, with an
attenuated base.--Sterile soil, Nantucket and southward along the coast
to Fla., and in the Mississippi valley, from Mich. to Minn., and south
to Ky. and Ark.

[*][*] _Very spiny, fruit dry and prickly._

3. O. Missouriensis, DC. Prostrate, _joints_ light green, _broadly
obovate, flat and tuberculate_ (2--6' long), leaves small (11/2--2''
long); _their axils armed with a tuft of straw-colored bristles and
5--10 slender radiating spines_ (1--2' long); flowers light yellow
(2--3' broad), fruit with spines of variable length.--Wisc. to Mo.,
westward across the plains, very variable.

4. O. fragilis, Haw. Subdecumbent; _joints small_ (1--2' long or less),
_ovate, compressed or tumid, or even terete_; leaves hardly 1'' long,
red; _bristles few, larger spines 1--4, cruciate, with 4--6 smaller
white radiating ones below_; flowers yellow.--Minn. to Iowa and Kan.,
and westward.


ORDER 47. FICOIDEAE.

A miscellaneous group, _chiefly of fleshy or succulent plants, with
mostly opposite leaves and no stipules_. Differing from Caryophyllaceae
and Portulacaceae by having the ovary and capsule 2--several-celled, and
the stamens and petals sometimes numerous, as in Cactaceae (but the
latter wanting in most of the genera), seeds, as in all these orders,
with the slender embryo curved about mealy albumen. Our genera are
apetalous and with the calyx free from the ovary.

1. Sesuvium. Calyx-lobes 5, petaloid. Stamens 5--60. Capsule
circumscissile. Succulent.

2. Mollugo. Sepals 5. Stamens 3 or 5. Capsule 3-valved. Not succulent.


1. SESUVIUM, L. SEA PURSLANE.

Calyx 5-parted, purplish inside, persistent, free. Petals none. Stamens
5--60, inserted on the calyx. Styles 3--5, separate. Pod 3--5-celled,
many-seeded, circumscissile, the upper part falling off as a
lid.--Usually prostrate maritime herbs, with succulent stems, opposite
leaves, and axillary or terminal flowers. (An unexplained name.)

1. S. pentandrum, Ell. Annual, procumbent or sometimes erect; leaves
oblong- to obovate-spatulate, obtuse; flowers sessile, stamens 5. (S.
Portulacastrum, _Gray_, Manual, not _L._)--Sea coast, N. J. to Fla.


2. MOLLUGO, L. INDIAN-CHICKWEED.

Sepals 5, white inside. Stamens hypogynous, 5 and alternate with the
sepals, or 3 and alternate with the 3 cells of the ovary. Stigmas 3.
Capsule 3-celled, 3-valved, loculicidal, the partitions breaking away
from the many-seeded axis.--Low homely annuals, much branched, the
stipules obsolete. (An old Latin name for some soft plant.)

M. VERTICILLATA, L. (CARPET-WEED.) Prostrate, forming patches; leaves
spatulate, clustered in whorls at the joints, where the 1-flowered
pedicels form a sort of sessile umbel, stamens usually 3.--Sandy
river-banks, and cultivated grounds. June--Sept. (An immigrant from
farther south.)


ORDER 48. UMBELLIFERAE. (PARSLEY FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with small flowers in umbels (or rarely in heads), the calyx
entirely adhering to the 2-celled and 2-ovuled ovary, the 5 petals and 5
stamens inserted on the disk that crowns the ovary and surrounds the
base of the 2 styles. Fruit consisting of 2 seed-like dry carpels._ Limb
of the calyx obsolete, or a mere 5-toothed border. Petals either
imbricated in the bud or valvate with the point inflexed. The two
carpels (called _mericarps_) cohering by their inner face (the
_commissure_), when ripe separating from each other and usually
suspended from the summit of a slender prolongation of the axis
(_carpophore_); each carpel marked lengthwise with _5 primary ribs_, and
often with 4 intermediate (_secondary_) ones; in the _interstices_ or
_intervals_ between them are commonly lodged the oil-tubes (_vittae_),
which are longitudinal canals in the substance of the fruit, containing
aromatic oil. (These are best seen in slices made across the fruit.)
Seed suspended from the summit of the cell, anatropous, with a minute
embryo in hard albumen.--Stems usually hollow. Leaves alternate, mostly
compound, the petioles expanded or sheathing at base, rarely with true
stipules. Umbels usually compound, in which case the secondary ones are
termed _umbellets_; the whorl of bracts which often subtends the general
umbel is the _involucre_, and those of the umbellets the _involucels_.
The base of the styles is frequently thickened and cushion-like, and
called the _stylopodium_. In many the flowers are _dichogamous_, i.e.
the styles are protruded from the bud some time before the anthers
develop,--an arrangement for cross-fertilization.--A large family, some
of the plants innocent and aromatic, others with very poisonous
(acrid-narcotic) properties. The flowers are much alike in all, and the
fruits, inflorescence, etc., likewise exhibit comparatively small
diversity. The family is consequently difficult for the young student.

I. Fruit with the secondary ribs the most prominent, winged and armed
with barbed or hooked prickles, the primary ribs filiform and bristly.

1. Daucus. Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit flattened dorsally. Seed-face
flat.

2. Caucalis. Calyx-teeth prominent. Fruit flattened laterally. Seed-face
deeply sulcate.

II. Fruit with primary ribs only (hence but 3 dorsal ones on each
carpel).

[*] Fruit strongly flattened dorsally, with the lateral ribs prominently
winged.

[+] Caulescent branching plants, with white flowers.

[++] Lateral wings distinct; oil-tubes usually more than one in the
intervals.

3. Angelica. Stylopodium mostly depressed, but the disk prominent and
crenulate. Dorsal ribs strong. Stout perennials, with mostly coarsely
divided leaves.

4. Conioselinum. Stylopodium slightly conical. Dorsal ribs prominent.
Tall slender glabrous perennial; leaves thin, finely pinnately compound.

[++][++] Lateral wings closely contiguous; oil-tubes solitary;
stylopodium thick-conical.

5. Tiedemannia. Dorsal ribs apparently 5, filiform. Smooth swamp herbs
with leaves few or reduced to hollow cylindrical petioles.

6. Heracleum. Dorsal ribs filiform, the broad wings with a marginal
nerve. Oil-tubes obclavate. Petals conspicuous. Tall stout perennials,
with large leaves.

[+][+] Caulescent branching plants, with depressed stylopodium and
yellow flowers.

7. Pastinaca. Fruit with filiform dorsal ribs, thin wings, and solitary
oil-tubes.

8. Polytaenia. Fruit with a thick corky margin, obscure dorsal ribs, and
very numerous oil-tubes.

[+][+][+] Acaulescent or nearly so, with filiform dorsal ribs, thin
wings, and no stylopodium.

9. Peucedanum. Flowers white or yellow. Low western plants, of dry
ground, with thick roots and finely dissected leaves.

[*][*] Fruit not flattened either way or but slightly, neither prickly
nor scaly.

[+] Ribs all conspicuously winged; stylopodium depressed or wanting.

10. Cymopterus. Low and glabrous, mostly cespitose perennials, with
pinnately compound leaves and white flowers. Oil-tubes 1 to several.
Western.

11. Thaspium. Tall perennials, with ternately divided or simple leaves,
and yellow flowers (rarely purple). Oil-tubes solitary.

[+][+] Ribs all prominent and equal but not winged; flowers white.

12. Ligusticum. Ribs acute, with broad intervals. Stylopodium conical.
Oil-tubes numerous. Smooth perennials, with large compound leaves.

13. AEthusa. Ribs very broad and corky, acute. Stylopodium depressed.
Oil-tubes solitary. Introduced annual.

14. Coelopleurum. Ribs thick, corky (mostly obtuse). Oil-tubes solitary,
adherent to the seed, which is loose in the pericarp. Stout glabrous
sea-coast perennial.

[+][+][+] Dorsal ribs filiform, the lateral very thick and corky;
oil-tubes solitary.

15. Crantzia. Small glabrous creeping perennials, rooting in the mud,
with small simple umbels and leaves reduced to hollow cylindrical
jointed petioles.

[*][*][*] Fruit flattened laterally.

[+] Carpels depressed dorsally; fruit short.

[++] Seed-face flat; flowers mostly yellow.

16. Foeniculum. Ribs prominent. Oil-tubes solitary. Stout aromatic herb,
with filiform-dissected leaves.

17. Pimpinella. Ribs filiform. Oil-tubes numerous. Glabrous perennials,
with compound leaves.

[++][++] Seed-face concave; flowers white (yellow in n. 20); ribs
filiform or obsolete.

18. Eulophus. Oil-tubes numerous. Stylopodium conical. Glabrous
perennials from fascicled tubers, with pinnately compound leaves.

19. Anthriscus. Fruit linear, long-beaked, without ribs or oil-tubes,
and with conical stylopodium. Leaves ternately decompound.

20. Bupleurum. Fruit oblong, with slender ribs, no oil-tubes, and
prominent flat stylopodium. Leaves simple, perfoliate.

[+][+] Carpels terete or slightly flattened laterally; flowers white
(except n. 24).

[++] Seed-face flat (or somewhat concave in n. 28); fruit short.

[=] Leaves 3-foliolate; stylopodium conical; oil-tubes solitary.

21. Cryptotaenia. Ribs obtuse, equal; fruit linear-oblong.

[=][=] Leaves once pinnate; stylopodium depressed; oil-tubes numerous.
Aquatic perennials.

22. Sium. Fruit ovate to oblong; ribs prominent, corky, nearly equal.

23. Berula. Fruit nearly globose; ribs inconspicuous; pericarp thick and
corky.

[=][=][=] Leaves decompound. Oil-tubes solitary (none in n. 27).
Perennials.

24. Zizia. Ribs filiform; stylopodium none. Flowers yellow.

25. Carum. Ribs filiform or inconspicuous; stylopodium short-conical.
Leaf-segments filiform. Roots tuberous.

26. Cicuta. Ribs flattish, corky, the lateral largest. Marsh perennials,
with serrate leaflets, the veins often running to the notches.

27. AEgopodium. Ribs filiform; oil-tubes none; stylopodium conical.
Leaves biternate.

[=][=][=][=] Leaves finely dissected; oil-tubes solitary. Very slender
annuals.

28. Leptocaulis. Fruit bristly or tuberculate, with rather prominent
equal ribs.

29. Discopleura. Dorsal ribs filiform, the lateral very thick and corky.

[++][++] Seed-face concave; fruit ovate, glabrous, with depressed
stylopodium, and no oil-tubes.

30. Conium. An introduced biennial, with spotted stems, and large
decompound leaves.

[++][++][++] Seed-face concave. Fruit linear-oblong, with conical
stylopodium.

31. Chaerophyllum. Fruit glabrous, with small mostly solitary oil-tubes.

32. Osmorrhiza. Fruit bristly, with oil-tubes obsolete.

[+][+][+] Carpels (as well as fruit) strongly flattened laterally.

[++] Seed lunate, deeply sulcate on the face; umbels compound,
leafy-bracted.

33. Erigenia. Fruit nearly orbicular, with numerous oil-tubes. Low,
nearly acaulescent from a deep-seated tuber. Leaves ternately
decompound.

[++][++] Seed straight, not sulcate; umbels simple.

34. Hydrocotyle. Fruit more or less orbicular, with no oil-tubes. Low
perennials, in or near water, with creeping stems, and peltate or
reniform leaves.

[*][*][*][*] Fruit obovoid or globose, densely prickly or scaly.

35. Eryngium. Flowers sessile in dense bracteate heads, white or blue.
Leaves mostly rigid and more or less spinose.

36. Sanicula. Flowers in irregularly compound few-rayed umbels, yellow.
Leaves palmate.


1. DAUCUS, Tourn. CARROT.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit oblong, flattened dorsally; stylopodium
depressed; carpel with 5 slender bristly primary ribs and 4 winged
secondary ones, each of the latter bearing a single row of barbed
prickles; oil-tubes solitary under the secondary ribs, two on the
commissural side; seed-face somewhat concave or almost flat.--Bristly
annuals or biennials, with pinnately decompound leaves, foliaceous and
cleft involucral bracts, and white flowers in compound umbels which
become strongly concave. (The ancient Greek name.)

D. CAROTA, L. Biennial; stem bristly; ultimate leaf-segments lanceolate
and cuspidate; rays numerous.--Naturalized everywhere, from Eu.


2. CAUCALIS, L.

Calyx-teeth prominent. Fruit ovate or oblong, flattened laterally;
stylopodium conical; prickles barbed or hooked; seed-face deeply
sulcate. Otherwise as Daucus.--Our species annual. (The ancient Greek
name.)

C. NODOSA, Hudson. Decumbent, branching only at base, stems 1--2 deg. long,
retrorsely hispid; umbels naked, opposite the leaves and nearly sessile,
of 2 or 3 very short rays.--Md., Iowa, and southward. (Nat. from Eu.)

C. ANTHRISCUS, Hudson, has 1--2-pinnate leaves with broad leaflets, and
more regularly compounded umbels.--Ohio, etc. (Nat. from Eu.)


3. ANGELICA, L.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit strongly flattened dorsally; primary ribs
very prominent, the laterals extended into broad distinct wings, forming
a double-winged margin to the fruit; oil-tubes one to several in the
intervals or indefinite, 2 to 10 on the commissure.--Stout perennials,
with ternately or pinnately compound leaves, large terminal umbels,
scanty or no involucres, small many-leaved involucels, and white or
greenish flowers. (Named _angelic_ from its cordial and medicinal
properties.)

[*] _Seed adherent to the pericarp; oil-tubes one to several in the
intervals; uppermost leaves mostly reduced to large inflated petioles._

1. A. Curtisii, Buckley. Glabrous; leaves twice ternate or the divisions
quinate; _leaflets thin_, ovate-lanceolate (_1--3' broad), sharply and
irregularly toothed; fruit glabrous_, 11/2--3'' broad; oil-tubes mostly
one in the intervals (sometimes 2 or 3).--Along the Alleghanies from
Penn. to N. C. Aug.

2. A. hirsuta, Muhl. _Pubescent above_; leaves twice pinnately or
ternately divided; _leaflets thickish_, lanceolate to oblong (_5--10''
broad), serrate; fruit pubescent_, 2'' broad; oil-tubes 3--6 in the
intervals. (Archangelica hirsuta, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Dry ground, Conn. to
Minn., Tenn., and Fla. July.

[*][*] _Seed loose; oil-tubes indefinite (25--30); upper petioles not so
prominent._

3. A. atropurpurea, L. Very stout, glabrous throughout, with dark purple
stem; leaves 2--3-ternately divided, the pinnate segments of 5--7
lanceolate to ovate leaflets (1--11/2' broad), sharply mucronate-serrate.
(Archangelica atropurpurea, _Hoffm._)--River-banks, Lab. to Del., Ill.
and Minn. June.


4. CONIOSELINUM, Fisch. HEMLOCK-PARSLEY.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Stylopodium slightly conical. Fruit oval,
flattened dorsally, glabrous, the dorsal ribs very prominent, the
lateral ones extended into broad wings; oil-tubes 1--4 in the intervals,
4--8 on the commissure; seed slightly concave on the inner face.--Tall
slender glabrous perennial, with finely 2--3-pinnately compound leaves,
few-leaved involucre or none, involucels of elongated linear-setaceous
bractlets, and white flowers. (Compounded of _Conium_ and _Selinum_,
from its resemblance to these genera.)

1. C. Canadense, Torr. & Gray. Leaflets pinnatifid; wings nearly as
broad as the seed; oil-tubes 2--3 in the intervals, sometimes 1 or
4.--Swamps and cold cliffs, from Maine to Minn., southward to N. C. (in
the higher mountains), Ind., Ill., and Mo. Aug.--Oct.


5. TIEDEMANNIA, DC.

Calyx-teeth evident. Fruit ovate to obovate, flattened dorsally; dorsal
ribs filiform, the lateral broadly winged, closely contiguous and
strongly nerved next to the body (giving the appearance of 5 dorsal
ribs); oil-tubes solitary in the intervals, 2--6 on the commissure;
stylopodium short, thick-conical.--Glabrous erect aquatic herbs, with
leaves reduced to petioles or of few narrow leaflets; involucre and
involucels present, and flowers white. (Dedicated to the anatomist
_Prof. Tiedemann_, of Heidelberg.)

1. T. teretifolia, DC. Stem hollow, 2--6 deg. high; _leaves reduced to
cylindrical hollow pointed nodose petioles_; oil-tubes filling the
intervals.--Ponds and swamps, Del. to Fla., and west to La. Aug., Sept.

2. T. rigida, Coult. & Rose. (COWBANE.) Stem 2--5 deg. high; _leaves simply
pinnate_, with 3--9 linear to lanceolate entire or remotely toothed
leaflets; oil-tubes mostly small. (Archemora rigida, _DC._)--Swamps,
N. Y. to Minn., south to the Gulf. Aug. Poisonous; roots tuberiferous.


6. HERACLEUM, L. COW-PARSNIP.

Calyx-teeth minute. Fruit broadly oval or obovate, like Pastinaca, but
with a thick conical stylopodium, and the conspicuous obclavate
oil-tubes extending scarcely below the middle.--Tall stout perennial,
with large ternately compound leaves, broad umbels, deciduous involucre,
and many-leaved involucels, white flowers, and obcordate petals, the
outer ones commonly larger and 2-cleft. (Dedicated to _Hercules_.)

1. H. lanatum, Michx. Woolly; stem grooved, 4--8 deg. high; leaflets broad,
irregularly cut-toothed.--Wet ground, Newf. to the Pacific, and
southward to N. C., Ky., and Kan. June.


7. PASTINACA, L. PARSNIP.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit oval, very much flattened dorsally; dorsal
ribs filiform, the lateral extended into broad wings, which are strongly
nerved toward the outer margin; oil-tubes small, solitary in the
intervals, 2--4 on the commissure; stylopodium depressed.--Tall stout
glabrous biennial, with pinnately compound leaves, mostly no involucre
or involucels, and yellow flowers. (The Latin name, from _pastus_,
food.)

P. SATIVA, L. Stem grooved; leaflets ovate to oblong,
cut-toothed.--Introduced everywhere. (Adv. from Eu.)


8. POLYTAENIA, DC.

Calyx-teeth conspicuous. Fruit obovate to oval, much flattened dorsally;
dorsal ribs small or obscure in the depressed back, the lateral with
broad thick corky closely contiguous wings forming the margin of the
fruit; oil-tubes 12--18 about the seed and many scattered through the
thick corky pericarp.--A perennial mostly glabrous herb, with 2-pinnate
leaves (upper opposite and 3-cleft), the segments cuneate and incised,
no involucre, narrow involucels, and bright yellow flowers in May.
(Named from [Greek: poly/s], _many_, and [Greek: taini/a], _a fillet_,
alluding to the numerous oil-tubes.)

1. P. Nuttallii, DC. Plant 2--3 deg. high; pedicels and involucels
pubescent.--Barrens, Mich, to N. Ala., west to the Rocky Mts.


9. PEUCEDANUM, L.

Calyx-teeth mostly obsolete. Fruit roundish to oblong, much flattened
dorsally; dorsal ribs filiform and approximate; the lateral extended
into broad closely coherent wings; oil-tubes 1--4 in the intervals, 2--6
on the commissure.--Dry ground acaulescent (or short caulescent) herbs,
with fusiform roots, dissected leaves, no involucre, yellow or white
flowers, and stylopodium depressed or wanting. (The ancient Greek name.)

1. P. nudicaule, Nutt. Pubescent, with peduncles 3--8' high; _leaves
bipinnate, the small oblong segments entire or toothed; involucels of
scarious-margined (often purplish) lanceolate bractlets; flowers white
or pinkish; fruit almost round_, emarginate at base, _glabrous_, with
wings hardly as broad as the body, and _indistinct or obsolete dorsal
ribs; oil-tubes solitary in the intervals_.--Minn. to Iowa and Kan.,
and westward. One of the earliest spring bloomers.

2. P. foeniculaceum, Nutt. Tomentose or glabrous, with peduncles 8--12'
long; _leaves finely dissected, with short filiform segments; involucels
gamophyllous, 5--7-cleft, with conspicuously hairy margins; flowers
yellow; fruit broadly oblong, glabrous_, with wings half as broad as the
body, and _prominent dorsal ribs; oil-tubes 1--3 in the
intervals_.--Minn. to Tex. March--April.

3. P. villosum, Nutt. More or less pubescent throughout, 3--8' high;
_leaves finely dissected, with very numerous narrow crowded segments;
involucels of ovate to linear bractlets; flowers yellow; fruit oval_,
with wings half as broad as the body, and _prominent dorsal ribs;
oil-tubes 3 or 4 in the intervals_.--Minn. to Neb. and Dak.,
southwestward to Ariz. Root much elongated.


10. CYMOPTERUS, Raf.

Calyx-teeth more or less prominent. Fruit usually globose, with all the
ribs conspicuously winged; oil-tubes one to several in the intervals,
2--8 on the commissure. Stylopodium depressed. Seed-face slightly
concave.--Mostly low (often cespitose) glabrous perennials, from a thick
elongated root, more or less pinnately compound leaves, with or without
an involucre, prominent involucels, and white flowers (in ours). (From
[Greek: ky~ma], _a wave_, and [Greek: ptero/n], _a wing_, referring to
the often undulate wings.)

1. C. glomeratus, Raf. Low (3--8'), with a short erect caudex bearing
leaves and peduncles at the summit, glabrous; rays and pedicels very
short, _making a compact cluster; involucre none; involucel of a single
palmately 5--7-parted bractlet_; fruit globose (3--4'' in diam.); wings
rather corky; _oil-tubes 4 or 5 in the intervals_.--Minn. and Wisc. to
Iowa and Ark., and westward.

2. C. montanus, Torr. & Gray. Of similar habit (1--6' high), glaucous
and mostly glabrous; _rays 3--9'' long_, pedicels very short; _involucre
and involucels of mostly broad membranaceous usually green-veined
bracts_ (more or less united); fruit oblong to orbicular in outline
(3--6'' long); wings thin; _oil-tubes 1--3 in the intervals_.--Neb. to
central Kan., Tex., and westward. April.


11. THASPIUM, Nutt. MEADOW-PARSNIP.

Calyx-teeth conspicuous. Fruit ovoid to oblong, slightly flattened
dorsally; carpel with 3 or 4 or all the ribs strongly winged; oil-tubes
solitary in the intervals, 2 on the commissure. Stylopodium wanting;
styles long.--Perennials (2--5 deg. high), with ternately divided leaves (or
the lower simple) and broad serrate or toothed leaflets, mostly yellow
flowers, and all the fruit pedicelled. (Name a play upon _Thapsia_, so
called from the island of Thapsus.)

1. T. aureum, Nutt. _Glabrous; root-leaves mostly cordate, serrate;
stem-leaves simply ternate_ (rarely biternate); leaflets ovate to
lanceolate, round or tapering at base, serrate; _flowers deep yellow_;
fruit globose-ovoid, about 2'' long, _all the ribs equally
winged_.--Thickets and woodlands, throughout the Atlantic States and
west into the Miss. Valley. Fl. in summer and maturing fruit in late
summer or autumn. Very variable, an extreme form being

Var. trifoliatum, Coult. & Rose. Leaves or leaflets crenate or crenately
toothed. (T. trifoliatum, _Gray_, Man., in part.)--Ohio to Ill.,
westward to Oregon. The common western form.

Var. atropurpureum, Coult. & Rose. Petals dark-purple. (T. trifoliatum,
var. atropurpureum, _Gray_, Man.)--Same range as the species.

2. T. barbinode, Nutt. Loosely branched, _pubescent on the joints_,
sometimes puberulent in the umbels; _leaves 1--3-ternate; leaflets ovate
to lanceolate_, acute, with cuneate base, coarsely cut-serrate, often
ternately cleft or parted; _flowers light yellow_; fruit broadly oblong,
about 3'' long and 2'' broad, _with mostly 7 prominent wings_.--Banks of
streams, N. Y. to Minn., and southward. May--June.--Var. ANGUSTIFOLIUM,
Coult. & Rose, has narrower, more sharply cut leaflets, and fruit more
or less puberulent.--Penn. to Ill.

3. T. pinnatifidum, Gray. Resembling the last, but _puberulent on the
branchlets, umbels, and fruit, with fewer leaves; leaflets
1--2-pinnatifid_, the lobes linear or oblong; one or two leaves near the
base often very large and long-petioled; flowers light yellow; fruit
oblong, 11/2--21/2'' long and 1--11/2'' broad, _all the ribs winged_,
generally three of them narrowly so. (T. Walteri, _Shuttlew._ in
herb.)--Barrens and mountains, Ky. to Tenn. and N. C.


12. LIGUSTICUM, L. LOVAGE.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit oblong or ovate, flattened laterally if at
all, glabrous; carpels with prominent equal acute ribs and broad
intervals; oil-tubes 2--6 in the intervals, 6--10 on the commissure.
Stylopodium conical.--Smooth perennials, from large aromatic roots, with
large ternately compound leaves, mostly no involucre, involucels of
narrow bractlets, and white flowers in large many-rayed umbels. (Named
from the country _Liguria_, where the officinal _Lovage_ of the gardens
abounds.)

1. L. actaeifolium, Michx. (NONDO. ANGELICO.) Stem stout, branched above
(2--6 deg. high); _leaves very large, 3--4-ternate; leaflets broadly oblong
(2--5' long), coarsely serrate; fruit ovate (2--3'' long)_; seed with
angled back.--Rich ground, S. Penn. to Ky., southward to the Gulf.

2. L. Scoticum, L. (SCOTCH LOVAGE.) Stem simple (1--2 deg. high); _leaves
biternate; leaflets ovate (1--2' long), coarsely toothed; fruit narrowly
oblong (4--5'' long)_; seed with round back.--Salt marshes, along the
coast from Nantucket northward. Aug. (Eu.)


13. AETHUSA, L. FOOL'S PARSLEY.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit ovate-globose, slightly flattened dorsally;
carpel with 5 thick sharp ribs; oil-tubes solitary in the intervals, 2
on the commissure.--Poisonous annuals, with 2--3-ternately compound
leaves, divisions pinnate, ultimate segments small and many cleft, no
involucre, long narrow involucels, and white flowers. (Name from [Greek:
ai)/tho], _to burn_, from the acrid taste.)

AE. CYNAPIUM, L. A fetid, poisonous European herb, in cultivated grounds,
from N. Eng. and Penn. to Minn. June--Aug.


14. COELOPLEURUM, Ledeb.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit globose to oblong, with very prominent
nearly equal thick corky ribs (none of them winged); oil-tubes solitary
in the intervals and under the ribs, 2 on the commissure. Seed loose in
the pericarp.--Stout glabrous (or inflorescence puberulent) sea-coast
perennial, with 2--3-ternate leaves on very large inflated petioles,
few-leaved deciduous involucre, involucels of numerous small
linear-lanceolate bractlets (rarely conspicuous or even leaf-like), and
greenish-white flowers in many-rayed umbels. (From [Greek: koi~los],
_hollow_, and [Greek: pleuro/n], _a rib_.)

1. C. Gmelini, Ledeb. Stem 1--3 deg. high; leaflets ovate, irregularly
cut-serrate (2--21/2' long); fruit 2--31/2'' long. (Archangelica Gmelini,
_DC._)--Rocky coasts, Mass. to Greenland.


15. CRANTZIA, Nutt.

Calyx-teeth small. Fruit globose or slightly flattened laterally; dorsal
ribs filiform, the lateral thick and corky; oil-tubes solitary in the
intervals, 2 on the commissure.--Small perennials, creeping and rooting
in the mud, with hollow cylindrical or awl-shaped nodose petioles in
place of leaves, simple few-flowered umbels, and white flowers. (Named
for _Prof. Henry John Crantz_, an Austrian botanist of the 18th
century.)

1. C. lineata, Nutt. Leaves very obtuse, 1--3' long, 1--2'' broad; fruit
1'' long, the thick lateral wings forming a corky margin.--In brackish
marshes along the coast, from Mass. to Miss. July. Very widely
distributed.


16. FOENICULUM, Adans. FENNEL.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit oblong, glabrous, with prominent ribs and
solitary oil-tubes.--Stout glabrous aromatic herb, with leaves dissected
into numerous filiform segments, no involucre nor involucels, and large
umbels of yellow flowers. (The Latin name, from _foenum_, hay.)

F. OFFICINALE, All., the cultivated fennel from Europe, has become
naturalized along the shores of Md. and Va., and is a common escape.


17. PIMPINELLA, L.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit oblong to ovate, glabrous, with slender
equal ribs, numerous oil-tubes, and depressed or cushion-like
stylopodium.--Glabrous perennials, with ternately or pinnately compound
leaves, involucre and involucels scanty or none, and white or yellow
flowers. (Name said to be formed from _bipinnula_, referring to the
bipinnate leaves.)

1. P. integerrima, Benth. & Hook. Glaucous, 1--3 deg. high, slender,
branching; leaves 2--3-ternate, with lanceolate to ovate entire
leaflets; flowers yellow; fruit broadly oblong, 2'' long; stylopodium
small or wanting. (Zizia integerrima, _DC._)--Rocky hillsides, Atlantic
States to Minn., E. Kan., and Ark. May.

P. SAXIFRAGA, L., var. MAJOR, Koch. Leaves simply pinnate, with sharply
toothed leaflets; flowers white; fruit oblong, 1'' long; stylopodium
cushion-like.--Rocky shores of Delaware River; Sycamore, Ohio. (Nat.
from Eu.)


18. EULOPHUS, Nutt.

Calyx-teeth prominent. Fruit ovate or oblong, glabrous, with equal
filiform ribs; oil-tubes 1--5 in the intervals; stylopodium conical,
with long recurved styles; seed-face broadly concave, with a central
longitudinal ridge.--Glabrous perennials (3--5 deg. high) from deep-seated
fascicled tubers, with pinnately or ternately compound leaves,
involucels of numerous narrowly lanceolate acuminate bractlets, and
long-peduncled umbels of white flowers. (Name from [Greek: eu~)],
_well_, and [Greek: lo/phos], _a crest_,--not well applied to a plant
with no crest at all.)

1. E. Americanus, Nutt. Radical and lower stem-leaves large,
1--2-pinnately compound, with leaflets cut into short narrow segments;
upper stem-leaves ternate, with narrowly linear elongated leaflets;
fruit 2--3'' long.--Ohio to Ill. and Mo., south to Tenn. and Ark. July.


19. ANTHRISCUS, Hoffm. CHERVIL.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit linear, notched at base, long-beaked,
glabrous, without ribs (but beak ribbed); oil-tubes none, stylopodium
conical, seed-face sulcate.--Resembling _Chaerophyllum_ in vegetative
characters. (The ancient Roman name.)

A. CEREFOLIUM, Hoffm. Mature fruit smooth and shining. (Chaerophyllum
sativum, _L._)--Naturalized in E. Penn. (From Eu.)


20. BUPLEURUM, L. THOROUGH-WAX.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit oblong, with very slender ribs, no
oil-tubes, depressed stylopodium, and seed-face somewhat
concave.--Smooth annual, with ovate perfoliate entire leaves, no
involucre, involucels of 5 very conspicuous ovate mucronate bractlets,
and yellow flowers. (Name from [Greek: bou~s], _an ox_, and [Greek:
pleuro/n], _a rib_.)

B. ROTUNDIFOLIUM, L., is very common in fields and cultivated ground,
N. Y. to N. C., west to Mo. and Ark. (Nat. from Eu.)


21. CRYPTOTAENIA, DC. HONEWORT.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit linear-oblong, glabrous, with obtuse equal
ribs; oil-tubes solitary in the intervals and beneath each rib;
stylopodium slender-conical; seed-face plane.--A glabrous perennial,
with thin 3-foliolate leaves, no involucre, involucels of minute
bractlets or none, and white flowers. (Name from [Greek: krypto/s],
_hidden_, and [Greek: taini/a], _a fillet_, referring to the concealed
oil-tubes.)

1. C. Canadensis, DC. Plant 1--3 deg. high; leaflets large, ovate (2--4'
long), pointed, doubly serrate, often lobed; umbels irregular and
unequally few-rayed; pedicels very unequal; fruit 2--3'' long, often
becoming curved.--N. Brunswick to Ga., west to Minn., E. Kan., and Tex.
June--Sept.


22. SIUM, Tourn. WATER PARSNIP.

Calyx-teeth minute. Fruit ovate to oblong, glabrous, with prominent
corky nearly equal ribs; oil-tubes 1--3 in the intervals; stylopodium
depressed; seed-face plane.--Smooth perennials, growing in water or wet
places, with pinnate leaves and serrate or pinnatifid leaflets,
involucre and involucels of numerous narrow bracts, and white flowers.
(From [Greek: si/on], the Greek name of some marsh plant.)

1. S. cicutaefolium, Gmelin. _Stout_, 2--6 deg. high; _leaflets 3--8 pairs_,
linear to lanceolate, sharply serrate and mostly acuminate, _2--5' long_
(lower leaves sometimes submersed and finely dissected, as in
the next); _fruit 11/2'' long_, with prominent ribs. (S. lineare,
_Michx._)--Throughout N. America.

2. S. Carsonii, Durand. _Weak_, 1--2 deg. high; _leaflets 1--3 pairs_,
linear, sharply serrate, _1--2' long; when submersed or floating, very
thin, ovate to oblong, usually laciniately toothed or dissected_, the
leaf sometimes reduced to the terminal leaflet; _fruit about 1''
long_.--Mass., R. I., Conn., and Penn.


23. BERULA, Koch.

Calyx-teeth minute. Fruit nearly round, emarginate at base, glabrous;
carpels nearly globose, with very slender inconspicuous ribs and thick
corky pericarp; oil-tubes numerous and contiguous about the seed-cavity;
seed terete.--Smooth aquatic perennial, with simply pinnate leaves and
variously cut leaflets, usually conspicuous involucre and involucels of
narrow bracts, and white flowers. (The Latin name of the Water-cress, of
Celtic origin.)

1. B. angustifolia, Koch. Erect, 1/2--3 deg. high, leaflets 5--9 pairs, linear
to oblong or ovate, serrate to cut-toothed, often laciniately lobed,
sometimes crenate (1/2--3' long); fruit scarcely 1'' long. (Sium
angustifolium, _L_.)--Throughout the U. S. July, Aug.


24. ZIZIA, Koch.

Calyx-teeth prominent. Fruit ovate to oblong, glabrous, with filiform
ribs; oil-tubes large and solitary in the broad intervals, and a small
one in each rib; stylopodium wanting; seed terete.--Smooth perennials
(1--3 deg. high), with mostly Thaspium-like leaves, no involucre, involucels
of small bractlets, yellow flowers, and the central fruit of each
umbellet sessile. Flowering in early spring in open prairies and upland
meadows. (Named for _I. B. Ziz_, a Rhenish botanist.)

1. Z. aurea, Koch. _Leaves_ (except the uppermost) _2--3-ternate_ the
radical very long-petioled; leaflets ovate to lanceolate, sharply
serrate; rays 15--25, stout (1--2' long); _fruit oblong, about 2''
long_. (Thaspium aureum, var. apterum, _Gray_, Manual.)--Atlantic
States, west to Minn. and Tex.

Var. Bebbii, Coult. & Rose. A more slender mountain form, with leaflets
more coarsely serrate, the radical leaves smaller and more simple; rays
2--8, slender (2--3' long); fruit oval, 1--11/2'' long.--W. Va. and Va. to
Ga.

2. Z. cordata, DC. Radical leaves mostly long-petioled, _cordate or even
rounder, crenately toothed_, very rarely lobed or divided; _stem-leaves
simply ternate or quinate_, with the ovate or lanceolate leaflets
serrate, incised, or sometimes parted; _fruit ovate, 11/2'' long_.
(Thaspium trifoliatum, var. apterum, _Gray_, Manual.)--Same range as the
preceding, but extending farther westward.


25. CARUM, L. CARAWAY.

Calyx-teeth small. Fruit ovate or oblong, glabrous, with filiform or
inconspicuous ribs; oil-tubes solitary; stylopodium conical; seed-face
plane or nearly so.--Smooth erect slender herbs, with fusiform or
tuberous roots, pinnate leaves, involucre and involucels of few to many
bracts, and white (or yellowish) flowers. (Name perhaps from the
country, _Caria_.)

C. CARUI, L. (CARAWAY.) Leaves pinnately compound, with filiform
divisions.--Naturalized in many places, especially northward. (Nat. from
Eu.)

C. PETROSELINUM, Benth., the common PARSLEY, from Europe, with 3-pinnate
leaves, ovate 3-cleft leaflets, and greenish yellow flowers, is
occasionally found as an escape from cultivation. (Petroselinum sativum,
_Hoffm._)


26. CICUTA, L. WATER-HEMLOCK.

Calyx-teeth prominent. Fruit oblong to nearly orbicular, glabrous, with
strong flattish corky ribs (the lateral largest); oil-tubes conspicuous,
solitary; stylopodium depressed; seed nearly terete.--Smooth marsh
perennials, very poisonous, with pinnately compound leaves and serrate
leaflets, involucre usually none, involucels of several slender
bractlets, and white flowers. (The ancient Latin name of the Hemlock.)

1. C. maculata, L. (SPOTTED COWBANE. MUSQUASH ROOT. BEAVER-POISON.) Stem
_stout_, 2--6 deg. high, streaked with purple; leaves 2--3-pinnate, the
lower on long petioles; _leaflets lanceolate_ to oblong-lanceolate
(1--5' long), acuminate, coarsely serrate, the veins passing to the
notches; pedicels in the umbellets numerous, very unequal; fruit broadly
ovate to oval, 1--11/2'' long.--Throughout the U. S. Aug.

2. C. bulbifera, L. _Rather slender_, 1--3 deg. high; leaves 2--3-pinnate
(sometimes appearing ternate); _leaflets linear_, sparsely toothed
(1--2' long); _upper axils bearing clustered bulblets_; fruit (rare)
scarcely 1'' long.--Common in swamps, N. Scotia to Del., west to Minn.
and Iowa.


27. AEGOPODIUM, L. GOUTWEED.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit ovate, glabrous, with equal filiform ribs,
and no oil-tubes; stylopodium conical and prominent; seed nearly
terete.--A coarse glabrous perennial, with creeping rootstock, biternate
leaves, sharply toothed ovate leaflets, and rather large naked umbels of
white flowers. (Name from [Greek: ai)/x], _goat_, and [Greek: po/dion],
_a little foot_, probably from the shape of the leaflets.)

AE. PODAGRARIA, L., a common and troublesome weed in Europe, is reported
from R. I. to Del. and E. Penn.


28. LEPTOCAULIS, Nutt.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit very small, ovate, usually bristly or
tuberculate, with somewhat prominent ribs; oil-tubes solitary in the
intervals; stylopodium conical; seed-face plane or somewhat
concave.--Very slender smooth branching annuals, with finely dissected
leaves (segments filiform or linear), and small white flowers in very
unequally few-rayed pedunculate umbels. (Name from [Greek: lepto/s],
_slender_, and [Greek: kaulo/s], _a stem_.)

1. L. divaricatus, DC. Plant 1--2 deg. high, with branches and umbels
diffusely spreading, the very slender rays 1/2--1' long and the longer
pedicels often 3--6'' long; fruit tuberculate, 1/2'' long. (Apium
divaricatum, _Benth. & Hook._)--N. C. to Fla., west to Ark. and Tex.;
reported from Kan. April.

2. L. patens, Nutt. Of similar habit, but the umbels shorter and more
strict, the rays 3--6'' long or less and the pedicels short; fruit
densely sharp-tuberculate or nearly smooth. (Apiastrum patens, _Coult. &
Rose._)--Central Neb. to Tex. and N. Mex.


29. DISCOPLEURA, DC. MOCK BISHOP-WEED.

Calyx-teeth small or obsolete. Fruit ovate, glabrous; carpel with dorsal
ribs filiform to broad and obtuse, the lateral very thick and corky,
those of the two carpels closely contiguous and forming a dilated obtuse
or acute corky band; oil-tubes solitary, stylopodium conical; seed
nearly terete.--Smooth branching annuals, with finely dissected leaves,
involucre of foliaceous bracts, involucels of prominent or minute
bractlets, and white flowers. (Name from [Greek: di/skos], _a disk_, and
[Greek: pleuro/n], _a rib_.)

1. D. capillacea, DC. Plant 1--2 deg. high (or even 5--6 deg.); leaves dissected
into filiform divisions; umbel 5--20-rayed, involucre of filiform bracts
usually cleft or parted, and involucels more or less prominent, fruit
1--11/2'' long, ovate, acute.--Wet ground, Mass. to Fla., west to Ill.,
Mo., and Tex. June--Oct.

2. D. Nuttallii, DC. Similar in habit; involucral bracts short and
entire; fruit very small (1/2'' long), as broad as high, blunt.--Ill. (?)
to Ark., La., and Tex.


30. CONIUM, L. POISON HEMLOCK.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit ovate, somewhat flattened at the sides,
glabrous, with prominent wavy ribs; oil-tubes none, but a layer of
secreting cells next the seed, whose face is deeply and narrowly
concave.--Poisonous biennial, with spotted stems, large decompound
leaves with lanceolate pinnatifid leaflets, involucre and involucels of
narrow bracts, and white flowers. ([Greek: Ko/neion], the Greek name of
the Hemlock, by which criminals and philosophers were put to death at
Athens.)

C. MACULATUM, L. A large branching European herb, in waste places,
N. Eng. to Penn., and west to Iowa and Minn.


31. CHAEROPHYLLUM, L.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit narrowly oblong to linear, notched at base,
with short beak or none, and equal ribs; oil-tubes solitary in the
intervals, seed-face more or less deeply grooved.--Moist ground annuals,
with ternately decompound leaves, pinnatifid leaflets with oblong obtuse
lobes, mostly no involucre, involucels of many bractlets, and white
flowers. (Name from [Greek: chai/ro], _to gladden_, and [Greek:
phy/llon], _a leaf_, alluding to the agreeable odor of the foliage.)

1. C. procumbens, Crantz. More or less hairy; stems slender, spreading
(6--18' high); umbels few-rayed; fruit narrowly oblong (21/2--31/2'' long),
glabrous, contracted but not tapering at the summit, the intervals
broader than the ribs.--N. Y. to N. C., west to Mich., Iowa, Ark., and
Miss.

Var. Shortii, Torr. & Gray, has more broadly oblong to ovate (often
somewhat pubescent) fruit, not at all contracted at the summit.--Ky. to
Ark. and La.


32. OSMORRHIZA, Raf. SWEET CICELY.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit linear to linear-oblong, with prominent
caudate attenuation at base, very bristly, with equal ribs; oil-tubes
obsolete; seed-face concave.--Glabrous to hirsute perennials (1--3 deg.
high) from thick aromatic roots, with ternately compound leaves, ovate
variously toothed leaflets, few-leaved involucres and involucels, and
white flowers in few-rayed and few-fruited umbels. (Name from [Greek:
o)sme/], _a scent_, and [Greek: r(i/za], _a root_.)

1. O. brevistylis, DC. Rather stout, _villous-pubescent_; leaves
2--3-ternate; leaflets 2--3' long, acuminate; fruit (not including the
caudate attenuation) 6'' long; _stylopodium and style 1/2'' long_.--From
N. Scotia westward through the Northern States, and in the mountains to
N. C. May, June.

2. O. longistylis, DC. _Glabrous or slightly pubescent_; like the last,
but with the _style 1'' long or more_, and the seed-face more deeply and
broadly concave.--N. Scotia to Va., and west to Tenn., E. Kan., and Dak.


33. ERIGENIA, Nutt. HARBINGER-OF-SPRING.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Petals obovate or spatulate, flat, entire. Fruit
didymous, nearly orbicular and laterally flattened, the carpels incurved
at top and bottom, nearly kidney-form, with 5 very slender ribs, and
several (1--3) small oil-tubes in the intervals; inner face of the seed
hollowed into a broad deep cavity.--A small glabrous vernal plant,
producing from a deep round tuber a simple stem, bearing one or two
2--3-ternately divided leaves, and a somewhat imperfect and
leafy-bracted compound umbel. Flowers few, white. (Name from [Greek:
e)rige/neia], _born in the spring_.)

1. E. bulbosa, Nutt. Stem 3--9' high; leaf-segments linear-oblong; fruit
1'' long, 11/2'' broad.--W. New York to Md. and Tenn., and west to Wisc.,
S. E. Minn., and Kan.


34. HYDROCOTYLE, Tourn. WATER PENNYWORT.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Fruit strongly flattened laterally, orbicular or
shield-shaped; the carpels 5-ribbed, two of the ribs enlarged and often
forming a thickened margin; oil-tubes none, but usually a conspicuous
oil-bearing layer beneath the epidermis.--Low, mostly smooth, marsh or
aquatic perennials, with slender creeping stems, and round shield-shaped
or kidney-form leaves, with scale-like stipules. Flowers small, white,
in simple umbels or clusters, which are either single or proliferous
(one above another), appearing all summer. (Name from [Greek: y(/dor],
_water_, and [Greek: koty/le], _a flat cup_, the peltate leaves of
several species being somewhat cup-shaped.)

[*] _Pericarp thin except at the broad corky dorsal and lateral ribs;
leaves round-peltate, crenate; peduncles as long as the petioles, from
creeping rootstocks._

[+] _Fruit notched at base and apex; intermediate ribs corky._

1. H. umbellata, L. _Umbels many-flowered, simple_ (sometimes
proliferous); _pedicels 2--6'' long; fruit about 11/2'' broad_, strongly
notched, the dorsal ribs prominent but obtuse.--Mass. to Minn., south to
the Gulf.

2. H. Canbyi, Coult. & Rose. _Umbels 3--9-flowered, generally
proliferous; pedicels very short_, but distinct; _fruit about 2 lines
broad_; carpels broader and more flattened than in the preceding,
sharper margined, the dorsal and lateral ribs much more prominent;
seed-section much narrower. (H. umbellata, var.? ambigua, _Gray_,
Manual).--N. J. to Md.

[+][+] _Fruit not notched; intermediate ribs not corky._

3. H. verticillata, Thunb. Umbels few-flowered, proliferous, forming an
interrupted spike; pedicels very short or none; fruit 11/2--2'' broad;
dorsal and lateral ribs very prominent. (H. interrupta, _Muhl._)--Mass.
to Fla.

[*][*] _Pericarp uniformly corky-thickened and ribs all filiform; leaves
not peltate; peduncles much shorter than the petioles._

[+] _Fruit small, without secondary ribs or reticulations; involucre
small or none._

4. H. Americana, L. Stems filiform, _branching and creeping; leaves
thin_, round-reniform, _crenate-lobed_ and the lobes crenate, shining;
few-flowered umbels _axillary and almost sessile_; fruit less than 1''
broad; intermediate ribs prominent; no oil-bearing layer; seed-section
broadly oval.--Common. (Addendum) Propagating by filiform tuberiferous
stolons.

5. H. ranunculoides, L. f. _Usually floating; leaves thicker_,
round-reniform, 3--7-cleft, the lobes crenate; _peduncles 1--3' long,
reflexed in fruit_; capitate umbel 5--10-flowered; fruit 1--11/2'' broad;
ribs rather obscure; seed-section oblong.--E. Penn. to Fla., thence
westward.

[+][+] _Fruit larger (2--21/2'' broad), with prominent secondary ribs and
reticulations; the 2--4-flowered umbel subtended by two conspicuous
bracts._

6. H. Asiatica, L. Petioles and peduncles (1--2' long) clustered on
creeping stems or runners; leaves ovate-cordate, repand-toothed,
thickish; seed-section narrowly oblong. (H. repanda, _Pers._)--Md. to
Fla. and Tex. (Widely distributed in the tropics and southern
hemisphere.)


35. ERYNGIUM, Tourn. ERYNGO.

Calyx-teeth prominent, rigid and persistent. Styles slender. Fruit ovate
or obovate, covered with little hyaline scales or tubercles, with no
ribs, and usually 5 slender oil-tubes on each carpel.--Chiefly
perennials, with coriaceous, toothed, cut, or prickly leaves, and blue
or white bracted flowers closely sessile in dense heads. (A name used by
Dioscorides, of uncertain origin.)

[*] _Stout, with parallel-veined elongated linear thick leaves._

1. E. yuccaefolium, Michx. (RATTLESNAKE-MASTER. BUTTON SNAKE-ROOT.)
Branching above, 1--6 deg. high; leaves rigid, tapering to a point (lower
sometimes 2--3 deg. long), the margins remotely bristly; heads ovate-globose
(9'' long), with ovate-lanceolate mostly entire cuspidate-tipped bracts
shorter than the head, and similar bractlets.--Dry or damp soil, N. J.
to Minn., south to Fla. and Tex. July--Sept.

[*][*] _Tall and often stout; leaves thick, not parallel-veined._

2. E. Virginianum, Lam. _Slender_ (1--3 deg. high); _radical and lower
stem-leaves linear- to oblong-lanceolate, on long_ (sometimes 1 deg. long)
_fistulous petioles_, entire or with small hooked teeth; upper leaves
sessile, spiny-toothed or laciniate; heads ovate-oblong (6'' long), with
spiny-toothed or entire reflexed bracts, and _bractlets with 3 spiny
cusps_ (the middle one largest).--Margins of ponds and streams, N. J. to
Fla. and Tex., near the coast. Aug., Sept.

3. E. Leavenworthii, Torr. & Gray. Stout (1--3 deg. high); lowest
stem-leaves broadly oblanceolate, spinosely toothed, the rest sessile
and _deeply palmately-parted into narrow incisely-pinnatifid spreading
pungent segments_; heads ovate-oblong (1--11/2' long), with pinnatifid
spinose bracts and 3--7-cuspidate bractlets, the terminal ones very
prominent and resembling the bracts.--Dry soil, E. Kan., Ark., and Tex.

[*][*][*] _Prostrate and slender, rooting at the joints, diffusely
branched, with small thin unarmed leaves and very small heads._

4. E. prostratum, Nutt. Lower leaves oblong, entire, few-toothed, or
lobed at base; upper leaves smaller, clustered at the rooting joints,
ovate, few-toothed or entire (occasionally some additional trifid ones);
reflexed bracts longer than the oblong heads (2--4'' long).--Wet places,
S. Mo. to Fla. and Tex.


36. SANICULA, Tourn. SANICLE. BLACK SNAKEROOT.

Calyx-teeth manifest, persistent. Fruit globular; the carpels not
separating spontaneously, ribless, thickly clothed with hooked prickles,
each with 5 oil-tubes.--Perennial rather tall glabrous herbs, with few
palmately-lobed or parted leaves, those from the root long-petioled.
Umbels irregular or compound, the flowers (greenish or yellowish)
capitate in the umbellets, perfect, and with staminate ones intermixed.
Involucre and involucels few-leaved. (Name said to be from _sano_, to
heal; or perhaps from _San Nicolas_.)

1. S. Marylandica, L. Stem 1--3 deg. high; leaves 3--7-parted, the divisions
mostly sharply cut and serrate; sterile flowers numerous and
long-pedicelled; fruit 11/2--2'' long, the styles longer than the
prickles.--Throughout our range, south to Ga. and Tenn., west to E. Kan.
and Minn. May--Aug.

Var. Canadensis, Torr., has comparatively few and short-pedicelled
sterile flowers, and styles shorter than the prickles. (S. Canadensis,
_L._)--With the last, but westward only to Minn. and E. Kan.


ORDER 49. ARALIACEAE. (GINSENG FAMILY.)

_Herbs, shrubs, or trees, with much the same characters as_
Umbelliferae, _but with usually more than 2 styles, and the fruit a
few--several-celled drupe._--Albumen mostly fleshy. Petals not inflexed.


1. ARALIA, Tourn. GINSENG. WILD SARSAPARILLA.

Flowers more or less polygamous. Calyx-tube coherent with the ovary, the
teeth very short or almost obsolete. Petals 5, epigynous, oblong or
obovate, lightly imbricated in the bud, deciduous. Stamens 5, epigynous,
alternate with the petals. Styles 2--5, mostly distinct and slender, or
in the sterile flowers short and united. Ovary 2--5-celled, with a
single anatropous ovule suspended from the top of each cell, ripening
into a berry-like drupe, with as many seeds as cells. Embryo
minute.--Leaves compound or decompound. Flowers white or greenish, in
umbels. Roots (perennial), bark, fruit, etc., warm and aromatic.
(Derivation obscure.)

Sec. 1. ARALIA. _Flowers monoeciously polygamous or perfect, the umbels
usually in corymbs or panicles; styles and cells of the (black or dark
purple) fruit 5; stems herbaceous or woody; ultimate divisions of the
leaves pinnate._

[*] _Umbels numerous in a large compound panicle; leaves very large,
decompound._

1. A. spinosa, L. (ANGELICA-TREE. HERCULES' CLUB.) _Shrub, or a low
tree; the stout stem and stalks prickly_; leaflets ovate, pointed,
serrate, pale beneath.--River-banks, Penn. to Ind., and south to the
Gulf. July, Aug.

2. A. racemosa, L. (SPIKENARD.) _Herbaceous; stem widely branched;
leaflets heart-ovate_, pointed, doubly serrate, slightly downy; umbels
racemose; _styles united_.--Rich woodlands, N. Brunswick to Minn., south
to the mountains of Ga. July. Well known for its spicy-aromatic large
roots.

[*][*] _Umbels 2--7, corymbed; stem short, somewhat woody._

3. A. hispida, Vent. (BRISTLY SARSAPARILLA. WILD ELDER.) _Stem_ (1--2 deg.
high) _bristly, leafy_, terminating in a peduncle bearing several
umbels; leaves twice pinnate; leaflets oblong-ovate, acute,
cut-serrate.--Rocky and sandy places, Newf. to Dak., south to the
mountains of N. C. June.

4. A. nudicaulis, L. (WILD SARSAPARILLA.) _Stem scarcely rising out of
the ground, smooth, bearing a single long-stalked leaf_ (1 deg. high) _and a
shorter naked scape_, with 2--7 umbels; leaflets oblong-ovate or oval,
pointed, serrate, 5 on each of the 3 divisions.--Moist woodlands; range
of n. 3. May, June. The long horizontal aromatic roots a substitute for
officinal Sarsaparilla.

Sec. 2. GINSENG. _Flowers dioeciously polygamous; styles and cells of the
red or reddish fruit 2 or 3; stem herbaceous, low, simple, bearing a
whorl of 3 palmately 3--7-foliolate leaves, and a simple umbel on a
slender peduncle._

5. A. quinquefolia, Decsne. & Planch. (GINSENG.) _Root large and
spindle-shaped, often forked_ (4--9' long, aromatic); stem 1 deg. high;
_leaflets long-stalked_, mostly 5, large and thin, obovate-oblong,
pointed; styles mostly 2; _fruit bright red_.--Rich and cool woods, Vt.
and W. Conn. to Minn., south to the mountains of Ga. July.

6. A. trifolia, Decsne. & Planch. (DWARF GINSENG. GROUND-NUT.) _Root or
tuber globular_, deep in the ground (pungent to the taste, not
aromatic); stems 4--8' high; _leaflets 3--5, sessile_ at the summit of
the leafstalk, narrowly oblong, obtuse; styles usually 3; _fruit
yellowish_.--Rich woods, N. Scotia to Minn., south to Ga. April, May.


ORDER 50. CORNACEAE. (DOGWOOD FAMILY.)

_Shrubs or trees (rarely herbaceous), with opposite or alternate simple
leaves, the calyx-tube coherent with the 1--2-celled ovary, its limb
minute, the petals (valvate in the bud) and as many stamens borne on the
margin of an epigynous disk in the perfect flowers; style one; a single
anatropous ovule hanging from the top of the cell; the fruit a
1--2-seeded drupe; embryo nearly as long as the albumen, with large
foliaceous cotyledons._--Including two genera, of which Nyssa is partly
apetalous. Bark bitter and tonic.

1. Cornus. Flowers perfect, 4-merous. Leaves mostly opposite.

2. Nyssa. Flowers dioeciously polygamous, 5-merous. Leaves alternate.


1. CORNUS, Tourn. CORNEL. DOGWOOD.

Flowers perfect (or in some foreign species dioecious). Calyx minutely
4-toothed. Petals 4, oblong, spreading. Stamens 4; filaments slender.
Style slender; stigma terminal, flat or capitate. Drupe small, with a
2-celled and 2-seeded stone.--Leaves opposite (except in one species),
entire. Flowers small, in open naked cymes, or in close heads surrounded
by a corolla-like involucre. (Name from _cornu_, a horn; alluding to the
hardness of the wood.)

Sec. 1. _Flowers greenish, in a head or close cluster, surrounded by a
large and showy, 4-leaved, corolla-like, white or rarely pinkish
involucre; fruit bright red._

1. C. Canadensis, L. (DWARF CORNEL. BUNCH-BERRY.) _Stems low and simple_
(5--7' high) from a slender creeping and subterranean rather woody
trunk; leaves scarcely petioled, the lower scale-like, the upper crowded
into an apparent whorl in sixes or fours, ovate or oval, pointed;
_leaves of the involucre ovate_; fruit globular.--Damp cold woods, N. J.
to Ind. and Minn., and the far north and west. June.

2. C. florida, L. (FLOWERING DOGWOOD.) _Tree_ 12--40 deg. high; leaves
ovate, pointed, acutish at the base; _leaves of the involucre obcordate_
(11/2' long); _fruit oval_.--Dry woods, from S. New Eng. to Ont. and S.
Minn., south to Fla. and Tex. May, June. Very showy in flower, scarcely
less so in fruit.

Sec. 2. _Flowers white, in open flat spreading cymes; involucre none; fruit
spherical; leaves all opposite (except in n. 9)._

[*] _Pubescence woolly and more or less spreading._

3. C. circinata, L'Her. (ROUND-LEAVED CORNEL or DOGWOOD.) Shrub 6--10 deg.
high; _branches greenish_, warty-dotted; _leaves round-oval, abruptly
pointed, woolly beneath_ (2--5' broad); cymes flat; _fruit light
blue_.--Copses, in rich or sandy soil, or on rocks, N. Scotia to Dak.,
south to Va. and Mo. June.

4. C. sericea, L. (SILKY CORNEL. KINNIKINNIK.) Shrub 3--10 deg. high;
_branches purplish; the branchlets, stalks, and lower surface of the
narrowly ovate or elliptical pointed leaves silky-downy_ (often rusty),
pale and dull; cymes flat, close; calyx-teeth lanceolate; _fruit pale
blue_.--Wet places, Canada to Dak., south to Fla. and La. June.

5. C. asperifolia, Michx. _Branches brownish; the branchlets, etc.,
rough-pubescent; leaves oblong or ovate_, on short petioles, pointed,
_rough_ with a harsh pubescence _above, and downy beneath_; calyx-teeth
minute; fruit white. (C. Drummondii, _Mey._)--Dry or sandy soil, N.
shore of L. Erie to Minn. and the Gulf. May, June. A rather tall shrub.

[*][*] _Pubescence closely appressed, straight and silky, or none._

6. C. stolonifera, Michx. (RED-OSIER DOGWOOD.) _Branches, especially the
osier-like shoots_ of the season, _bright red-purple, smooth; leaves
ovate_, rounded at base, abruptly short-pointed, roughish with a minute
close pubescence on both sides, _whitish underneath_; cymes small and
flat, rather few-flowered, smooth; _fruit white or lead-color_.--Wet
places; common, especially northward. Multiplies freely by prostrate or
subterranean suckers, and forms broad clumps, 3--6 deg. high. June.

7. C. stricta, Lam. (STIFF CORNEL.) A shrub 8--15 deg. high; branches
brownish or reddish, smooth; _leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate_,
taper-pointed, acutish at base, _glabrous, of nearly the same hue both
sides; cymes loose, flattish_; _anthers and fruit pale blue_.--Swamps,
Va. to Ga. and Fla. April, May.

8. C. paniculata, L'Her. (PANICLED CORNEL.) Shrub 4--8 deg. high, much
branched; _branches gray, smooth; leaves ovate-lanceolate_,
taper-pointed, acute at base, _whitish beneath_ but not
downy; _cymes convex, loose_, often panicled; _fruit white_,
depressed-globose.--Thickets and river-banks. June.

9. C. alternifolia, L. f. Shrub or tree 8--25 deg. high; _branches greenish
streaked with white, the alternate leaves clustered at the ends_, ovate
or oval, long-pointed, acute at base, whitish and minutely pubescent
beneath; cymes very broad and open; _fruit deep blue_ on reddish
stalks.--Hillsides in copses, N. Brunswick to Minn., south to Ga. and
Ala. May, June.


2. NYSSA, L. TUPELO. PEPPERIDGE. SOUR-GUM TREE.

Flowers dioeciously polygamous, clustered or rarely solitary at the
summit of axillary peduncles. _Stam. Fl._ numerous in a simple or
compound dense cluster of fascicles. Calyx small, 5-parted. Petals as in
fertile flower or none. Stamens 5--12, oftener 10, inserted on the
outside of a convex disk; filaments slender; anthers short. No pistil.
_Pist. Fl._ solitary, or 2--8, sessile in a bracted cluster, much larger
than the staminate flowers. Calyx with a very short repand-truncate or
minutely 5-toothed limb. Petals very small and fleshy, deciduous, or
often wanting. Stamens 5--10, with perfect or imperfect anthers. Style
elongated, revolute, stigmatic down one side. Ovary 1-celled. Drupe
ovoid or oblong, with a bony and grooved or striate 1-celled and
1-seeded stone.--Trees with entire or sometimes angulate-toothed leaves,
which are alternate, but mostly crowded at the ends of the branchlets,
and greenish flowers appearing with the leaves. (The name of a Nymph:
"so called because it [the original species] grows in the water.")

1. N. sylvatica, Marsh. (TUPELO. PEPPERIDGE. BLACK or SOUR GUM.)
Middle-sized tree, with horizontal branches; leaves oval or obovate,
commonly acuminate, glabrous or villous pubescent when young, at least
on the margins and midrib, shining above when old (2--5' long); _fertile
flowers 3--8_, at the summit of a slender peduncle; _fruit ovoid_, acid,
_bluish-black_ (about 1/2' long). (N. multiflora, _Wang._)--Rich soil,
either moist or nearly dry, S. Maine and N. Vt. to Mich., south to Fla.
and Tex. April, May. Leaves turning bright crimson in autumn. Wood firm,
close-grained and very unwedgeable, on account of the oblique direction
and crossing of its fibres.

2. N. uniflora, Wang. (LARGE TUPELO.) A large tree; leaves oblong or
ovate, sometimes slightly cordate at base, long-petioled, entire or
angulate-toothed, pale and downy-pubescent beneath, at least when young
(4--12' long); _fertile flower solitary_ on a slender peduncle; _fruit
oblong, blue_ (1' or more in length).--Deep swamps, S. Va. to S. Ill.
and Mo., south to Fla. and Tex. April. Wood soft; that of the roots very
light and spongy.




DIVISION II. GAMOPETALOUS DICOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS.

Floral envelopes consisting of both calyx and corolla, the latter
composed of more or less united petals, that is, gamopetalous.[A]

[Footnote A: In certain families, as in Ericaceae, etc., the petals in
some genera are nearly or quite separate. In Compositae and some others,
the calyx is mostly reduced to a pappus, or a mere border, or even to
nothing more than a covering of the surface of the ovary. The student
might look for these in the first or the third division; but the
_artificial analysis_ prefixed to the volume provides for such
anomalies, and will lead him to the proper order.]


ORDER 51. CAPRIFOLIACEAE. (HONEYSUCKLE FAMILY.)

_Shrubs, or rarely herbs, with opposite leaves, no (genuine) stipules,
the calyx-tube coherent with the 2--5-celled ovary, the stamens as many
as_ (one fewer in Linnaea, doubled in Adoxa) _the lobes of the tubular or
rotate corolla, and inserted on its tube._--Fruit a berry, drupe, or
pod, 1--several-seeded. Seeds anatropous, with small embryo in fleshy
albumen.

Tribe I. SAMBUCEAE. Corolla wheel-shaped or urn-shaped, regular, deeply
5-lobed. Stigmas 3--5, sessile or nearly so. Inflorescence terminal and
cymose.

[*] Dwarf herb, with stamens doubled and flowers in a capitate cluster.

1. Adoxa. Fruit a dry greenish drupe, with 3--5 cartilaginous nutlets.
Cauline leaves a single pair and ternate.

[*][*] Shrubs, with stamens as many as corolla-lobes and flowers in
broad compound cymes.

2. Sambucus. Fruit berry-like, containing three small seed-like nutlets.
Leaves pinnate.

3. Viburnum. Fruit a 1-celled 1-seeded drupe, with a compressed stone.
Leaves simple.

Tribe II. LONICEREAE. Corolla tubular, often irregular, sometimes
2-lipped. Style slender; stigma capitate.

[*] Herbs, with axillary flowers.

4. Triosteum. Stamens 5. Corolla gibbous at the base. Fruit a 3-celled
drupe. Erect; flowers sessile.

5. Linnaea. Stamens 4, one fewer than the lobes of the corolla. Fruit
dry, 3-celled, but only 1-seeded. Creeping, with long-pedunculate twin
flowers.

[*][*] Erect or climbing shrubs, with scaly winter-buds.

6. Symphoricarpos. Stamens 4 or 5, as many as the lobes of the
bell-shaped regular corolla. Berry 4-celled, but only 2-seeded; two of
the cells sterile.

7. Lonicera. Stamens 5, as many as the lobes of the tubular and more or
less irregular corolla. Berry several-seeded; all the 2 or 3 cells
fertile.

8. Diervilla. Stamens 5. Corolla funnel-form, nearly regular. Pod
2-celled, 2-valved, many-seeded, slender.


1. ADOXA, L. MOSCHATEL.

Calyx-tube reaching not quite to the summit of the 3--5-celled ovary;
limb of 3 or more teeth. Corolla wheel-shaped, 4--6-cleft, bearing at
each sinus a pair of separate or partly united stamens with 1-celled
anthers. Style 3--5-parted. Dry drupe greenish, with 3--5 cartilaginous
nutlets.--A dwarf perennial herb with scaly rootstock and ternately
divided leaves, the cauline a single pair. An anomalous genus. (From
[Greek: a)/doxos], obscure or insignificant.)

1. A. Moschatellina, L. Smooth, musk-scented; radical leaves
1--3-ternate, the cauline 3-cleft or 3-parted; leaflets obovate,
3-cleft; flowers several in a close cluster on a slender peduncle,
greenish or yellowish.--N. Iowa, Wisc., and Minn., and northward. (Eu.,
Asia.)


2. SAMBUCUS, Tourn. ELDER.

Calyx-lobes minute or obsolete. Corolla open urn-shaped, with a broadly
spreading 5-cleft limb. Stamens 5. Stigmas 3. Fruit a berry-like juicy
drupe, containing 3 small seed-like nutlets.--Shrubby plants, with a
rank smell when bruised, pinnate leaves, serrate-pointed leaflets, and
numerous small and white flowers in compound cymes. (The Latin name,
perhaps from [Greek: sambu/ke], an ancient musical instrument.)

1. S. Canadensis, L. (COMMON ELDER.) Stems scarcely woody (5--10 deg. high);
_leaflets 5--11, oblong_, mostly smooth, the lower often 3-parted;
_cymes flat; fruit black-purple_.--Rich soil, in open places, throughout
our range, and south and west. June, July.--Pith white.

2. S. racemosa, L. (RED-BERRIED ELDER.) Stems woody (2--12 deg. high), the
bark warty; _leaflets 5--7, ovate-lanceolate, downy underneath; cymes
panicled, convex or pyramidal; fruit bright red_ (rarely white). (S.
pubens, _Michx._)--Rocky woods, N. Scotia to Ga., and westward across
the continent. May; the fruit ripening in June.--Pith brown. Both
species occur with the leaflets divided into 3--5 linear-lanceolate
2--3-cleft or laciniate segments.


3. VIBURNUM, L. ARROW-WOOD. LAURESTINUS.

Calyx 5-toothed. Corolla spreading, deeply 5-lobed. Stamens 5. Stigmas
1--3. Fruit a 1-celled, 1-seeded drupe, with soft pulp and a
thin-crustaceous (flattened or tumid) stone.--Shrubs, with simple
leaves, and white flowers in flat compound cymes. Petioles sometimes
bearing little appendages which are evidently stipules. Leaf-buds naked,
or with a pair of scales. (The classical Latin name, of unknown
meaning.)

Sec. 1. _Cyme radiant, the marginal flowers neutral, with greatly enlarged
flat corollas as in_ Hydrangea; _drupes coral-red turning darker, not
acid; stone sulcate; leaves pinnately veined; winter-buds naked._

1. V. lantanoides, Michx. (HOBBLE-BUSH. AMERICAN WAYFARING-TREE.) Leaves
(4--8' across) round-ovate, abruptly pointed, heart-shaped at the base,
closely serrate, the veins and veinlets beneath with the stalks and
branchlets very rusty-scurfy; cymes sessile, very broad and flat.--Cold
moist woods, N. Brunswick to Ont. and Penn., and in the mountains to
N. C. May. A straggling shrub; the reclining branches often taking
root.

Sec. 2. _Cyme peduncled, radiant in n. 2; drupe light red, acid, globose;
stone very flat, orbicular, not sulcate; leaves palmately veined;
winter-buds scaly._

2. V. Opulus, L. (CRANBERRY-TREE.) Nearly smooth, upright (4--10 deg. high);
leaves 3--5-ribbed, strongly 3-lobed, broadly wedge-shaped or truncate
at base, the spreading lobes pointed, mostly toothed on the sides,
entire in the sinuses; petioles bearing 2 glands at the apex.--Low
ground, along streams, from N. Brunswick far westward, and south to
Penn. June, July.--The acid fruit is a substitute for cranberries,
whence the names _High Cranberry-bush_, etc. The well-known SNOW-BALL
TREE, or GUELDER-ROSE, is a cultivated state, with the whole cyme turned
into showy sterile flowers. (Eu.)

3. V. pauciflorum, Pylaie. A low straggling shrub; leaves glabrous or
loosely pubescent beneath, 5-ribbed at base, unequally serrate nearly
all round, with 3 short lobes at the summit; cyme few-flowered; stamens
shorter than the corolla.--Cold woods, Newf. and Lab. to the mountains
of N. Eng., westward to N. Mich. and the Rocky Mts.

Sec. 3. _Cyme never radiant; drupes blue, or dark-purple or black at
maturity._

[*] _Leaves 3-ribbed from the rounded or subcordate base, somewhat
3-lobed; stipules bristle-shaped._

4. V. acerifolium, L. (DOCKMACKIE. ARROW-WOOD.) Shrub 3--6 deg. high; leaves
soft-downy beneath, the pointed lobes diverging, unequally toothed;
cymes small, slender-peduncled; stamens exserted; fruit crimson turning
purple; stone lenticular, hardly sulcate.--Cool rocky woods, from
N. Brunswick to N. C., and west to S. Minn.

[*][*] _Leaves (with base inclined to heart-shaped) coarsely toothed,
prominently pinnately veined; stipules narrowly subulate; no rusty
scurf; fruit ovoid, blue or purple; the stone grooved; cymes peduncled._

[+] _Stone flat; leaves all short-petioled or subsessile._

5. V. pubescens, Pursh. (DOWNY A.) A low, straggling shrub; leaves ovate
or oblong-ovate, acute or taper-pointed, the veins and teeth fewer and
less conspicuous than in the next, the lower surface and very short
petioles soft-downy, at least when young; fruit dark-purple; the stone
lightly 2-sulcate on the faces.--Rocks, etc., Lower Canada to the
mountains of Ga., west to Iowa and Minn. June.

[+][+] _Stone very deeply sulcate ventrally; leaves rather
slender-petioled._

6. V. dentatum, L. (ARROW-WOOD.) Smooth, 5--15 deg. high, with ash-colored
bark; leaves broadly ovate, very numerously sharp-toothed and strongly
veined; fruit 3'' long; cross-section of stone between kidney- and
horseshoe-shaped.--Wet places, N. Brunswick to N. Ga., and west to Minn.
June.--The pale leaves often with hairy tufts in the axils of the
straight veins.

7. V. molle, Michx. Leaves broadly oval, obovate or ovate, scarcely
pointed, coarsely crenate or repand-toothed, the lower surface,
branchlets and cymes soft-downy, the latter with stellate pubescence;
fruit oily, larger and more pointed, the stone as in n. 6, but less
deeply excavated.--Coast of N. Eng. (Martha's Vineyard), to Tex.

[*][*][*] _Leaves finely serrate or entire, bright green; veins not
prominent; stipules none; whole plant glabrous or with some minute rusty
scurf; fruit black or with a blue bloom, sweet, stone very flat and
even, broadly oval or orbicular._

[+] _Cymes peduncled, about 5-rayed; drupes globose-ovoid, 3'' long,
shrubs 5--12 deg. high, in swamps._

8. V. cassinoides, L. (WITHE-ROD.) Shoots scurfy-punctate; leaves
thickish and _opaque or dull_, ovate to oblong, mostly with obtuse
acumination, _obscurely veiny_ (1--3' long), _with margins irregularly
crenulate-denticulate_ or sometimes entire; _peduncle shorter than the
cyme_. (V. nudum, var. cassinoides, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Newf. to N. J. and
Minn. Flowers earlier than the next.

9. V. nudum, L. Obscurely scurfy-punctate; _leaves more veiny_,
thickish, oval, oblong or lanceolate, entire or obsoletely denticulate,
_lucid above_ (2--4' long); _peduncle usually equalling the
cyme_.--N. J. to Fla.

[+][+] _Compound cymes sessile, 3--5-rayed; drupes oval, 5--7'' long._

10. V. Lentago, L. (SWEET VIBURNUM. SHEEP-BERRY.) _Leaves ovate,
strongly pointed_, closely and very _sharply serrate_; petioles long and
margined; cyme large; fruit oval, 1/2' long or more, ripe in autumn,
edible; tree 15--30 deg. high.--Woods and banks of streams, from the
Atlantic to Mo., Minn., and northward. Fl. in spring.

11. V. prunifolium, L. (BLACK HAW.) _Leaves oval, obtuse_ or slightly
pointed, _finely and sharply serrate_, smaller than in the preceding
(1--2' long); fruit similar or rather smaller.--Dry or moist ground,
N. Y. to Mich., Kan., and southward. Flowering early.--A tall shrub or
small tree.

12. V. obovatum, Walt. Shrub 2--8 deg. high; leaves obovate or spatulate,
obtuse, entire or denticulate, thickish, small (1--11/2' long), shining;
cymes small; fruit 5'' long, black.--River-banks and swamps, Va. to Fla.
May.


4. TRIOSTEUM, L. FEVER-WORT. HORSE-GENTIAN.

Calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate, leaf-like, persistent. Corolla tubular,
gibbous at base, somewhat equally 5-lobed, scarcely longer than the
calyx. Stamens 5. Ovary mostly 3-celled, in fruit forming a rather dry
drupe, containing as many ribbed 1-seeded bony nutlets.--Coarse, hairy,
perennial herbs, leafy to the top; the ample entire pointed leaves
tapering to the base, but connate round the simple stem. Flowers
sessile, solitary or clustered in the axils. (Name an abbreviation of
_Triosteospermum_, alluding to the three bony nutlets.)

1. T. perfoliatum, L. _Softly hairy_ (2--4 deg. high); _leaves oval,
abruptly narrowed below_, downy beneath; flowers brownish-purple, mostly
clustered; fruit orange-color, 1/2' long.--Rich woodlands, Canada and N.
Eng. to Minn., Iowa, and Ala. June. Also called TINKER'S-WEED, WILD
COFFEE, etc.

2. T. angustifolium, L. Smaller, _bristly-hairy; leaves lanceolate,
tapering to the base_; flowers greenish-cream-color, mostly single in
the axils.--Shady grounds, Va. to Ill., Mo., and Ala. May.


5. LINNAEA, Gronov. TWIN-FLOWER.

Calyx-teeth 5, awl-shaped, deciduous. Corolla narrow bell-shaped, almost
equally 5-lobed. Stamens 4, two of them shorter, inserted toward the
base of the corolla. Ovary and the small dry pod 3-celled, but only
1-seeded, two of the cells having only abortive ovules.--A slender
creeping and trailing little evergreen, somewhat hairy, with
rounded-oval sparingly crenate leaves contracted at the base into short
petioles, and thread-like upright peduncles forking into 2 pedicels at
the top, each bearing a delicate and fragrant nodding flower. Corolla
purple and whitish, hairy inside. (Dedicated to the immortal _Linnaeus_,
who first pointed out its characters, and with whom this pretty little
plant was a special favorite.)

1. L. borealis, Gronov.--Moist mossy woods and cold bogs, N. Eng. to
N. J. and the mountains of Md., west to Minn.; also far north and west.
June. (Eu.)


6. SYMPHORICARPOS, Dill. SNOWBERRY.

Calyx-teeth short, persistent. Corolla bell-shaped, regularly
4--5-lobed, with as many short stamens inserted into its throat. Ovary
4-celled, only 2 of the cells with a fertile ovule; the berry therefore
4-celled but only 2-seeded. Seeds bony.--Low and branching upright
shrubs, with oval short-petioled leaves, which are downy underneath and
entire, or wavy toothed or lobed on the young shoots. Flowers white
tinged with rose-color, in close short spikes or clusters. (Name
composed of [Greek: symphore/o], _to bear together_, and [Greek:
karpo/s], _fruit_; from the clustered berries.)

[*] _Style bearded; fruit red; flowers all in short dense axillary
clusters._

1. S. vulgaris, Michx. (INDIAN CURRANT. CORAL-BERRY.) Flowers in the
axils of nearly all the leaves; corolla sparingly bearded; berries
small.--Rocky banks, western N. Y. and Penn. to Dak., Neb., and Tex.
July.

[*][*] _Style glabrous; fruit white; flowers in clusters or sometimes
solitary._

2. S. occidentalis, Hook. (WOLFBERRY.) _Flowers in dense terminal and
axillary spikes_; corolla much bearded within; stamens and style
protruded.--Rocky ground, N. Mich. and Ill., west to the Rocky
Mts.--Flowers larger and more funnel-form, and stamens longer, than in
the next.

3. S. racemosus, Michx. (SNOWBERRY.) _Flowers in a loose and somewhat
leafy interrupted spike_ at the end of the branches; corolla bearded
inside; berries large.--Rocky banks, N. New Eng. and Penn., to Minn. and
westward; common in cultivation. June--Sept. Berries ripe in
autumn.--Var. PAUCIFLORUS, Robbins. Low, diffusely branched and
spreading; leaves smaller (about 1' long), the spike reduced to one or
two flowers in the uppermost axils.--Mountains of Vt. and Penn. to
Minn., Dak., and westward.


7. LONICERA, L. HONEYSUCKLE. WOODBINE.

Calyx-teeth very short. Corolla tubular or funnel-form, often gibbous at
the base, irregularly or almost regularly 5-lobed. Stamens 5. Ovary
2--3-celled. Berry several-seeded.--Leaves entire. Flowers often showy
and fragrant. (Named in honor of _Adam Lonitzer_, latinized _Lonicerus_,
a German herbalist of the 16th century.)

Sec. 1. XYLOSTEON. _Upright bushy shrubs; leaves all distinct; peduncles
axillary, single, 2-flowered at the summit; the two berries sometimes
united into one; calyx-teeth not persistent._

[*] _Bracts (2 or sometimes 4) at the base of the ovaries minute._

1. L. ciliata, Muhl. (FLY-HONEYSUCKLE.) Branches straggling (3--5 deg.
high); _leaves oblong-ovate, often heart-shaped, petioled, thin_, downy
beneath; _filiform peduncles shorter than the leaves_; corolla
funnel-form, almost spurred at the base (greenish-yellow, 3/4' long), the
lobes nearly equal; _berries separate (red)_.--Rocky woods, N. Brunswick
to Penn. and Minn. May.

2. L. caerulea, L. (MOUNTAIN F.) Low (1--2 deg. high); branches upright;
_leaves oval_, downy when young; _peduncles very short; bracts
awl-shaped, longer than the ovaries, which are united into one (blue)
berry_; flowers yellowish.--Mountain woods and bogs, Lab. to R. I.,
Minn., and northward. May. (Eu.)

3. L. oblongifolia, Muhl. (SWAMP F.) Shrub 2--5 deg. high, branches upright;
_leaves_ (2--3' long) _oblong_, downy when young, smooth when old;
_peduncles long and slender; bracts minute or deciduous; corolla deeply
2-lipped_ (1/2' long, yellowish-white); _berries (purple) united_ or
nearly distinct.--Bogs, N. New Eng. and N. Y., to Minn. June.

[*][*] _The two flowers involucrate by 4 conspicuous and broad
foliaceous bracts._

4. L. involucrata, Banks. Pubescent, or becoming glabrous; branches
4-angular; leaves (2--5' long) ovate-oblong, mostly pointed, petioled,
and with a strong midrib, exceeding the peduncle; corolla yellowish,
viscid-pubescent, cylindraceous (6--8'' long); ovaries and globose
dark-purple berries distinct.--Deep woods; shores of L. Superior, and
north and westward.

Sec. 2. CAPRIFOLIUM. _Twining shrubs, with the flowers in sessile whorled
clusters from the axils of the (often connate) upper leaves, forming
interrupted terminal spikes; calyx-teeth persistent on the (red or
orange) berry._

[*] _Corolla trumpet-shaped, almost regular; stamens and style little
exserted._

5. L. sempervirens, Ait. (TRUMPET HONEYSUCKLE.) Flowers in somewhat
distant whorls, scentless, nearly 2' long, deep red outside, yellowish
within or rarely throughout; leaves oblong, smooth, the lower petioled,
the uppermost pairs connate.--Copses, Conn. to Ind., and southward;
common in cultivation. May--Oct.--Leaves deciduous at the north.

[*][*] _Corolla ringent; the lower lip narrow, the upper broad and
4-lobed; stamens and style conspicuously exserted._

[+] _Corolla-tube an inch long, glabrous inside; stamens and style
glabrous._

6. L. grata, Ait. (AMERICAN WOODBINE.) Leaves smooth, glaucous beneath,
obovate, the 2 or 3 upper pairs united; flowers whorled in the uppermost
axils; corolla whitish with a purple tube, fading yellowish, not gibbous
at base, fragrant.--Rocky woodlands, N. J. and Penn. to Mich. and Mo.,
and southward; also cultivated. May.

[+][+] _Corolla hairy within, the tube 6'' long or less._

7. L. hirsuta, Eaton. (HAIRY HONEYSUCKLE.) Twining and rather
high-climbing; leaves deep green above, downy-hairy beneath, as well as
the branches, veiny, dull, broadly oval, the uppermost united, the lower
short-petioled; flowers in approximate whorls; tube of the
(orange-yellow) clammy-pubescent corolla gibbous at base, slender.--Damp
copses and rocks, Maine to Penn., Mich., and Minn. July.--A coarse
large-leaved species.

8. L. Sullivantii, Gray. At length _much whitened with glaucous bloom_,
3--6 deg. high, glabrous; leaves oval and obovate-oblong (2--4' long),
sessile and mostly connate on the flowering stems, the uppermost into an
orbicular disk; corolla pale yellow; _filaments nearly glabrous_. (L.
flava of former edition, mainly.)--Ohio to Ill., Minn., and L. Winnipeg;
also in Tenn. and N. C.

9. L. glauca, Hill. Glabrous, or lower leaf surface sometimes
puberulent, 3--5 deg. high; leaves oblong (2--3' long), glaucous but less
whitened than in the last, the 1--4 _upper pairs connate_; corolla
greenish-yellow or purplish; _tube only 3--4'' long, within and also
style and base of filaments hirsute_. (L. parviflora, _Lam._, and part
of var. Douglasii, _Gray._)--Rocky grounds, N. Eng. and Penn. to Minn.,
and northward.


8. DIERVILLA, Tourn. BUSH-HONEYSUCKLE.

Calyx-tube tapering at the summit; the lobes slender, awl-shaped,
persistent. Corolla funnel-form, 5-lobed, almost regular. Stamens 5.
Pod ovoid-oblong, pointed, 2-celled, 2-valved, septicidal,
many-seeded.--Low upright shrubs, with ovate or oblong pointed serrate
leaves, and cymosely 3--several-flowered peduncles, from the upper axils
or terminal. (Named in compliment to _Dr. Dierville_, who brought it
from Canada to Tournefort.)

1. D. trifida, Moench. Leaves oblong-ovate, taper-pointed, petioled;
peduncles mostly 3-flowered; pod long-beaked.--Rocks, Newf. to the
mountains of N. C., west to Minn. June--Aug.--Flowers honey-color, not
showy, as are the Japanese species cultivated under the name of WEIGELA.


ORDER 52. RUBIACEAE. (MADDER FAMILY.)

_Shrubs or herbs, with opposite entire leaves connected by interposed
stipules, or in whorls without apparent stipules, the calyx coherent
with the 2--4-celled ovary, the stamens as many as the lobes of the
regular corolla (4--5), and inserted on its tube._--Flowers perfect, but
often dimorphous (as in Mitchella and Houstonia). Fruit various. Seeds
anatropous or amphitropous. Embryo commonly pretty large, in copious
hard albumen.--A very large family, the greater part, and all its most
important plants (such as the Coffee and Peruvian-Bark trees), tropical.

I. CINCHONEAE. Ovules numerous in each cell; leaves opposite.

1. Houstonia. Corolla salver-form or funnel-form, 4-lobed. Seeds rather
few, thimble-shaped or saucer-shaped. Low herbs.

2. Oldenlandia. Corolla wheel-shaped in our species, 4-lobed. Seeds very
numerous and minute, angular. Low herbs.

II. COFFEINEAE. Ovules solitary in the cells; leaves mostly opposite.

[+] Flowers in a close and globose long-peduncled head. Fruit dry.
Shrubs.

3. Cephalanthus. Corolla tubular; lobes 4. Fruit inversely pyramidal,
2--4-seeded.

[+][+] Flowers twin; their ovaries united into one. Fruit a 2-eyed
berry.

4. Mitchella. Corolla funnel-form; its lobes 4. A creeping herb.

[+][+][+] Flowers axillary, separate. Fruit dry when ripe. Herbs.

5. Spermacoce. Corolla funnel-form or salver-form; lobes 4. Fruit
separating when ripe into 2 carpels, one or both of them opening.

6. Diodia. Fruit separating into 2 or 3 closed and indehiscent carpels;
otherwise as n. 5.

III. STELLATAE. Ovules solitary; leaves in whorls, without stipules.

7. Galium. Corolla wheel-shaped, 4- (or rarely 3-) parted. Calyx-teeth
obsolete. Fruit twin, separating into 2 indehiscent 1-seeded carpels.

8. Sherardia. Corolla funnel-form. Calyx-lobes lanceolate. Flowers
subsessile, involucrate.

1. HOUSTONIA, L.

Calyx 4-lobed, persistent; the lobes in fruit distant. Corolla
salver-form or funnel-form, usually much longer than the calyx-lobes,
4-lobed, the lobes valvate in the bud. Stamens 4; anthers linear or
oblong. Style 1; stigmas 2. Ovary 2-celled. Pod top-shaped, globular,
or didymous, thin, its summit or upper half free from and projecting
beyond the tube of the calyx, loculicidal across the top. Seeds
rather few (4--20 in each cell), peltate and saucer-shaped or
globular-thimble-shaped, pitted.--Small herbs, with short entire
stipules connecting the petioles or narrowed bases of the leaves, and
cymose or solitary and peduncled flowers. These are dimorphous, in some
individuals with exserted anthers and short included style; in others
the anthers included and the style long, the stigmas therefore
protruding. (Named for _Dr. Wm. Houston_, an English botanist who
collected in Central America.)

[*] _Small and delicate, vernal-flowering; peduncles 1-flowered; corolla
salver-form; upper half of the broad and somewhat 2-lobed pod free;
seeds globular, with a very deep round cavity occupying the inner face._

[+] _Perennial by delicate filiform creeping rootstocks or creeping
stems; peduncles filiform, 1--2' long._

1. H. caerulea, L. (BLUETS. INNOCENCE.) Glabrous; _stems erect_, slender,
sparingly branched from the base (3--5' high); _leaves oblong-spatulate_
(3--4'' long); peduncle filiform, erect; corolla _light blue_, pale
lilac or nearly white with a yellowish eye, with tube much longer than
its lobes or than those of the calyx.--Moist and grassy places, N. Eng.
to Ga., west to Mich. and Ala.; producing from early spring to midsummer
its delicate little flowers.

2. H. serpyllifolia, Michx. Like the last, but filiform
_stems prostrate_, extensively creeping and rooting; _leaves
orbicular to ovate_ (2--4'' long); corolla rather larger, and _deep
violet-blue_.--Along streamlets and on mountain-tops, Va. to Tenn. and
S. C.

[+][+] _Winter-annuals, branching from the simple root; peduncles much
shorter._

3. H. patens, Ell. An inch to at length a span high, with ascending
branches and erect peduncles; leaves spatulate to ovate; corolla much
smaller than that of n. 1, violet-blue or purplish without yellowish
eye, _the tube longer than its lobes, twice the length of the
calyx-lobes_.--Dry or sandy soil, S. Va. to Tex. and Ill. (?)

4. H. minima, Beck. More diffuse, _commonly scabrous_; stems at length
much branched and spreading (1--4' high); lowest leaves ovate or
spatulate, the upper oblong or nearly linear; earlier peduncles
elongated and spreading in fruit, the later ones short; _tube of the
purplish corolla not longer than its lobes or the ample calyx-lobes_
(11/2'' long).--Dry hills, Mo. to Tex. March--May.

[*][*] _Erect, mostly perennial herbs (6--20' high), with stem-leaves
sessile, and flowers in small terminal cymes or clusters; corolla
funnel-form, purplish, often hairy inside; seeds meniscoidal, with a
ridge across the hollowed inner face._

5. H. purpurea, L. Pubescent or smooth (8--15' high); _leaves varying
from roundish-ovate to lanceolate_, 3--5-ribbed; calyx-lobes longer than
the half-free globular pod.--Woodlands, Md. to Ark., and southward.
May--July.--Varying wonderfully, as into--

Var. ciliolata, Gray. A span high; leaves only 1/2' long, thickish;
cauline oblong-spatulate; radical oval or oblong, rosulate,
hirsute-ciliate; calyx-lobes a little longer than the pod.--Rocky banks,
from the Great Lakes and Minn. to Ky.; passing into

Var. longifolia, Gray. A span or two high, mostly glabrous,
thinner-leaved; leaves oblong-lanceolate to linear (6--20'' long);
radical oval or oblong, less rosulate, not ciliate.--Rocky or gravelly
ground, Maine to Minn., south to Ga. and Mo.; also northward.

Var. tenuifolia, Gray. Slender, lax, diffuse, 6--12' high, with loose
inflorescence, and almost filiform branches and peduncles; cauline
leaves all linear, hardly over 1'' wide.--S. E. Ohio to Va., N. C., and
Tenn.

Var. calycosa, Gray. Almost 1 deg. high; leaves broadly lanceolate,
thickish; calyx-lobes elongated (2--4'' long), much surpassing the
pod.--From Ill. (_Hall_) to Ark. and N. Ala.

6. H. angustifolia, Michx. Stems tufted from a hard or woody root;
_leaves narrowly linear_, acute, 1-ribbed, many of them fascicled;
flowers crowded, short-pedicelled; lobes of the corolla densely bearded
inside; _pod obovoid, acute at base, only its summit free_, opening
first across the top, at length through the partition.--Barrens, Ill. to
Kan., south to Tex., Tenn., and Fla.


2. OLDENLANDIA, Plumier.

Calyx 4-lobed, persistent. Corolla short, in our species wheel-shaped;
the limb 4-parted, valvate in the bud. Stamens 4; anthers short. Style 1
or none; stigmas 2. Pod thin, 2-celled, many-seeded, opening
loculicidally across the summit. Seeds very numerous, minute and
angular.--Low herbs, with small stipules united to the petioles.
(Dedicated to the memory of _Oldenland_, a German physician and
botanist, who died early at the Cape of Good Hope.)

1. O. glomerata, Michx. An inconspicuous, pubescent or smoothish,
branched and spreading annual (2--12' high); leaves ovate to oblong;
flowers in sessile axillary clusters; corolla nearly wheel-shaped
(white), much shorter than the calyx.--Wet places, near the coast, N. Y.
to Fla. and Tex.


3. CEPHALANTHUS, L. BUTTON-BUSH.

Calyx-tube inversely pyramidal, the limb 4-toothed. Corolla tubular,
4-toothed; the teeth imbricated in the bud. Style thread-form, much
protruded. Stigma capitate. Fruit dry and hard, small, inversely
pyramidal, 2--4-celled, at length splitting from the base upward into
2--4 closed 1-seeded portions.--Shrubs, with the white flowers densely
aggregated in spherical peduncled heads. (Name composed of [Greek:
kephale/], _a head_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _a flower_.)

1. C. occidentalis, L. Smooth or pubescent; leaves petioled, ovate or
lanceolate-oblong, pointed, opposite or whorled in threes, with short
intervening stipules.--Swamps and along streams, throughout the
continent. July, Aug.


4. MITCHELLA, L. PARTRIDGE-BERRY.

Flowers in pairs, with their ovaries united. Calyx 4-toothed. Corolla
funnel-form, 4-lobed; the lobes spreading, densely bearded inside,
valvate in the bud. Stamens 4. Style 1; stigmas 4, linear. Fruit a
berry-like double drupe, crowned with the calyx-teeth of the two
flowers, with 4 small seed-like bony nutlets to each flower.--A smooth
and trailing small evergreen herb, with round-ovate and shining petioled
leaves, minute stipules, white fragrant flowers often tinged with
purple, and scarlet edible (but nearly tasteless) berries, which remain
over winter. Flowers occasionally 3--6-merous, always dimorphous; all
those of some individuals having exserted stamens and included stigmas;
of others, included stamens and exserted style. (This very pretty plant
commemorates _Dr. John Mitchell_, an early correspondent of Linnaeus, and
an excellent botanist, who resided in Virginia.)

1. M. repens, L.--Dry woods, creeping about the foot of trees,
especially Coniferae, throughout our range and southward. June,
July.--Leaves often variegated with whitish lines. Rarely the two
flowers are completely confluent into one, with a 10-lobed corolla.


5. SPERMACOCE, Dill. BUTTON-WEED.

Calyx-tube short; the limb parted into 4 teeth. Corolla funnel-form or
salver-form, valvate in the bud. Stamens 4. Stigma or style 2-cleft.
Fruit small and dry, 2-celled, 2-seeded, splitting when ripe into 2
carpels, one of them usually carrying with it the partition, and
therefore closed, the other open on the inner face.--Small herbs, the
bases of the leaves or petioles connected by a bristle-bearing stipular
membrane. Flowers small, whitish, crowded into sessile axillary whorled
clusters or heads. (Name compounded of [Greek: spe/rma], _seed_, and
[Greek: akoke/], _a point_, probably from the pointed calyx-teeth on the
fruit.)

1. S. glabra, Michx. Glabrous perennial; stems spreading (9--20' long);
leaves oblong-lanceolate; heads many-flowered; corolla little exceeding
the calyx, bearded in the throat, bearing the anthers at its base;
filaments and style hardly any.--River-banks, S. Ohio to Ark., Tex., and
Fla. Aug.


6. DIODIA, Gronov. BUTTON-WEED.

Calyx-teeth 2--5, often unequal. Fruit 2- (rarely 3-) celled; the
crustaceous carpels into which it splits all closed and indehiscent.
Flowers 1--3 in each axil. Otherwise resembling Spermacoce. Flowering
all summer. (Name from [Greek: di/odos], _a thoroughfare_; the species
often growing by the wayside.)

1. D. Virginiana, L. Smooth or hairy perennial; stems spreading (1--2 deg.
long); leaves lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, sessile; corolla white
(1/2' long), the _slender tube abruptly expanded into the large limb;
style 2-parted; fruit oblong, strongly furrowed_, crowned mostly with 2
slender calyx-teeth.--Low grounds along streams, southern N. J. to Fla.,
west to Ark. and Tex.

2. D. teres, Walt. Hairy or minutely pubescent annual; stem spreading
(3--9' long), nearly terete; leaves linear-lanceolate, closely sessile,
rigid; _corolla funnel-form_ (2--3'' long, whitish), with short lobes,
not exceeding the long bristles of the stipules; _style undivided;
fruit_ obovate-turbinate, _not furrowed_, crowned with 4 short
calyx-teeth.--Sandy soil, N. J. to W. Ill., Fla., and Tex.


7. GALIUM, L. BEDSTRAW. CLEAVERS.

Calyx-teeth obsolete. Corolla 4-parted, rarely 3-parted, wheel-shaped,
valvate in the bud. Stamens 4, rarely 3, short. Styles 2. Fruit dry or
fleshy, globular, twin, separating when ripe into the 2 seed-like,
indehiscent, 1-seeded carpels.--Slender herbs, with small cymose flowers
(produced in summer), square stems, and whorled leaves, the roots often
containing a red coloring matter. (Name from [Greek: ga/la], _milk_,
which some species are used to curdle.)

Sec. 1. _Naturalized species; fruit dry._

G. VERUM, L. (YELLOW BEDSTRAW.) Perennial; stems smooth, erect; leaves 8
or sometimes 6 in the whorls, linear, roughish, soon deflexed; flowers
very numerous, paniculate, yellow; fruit usually smooth.--Dry fields,
E. Mass. (Nat. from Eu.)

G. MOLLUGO, L. Perennial, smooth throughout; stems erect or diffuse, 2
or 3 deg. long; leaves 8, or 6 on the branchlets, oblanceolate to nearly
linear; flowers very numerous in ample almost leafless panicles; fruit
smooth.--Roadsides and fields, N. Y. and Penn. (Nat. from Eu.)

G. ANGLICUM, Huds. Annual, slender, diffuse, seldom 1 deg. high, glabrous;
leaves 5--7, oblanceolate to nearly linear (3'' long), their margins and
the angles of the stem spinulose-scabrous; flowers rather few, cymulose
on leafy branches, greenish-white, very small; fruit glabrous, more or
less tuberculate.--Roadsides, Bedford Co., Va. (_Curtiss_). (Nat. from
Eu.)

G. TRICORNE, With. Annual, resembling _G. Aparine_, rather stout, with
simple branches; leaves 6 or 8, oblanceolate, cuspidate-mucronate, the
margins and stem retrorsely prickly-hispid; flowers mostly in clusters
of 3, dull white; fruits rather large, tuberculate-granulate, not hairy,
pendulous.--Fields, eastward. (Nat. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. _Indigenous species; fruit dry._

[*] _Annual; leaves about 8 in a whorl; peduncles 1--3-flowered,
axillary; fruit bristly with hooked prickles._

1. G. Aparine, L. (CLEAVERS. GOOSE-GRASS.) Stem weak and reclining,
bristle-prickly backward, hairy at the joints; leaves lanceolate,
tapering to the base, short-pointed, rough on the margins and midrib
(1--2' long); flowers white.--Shaded grounds, throughout the continent;
probably as an introduced plant eastward.

[*][*] _Perennials; leaves in 4's, comparatively large, and broad
(narrower in n. 7 and 8), not cuspidate-pointed, more or less distinctly
3-nerved; fruit uncinate-hispid (except in n. 6 and 7)._

[+] _Peduncles loosely 3--several-flowered; flowers dull purple to
yellowish-white._

2. G. pilosum, Ait. _Hairy; leaves oval_, dotted, hairy (1' long), the
lateral nerves obscure; _peduncles 2--3-forked, the flowers all
pedicelled_.--Dry copses, R. I. and Vt. to Ill., E. Kan., and southward.

Var. puncticulosum, Torr. & Gray. Almost glabrous; leaves varying to
elliptical-oblong, hispidulous-ciliate.--Va. to Tex.

3. G. Kamtschaticum, Steller. Stems weak, mainly glabrous (1 deg. high);
_leaves orbicular_ to oblong-ovate, thin (1/2--1' long), slightly pilose;
flowers slenderly pedicellate; _corolla glabrous, yellowish-white_, not
turning dark, _its lobes merely acute_. (G. circaezans, var. montanum,
_Torr. & Gray_.)--Higher mountains of N. Eng., L. Canada, and far
westward. (Asia.)

4. G. circaezans, Michx. (WILD LIQUORICE.) Smooth or downy (1 deg. high);
_leaves oval_, varying to ovate-oblong, _mostly obtuse_, ciliate (1--11/2'
long); _peduncles usually once forked, the branches elongated_ and
widely diverging in fruit, _bearing several remote flowers on very short
lateral pedicels_, reflexed in fruit; lobes of the _greenish corolla
hairy outside, acute or acuminate_.--Rich woods, N. Eng. to Minn., south
to Fla. and Tex.

5. G. lanceolatum, Torr. (WILD LIQUORICE.) Nearly glabrous; _leaves_
(except the lowest) _lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, tapering to the
apex_ (2' long); _corolla glabrous, yellowish turning dull purple, lobes
more acuminate_; otherwise like the last.--Dry woods, N. Eng. to
N. Mich. and Minn.

6. G. latifolium, Michx. Smooth (1--2 deg. high); _leaves lanceolate or
ovate-lanceolate_, acute (2' long), the midrib and margins rough; cymes
panicled, loosely many-flowered, the purple flowers on _slender
spreading pedicels; fruit smooth_, rather fleshy.--Dry woods, mountains
of Penn. to N. C. and Tenn.

7. G. Arkansanum, Gray. Similar but lower; leaves lanceolate to linear
(1' long or less), the lateral nerves obscure or none.--S. Mo. and Ark.

[+][+] _Leaves narrow; flowers bright white, numerous in a compact
panicle._

8. G. boreale, L. (NORTHERN BEDSTRAW.) Smooth (1--2 deg. high); leaves
linear-lanceolate; fruit minutely bristly, sometimes smooth.--Rocky
banks of streams, Maine to Penn., Iowa, Minn., and westward. (Eu.,
Asia.)

[*][*][*] _Leaves in 4's, 5's, or 6's, small, 1-nerved; flowers white;
fruit smooth (flowers greenish and fruit hispid in n. 12.)_

[+] _Leaves pointless._

9. G. trifidum, L. (SMALL BEDSTRAW.) Stems weak, ascending (5--20'
high), branching, mostly roughened backwards on the angles; _leaves in
whorls of 4 to 6_, linear or oblanceolate, the margins and midrib rough;
_peduncles scattered, 1--7-flowered_; corolla-lobes and stamens often
only 3.--Sphagnous bogs and wet ground, throughout the continent.
Exceedingly variable.--Var. PUSILLUM, Gray, the smallest form; leaves
only in 4's, 3--4'' long, narrow, in age often reflexed; peduncles
1-flowered. In cold bogs, northward.--Var. LATIFOLIUM, Torr., the
larger and broadest-leaved form; leaves 6 or 7'' long, often 2'' wide.
From Canada, south and west. (Eu., Asia.)

10. G. concinnum, Torr. & Gray. Stems low and slender (6--12' high),
with minutely roughened angles; _leaves all in 6's, linear, slightly
pointed_, veinless, the margins upwardly roughened; _peduncles 2--3
times forked, diffusely panicled_; pedicels short.--Dry hills, Penn. to
Va., west to Minn., Iowa, and Ark.

[+][+] _Leaves cuspidately mucronate or acuminate._

11. G. asprellum, Michx. (ROUGH BEDSTRAW.) _Stem_ much branched, _rough
backwards with hooked prickles_, leaning on bushes (3--5 deg. high); _leaves
in whorls of 6, or 4--5 on the branchlets, oval-lanceolate_, with almost
prickly margins and midrib; peduncles short, 2--3 times
forked.--Alluvial ground, N. Eng. to N. C., west to Minn., Iowa, and
Mo.

12. G. triflorum, Michx. (SWEET-SCENTED BEDSTRAW.) Stem (1--3 deg. long)
bristly-roughened backward on the angles; leaves elliptical-lanceolate,
bristle pointed, with slightly roughened margins (1--2' long); peduncles
3-flowered, the flowers all pedicelled, greenish; fruit beset with
hooked bristles.--Rich woodlands, throughout the continent.
Sweet-scented in drying. (Eu.)

Sec. 3. _Perennial; fruit a berry; leaves in 4's, 1-nerved._

13. G. hispidulum, Michx. Hirsute-pubescent, scabrous, or sometimes
nearly smooth, 1--2 deg. high, diffusely branched; leaves oblong or oval,
mucronate (3--6'' long), pedicels solitary or commonly 2 or 3 from the
small involucral whorl, all naked, or one of them bracteolate; flowers
white; berry purple, glabrate.--Dry or sandy soil, southern N. J. to
Fla., along the coast.


8. SHERARDIA, Dill.

Calyx-lobes lanceolate, persistent. Corolla funnel-form, the limb
4--5-lobed. Stamens 4--5. Style filiform, 2-cleft, stigmas capitate.
Fruit dry, twin, of 2 indehiscent 1-seeded carpels.--A slender
procumbent herb, with square stems, lanceolate pungent leaves in whorls
of 4--6, and small subsessile blue or pinkish flowers surrounded by a
gamophyllous involucre. (Named for _Dr. William Sherard_, patron of
Dillenius.)

S. ARVENSIS, L. The only species; sparingly naturalized from Eu.


ORDER 53. VALERIANACEAE. (VALERIAN FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with opposite leaves and no stipules; the calyx-tube coherent
with the ovary, which has one fertile 1-ovuled cell and two abortive or
empty ones; the stamens distinct, 1--3, fewer than the lobes of the
corolla, and inserted on its tube._--Corolla tubular or funnel-form,
often irregular, mostly 5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud. Style
slender; stigmas 1--3. Fruit indehiscent, 1-celled (the two empty cells
of the ovary disappearing), or 3-celled, two of them empty, the other
1-seeded. Seed suspended, anatropous, with a large embryo and no
albumen.--Flowers in panicled or clustered cymes. (Roots often odorous
and antispasmodic.)


1. VALERIANA, Tourn. VALERIAN.

Limb of the calyx of several plumose bristles (like a pappus) which are
rolled up inward in flower, but unroll and spread as the seed-like
1-celled fruit matures. Corolla commonly gibbous near the base, the
5-lobed limb nearly regular. Stamens 3.--Perennial herbs, with
thickened strong-scented roots, and simple or pinnate leaves. Flowers in
many species imperfectly dioecious or dimorphous. (A mediaeval Latin name
of uncertain origin.)

[*] _Root spindle-shaped, large and deep (6--12' long); leaves
thickish._

1. V. edulis, Nutt. Smooth, or minutely downy when very young; stem
straight (1--4 deg. high), few-leaved; leaves commonly minutely and densely
ciliate, those of the root spatulate and lanceolate, of the stem
pinnately parted into 3--7 long and narrow divisions; flowers in a long
and narrow interrupted panicle, nearly dioecious; corolla whitish,
obconical (2'' long).--Wet plains and prairies, Ohio and Ont. to Iowa,
Minn., and westward. June.

[*][*] _Root fibrous; leaves thin. (Stems 1--3 deg. high.)_

2. V. sylvatica, Banks. Smooth or minutely pubescent; _root-leaves ovate
or oblong, entire_, rarely with 2 small lobes; stem-leaves pinnate, with
3--11 oblong-ovate or lanceolate nearly entire leaflets; cyme at first
close, many-flowered; _corolla inversely conical_ (3'' long, rose-color
or white).--Wet ground, Newf. to southern N. Y., N. Mich., westward and
northward. June.

3. V. pauciflora, Michx. Smooth, slender, surculose; _root-leaves ovate,
heart-shaped, toothed_, pointed, sometimes with 2 small lateral
divisions; stem-leaves pinnate, with 3--7 ovate toothed leaflets;
branches of the panicled cyme few-flowered; tube of the (pale pink)
_corolla long and slender_ (1/2' long).--Woods and alluvial banks,
Penn. to S. Ill., Mo., and Tenn. June.


2. VALERIANELLA, Tourn. CORN SALAD. LAMB-LETTUCE.

Limb of the calyx obsolete or merely toothed. Corolla funnel-form,
equally or unequally 5-lobed. Stamens 3, rarely 2. Fruit 3-celled, two
of the cells empty and sometimes confluent into one, the other
1-seeded.--Annuals and biennials, usually smooth, with forking stems,
tender and rather succulent leaves (entire or cut-lobed towards the
base), and white or whitish cymose-clustered and bracted small
flowers.--Our species all have the limb of the calyx obsolete, and are
so much alike in aspect, flowers, etc., that good characters are only to
be taken from the fruit. They all have a rather short corolla, the limb
of which is nearly regular. (Name a diminutive of Valeriana.)

[*] _Corolla bluish; fruit with a corky mass at the back of the fertile
cell._

V. OLITORIA, Poll. Fruit flattish, obliquely rhomboidal; empty cells as
large as the fertile, contiguous, the thin partition at length breaking
up.--Old fields, N. Y. to Penn. and La. (Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Corolla white; no corky mass behind the fertile cell._

[+] _Fertile cell broader than the empty ones; cross-section of fruit
triangular._

1. V. chenopodifolia, DC. Stems with long internodes and few forks;
glomerate cymes few, slender-peduncled; bracts broadly lanceolate; fruit
glabrous or pubescent, 2'' long. (Fedia Fagopyrum, _Torr. &
Gray_.)--Moist grounds, western N. Y. to Minn., south to Va. and Ky.

[+][+] _Fertile cell as broad as the empty ones, beaked; cross-section
quadrate._

2. V. radiata, Dufr. Fruit ovate-tetragonal, _downy-pubescent_
(sometimes glabrous); empty cells as thick as the oblong-ovate fertile
one, or thicker, _a broad shallow groove between them_. (Fedia radiata,
_Michx._)--Low grounds, Penn. to Minn., Tex., and Fla.

3. V. stenocarpa, Krok. Fruit oblong-tetragonal, _commonly glabrous_;
oblong fertile cell thicker than the linear-oblong approximate empty
ones. (Fedia stenocarpa, _Engelm._)--W. Mo. and E. Kan. to Tex.

[+][+][+] _Fertile cell much the narrowest, dorsally 1-nerved; section
roundish._

4. V. Woodsiana, Walp. Fruit 1'' long or more; fertile cell ovate,
tipped with a tooth; empty ones inflated, with oblong depression
(sometimes an open cavity) in the middle.--Moist grounds, N. Y. and
Penn. to Tex.

Var. umbilicata, Gray. Empty cells becoming confluent, vesicular by
incurvation of the circular margin, forming a deep and round
umbilication. (Fedia umbilicata, _Sulliv._)--N. Y. to Ohio and
southward.

Var. patellaria, Gray. Fruit saucer-shaped, emarginate at base and apex,
winged by the divergent cells. (Fedia patellaria, _Sulliv._)--Same
range.


ORDER 54. DIPSACEAE. (TEASEL FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with opposite or whorled leaves, no stipules, and the flowers in
dense heads, surrounded by an involucre, as in the_ Composite Family;
_but the stamens are distinct, and the suspended seed has
albumen._--Represented by the following introduced species and by the
cultivated Sweet Scabious (_Scabiosa atropurpurea_).


1. DIPSACUS, Tourn. TEASEL.

Involucre many-leaved, longer than the chaffy leafy-tipped and pointed
bracts among the densely capitate flowers; each flower with a 4-leaved
calyx-like involucel investing the ovary and fruit (achene). Calyx-tube
coherent with the ovary, the limb cup-shaped, without a pappus. Corolla
nearly regular, 4-cleft. Stamens 4, inserted on the corolla. Style
slender.--Stout and coarse biennials, hairy or prickly, with large
oblong heads. (Name from [Greek: dipsa/o], _to thirst_, probably because
the united cup-shaped bases of the leaves in some species hold water.)

1. D. SYLVESTRIS, Mill. (WILD TEASEL.) Prickly; leaves lance-oblong;
leaves of the involucre slender, longer than the head; bracts (chaff)
tapering into a long flexible awn with a straight point.--Roadsides;
rather rare. (Nat. from Eu.) Suspected to be the original of

2. D. FULLONUM, L., the FULLER'S TEASEL, which has a shorter involucre,
and stiff chaff to the heads, with hooked points, used for raising a nap
upon woollen cloth; it has escaped from cultivation in some places.
(Adv. from Eu.)


(Addendum) 2. SCABIOSA, Tourn. SCABIOUS.

Characters of Dipsacus, but the green leaves of the involucre and
involucels not rigid nor spinescent. (Name from _scabies_, the itch,
from its use as a remedy.)

S. AUSTRALIS, Wulf. Perennial, sparsely branched, nearly glabrous,
11/2--3 deg. high; leaves narrowly lanceolate to linear, the lower
oblanceolate, slightly toothed or entire; heads short-oblong; calyx
obtusely short-lobed; corolla pale blue.--Central N. Y. and Penn.; rare.
(Adv. from Eu.)


ORDER 55. COMPOSITAE. (COMPOSITE FAMILY.)

_Flowers in a close head_ (the compound flower of the older botanists),
_on a common receptacle, surrounded by an involucre, with 5 (rarely 4)
stamens inserted on the corolla, their anthers united in a tube
(syngenesious)._--Calyx-tube united with the 1-celled ovary, the limb
(called a _pappus_) crowning its summit in the form of bristles, awns,
scales, teeth, etc., or cup-shaped, or else entirely absent. Corolla
either strap-shaped or tubular; in the latter chiefly 5-lobed, valvate
in the bud, the veins bordering the margins of the lobes. Style 2-cleft
at the apex (in sterile flowers usually entire). Fruit seed-like
(_achene_), dry, containing a single erect anatropous seed, with no
albumen.--An immense family, in temperate regions chiefly herbs, without
stipules, with perfect, polygamous, monoecious or dioecious flowers. The
flowers with a strap-shaped (_ligulate_) corolla are called _rays_ or
_ray-flowers_; the head which presents such flowers, either throughout
or at the margin, is _radiate_. The tubular flowers compose the _disk_;
and a head which has no ray-flowers is said to be _discoid_. When the
head contains two sorts of flowers it is said to be _heterogamous_; when
only one sort, _homogamous_. The leaves of the involucre, of whatever
form or texture, are termed _scales_. The bracts or scales, which often
grow on the receptacle among the flowers, are called the _chaff_; when
these are wanting, the receptacle is said to be _naked_.--The largest
order of Phaenogamous plants. The genera are divided by the corolla into
three series, only two of which are represented in the Northern United
States. The first is much the larger.


Systematic Synopsis.

SERIES I. TUBULIFLORAE.

Corolla tubular in all the perfect flowers, regularly 5- (rarely 3--4-)
lobed, ligulate only in the marginal or ray-flowers, which when present
are either pistillate only, or neutral (with neither stamens nor
pistil).

Tribe I. VERNONIACEAE. Heads discoid; the flowers all alike, perfect and
tubular, never yellow. Branches of the style long and slender, terete,
thread-shaped, minutely bristly-hairy all over.--Leaves alternate or
scattered.

1. Elephantopus. Heads 3--5-flowered, several crowded together into a
compound head. Involucre of 8 scales. Pappus of several chaffy
bristles.

2. Vernonia. Heads several--many-flowered, separate. Involucre of many
scales. Pappus double, the inner capillary, the outer of minute chaffy
bristles.

Tribe II. EUPATORIACEAE. Heads discoid, the flowers all alike, perfect
and tubular, never yellow. Branches of the style thickened upward or
club-shaped, obtuse, very minutely and uniformly pubescent; the
stigmatic lines indistinct.

[*] Pappus a row of hard scales.

3. Sclerolepis. Head many-flowered. Scales of the involucre equal.
Leaves whorled.

[*][*] Pappus of slender bristles.

[+] Achene 5-angled; bristles of the pappus roughish.

4. Mikania. Flowers and involucral scales only 4. Stems twining.

5. Eupatorium. Involucre of more than 4 scales and the flowers few or
many. Stems not twining.

[+][+] Achene 10-ribbed; involucral scales striate-nerved.

6. Kuhnia. Pappus very strongly plumose. Scales of the involucre few.

7. Brickellia. Involucral scales in several series. Pappus merely
scabrous.

8. Liatris. Pappus plumose or only barbellate. Corolla red-purple,
strongly 5-lobed. Heads spicate or racemose, the involucre well
imbricated.

9. Trilisa. Pappus minutely barbellate. Corolla rose-purple. Heads
corymbed or panicled, the involucre little imbricated.

Tribe III. ASTEROIDEAE. Heads discoid, the flowers all alike and tubular;
or else radiate, the outer ones ligulate and pistillate. Anthers not
caudate at base. Branches of the style in the perfect flowers flat,
smooth up to where the conspicuous marginal stigmatic lines abruptly
terminate, and prolonged above this into a flattened lance-shaped or
triangular appendage which is evenly hairy or pubescent outside.--Leaves
alternate. Receptacle naked (destitute of chaff) in all our species.

[*] 1. Ray-flowers yellow (in one species of Solidago whitish), or
sometimes none at all.

[+] Pappus of not numerous slender bristles. Heads radiate. Involucre of
firm scales with greenish tips, commonly coated with resin. West of the
Mississippi.

10. Gutierrezia. Heads small, numerous. Ray and disk-flowers 3 or 4
each, all fertile. Pappus of several short chaffy scales.
Suffrutescent; leaves very narrow.

11. Amphiachyris. Heads small. Ray-flowers 5--10; pappus coroniform.
Disk-flowers infertile; pappus of several bristle-like scales. Annual;
leaves very narrow.

12. Grindelia. Heads large, many-flowered. Flowers all fertile. Pappus
of 2--8 rigid caducous awns. Coarse herbs with toothed leaves.

[+][+] Pappus (at least of the disk) of copious slender or capillary
bristles.

[=] Pappus double.

13. Heterotheca. Resembling Chrysopsis, but the achenes of the ray
thicker than those of the disk and without pappus or nearly so. Western.

14. Chrysopsis. Heads many-flowered; rays numerous. The outer pappus of
very small chaffy bristles, much shorter than the inner of copious
capillary bristles.

[=][=] Pappus simple.

15. Aplopappus. Heads many-flowered, many-radiate. Involucre
hemispherical. Pappus of many unequal bristles. Western.

16. Bigelovia. Heads 3--4-flowered; rays none. Receptacle awl-shaped.
Pappus a single row of capillary bristles.

17. Solidago. Heads few--many-flowered; rays 1--16. Pappus of numerous
slender and equal capillary bristles.

18. Brachychaeta. Heads 8--10-flowered, clustered; rays 4 or 5. Pappus a
row of minute bristles shorter than the achene.

[*] 2. Ray-flowers white, blue, or purple, never yellow.

[+] Pappus none or very short, with or without a few awns.

[++] Receptacle conical. Awns none.

19. Bellis. Achenes marginless, flattened; pappus none. Involucral
scales equal.

20. Aphanostephus. Achenes prismatic; pappus coroniform. Outer scales
shorter.

[++][++] Receptacle flat or convex. Pappus usually with awns.

21. Chaetopappa. Achenes fusiform; pappus of 5 or fewer thin chaff and
alternating awns. Western.

22. Boltonia. Achenes very flat, thick-winged; pappus of short bristles
and usually 2--4 awns.

[+][+] Pappus of a single row of awns or coarse rigid bristles, or in
the ray scale-like.

23. Townsendia. Low or stemless, with linear-spatulate leaves and large
aster-like flowers.

[+][+][+] Pappus of numerous long and capillary bristles; receptacle
flat.

24. Sericocarpus. Heads 12--20-flowered; rays 4 or 5. Involucre oblong
or club-shaped, imbricated, cartilaginous. Achenes short, narrowed
downward, silky.

25. Aster. Heads many-flowered, on leafy peduncles. Involucral scales
unequal, loosely or closely imbricated. Achenes flattish; pappus simple
(rarely double), copious.

26. Erigeron. Heads many-flowered, on naked peduncles. Involucre of
narrow equal scales, little imbricated. Achenes flattened; pappus simple
and rather scanty, or with some outer minute scales.

[*] 3. Rays none. Heads dioecious (all pistillate or all staminate).

27. Baccharis. Heads many-flowered. Pappus capillary. Smooth glutinous
shrubs.

Tribe IV. INULOIDEAE. Heads discoid (radiate only in Inula), the
pistillate flowers mostly filiform and truncate. Anthers sagittate, the
basal lobes attenuate into tails. Style-branches with unappendaged
obtuse or truncate naked tips. Pappus capillary or none.

[*] 1. Receptacle naked. Involucre not scarious, imbricated. Not woolly.

28. Pluchea. Heads containing a few perfect but sterile flowers in the
centre, and many pistillate fertile ones around them. Pappus capillary.

[*] 2. Receptacle chaffy. Involucral scales few, mostly scarious. Low
floccose-woolly annuals; flowers as in n. 28.

29. Evax. Receptacle convex. Achenes obcompressed. Pappus none. Western.

30. Filago. Receptacle subulate. Achenes terete. Outer flowers without
pappus.

[*] 3. Receptacle naked. Involucral scales many, scarious.
Floccose-woolly herbs.

31. Antennaria. Heads dioecious. Pappus of sterile flowers club-shaped,
of the fertile united at base and deciduous together.

32. Anaphalis. Heads dioecious or nearly so. Pappus not thickened above
nor at all united at base.

33. Gnaphalium. Heads all fertile throughout. Pappus all capillary.

[*] 4. Corollas all somewhat broadly tubular and lobed. Involucre not
scarious. Receptacle naked. Pappus none.

34. Adenocaulon. Head few-flowered and scales few; outer flowers
pistillate. Somewhat woolly.

[*] 5. Heads radiate. Receptacle naked. Involucre herbaceous. Pappus
copious.

35. Inula. Heads large, many-flowered. Flowers yellow. Stout perennial.

Tribe V. HELIANTHOIDEAE. Heads radiate or discoid. Involucre not scarious
(nut-like in fruit in n. 43, 44). Receptacle chaffy. Pappus never
capillary, sometimes none. Anthers not caudate. Style-branches truncate
or hairy-appendaged.

[*] 1. Heads radiate (obscurely so in n. 41, sometimes discoid in
n. 36), the ray pistillate and fertile, the disk perfect but sterile.

[+] Achenes turgid, triangular-obovoid; pappus none.

36. Polymnia. Involucral scales in 2 rows, the 5 outer leaf-like, the
inner small.

[+][+] Achenes flattened dorsally (obcompressed).

37. Silphium. Achenes wing-margined, in several rows; pappus none or 2
teeth. Scales thick, in several rows.

38. Berlandiera. Achenes wingless, 5--12 in one row, without pappus.
Inner involucral scales obovate, outer smaller and more foliaceous.
Western.

39. Chrysogonum. Achenes wingless, about 5; pappus a one-sided
2--3-toothed crown. Inner scales 5, chaff-like, the 5 outer longer and
leaf-like.

40. Engelmannia. Achenes wingless, 8--10; pappus a scarious hispid
crown. Outer scales (about 10) leaf-like, inner coriaceous with green
tips. Western.

41. Parthenium. Rays 5, very short, persistent. Pappus of 2 small
scales. Involucral scales short, roundish, in 2 rows.

[*] 2. Fertile flowers 1--5, the corolla none or reduced to a tube;
staminate corolla funnel-form. Pappus none.

[+] Heads with 1--5 pistillate flowers. Receptacle chaffy.

42. Iva. Achenes short, thick. Involucre of few roundish scales.

[+][+] Heads of two sorts on the same plant, the upper staminate with an
open cup-shaped involucre, the lower pistillate, of 1--4 flowers in a
closed bur-like involucre.

43. Ambrosia. Scales of staminate involucre united. Fruit 1-seeded.

44. Xanthium. Scales of staminate involucre distinct. Fruit 1--4-celled,
1--4-beaked.

[*] 3. Heads radiate, or rarely discoid; disk-flowers all perfect and
fertile. Anthers blackish. Pappus none, or a crown or cup, or of one or
two chaffy awns, never capillary, nor of several uniform chaffy
scales.--Leaves more commonly opposite.

[+] Involucre double; the outer forming a cup.

45. Tetragonotheca. Outer involucre 4-leaved. Achenes obovoid; pappus
none.

[+][+] Involucre of one or more rows of separate scales.

[++] Chaff of the flat receptacle bristle-shaped.

46. Eclipta. Ray short. Involucral scales 10--12, in two rows,
herbaceous.

[++][++] Chaff scale-like, embracing or subtending the achenes.

[=] Receptacle high, conical or columnar in fruit. Pappus none or a
short crown.

47. Heliopsis. Rays fertile. Achenes 4-sided. Leaves opposite.

48. Echinacea. Rays rose-colored, pistillate, sterile. Achenes short,
4-sided. Chaff spinescent.

49. Rudbeckia. Rays neutral. Achenes 4-sided, flat at the top,
marginless.

50. Lepachys. Rays few, neutral. Achenes flattened laterally and
margined.

[=][=] Receptacle flat to convex. Achenes not winged nor very flat.

51. Borrichia. Achenes 3--4-angled; pappus a short 4-toothed crown.
Shrubby.

52. Helianthus. Achenes flattened, bearing 2 very deciduous chaffy
pointed scales.

[=][=][=] Receptacle convex (rarely conical). Achenes flat-compressed
laterally, winged or wingless, 2-awned. Leaves decurrent.

53. Verbesina. Involucral scales closely imbricated in 2 or more rows.

54. Actinomeris. Scales few, soon deflexed. Achenes obovate, squarrosely
spreading.

[*] 4. Rays few, neutral, or wanting. Achenes obcompressed, i.e.,
flattened parallel with the scales of the involucre (rarely terete).
Involucre double; the outer spreading and often foliaceous. Receptacle
flat. Leaves opposite.

55. Coreopsis. Pappus of 2 (or rarely more) scales, teeth, or awns,
which are naked or barbed upward, sometimes obsolete or a mere crown.

56. Bidens. Pappus of 2 or more rigid and persistent downwardly barbed
awns or teeth.

57. Thelesperma. Inner involucre connate to the middle. Achenes terete.
Awns retrorsely bearded.

[*] 5. Heads radiate or discoid; disk-flowers all perfect and fertile.
Achenes turbinate, 5-angled; pappus of several chaffy scales.

[+] Leaves alternate, entire. Disk-flowers purplish.

58. Baldwinia. Rays numerous, long, neutral. Involucre much imbricated.
Receptacle deeply honey-combed.

59. Marshallia. Rays none. Involucre of narrow leafy equal scales.
Receptacle chaffy.

[+][+] Leaves opposite, serrate. Disk-flowers yellow.

60. Galinsoga. Rays few, short, pistillate, whitish. Involucre of 4--5
thin ovate scales. Receptacle chaffy.

Tribe VI. HELENIOIDEAE. Nearly as Tribe V., but receptacle not chaffy
(somewhat so in n. 64). In our genera, the disk-flowers perfect and
fertile; the pappus a row of several chaffy scales (bristly-dissected in
n. 65); the involucre hardly at all imbricated (partly scarious in
n. 61).

[*] Involucral scales distinct, not glandular-punctate.

61. Hymenopappus. Rays none. Receptacle flat. Involucre colored.
Western.

62. Actinella. Rays fertile, 3-toothed. Receptacle elevated. Involucre
appressed. Western.

63. Helenium. Rays fertile or sterile, 3--5-cleft. Receptacle elevated.
Involucre small, reflexed. Leaves decurrent.

64. Gaillardia. Ray 3-toothed, or none. Receptacle usually beset with
fine fimbrillate chaff. Outer involucral scales loose and leafy.
Pappus-chaff tipped with the projecting midvein. Western.

[*][*] Dotted with oil-glands. Involucral scales united into a cup.

65. Dysodia. Pappus a row of chaffy scales dissected into many bristles.

Tribe VII. ANTHEMIDEAE. Distinguished from the last two tribes by the
more or less dry and scarious imbricated scales of the involucre. Heads
radiate (ray mostly white) or discoid, the perfect flowers sometimes
sterile and the pistillate rarely tubular. Achenes small; pappus a
short crown or none.--Mostly strong-scented; leaves alternate.

[*] Receptacle chaffy, at least in part. Heads radiate, many-flowered.

66. Anthemis. Achenes terete, angled or ribbed. Heads hemispherical,
rather large.

67. Achillea. Achenes obcompressed. Heads small, campanulate or obovate.

[*][*] Receptacle naked.

[+] Heads rather large, pedunculate, radiate or rarely rayless.

68. Matricaria. Receptacle conical. Rays pistillate or none. Pappus
crown-like or none.

69. Chrysanthemum. Receptacle flattish. Rays many, pistillate. Pappus
none.

[+][+] Heads mostly small, discoid, corymbed or paniculate.

70. Tanacetum. Heads corymbed. Achene with broad summit; pappus a short
crown.

71. Artemisia. Heads in panicled spikes or racemes. Achenes with narrow
summit; pappus none.

Tribe VIII. SENECIONIDEAE. Heads radiate or discoid, the involucre little
or not at all imbricated, not scarious. Receptacle naked. Anthers
tailless. Pappus capillary.

[*] Heads monoecious or subdioecious, the perfect flowers mostly
sterile, and the small (ligulate or tubular) ray-flowers in more than
one row (at least in the fertile heads). Style-branches obtuse, not
appendaged nor hispid. Leaves all radical.

72. Tussilago. Head solitary, yellow-flowered, monoecious.

73. Petasites. Heads corymbed, subdioecious. Flowers white or purplish.

[*][*] Flowers all fertile. Style-branches truncate or capitellate,
often appendaged. Involucral scales connivent-erect.

[+] Leaves opposite.

74. Arnica. Heads showy. Pappus rather rigid, scabrous.

[+][+] Leaves alternate. Pappus soft-capillary, copious.

75. Senecio. Heads usually radiate. Corollas yellow, 5-toothed.

76. Cacalia. Heads discoid. Corollas white or cream-colored, 5-cleft.

77. Erechtites. Heads discoid. Flowers whitish, the outer pistillate
with filiform corollas.

Tribe IX. CYNAROIDEAE. Flowers all tubular and perfect (the outer
ray-like and neutral in n. 82). Involucre much imbricated. Anthers
caudate, long-appendaged at tip. Style-branches short or united, obtuse,
unappendaged, smooth, with often a pubescent ring below. Pappus mostly
bristly.--Leaves alternate.

[*] Achenes attached by the base. Flowers all alike.

[+] Leaves not prickly. Style-branches partly distinct. Filaments
glabrous.

78. Arctium. Involucral scales hooked at the tip. Pappus of short rough
bristles.

[+][+] Leaves prickly. Style-branches coherent, usually a pubescent ring
below.

79. Cnicus. Pappus bristles plumose. Receptacle densely bristly.

80. Carduus. Pappus-bristles not plumose. Receptacle densely bristly.

81. Onopordon. Pappus-bristles not plumose. Receptacle deeply
honeycombed.

[*][*] Achenes attached obliquely. Marginal flowers often enlarged and
ray-like.

82. Centaurea. Involucral scales appendaged. Pappus double and bristly,
or very short or none.

SERIES II. LIGULIFLORAE. Tribe X. CICHORIACEAE.

Corolla ligulate in all the flowers of the head, and all the flowers
perfect.--Herbs, with milky juice. Leaves alternate.

[*] Pappus none.

83. Lampsana. Involucre cylindrical, of 8 scales in a single row,
8--12-flowered.

[*][*] Pappus chaffy, or of both chaff and bristles.

84. Krigia. Involucre simple, not calyculate. Pappus of both chaff and
bristles.

85. Cichorium. Involucre double. Pappus a small crown of many
bristle-form scales.

[*][*][*] Pappus plumose.

86. Tragopogon. Involucre simple, not calyculate. Achenes long-beaked.
Stems leafy.

87. Leontodon. Involucre calyculate. Achenes fusiform. Leaves radical.

88. Picris. Outer involucral scales spreading. Achenes terete. Stems
leafy.

[*][*][*][*] Pappus composed entirely of capillary bristles, not
plumose.

[+] Achenes not flattened, columnar or terete, often slender.

[++] Achenes not beaked.

[=] Flowers yellow or orange.

89. Hieracium. Involucre imbricated. Pappus tawny. Pilose perennials.

90. Crepis. Involucral scales in one row. Pappus white, soft. Not
pilose.

[=][=] Flowers white or cream color or pinkish. Involucre calyculate.

91. Prenanthes. Achenes short, blunt. Pappus tawny or brown. Stems leafy
and heads often nodding.

92. Lygodesmia. Achenes long, tapering. Pappus white. Stems nearly
leafless; heads erect. Western.

[++][++] Achenes beaked (sometimes beakless in n. 93). Flowers yellow.

93. Troximon. Scapose. Involucre loosely imbricated. Achenes 10-ribbed.

94. Taraxacum. Scapose. Involucre calyculate. Achenes 4--5-ribbed.

95. Pyrrhopappus. Scapose or branched. Pappus reddish, the base
surrounded by a soft villous ring.

96. Chondrilla. Stem branching, leafy. Involucre few-flowered,
calyculate. Pappus white.

[+][+] Achenes flat or flattish. Pappus white, fine and soft. Involucre
imbricated. Leafy-stemmed, with panicled heads.

97. Lactuca. Achenes more or less beaked. Flowers yellow or purplish.

98. Sonchus. Achenes flattish, not at all beaked. Flowers yellow.

The technical characters of the tribes, taken from the styles, require a
magnifying-glass to make them out, and will not always be clear to the
student. The following artificial analysis, founded upon other and more
obvious distinctions, will be useful to the beginner.

Artificial Key to the Genera of the Tubuliflorae.

Sec. 1. Rays or ligulate flowers none; corollas all tubular (or rarely
none).

[*] 1. Flowers of the head all perfect and alike.

  Pappus composed of bristles:

    Double, the outer of very short, the inner of longer bristles  No. 2

    Simple, the bristles all of the same sort.

      Heads few-flowered, themselves aggregated into a compound or dense
      cluster                                                          1

      Heads separate, few-flowered or many-flowered.

        Receptacle (when the flowers are pulled off) bristly-hairy
                                                              78, 79, 80

        Receptacle deeply honeycomb-like                              81

        Receptacle naked.

          Pappus of plumose or bearded stiff bristles. Flowers purple  8

          Pappus of very plumose bristles. Flowers whitish             6

          Pappus of slender but rather stiff rough bristles
                                                          4, 5, 7, 9, 16

          Pappus of very soft and weak naked bristles             76, 77

  Pappus composed of scales or chaff.

    Receptacle naked. Leaves in whorls                                 3

    Receptacle naked. Leaves alternate, dissected                     61

    Receptacle bearing chaff among the flowers                    59, 64

  Pappus of 2 or few awns or teeth              53, 57, barbed in 55, 56

  Pappus none, or a mere crown-like margin to the fruit       36, 68, 71

[*] 2. Flowers of two kinds in the same head.

  Marginal flowers neutral and sterile, either conspicuous or
  inconspicuous                                                       82

  Marginal flowers pistillate and fertile.

    Receptacle elongated and bearing broad chaff among the flowers
                                                                  29, 30

    Receptacle convex, chaffy. Achene flat, 2-awned                   52

    Receptacle naked or bearing no conspicuous chaff.

      Pappus of capillary bristles. Involucre imbricated      28, 32, 33

      Pappus of capillary bristles. Involucre merely one row of scales
                                                              26, 73, 77

      Pappus a short crown or none.

        Achenes becoming much longer than the involucre               34

        Achenes not exceeding the involucre                   42, 70, 71

[*] 3. Flowers of two kinds in separate heads, the one pistillate, the
other staminate.

  Heads dioecious; in both kinds many-flowered. Pappus capillary
                                                          27, 31, 32, 79

  Heads monoecious; the fertile 1--2-flowered and closed. Pappus none
                                                                  43, 44

Sec. 2. Rays present; i.e. the marginal flowers or some of them with
ligulate corollas.

[*] 1. Pappus of capillary bristles, at least in the disk. (Rays all
pistillate.)

  Rays occupying several rows                                 26, 72, 73

  Rays in one marginal row, and

    White, purple or blue, never yellow               17, 24, 25, 26, 73

    Yellow, of the same color as the disk.

      Pappus (at least in the disk) double, the outer short and minute
                                                                  13, 14

      Pappus simple.

        Scales of the involucre equal and all in one row. Leaves
        alternate                                                     75

        Scales of the involucre in two rows. Leaves opposite          74

        Scales of the involucre imbricated. Leaves alternate
                                                      10, 11, 15, 17, 35

[*] 2. Pappus a circle of awns or rigid bristles (at least in the disk).

  Ray yellow, awns few (2--8)                                         12

  Ray rose-color                                                      23

[*] 3. Pappus a circle of chaffy scales, dissected into bristles      65

[*] 4. Pappus a circle of thin chaffy scales or short chaffy bristles.

  Heads several-flowered. Receptacle chaffy                           60

  Heads 8--10-flowered. Receptacle naked                              18

  Heads many-flowered. Receptacle deeply honeycombed                  58

  Heads many-flowered. Receptacle naked                           62, 63

  Heads many-flowered. Receptacle chaffy                              64

[*] 5. Pappus none, or a cup or crown, or of 2 or 3 awns, teeth, or
chaffy scales corresponding with the edges or angles of the achene,
often with intervening minute bristles or scales.

[+] Receptacle naked.

  Achene flat, wing-margined. Pappus of separate little bristles and
  usually 2--4 awns                                                   22

  Achene flat, marginless. Pappus none. Receptacle conical            19

  Achene terete or angled. Pappus none. Receptacle flattish           69

  Achene angled. Pappus a little cup or crown (or none). Receptacle
  conical                                                         20, 68

  Achene fusiform. Pappus of few scales, usually with alternating awns
                                                                      21

[+][+] Receptacle chaffy.

  Rays neutral (rarely pistillate but sterile); the disk-flowers perfect
  and fertile.

    Receptacle mostly elevated (varying from convex to columnar), and

      Chaffy only at the summit; the chaff deciduous. Pappus none     66

      Chaffy throughout. Achene flattened laterally if at all
                                                      48, 49, 50, 52, 54

    Receptacle flat or flattish. Achene flattened, parallel with the
    scales or chaff                                               55, 56

    Receptacle flat. Achene terete, 2-awned                           57

  Rays pistillate and fertile; the disk-flowers also perfect and
  fertile.

    Achene much flattened laterally, 1--2-awned                       53

    Achene flattened parallel with the scales and chaff. Pappus none  67

    Achene 3--4-angular, terete or laterally flattish, awnless.

      Receptacle convex or conical. Leaves alternate, dissected       66

      Receptacle conical. Leaves opposite, simple.

        Achene obovoid. Involucre a leafy cup                         45

        Achene 4-angular. Involucre of separate scales                47

      Receptacle flat. Leaves opposite and simple                 46, 51

  Rays pistillate and fertile; the disk-flowers staminate and sterile
  (pistil imperfect).

      Receptacle chaffy                                            36-41


1. ELEPHANTOPUS, L. ELEPHANT'S-FOOT.

Heads discoid, 2--5-flowered, several together clustered into a compound
pedunculate head; flowers perfect. Involucre narrow, flattened, of 8
oblong dry scales. Achenes 10-ribbed; pappus of stout bristles,
chaffy-dilated at the base.--Perennials, with alternate leaves and
purplish flowers. (Name composed of [Greek: e)/lephas], _elephant_, and
[Greek: pou~s], _foot_.)

[*] _Stem leafy; upper leaves very like the basal._

1. E. Carolinianus, Willd. Somewhat hairy, corymbose, leafy; leaves
ovate-oblong, thin.--Dry soil, Penn. to Ill. and Kan., and southward.

[*][*] _Stem scape-like, with a few bract-like leaves or naked._

2. E. tomentosus, L. Somewhat hairy; basal leaves obovate to narrowly
spatulate, silky and prominently veined beneath; heads large;
pappus-scales attenuate.--Va., Ky., and southward.

3. E. nudatus, Gray. Strigose-puberulent; basal leaves thin, green,
spatulate-obovate or oblanceolate, not prominently veined beneath; heads
smaller; pappus scales broadly deltoid.--Del. and southward.


2. VERNONIA, Schreb. IRON-WEED.

Heads discoid, 15--many-flowered, in corymbose cymes; flowers perfect.
Involucre shorter than the flowers, of many much imbricated scales.
Receptacle naked. Achenes cylindrical, ribbed; pappus double, the outer
of minute scale-like bristles, the inner of copious capillary
bristles.--Perennial herbs, with leafy stems, alternate and acuminate or
very acute leaves and mostly purple flowers. Species very difficult.
(Named for _Wm. Vernon_, an early English botanist who travelled in this
country.)

[*] _Heads large, 50--70-flowered._

1. V. Arkansana, DC. Tall, rather glabrous; leaves linear-lanceolate,
retrorsely denticulate; involucre very squarrose, the scales with long
filiform tips.--Mo., Kan., and southward.

[*][*] _Heads 1/2' high or less, 15--40-flowered._

[+] _Leaves narrowly linear, glabrous, veinless, mostly entire._

2. V. Jamesii, Torr. & Gray. Low, nearly glabrous; heads few-flowered;
scales obtuse or acute.--Plains of Neb. and southward.

[+][+] _Leaves broader, mostly sharply denticulate or rigidly serrate,
veined._

3. V. fasciculata, Michx. Leaves linear to oblong-lanceolate; heads
many, crowded; scales close, obtuse or the uppermost mucronate; achene
smooth.--Low grounds, Ohio and Ky. to Dak., and southward. Aug.

4. V. altissima, Nutt. Usually tall; leaves lanceolate or lance-oblong;
cyme loose; scales close, obtuse or mucronate; achenes hispidulous on
the ribs.--Low grounds, W. Penn. to Ill., and southward.--Heads
variable, 2--4'' high and the scales in few or many ranks; the var.
GRANDIFLORA, Nutt., with large heads, the involucre of 35--40 scales in
many ranks.

5. V. Noveboracensis, Willd. Rather tall; leaves long-lanceolate to
lance-oblong; cyme open; involucre usually purplish; scales ovate and
lance-ovate tipped with a slender cusp or awn.--Low grounds near the
coast, Maine to Va., west to Minn., E. Kan., and southward. Aug.

Var. latifolia, Gray. Leaves broader; heads few; scales merely acute or
acuminate.--Penn. to Ohio and southward.

6. V. Baldwinii, Torr. Tomentulose; heads small, at first globose;
leaves lance-oblong or -ovate; involucre hoary-tomentose, greenish,
squarrose, the scales acute or acuminate.--Prairies and barren hills;
E. Mo. to Kan. and Tex. July, Aug. Passes into n. 4.


3. SCLEROLEPIS, Cass.

Head discoid, many-flowered; flowers perfect. Involucral scales linear,
equal, in 1 or 2 rows. Receptacle naked. Corolla 5-toothed. Achenes
5-angled; pappus a single row of 5 almost horny oval and obtuse
scales.--A smooth perennial, with simple stems, rooting at the base,
linear entire leaves in whorls of 4--6, and a terminal head of
flesh-colored flowers. (Name composed of [Greek: sklero/s], _hard_, and
[Greek: lepi/s], _a scale_, from the pappus.)

1. S. verticillata, Cass.--In water; pine barrens, New Jersey and
southward. Aug.


4. MIKANIA, Willd. CLIMBING HEMP-WEED.

Heads discoid, 4-flowered. Involucre of 4 scales. Receptacle small.
Flowers, achenes, etc., as in Eupatorium.--Twining perennials, climbing
bushes, with opposite commonly heart-shaped and petioled leaves, and
corymbose-panicled flesh-colored flowers. (Named for _Prof. Mikan_, of
Prague.)

1. M. scandens, L. Nearly smooth, twining; leaves somewhat
triangular-heart-shaped or halberd-form, pointed, toothed at the
base.--Copses along streams, E. New Eng. to Ky., and southward.
July--Sept.


5. EUPATORIUM, Tourn. THOROUGHWORT.

Heads discoid, 3--many-flowered; flowers perfect. Involucre cylindrical
or bell-shaped, of more than 4 scales. Receptacle flat or conical,
naked. Corolla 5-toothed. Achenes 5-angled; pappus a single row of
slender capillary barely roughish bristles.--Erect perennial herbs,
often sprinkled with bitter resinous dots, with generally corymbose
heads of white, bluish, or purple blossoms, appearing near the close of
summer. (Dedicated to _Eupator Mithridates_, who is said to have used a
species of the genus in medicine.)

Sec. 1. EUPATORIUM proper. _Receptacle flat._

[*] _Heads cylindrical, 5--15-flowered; the purplish scales numerous,
closely imbricated in several rows, of unequal length, slightly striate;
stout herbs, with ample mostly whorled leaves, and flesh-colored
flowers._

1. E. purpureum, L. (JOE-PYE WEED. TRUMPET-WEED.) Stems tall and stout,
simple; leaves 3--6 in a whorl, oblong-ovate or lanceolate, pointed,
very veiny, roughish, toothed; corymbs very dense and compound.--Varies
greatly in size (2--12 deg. high), etc., and with spotted or unspotted,
often dotted stems, etc.,--including several nominal species.--Low
grounds; common.

Var. amoenum, Gray. Low; leaves fewer, ovate or oblong; heads few,
3--5-flowered.--Mountains of Va. and N. Y.

[*][*] _Heads 3--20-flowered; involucre 8--15 more or less imbricated
and unequal scales, the outer ones shorter; flowers white._

[+] _Leaves all alternate, mostly dissected; heads panicled, very small,
3--5-flowered._

2. E. foeniculaceum, Willd. (DOG-FENNEL.) Smooth or nearly so,
paniculately much-branched (3--10 deg. high); leaves 1--2-pinnately parted,
filiform.--Va., near the coast, and southward. Adv. near Philadelphia.

[+][+] _Leaves long-petioled, the upper ones alternate; heads
12--15-flowered, in compound corymbs._

3. E. serotinum, Michx. Stem pulverulent-pubescent, bushy-branched
(3--7 deg. high); leaves ovate-lanceolate, tapering to a point,
triple-nerved and veiny, coarsely serrate (3--6' long); involucre very
pubescent.--Alluvial ground, Md. to Minn., E. Kan., and southward.

[+][+][+] _Leaves sessile or nearly so, with a narrow base, mostly
opposite; heads mostly 5-flowered._

[=] _Involucral scales with white and scarious acute tips._

4. E. album, L. _Roughish-hairy_ (2 deg. high), _leaves oblong-lanceolate,
coarsely toothed, veiny_; heads clustered in the corymb; _involucral
scales_ closely imbricated, rigid, narrowly lanceolate, _longer than the
flowers_.--Sandy and barren places, pine barrens of Long Island to Va.,
and southward.

Var. subvenosum, Gray. Less rough; leaves 1--2' long, finely toothed and
less veiny.--Long Island and N. J.

5. E. leucolepis, Torr. & Gray. Minutely pubescent, simple (1--2 deg. high);
_leaves linear-lanceolate, closely sessile, 1-nerved_, obtuse, _minutely
serrate, rough both sides_; corymb hoary.--Sandy bogs, Long Island,
N. J., and southward.

[=][=] _Scales not scarious or obscurely so, obtuse, at length shorter
than the flowers._

6. E. hyssopifolium, L. Minutely pubescent (1--2 deg. high); _leaves narrow,
linear or lanceolate_, elongated, obtuse, 1--3-nerved, entire, or the
lower toothed, often crowded in the axils, _acute at the base_.--Sterile
soil, Mass. to Va., E. Ky., and southward.

Var. laciniatum, Gray. Leaves irregularly and coarsely toothed or
laciniate.--Penn., Ky., and southward.

7. E. semiserratum, DC. Minutely velvety-pubescent, branching (2--3 deg.
high); _leaves lanceolate or oblong, triple-ribbed and veiny_, serrate
above the middle, _tapering to the base_, the lower slightly petioled;
heads small. (E. parviflorum, _Ell._)--Damp soil, Va. to Ark., and
southward.--Leaves sometimes whorled in threes, or the upper alternate.

8. E. altissimum, L. Stem stout and tall (3--7 deg. high), _downy; leaves
lanceolate, tapering at both ends, conspicuously 3-nerved_, entire, or
toothed above the middle, the uppermost alternate; corymbs dense;
_scales of the involucre obtuse_, shorter than the flowers.--Dry soil,
Penn. to Minn. and Ky.--Leaves 3--4' long, somewhat like those of a
Solidago.

[+][+][+][+] _Leaves sessile or nearly so, with a broad base, opposite
or in threes; heads pubescent._

[=] _Heads 5--8-flowered; leaves not clasping._

9. E. teucrifolium, Willd. Roughish-pubescent (2--8 deg. high); _leaves
ovate-oblong and ovate-lanceolate_, obtuse or truncate at base, slightly
triple-nerved, veiny, _coarsely toothed or incised toward the base, the
lower shortly petioled, the upper alternate_; branches of the corymb
few, unequal; _scales of the involucre oblong-lanceolate, at length
shorter than the flowers_.--Low grounds, Mass. to Va., and southward
near the coast.

10. E. rotundifolium, L. Downy-pubescent (2 deg. high); _leaves
roundish-ovate, obtuse_, truncate or slightly heart-shaped at the base,
deeply crenate-toothed, triple-nerved, veiny, roughish (1--2' long);
corymb large and dense; _scales of the (5-flowered) involucre
linear-lanceolate_, slightly pointed.--Dry soil, R. I. to Va., near the
coast, and southward.

Var. ovatum, Torr. Usually taller, leaves ovate, acute, hardly truncate
at base, more strongly serrate; heads 5--8-flowered. (E. pubescens,
_Muhl._)--Mass. to Va., near the coast.

11. E. sessilifolium, L. (UPLAND BONESET.) Stem tall (4--6 deg. high),
_smooth_, branching; _leaves oblong- or ovate-lanceolate, tapering from
near the rounded sessile base to the sharp point_, serrate, veiny,
smooth (3--6' long); corymb very compound, pubescent; _scales of the
5-flowered involucre oval and oblong, obtuse_.--Copses and banks, Mass.
to Ill., and southward along the mountains.

[=][=] _Leaves opposite, clasping or united at the base, long, widely
spreading; heads mostly 10--15-flowered; corymbs very compound and
large._

12. E. perfoliatum, L. (THOROUGHWORT. BONESET.) Stem stout (2--4 deg. high),
_hairy; leaves lanceolate, united at the base around the stem_
(connate-perfoliate), tapering to a slender point, serrate, very veiny,
wrinkled, downy beneath (5--8' long); scales of the involucre
linear-lanceolate.--Low grounds; common and well-known.--Varies with the
heads 30--40-flowered, or with some or all of the leaves separated and
truncate at base.

Var. cuneatum, Engelm. Leaves smaller, narrowed at base and separate,
and heads fewer-flowered. Perhaps a hybrid with n. 7.--Mo. and
southward.

13. E. resinosum, Torr. _Minutely velvety-downy_ (2--3 deg. high); _leaves
linear-lanceolate, elongated_, serrate, _partly clasping_, tapering to
the point, slightly veiny beneath (4--6' long); scales of the involucre
oval, obtuse.--Wet pine barrens, N. J.--Name from the copious resinous
globules of the leaves.

[*][*][*] _Heads 8--30-flowered; involucral scales nearly equal, in one
row; leaves opposite, ovate, petioled, triple-nerved, not
resinous-dotted; flowers white._

14. E. ageratoides, L. (WHITE SNAKE-ROOT.) Smooth, branching (3 deg. high);
_leaves broadly ovate, pointed, coarsely and sharply toothed,
long-petioled_, thin (3--5' long); corymbs compound.--Rich woods; common
northward.

15. E. aromaticum, L. Smooth or slightly downy; stems nearly simple;
_leaves on short petioles, ovate, rather obtusely toothed, not pointed_,
thickish.--Copses, Mass. to Va., and southward, near the coast.--Lower
and more slender than n. 14, with fewer, but usually larger heads; not
aromatic.

Sec. 2. CONOCLINIUM. _Receptacle conical; involucral scales nearly equal,
somewhat imbricated._

16. E. coelestinum, L. (MIST-FLOWER.) Somewhat pubescent (1--2 deg. high),
leaves opposite, petiolate, triangular-ovate and slightly heart-shaped,
coarsely and bluntly toothed; heads many-flowered, in compact cymes;
flowers blue or violet. (Conoclinium coelestinum, _DC._)--Rich soil,
N. J. to Mich., Ill., and southward. Sept.


6. KUHNIA, L.

Heads discoid, 10--25-flowered; flowers perfect. Involucral scales thin,
few and loosely imbricated, narrow, striate-nerved. Corolla slender,
5-toothed. Achenes cylindrical, 10-striate; pappus a single row of very
plumose (white) bristles.--A perennial herb, resinous-dotted, with
mostly alternate leaves, and paniculate-corymbose heads of cream-colored
flowers. (Dedicated to _Dr. Kuhn_, of Pennsylvania, who carried the
living plant to Linnaeus.)

1. K. eupatorioides, L. Stems 2--3 deg. high; pubescence minute; leaves
varying from broadly lanceolate and toothed, to linear and entire.--Dry
soil, N. J. to Minn., E. Kan., and southward. Sept. Very variable.--Var.
CORYMBULOSA, Torr. & Gray, is a western form, stouter and somewhat more
pubescent, the heads rather crowded.


7. BRICKELLIA, Ell.

Characters as in Kuhnia; involucral scales more numerous, and the
bristles of the pappus merely scabrous or at the most barbellate or
subplumose; leaves often all opposite. (_Dr. John Brickell_ of Georgia,
correspondent of Elliott and Muhlenberg.)

1. B. grandiflora, Nutt. Nearly glabrous, 2--3 deg. high; leaves deltoid,
cordate, the upper deltoid-lanceolate, coarsely dentate-serrate,
acuminate, 4' long or less; heads about 40-flowered.--Shannon Co., Mo.
(_Bush_), Kan. to Col., New Mex., and westward.


8. LIATRIS, Schreb. BUTTON SNAKEROOT. BLAZING-STAR.

Head discoid, few--many-flowered; flowers perfect. Involucral scales
well imbricated, appressed. Receptacle naked. Corolla 5-lobed, the lobes
long and slender. Achenes slender, tapering to the base, 10-ribbed.
Pappus of 15--40 capillary bristles, manifestly plumose or only
barbellate.--Perennial herbs, often resinous-dotted, with simple stems
from a roundish corm or tuber, rigid alternate narrow entire leaves
(sometimes twisted so as to become vertical), and spicate or racemed
heads of handsome rose-purple flowers, appearing late in summer or in
autumn. (Derivation of the name unknown.)

[*] _Pappus very plumose; scales of the 5-flowered involucre with ovate
or lanceolate spreading petal-like (purple or sometimes white) tips,
exceeding the flowers._

1. L. elegans, Willd. Stem (2--3 deg. high) and involucre hairy; leaves
linear, short and spreading; spike or raceme compact (3--20'
long).--Barren soil, Va. and southward.

[*][*] _Pappus very plumose; scales of the cylindrical many-flowered
involucre imbricated in many rows, the tips rigid, not petal-like;
corolla-lobes hairy within._

2. L. squarrosa, Willd. (BLAZING-STAR, etc.) Often hairy (6'--2 deg. high);
leaves rigid, linear, elongated; heads usually few (1' long); _scales
mostly with elongated and leaf-like spreading tips._--Dry soil, Penn. to
Minn., and southward.--Var. INTERMEDIA, DC. Heads narrow; scales
shorter, erect or nearly so.--Ont. to Neb. and Tex.

3. L. cylindracea, Michx. Commonly smooth (6--18' high); leaves linear;
_heads_ few (1/2--{2/3}' long); _scales with short and rounded abruptly
mucronate appressed tips._--Dry open places, Niagara Falls to Minn. and
Mo.

[*][*][*] _Pappus very plumose; heads 4--6-flowered; scales acuminate;
corolla-lobes naked._

4. L. punctata, Hook. Stout (10--30' high), from a branching or globose
rootstock; leaves narrowly linear or the upper acerose, rigid; heads
usually many in a dense spike.--Minn. to Kan., and southward.

[*][*][*][*] _Pappus not obviously plumose to the naked eye;
corolla-lobes smooth inside._

5. L. scariosa, Willd. Stem stout (2--5 deg. high), pubescent or hoary;
_leaves_ (smooth, rough, or pubescent) _lanceolate_; the lowest
_oblong-lanceolate or obovate-oblong_, tapering into a petiole; heads
few or many, large, 25--40-flowered; _scales of the broad or depressed
involucre obovate or spatulate, very numerous, with dry and scarious
often colored tips or margins._--Dry soil, New Eng. to Minn., and
southward.--Widely variable; heads 1' or less in diameter.

6. L. pycnostachya, Michx. Hairy or smoothish; stem stout (3--5 deg. high),
very leafy; leaves linear-lanceolate, the upper very narrowly linear;
_spike thick and dense_ (6--20' long), heads about 5-flowered (1/2' long);
_scales of the cylindrical involucre oblong or lanceolate, with recurved
or spreading colored tips_.--Prairies, from Ind. to Minn., and
southward.

7. L. spicata, Willd. Smooth or somewhat hairy; stems very leafy, stout
(2--5 deg. high); leaves linear, the lower 3--5-nerved; heads 8--12-flowered
({1/3}--1/2' long), crowded in a long spike; _scales of the
cylindrical-bell-shaped involucre oblong or oval, obtuse, appressed,
with slight margins; achenes pubescent or smoothish_.--Moist grounds;
common from Mass. to Minn., and southward.--Involucre often resinous,
very smooth.

Var. montana, Gray. Low and stout; leaves broader, obtuse; spike short
and heads large.--Mountain-tops, Va., and southward.

8. L. graminifolia, Willd. Hairy or smoothish; stem (1--3 deg. high)
slender, leafy; leaves linear, elongated, 1-nerved; heads several or
numerous, in a spike or raceme, 7--12-flowered; _scales of the obconical
or obovoid involucre spatulate or oblong, obtuse, or somewhat pointed,
rigid, appressed; achenes hairy_.--Va. and southward.--Inflorescence
sometimes panicled, especially in

Var. dubia, Gray. Scales of the involucre narrower and less rigid,
oblong, often ciliate.--Wet pine barrens, N. J., and southward.


9. TRILISA, Cass.

Heads discoid, 5--10-flowered; flowers perfect. Involucral scales nearly
equal, little imbricated. Receptacle naked. Corolla-lobes short-ovate or
oblong. Achenes 10-ribbed; pappus of rather rigid bristles, not
plumose.--Perennial herbs, fibrous-rooted, with broad entire leaves,
obscurely or not at all punctate, and cymules of small heads in a thyrse
or panicle. Flowers rose-purple, in autumn. (Name an anagram of
_Liatris_.)

1. T. odoratissima, Cass. (VANILLA-PLANT.) _Very smooth; leaves pale_,
thickish, obovate-spatulate, or the upper oval and clasping; _heads
corymbed_. (Liatris odoratissima, _Willd._)--Low pine barrens, Va., and
southward.--Leaves exhaling the odor of Vanilla when bruised.

2. T. paniculata, Cass. _Viscid-hairy_; leaves narrowly oblong or
lanceolate, smoothish, those of the stem partly clasping, _heads
panicled_. (Liatris paniculata, _Willd._)--Va. and southward.


10. GUTIERREZIA, Lag.

Heads few--several-flowered, radiate; rays 1--6, pistillate. Involucre
oblong-clavate; scales coriaceous with green tips, closely imbricated,
the outer shorter. Receptacle small, naked. Achenes short,
terete; pappus of about 9 chaffy scales, shorter in the
ray-flowers.--Suffrutescent (our species), glabrous and often glutinous,
much branched, with narrowly linear entire alternate leaves, and small
heads of yellow flowers in fastigiate or paniculate cymes. (From
_Gutierrez_, a noble Spanish family.)

1. G. Euthamiae, Torr. & Gray. Low; leaves numerous, 1--2' long; heads
usually crowded, the disk- and short ray-flowers usually 3 or 4
each.--Dry plains, Mont. and Minn. to central Kan., southward and
westward.


11. AMPHIACHYRIS, Nutt.

Heads hemispherical; rays 5--10. Disk-flowers perfect but infertile.
Pappus of the ray minute, coroniform; of the disk-flowers of almost
bristle-like scales, more or less dilated and united at base.--A
diffusely much-branched annual, with heads solitary on the branchlets;
otherwise as Gutierrezia. (From [Greek: a)mphi/], _around_, and [Greek:
a)/chyron], _chaff_.)

1. A. dracunculoides, Nutt. Rather low, slender; leaves narrowly linear,
the upper filiform; disk-flowers 10--20, their pappus of 5--8
bristle-like chaff united at base and slightly dilated upward.--Plains,
Kan. and southward.


12. GRINDELIA, Willd.

Heads many-flowered, radiate (or rayless); ray pistillate. Scales of the
hemispherical involucre imbricated in several series, with slender more
or less spreading green tips. Achenes short and thick, compressed or
turgid, truncate, glabrous; pappus of 2--8 caducous awns. Coarse
perennial or biennial herbs, often resinous-viscid, ours glabrous and
leafy with sessile or clasping alternate and spinulose-serrate or
laciniate rigid leaves, and large heads terminating leafy branches. Disk
and ray yellow. (Prof. _Grindel_, a Russian botanist.)

1. G. squarrosa, Dunal. Leaves spatulate- to linear-oblong; involucre
squarrose; achenes not toothed; pappus-awns 2 or 3.--Prairies, Minn.,
southward and westward; Evanston, Ill.--Var. NUDA, Gray. Rays wanting.
About St. Louis and westward.

2. G. lanceolata, Nutt. Leaves lanceolate or linear; involucral scales
erect or the lower tips spreading; achenes with 1 or 2 short teeth at
the summit; awns 2.--Prairies, eastern Kan. to Ark., and southward.


13. HETEROTHECA, Cass.

Characters as in Chrysopsis, but the achenes of the ray thickish or
triangular, without pappus or obscurely crowned, and those of the disk
compressed, with a double pappus, the inner of numerous long bristles,
the outer of many short and stout bristles.--(From [Greek: e(/teros],
_different_, and [Greek: the/ke], _case_, alluding to the unlike
achenes.)

1. H. Lamarckii, Cass. Annual or biennial, 1--3 deg. high, bearing numerous
small heads; leaves oval or oblong, the lower with petioles auricled at
base, the upper mostly subcordate-clasping.--S. E. Kan., and southward.


14. CHRYSOPSIS, Nutt. GOLDEN ASTER.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; the rays numerous, pistillate. Involucral
scales linear, imbricated, without herbaceous tips. Receptacle flat.
Achenes obovate or linear-oblong, flattened, hairy; pappus in all the
flowers double, the outer of very short and somewhat chaffy bristles,
the inner of long capillary bristles.--Chiefly perennial, low herbs,
woolly or hairy, with rather large often corymbose heads terminating the
branches. Disk and ray-flowers yellow. (Name composed of [Greek:
chryso/s], _gold_, and [Greek: o)/psis], _aspect_, from the golden
blossoms.)

[*] _Leaves narrowly lanceolate or linear; achenes linear._

1. C. graminifolia, Nutt. _Silvery-silky_, with long close-pressed
hairs; stem slender, often with runners from the base, naked above,
bearing few heads; _leaves lanceolate or linear, elongated, grass-like,
nerved, shining_, entire.--Dry sandy soil, Del. to Va., and southward.
July--Oct.

2. C. falcata, Ell. _Stems_ (4--10' high) very woolly; _leaves crowded,
linear, rigid, about 3-nerved_, entire, _somewhat recurved or
scythe-shaped, hairy_, or smooth when old, sessile; heads (small)
corymbed.--Dry sandy soil on the coast, pine barrens of N. J. to
Nantucket and Cape Cod, Mass. Aug.

[*][*] _Leaves oblong or lanceolate, entire or slightly serrate, mostly
sessile, veined, not nerved; achenes obovate, flattened._

3. C. gossypina, Nutt. _Densely woolly all over; leaves spatulate or
oblong, obtuse_ (1--2' long); heads larger than in the next.--Pine
barrens, Va., and southward. Aug.--Oct.

4. C. Mariana, Nutt. _Silky with long and weak hairs_, or when old
smoothish; _leaves oblong_; heads corymbed, on glandular peduncles.--Dry
barrens, from S. New York and Penn., southward, near the coast.
Aug.--Oct.

5. C. villosa, Nutt. _Hirsute and villous-pubescent_; stem corymbosely
branched, the branches terminated by single short-peduncled heads;
_leaves narrowly oblong, hoary with rough pubescence_ (as also the
involucre), _bristly-ciliate_ toward the base.--Dry plains and prairies,
Wisc. to Ky., and westward. July--Sept. Very variable.--Var. HISPIDA,
Gray. Low, hirsute and hispid, not canescent; heads small. Kan., west
and southward.--Var. CANESCENS, Gray. Wholly canescent with short
appressed pubescence; leaves narrow, mostly oblanceolate.--Kan. to Tex.

6. C. pilosa, Nutt. Annual, soft-hirsute or villous; leaves
oblong-lanceolate; involucre viscid; outer pappus chaffy and
conspicuous--Kan. and southward.


15. APLOPAPPUS, Cass.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; rays many, pistillate. Involucre
hemispherical, of many closely imbricated scales in several series.
Receptacle flat. Achenes short, turbinate to linear; pappus simple, of
numerous unequal bristles.--Mostly herbaceous perennials, with alternate
rigid leaves. Ray- and disk-flowers yellow. (From [Greek: a(plo/os],
_simple_, and [Greek: pa/ppos], _pappus_.)

1. A. ciliatus, DC. Annual or biennial, glabrous, 2--5 deg. high, leafy;
leaves oval (or lower obovate), obtuse, dentate with bristle-pointed
teeth; heads very large, few and clustered, the outer scales spreading;
achenes glabrous, the central abortive.--Mo., Kan., and southward.

2. A. spinulosus, DC. Perennial, branching, puberulent or glabrate, low;
leaves narrow, pinnately or bipinnately parted, the lobes and teeth
bristle-tipped; heads small, the appressed scales bristle-tipped;
achenes pubescent.--Minn. to Kan., and southward.

3. A. divaricatus, Gray. Annual, 1--2 deg. high, slender and diffusely
paniculate, rough-pubescent or glabrate; leaves rigid, narrow, entire or
with a few spinulose teeth, much reduced above; heads small and narrow,
the appressed scales subulate, attenuate; achenes silky.--Southern Kan.


16. BIGELOVIA, DC. RAYLESS GOLDEN-ROD.

Heads 3--4-flowered, the flowers all perfect and tubular. Involucre
club-shaped, yellowish; the rigid somewhat glutinous scales linear,
closely imbricated and appressed. Receptacle narrow, with an awl-shaped
prolongation in centre. Achenes somewhat obconical, hairy; pappus a
single row of capillary bristles.--Flowers yellow. Leaves scattered,
oblanceolate or linear, 1--3-nerved. A large western genus, few species
approaching our limits. (Dedicated by De Candolle to _Dr. Jacob
Bigelow_, author of the Florula Bostoniensis, and of the American
Medical Botany.)

1. B. nudata, DC. A smooth perennial; the slender stem (1--2 deg. high)
simple or branched from the base, naked above, corymbose at the summit,
bearing small heads in a flat-topped corymb.--Low pine barrens, N. J.
(rare), and southward. Sept.


17. SOLIDAGO, L. GOLDEN-ROD.

Heads few--many-flowered, radiate; the rays 1--16, pistillate. Scales of
the oblong involucre appressed, destitute of herbaceous tips (except
n. 1 and 2). Receptacle small, not chaffy. Achenes many-ribbed, nearly
terete; pappus simple, of equal capillary bristles.--Perennial herbs,
with mostly wand-like stems and nearly sessile stem-leaves, never
heart-shaped. Heads small, racemed or clustered; flowers both of the
disk and ray (except n. 6) yellow. (Name from _solidus_ and _ago_, to
join, or make whole, in allusion to reputed vulnerary qualities.)
Flowering in autumn.

Conspectus of Groups.

  Heads small, sessile in flat-topped corymbs; leaves linear      41, 42

  Heads all more or less pedicelled.

    Involucral scales rigid, with spreading herbaceous tips         1, 2

    Involucral scales without green tips.

      Heads in a compound terminal corymb, not at all racemose    37--40

      Heads small, mostly clustered in the axils of feather-veined
      leaves                                                        3--7

      Heads mostly large, in a terminal thyrse; leaves feather-veined.

        Western species                                             8, 9

        Northern or mountain species                              10--12

      Heads mostly small or middle-sized; inflorescence paniculate
      (sometimes thyrsoidal).

        Leaves 3-ribbed; heads in 1-sided spreading panicled racemes.

          Stem and leaves smooth and glabrous                     29--32

          Pubescent or scabrous                                   33--36

        Leaves not 3-ribbed, or only obscurely triple-nerved.

          Heads large; leaves thickish, very smooth, entire. Seashore 13

          Panicle virgate or thyrsoid; leaves nearly entire       14--17

          Heads very small in a short broad panicle; leaves nearly
          entire                                                  18--20

          Heads racemosely paniculate; leaves ample, the lower serrate
                                                                  21--28

Sec. 1. VIRGAUREA. _Rays mostly fewer than the disk-flowers; heads all more
or less pedicelled._

[*] _Scales of the much imbricated and rigid involucre with abruptly
spreading herbaceous tips; heads in clusters or glomerate racemes,
disposed in a dense somewhat leafy and interrupted wand-like compound
spike._

1. S. squarrosa, Muhl. Stem stout (2--5 deg. high), hairy above; leaves
large, oblong, or the lower spatulate-oval and tapering into a margined
petiole, serrate, veiny; heads numerous; scales obtuse or acute;
disk-flowers 16--24, the rays 12--16.--Rocky and wooded hills, Maine and
W. Vt. to Penn., Ohio, and the mountains of Va.; rather rare.

2. S. petiolaris, Ait. Minutely hoary or downy; stem strict, simple
(1--3 deg. high); leaves small (1/2--2' long), oval or oblong, mucronate,
veiny, rough-ciliolate; the upper entire and abruptly very
short-petioled, the lower often serrate and tapering to the base; heads
few, in a wand-like raceme or panicle, on slender bracted pedicels; rays
about 10, elongated; scales of the pubescent involucre lanceolate or
linear-awl-shaped, the outer loose and spreading, more or less
foliaceous.--S. W. Ill. to Kan. and southward.--The name is misleading,
as the leaves are hardly petioled.

[*][*] _Involucral scales without green tips and wholly appressed._

[+] _Heads small (3'' long), clustered along the stem in the axils of
the feather-veined leaves, or the upper forming a thyrse._

[++] _Achenes pubescent._


3. S. caesia, L. Smooth; _stem terete, mostly glaucous_, at length much
branched and diffuse; _leaves lanceolate_ or oblong-lanceolate, serrate,
pointed, sessile; heads in very short clusters, or somewhat
racemose-panicled on the branches.--Rich woodlands, common; west to
S. E. Minn., Ill., and Ky.

4. S. latifolia, L. Smooth or nearly so; _stem angled, zigzag_, simple
or paniculate-branched (1--3 deg. high); _leaves broadly ovate or oval, very
strongly and sharply serrate, conspicuously pointed at both ends_ (thin,
3--6' long); heads in very short axillary clusters, or the clusters
somewhat prolonged at the end of the branches; rays 3--4.--Moist shaded
banks; common northward, and south along the mountains.

5. S. Curtisii, Torr. & Gray. Smooth or nearly so; stem angled, usually
branched; leaves oblong to long-lanceolate with narrowed entire base,
serrate above with subulate teeth; heads in small, loose clusters; rays
4--7.--Open woods at low elevations in the mountains of Va. and
southward.

[++][++] _Achenes glabrous; inflorescence more thyrsoid._

6. S. bicolor, L. _Hoary or grayish with soft hairs_; stem mostly
simple; leaves oblong or elliptical-lanceolate, acute at both ends, or
the lower oval and tapering into a petiole, slightly serrate; _clusters
or short racemes from the axils of the upper leaves_, forming an
interrupted spike or crowded panicle; scales very obtuse; _rays (5--14)
small, cream-color or nearly white_.--Var. CONCOLOR, Torr. & Gray, has
the _rays yellow_.--Dry copses, west to Minn. and Mo.

7. S. monticola, Torr. & Gray. Nearly glabrous; stem slender, 1--2 deg.
high; leaves oblong-ovate to lanceolate, acute or tapering at both ends,
the lower sparingly serrate; heads small, the scales acutish; rays
5--6.--Alleghany Mts., from Md. southward.

[+][+] _Heads mostly large (smaller in n. 12), many-flowered, forming an
erect terminal thyrse; leaves feather-veined._

[++] _Leaves numerous, short, sessile, entire, uniform in size and
shape; western._

8. S. Bigelovii, Gray. Cinereous-puberulent, 2 deg. high; leaves oval and
oblong, mostly obtuse at both ends; thyrse rather loose; involucre
broad.--S. Kan. and southward. Probably running into the next.

9. S. Lindheimeriana, Scheele. Less puberulent; leaves lanceolate or
oblong, more acute; heads narrower and more densely clustered; achenes
glabrous.--S. Kan. and southward.

[++][++] _Northern or mountain species, bright green._

10. S. macrophylla, Pursh. _Stem stout_ (1--4 deg. high), _wand-like_,
pubescent near the summit, simple; _leaves thin, ovate, irregularly and
coarsely serrate with sharp salient teeth, large_ (lower 3--4' long),
all but the uppermost abruptly contracted into _long and margined
petioles; heads large_ (5--6'' long), many-flowered, crowded in an
oblong or wand-like raceme or contracted panicle (2--18' long); scales
loose and thin, long, lanceolate, taper-pointed; rays 8--10, elongated;
achenes smooth. (S. thyrsoidea, _E. Mey_.)--Wooded sides of mountains,
N. Maine to N. Y. (south to the Catskills), shore of L. Superior and
northward.--Very near a European form of S. Virgaurea.

11. S. Virgaurea, Linn. An extremely variable and confused species in
the Old World, represented in North America by

Var. alpina, Bigel. Dwarf (1--8' high), with few (1--12) pretty large
heads (3--4'' long, becoming smaller as they increase in number); leaves
thickish, mostly smooth, spatulate or obovate, mostly obtuse, finely
serrate or nearly entire, the uppermost lanceolate; heads few in a
terminal cluster or subsolitary in the upper axils; _scales_ lanceolate,
_acute or acutish_; rays about 12.--Alpine summits of Maine, N. H., and
N. Y., and shore of L. Superior.

12. S. humilis, Pursh. Low (6--12' high) and smooth, bearing several or
numerous loosely thyrsoid smaller heads, which, with the peduncles,
etc., are mostly somewhat glutinous; _scales obtuse_; rays 6--8, short;
upper leaves lanceolate to linear, entire, the lower becoming spatulate
and sparingly serrate. (S. Virgaurea, var. humilis, _Gray_.)--Rocky
banks, W. Vt., along the Great Lakes, and northward; also on islands in
the Susquehanna, near Lancaster, and at the Falls of the Potomac.--At
the base of the White Mountains, on gravelly banks, occurs a form with
the minutely pubescent stout stem 1--2 deg. high, the leaves larger,
broader, and coarsely toothed, and the heads very numerous in an ample
compound raceme; rays occasionally almost white.

Var. Gillmani, Gray. Larger (2 deg. high), rigid, with compound ample
panicle and laciniately toothed leaves.--Sand-hills of the lake-shores,
N. Mich.

[+][+][+] _Heads small or middle-sized (large in n. 13 and 17), panicled
or sometimes thyrsoidal, not in a terminal corymbiform cyme; not
alpine._

[++] _Leaves veiny, not 3-ribbed, but sometimes obscurely
triple-nerved._

[=] 1. _Heads commonly large; leaves thickish, very smooth, entire,
elongated._

13. S. sempervirens, L. Smooth and stout (1--8 deg. high); leaves
lanceolate, slightly clasping, or the lower ones lanceolate-oblong,
obscurely triple-nerved; racemes short, in an open or contracted
panicle.--Salt marshes, or rocks on the shore, Maine to Va.--Heads
showy; the golden rays 7--10. Varies, in less brackish swamps, with
thinner elongated linear-lanceolate leaves, tapering to each end, and
more erect racemes in a narrower panicle.

[=] 2. _Heads small, in a narrow virgate or thyrsoid panicle; scales
thin, acute; leaves nearly entire._

14. S. stricta, Ait. _Very smooth_ throughout; _stem strict and simple,
wand-like_ (2--4 deg. high), slender, beset with small and entire appressed
lanceolate-oblong thickish leaves, gradually reduced upward to mere
bracts, the lowest oblong-spatulate; _heads crowded in a very narrow
compound spicate raceme_; rays 5--7. (S. virgata, _Michx._)--Damp pine
barrens, N. J. and southward.

15. S. puberula, Nutt. _Stem_ (1--3 deg. high, simple or branched) _and
panicle minutely hoary; stem-leaves lanceolate, acute, tapering to the
base_, smoothish; the lower wedge-lanceolate and _sparingly toothed,
heads_ very numerous and _crowded in compact short racemes forming a
prolonged and dense_ narrow or pyramidal _panicle; scales
linear-awl-shaped_, appressed; rays about 10.--Sandy soil, Maine to Va.
and southward, mostly near the coast.

[=] 3. _Heads middle-sized, in a thyrsoid panicle; involucral scales
rather firm, obtuse; leaves entire or little serrate, smooth._

16. S. uliginosa, Nutt. _Smooth_ nearly throughout; stem simple, strict
(2--3 deg. high); _leaves lanceolate_, pointed, the lower tapering into
winged petioles, partly sheathing at the base, sparsely serrulate or
entire; _racemes much crowded and appressed in a dense wand-like
panicle_; scales linear-oblong; rays 5--6, small. (S. stricta,
_Ait._)--Peat-bogs, Maine to Penn., Minn., and northward. Root-leaves
6--10' long. Flowers earlier than most species, beginning in July.

17. S. speciosa, Nutt. Stem stout (3--6 deg. high), smooth; _leaves
thickish, smooth_ with rough margins, _oval or ovate_, slightly serrate,
the uppermost oblong-lanceolate, the lower contracted into a margined
petiole; _heads_ somewhat crowded _in numerous erect racemes, forming an
ample pyramidal or thyrsiform panicle_; peduncles and pedicels
rough-hairy; scales of the cylindrical involucre oblong; rays about 5,
large.--Var. ANGUSTATA, Torr. & Gray, is a dwarf form, with the racemes
short and clustered, forming a dense interrupted or compound
spike.--Copses, Maine to Minn., and southward.--A very handsome species;
the lower leaves 4--6' long and 2--4' wide in the larger forms.

[=] 4. _Heads very small in slender spreading secund clusters forming a
mostly short and broad panicle; leaves entire or nearly so._

18. S. odora, Ait. (SWEET GOLDEN-ROD.) _Smooth_ or nearly so throughout;
_stem slender_ (2--3 deg. high), _often reclined; leaves linear-lanceolate,
entire_, shining, _pellucid-dotted_; racemes spreading in a small
one-sided panicle; rays 3--4, rather large.--Border of thickets in dry
or sandy soil, Maine and Vt. to Ky., and southward.--The crushed leaves
yield a pleasant anisate odor; but an occasional form is nearly
scentless.

19. S. tortifolia, Ell. Stem scabrous-puberulent, 2--3 deg. high; leaves
linear, short, commonly twisted, roughish-puberulent or glabrate; rays
very short.--Dry soil, coast of Va. and southward.

20. S. pilosa, Walt. _Stem stout, upright_ (3--7 deg. high), _clothed with
spreading hairs; leaves oblong-lanceolate, roughish, hairy beneath_, at
least on the midrib, serrulate, the upper ovate-lanceolate or oblong and
entire, closely sessile; racemes many, recurved, in a dense pyramidal
panicle; rays 7--10, very short.--Low grounds, pine barrens of N. J. to
Va. and southward.

[=] 5. _Heads small or middle-sized, racemosely paniculate; leaves broad
or ample, veiny, at least the lower serrate (or entire in n. 28);
involucral scales obtuse._

21. S. patula, Muhl. _Stem strongly angled, smooth_ (2--4 deg. high);
_leaves_ (4--8' long) _ovate_, acute, serrate, pale, _very smooth and
veiny underneath_, but the _upper surface very rough_, like shagreen;
racemes rather short and numerous on the spreading branches; heads
rather large.--Swamps; common.

22. S. rugosa, Mill. _Rough-hairy, especially the very leafy stem_
(1--6 deg. high); _leaves ovate-lanceolate, elliptical or oblong, often
thickish and very rugose_; racemes spreading; involucral scales linear;
rays 6--9; the disk-flowers 4--7. (S. altissima, _Torr. & Gray_, not
_L._)--Borders of fields and copses; very common, presenting a great
variety of forms; usually one of the lowest of common _Golden-rods_. It
flowers early. Aug.--Sept.

23. S. ulmifolia, Muhl. _Stem smooth_, the branches hairy; _leaves thin,
elliptical-ovate or oblong-lanceolate_, pointed, _tapering to the base_,
loosely veined, beset with soft hairs beneath; racemes panicled,
recurved-spreading; involucral scales lanceolate-oblong; rays about
4.--Low copses; common.--Too near the last; distinguished only by its
smooth stem and thin larger leaves.

24. S. Elliottii, Torr. & Gray. _Smooth_; stem stout (1--3 deg. high), _very
leafy; leaves elliptical or oblong-lanceolate_, acute (2--3' long),
closely sessile, slightly serrate, strongly veined, _thick, smooth both
sides, shining above; heads in dense spreading racemes which are crowded
in a close pyramidal panicle_; peduncles and achenes strigose-pubescent.
(S. elliptica, _Torr. & Gray_, not _Ait._)--Swamps (fresh or brackish)
near the coast, Mass. to N. J. and southward.--Heads showy, 3'' long;
the rays 8--12.

25. S. neglecta, Torr. & Gray. _Smooth_; stem stout (2--4 deg. high), less
leafy; _leaves thickish, smooth both sides, opaque; the upper
oblong-lanceolate_, mostly acute and nearly entire; the _lower
ovate-lanceolate or oblong_, sharply serrate, tapering into a petiole;
_racemes short and dense, at length spreading_, disposed in an elongated
or pyramidal close panicle; peduncles and achenes nearly
glabrous.--Swamps, Maine to Md., Wisc., and Minn.--Heads rather large,
crowded; the racemes at first erect and scarcely one-sided. Very
variable, the forms approaching n. 16 and 27.

Var. linoides, Gray. The most slender form; radical leaves 4--8' long
and 4--6'' wide, the upper very small, erect, branches of panicle rather
few, one-sided; rays 2--5. (S. linoides, _Torr. & Gray._)--Mass. to
N. J.

26. S. Boottii, Hook. Smooth, or scabrous-pubescent or below hirsute,
slender, often branched, 2--5 deg. high; leaves rather finely serrate, ovate
to oblong-lanceolate, pointed; the upper small, oblong to narrowly
lanceolate, often entire; heads loosely racemose; rays 1--5 or none;
achenes pubescent.--Dry grounds, Va. and southward.

27. S. arguta, Ait. _Smooth; stem angled; leaves_ (large and thin)
_ovate_, and the upper elliptical-lanceolate, _very sharply and strongly
serrate_ (entire only on the branches), _pointed at both ends_, the
lowest on margined petioles; _racemes pubescent, spreading, disposed in
an elongated open panicle; rays 6--7, large_; achenes usually glabrous.
(S. Muhlenbergii, _Torr. & Gray._)--Copses and moist woods, N. H. to
Penn., Ont., and N. E. Minn.--Racemes much shorter and looser than in
the next; the involucral scales thin and more slender; the heads
somewhat larger, fully 3'' long.

28. S. juncea, Ait. _Smooth throughout_ (1--3 deg. high); _radical and lower
stem-leaves elliptical or lanceolate-oval, sharply serrate_ with
spreading teeth, _pointed_, tapering into winged and ciliate petioles;
_the others lanceolate or narrowly oblong_, slightly triple-nerved,
tapering to each end, the _uppermost entire; racemes dense, naked, at
length elongated and recurved, forming a crowded and flat corymb-like
panicle; rays 8--12, small_. (S. arguta, _Torr. & Gray._)--Var.
SCABRELLA, Gray, is somewhat roughish-pubescent (Wisc. to Ky.).--Copses
and banks; common. Well distinguished by its long or drooping racemes,
and the closely appressed rigid scales of the involucre, small rays,
etc. Heads seldom over 2'' long, the scales small and pale.

[++][++] _Leaves more or less plainly 3-ribbed; heads in one-sided
spreading or recurved racemes, forming an ample panicle. Not maritime._

[=] _Smooth and glabrous, at least the stem and bright green leaves._

[a.] _Leaves firm and rather rigid; involucral scales thickish, obtuse,
quite unequal._

29. S. Missouriensis, Nutt. Smooth throughout (1--3 deg. high); _leaves
linear-lanceolate_, or the lower broadly lanceolate, tapering to both
ends, with very rough margins; teeth, if any, sharp and rigid; heads and
dense crowded racemes nearly as in n. 28; _achenes nearly
glabrous_.--Dry prairies, from Wisc. and Ind. south and
westward.--Heads 1{1/2}--2'' long.

30. S. Shortii, Torr. & Gray. Stem slender, simple (2--4 deg. high),
minutely roughish-pubescent above; _leaves_ (the larger 2--3' long)
_oblong-lanceolate_, acute, the lower mostly serrate with a few fine
teeth; racemes mostly short in a crowded panicle; _achenes
silky-pubescent_.--Rocks at the Falls of the Ohio; Ark.--A handsome
species; heads 3'' long, narrow.

[b.] _Leaves thinner; involucral scales thin, chiefly linear, obtuse._

31. S. serotina, Ait. _Stem_ stout (2--7 deg. high), _smooth, often
glaucous; leaves quite smooth both sides_, lanceolate, taper-pointed,
very sharply serrate, except the narrowed base, rough-ciliate; the ample
panicle pubescent; _rays 7--14, rather long_. (S. gigantea, of previous
ed.)--Copses and fence-rows; common, and presenting many varieties.
Seldom very tall.

Var. gigantea, Gray. Commonly tall, 5--8 deg. high; leaves more or less
pubescent or hispidulous beneath. (S. gigantea, _Ait._; S. serotina of
previous ed.)--Thickets and low grounds, Can. to Tex.

32. S. rupestris, Raf. _Stem smooth, slender_, 2--3 deg. high; _leaves
linear-lanceolate, tapering both ways, entire_ or nearly so; panicle
narrow; _heads very small; rays 4--6, very short_.--Rocky river-banks,
W. Va. to Ky. and Ind.

[=][=] _Pubescent (at least the stem) or hispidulous-scabrous._

33. S. Canadensis, L. _Stem rough-hairy_, tall and stout (3--6 deg. high);
_leaves lanceolate_, pointed, sharply serrate (sometimes almost entire),
_more or less pubescent beneath and rough above; heads small; rays very
short_.--Borders of thickets and fields; very common.--Varies greatly in
the roughness and hairiness of the stem and leaves, the latter
oblong-lanceolate or elongated linear-lanceolate;--in var. PROCERA,
whitish-woolly underneath; and in var. SCABRA also very rough above,
often entire, and rugose-veined.

34. S. nemoralis, Ait. _Clothed with a minute and close grayish-hoary_
(soft or roughish) _pubescence_; stem simple or corymbed at the summit
({1/2}--2{1/2} deg. high); leaves _oblanceolate or spatulate-oblong_, the
lower somewhat crenate-toothed and tapering into a petiole; racemes
numerous, dense, at length recurved, forming a large and crowded
compound raceme or panicle which is usually turned to one side; scales
of the involucre linear-oblong, appressed; rays 5--9.--Dry sterile
fields; very common. Flowers very bright yellow, beginning early in
Aug.--Var. INCANA, Gray, of Minn., and westward, is a dwarf form, with
rigid oval or oblong leaves, rather strongly serrate or entire, and the
clusters of heads in a dense oblong or conical thyrse.

35. S. radula, Nutt. Stem and _oblong or obovate-spatulate leaves rigid
and very rough, not hoary_, the upper sessile; scales oblong, rigid;
rays 3--6; otherwise nearly as in n. 34.--Dry hills, W. Ill., Minn.
Kan., and southward.

36. S. Drummondii, Torr. & Gray. _Stem_ (1--3 deg. high) _and lower surface
of the broadly ovate or oval somewhat triple-ribbed leaves minutely
velvety-pubescent_, some of the leaves almost entire; racemes panicled,
short; scales of the involucre oblong, obtuse; rays 4 or 5.--S. W. Ill.,
Mo., and southward.

[+][+][+][+] _Heads in a compound corymb terminating the simple stem,
not at all racemose; leaves mostly with a strong midrib._

[++] Leaves flat, not 3-nerved.

37. S. rigida, L. _Rough and somewhat hoary_ with a minute pubescence;
stem stout (2--5 deg. high), very leafy; corymb dense; _leaves oval or
oblong_, copiously feather-veined, thick and rigid; the upper closely
sessile by a broad base, slightly serrate, the uppermost entire; heads
large, over 30-flowered; the rays 7--10.--Dry soil, N. Eng. to Minn.,
and southward.

38. S. Ohioensis, Riddell. _Very smooth_ throughout; stem wand-like,
slender, leafy (2--3 deg. high); _stem-leaves oblong-lanceolate, flat_,
entire, obscurely feather-veined, closely sessile; the lower and radical
ones elongated, slightly serrate toward the apex, tapering into long
margined petioles; head numerous, on smooth pedicels, small,
16--20-flowered; the rays 6 or 7.--Moist meadows or prairies, W. New
York to Ind. and Wisc.--Root-leaves 1 deg. long; the upper reduced to 1--2',
with rough margins, like the rest.

[++][++] _Leaves somewhat folded, entire, the lower slightly 3-nerved._

39. S. Riddellii, Frank. _Smooth and stout_ (2--4 deg. high), _very leafy_,
the branches of the dense corymb and pedicels rough-pubescent; _leaves
linear-lanceolate, elongated_ (4--6' long), acute, partly clasping or
sheathing, _mostly recurved_, the lowest elongated-lanceolate and
tapering into a long keeled petiole; _heads very numerous_, clustered,
20--30-flowered; the rays 7--9.--Wet grassy prairies, Ohio to Minn. and
Mo.; Ft. Monroe, Va.--Heads larger than in the last, 2--3'' long.
Stem-leaves upright and partly sheathing at the base, then gradually
recurved-spreading.

40. S. Houghtonii, Torr. & Gray. _Smooth; stem rather low and slender_
(1--2 deg. high); _leaves scattered, linear-lanceolate, acutish_, tapering
into a narrowed slightly clasping base, or the lower into margined
petioles; _heads few or several_, 20--30-flowered; the rays
7--9.--Swamps, north shore of Lake Michigan; Genesee Co., N. Y. July,
Aug.--Leaves rough-margined, 2--5' long, 2--4'' wide, 1-nerved, or the
lower obscurely 3-nerved above; veins obscure. Heads large, nearly 1/2'
long. Scales of the involucre obtuse.

Sec. 2. EUTHAMIA. _Corymbosely much branched; heads small, sessile, in
little clusters crowded in flat-topped corymbs; the closely appressed
involucral scales somewhat glutinous; receptacle fimbrillate; rays
6--20, short, more numerous than the disk-flowers; leaves narrow,
entire, sessile._

41. S. lanceolata, L. _Leaves lanceolate-linear, 3--5-nerved_; the
nerves, margins, and angles of the branches minutely rough-pubescent;
heads obovoid-cylindrical, in dense corymbed clusters; _rays
15--20_.--River-banks, etc., in moist soil; common.--Stem 2--3 deg. high;
leaves 3--5' long.

42. S. tenuifolia, Pursh. Smooth, slender; _leaves very narrowly
linear, mostly 1-nerved, dotted_; heads obovoid-club-shaped, in numerous
clusters of 2 or 3, disposed in a loose corymb; _rays 6--12_.--Sandy
fields, Mass. to Ill., and southward; common near the coast.


18. BRACHYCHAETA, Torr. & Gray. FALSE GOLDEN-ROD.

Heads and flowers nearly as in Solidago, except the pappus, which is a
row of minute rather scale-like bristles, shorter than the achene.--A
perennial herb, with rounded or ovate serrate leaves, all the _lower
ones heart-shaped_; the small yellow heads in sessile clusters racemed
or spiked on the branches. (Name composed of [Greek: brachy/s], _short_,
and [Greek: chi/te], _bristle_, from the pappus.)

1. B. cordata, Torr. & Gray. Wooded hills, S. Ind. and E. Ky. to N. Ga.
Oct.--Plant 2--4 deg. high, slender, more or less pubescent.


19. BELLIS, Tourn. DAISY.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; the rays numerous, pistillate. Scales of
the involucre herbaceous, equal, in about 2 rows. Receptacle conical,
naked. Achenes obovate, flattened, wingless, and without any
pappus.--Low herbs (all but our single species natives of the Old
World), either stemless, like the true _Daisy_, B. PERENNIS (which is
found as an occasional escape from cultivation), or leafy-stemmed, as is
the following. (The Latin name, from _bellus_, pretty.)

1. B. integrifolia, Michx. (WESTERN DAISY.) Annual or biennial,
diffusely branched (4'--1 deg. high), smoothish; leaves lanceolate or
oblong, the lower spatulate-obovate; heads on slender peduncles; rays
pale violet-purple.--Prairies and banks, Ky. and southwestward.
March--June.

20. APHANOSTEPHUS, DC.

Involucral scales in few series, broadly lanceolate, the outer shorter.
Achenes prismatic, the broad truncate apex bearing a short coroniform
pappus. Otherwise as Bellis.--Southwestern leafy-stemmed and branching
pubescent herbs, with solitary terminal daisy-like heads. ([Greek:
A)phane/s], _inconspicuous_, and [Greek: ste/phos], _crown_; in allusion
to the pappus.)

1. A. Arkansanus, Gray. Diffuse, 1 deg. high; leaves oblong-spatulate to
broadly lanceolate, the lower often toothed or lobed; rays white to
purple, 1/2' long; pappus mostly 4--5-lobed.--Plains of Kan. and
southward.


21. CHAETOPAPPA, DC.

Heads several-flowered, radiate; disk-flowers often sterile. Involucral
bracts imbricated in 2 or more rows, the outer shorter. Receptacle flat,
naked. Achenes fusiform or compressed; pappus of 5 or fewer thin
nerveless paleae, alternating with rough bristly awns, or these
wanting.--Low southwestern branching annuals, with narrow entire leaves
and solitary terminal heads; ray white or purple. ([Greek: Chai/te], _a
bristle_, and [Greek: pa/ppos], _pappus_.)

1. C. asteroides, DC. Slender, 2--10' high, pubescent; involucres
narrow, 2'' long; rays 5--12; achenes pubescent.--Dry grounds, Vernon
Co., Mo., and southward.


22. BOLTONIA, L'Her.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; the rays numerous, pistillate. Scales of
the hemispherical involucre imbricated somewhat in 2 rows, appressed,
with narrow membranaceous margins. Receptacle conical or hemispherical,
naked. Achenes very flat, obovate or inversely heart-shaped, margined
with a callous wing, or in the ray 3-winged, crowned with a pappus of
several minute bristles and usually 2--4 longer awns.--Perennial and
bushy-branched smooth herbs, pale green, with the aspect of Aster; the
thickish leaves chiefly entire, often turned edgewise. Flowers autumnal;
disk yellow; rays white or purplish. (Dedicated to _James Bolton_, an
English botanist of the last century.)

[*] _Heads middle-sized, loosely corymbed._

1. B. asteroides, L'Her. Stems 2--8 deg. high; leaves lanceolate; involucral
scales acuminate; pappus of few or many minute bristles and 2 awns or
none. (B. glastifolia, _L'Her._, the awned form.)--Moist places along
streams; Penn. to Ill., and southward to Fla. Sept., Oct.--Var.
DECURRENS, Engelm., a large form with the leaves alate-decurrent upon
the stem and branches. Mo. (_Eggert_).

2. B. latisquama, Gray. Heads rather larger; involucral scales oblong to
ovate, obtuse or mucronate-apiculate; pappus-awns conspicuous.--W. Mo.
and Kan.

[*][*] _Heads small, panicled on the slender branches._

3. B. diffusa, L'Her. Stem diffusely branched; leaves lance-linear,
those on the branchlets very small and awl-shaped; rays short, mostly
white; pappus of several very short bristles and 2 short awns.--Prairies
of S. Ill. (_Vasey_), and southwestward. Aug.--Oct.


23. TOWNSENDIA, Hook.

Heads many-flowered, the numerous ray-flowers (violet to white) in a
single series, fertile. Involucre broad, the lanceolate scariously
margined scales imbricated in several series. Receptacle flat, naked.
Achenes obovate or oblong, flattened, with thickish margins and beset
with forked-capitellate hairs; pappus a single row of long awns or
coarse rigid bristles, or reduced in the ray to chaffy scales.--Low
scarcely caulescent herbs, with linear to spatulate entire leaves and
large heads. (Named for _David Townsend_, botanical associate of Dr.
Darlington of Penn.)

1. T. sericea, Hook. Acaulescent silky-pubescent perennial; heads
sessile, solitary or few, 1/2--1' high; ray-pappus mostly bristly.--Dry
plains, central Neb., north and westward. April, May.


24. SERICOCARPUS, Nees. WHITE-TOPPED ASTER.

Heads 12--20-flowered, radiate; the rays about 5, fertile (white).
Involucre somewhat cylindrical or club-shaped; the scales closely
imbricated in several rows, cartilaginous and whitish, appressed, with
short and abrupt often spreading green tips. Receptacle
alveolate-toothed. Achenes short, inversely pyramidal, very silky;
pappus simple, of numerous capillary bristles.--Perennial tufted herbs
(1--2 deg. high), with sessile somewhat 3-nerved leaves, and small heads
mostly in little clusters, disposed in a flat corymb. Disk-flowers pale
yellow. (Name from [Greek: seriko/s], _silky_, and [Greek: karpo/s],
_fruit_.)

[*] _Pappus rusty; leaves sparingly serrate, veiny, rather thin._

1. S. conyzoides, Nees. Somewhat pubescent; leaves oblong-lanceolate or
the lower spatulate, ciliate; heads rather loosely corymbed, obconical
(4--6'' long).--Dry ground; Maine to Ohio, and southward. July.

[*][*] _Pappus white; leaves entire, obscurely veined, firmer and
smaller._

2 S. solidagineus, Nees. Smooth, slender; leaves linear, rigid, obtuse,
with rough margins, tapering to the base; heads narrow (3'' long), in
close clusters, few-flowered.--Thickets, S. New Eng. to Tenn., and
southward. July.

3. S. tortifolius, Nees. Hoary-pubescent; leaves obovate or
oblong-spatulate, short (1/2--1' long), vertical, both sides alike; heads
rather loosely corymbed, obovoid (4--5'' long).--Pine woods, Va. and
southward. Aug.


25. ASTER, L. STARWORT. ASTER.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; the ray-flowers in a single series,
fertile. Scales of the involucre more or less imbricated, usually with
herbaceous or leaf-like tips. Receptacle flat, alveolate. Achenes more
or less flattened; pappus simple, of capillary bristles (double in Secs. 4
and 5).--Perennial herbs (annual only in Secs. 7 and 8), with corymbed,
panicled, or racemose heads; flowering in autumn. Rays white, purple, or
blue; the disk yellow, often changing to purple. (Name [Greek: a)ste/r],
_a star_, from the radiate heads of flowers.)

Conspectus of Groups.

  Annuals, with copious fine soft pappus                          53, 54

  Pappus double                                                   46--48

  Scales closely imbricated, not green-tipped, often scarious-edged
                                                                  49--52

  Scales closely imbricated, scarcely at all herbaceous; leaves cordate,
  serrate                                                           2, 3

  Scales nearly equal, rigid, more or less foliaceous; pappus-bristles
  rigid, some thickened at top                                         1

  Scales with herbaceous tips or the outer wholly foliaceous.
  ASTER proper.

    Pappus rigid; stem-leaves sessile, none cordate or clasping; heads
    few, large                                                      4--8

    Leaves silvery-silky both sides, sessile, entire              14, 15

    Lower leaves more or less cordate, petiolate                  17--24

    Leaves entire, lower not cordate, cauline sessile with
    cordate-clasping base                                             16

    Involucre (and branchlets) viscid or glandular; leaves not cordate,
    mostly entire, the cauline all sessile or clasping             9--13

    Lower leaves all acute at base; not glandular nor viscid nor
    silky-canescent.

      Smooth and glabrous, usually glaucous; scales coriaceous at base;
      leaves firm, usually entire                                 25--30

      Hoary-pubescent or hirsute; scales squarrose; stem-leaves small,
      linear, entire                                              31, 32

      Scales closely imbricated, not coriaceous at base; branches
      divaricate; heads many, small                               33--35

      Remaining species; branches erect or ascending.

        Stem-leaves auriculate-clasping or with winged-petiole-like
        base; involucre lax                                       42--45

        Stem-leaves sessile, but rarely cordate or auriculate at base
                                                                  36--41

Sec. 1. HELIASTRUM. _Pappus simple, coarse and rigid, the stronger bristles
somewhat clavate; scales rigid, more or less foliaceous, nearly equal._

1. A. paludosus, Ait. Stems 1 deg. high; glabrous or nearly so; heads 1/2'
high, rather few, racemose or spicate; outer scales lax, foliaceous;
rays purple; leaves linear, entire.--Mo. to Tex., thence to Car. and Ga.

Sec. 2. BIOTIA. _Involucre obovoid-bell-shaped; the scales regularly
imbricated in several rows, appressed, nearly destitute of herbaceous
tips; rays 6--18 (white or nearly so); achenes slender; pappus slightly
rigid, simple; lower leaves large, heart-shaped, petioled, coarsely
serrate; heads in open corymbs._

2. A. corymbosus, Ait. _Stem slender_, somewhat zigzag; _leaves thin,
smoothish, coarsely and unequally serrate with sharp spreading teeth,
taper-pointed_, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, all but the uppermost
heart-shaped at the base and on slender naked petioles; _rays
6--9_.--Woodlands; common; especially northward. July, Aug.--Plant 1--2 deg.
high, with smaller heads, looser corymbs, rounder and less rigid
exterior involucral scales, and thinner leaves than the next; not rough,
but sometimes pubescent.

3. A. macrophyllus, L. _Stem stout and rigid_ (2--3 deg. high); _leaves
thickish, rough, closely serrate_, abruptly pointed; the lower
heart-shaped (4--10' long, 3--6' wide), long-petioled; the upper ovate
or oblong, sessile or on margined petioles; heads in ample rigid
corymbs; _rays 10--15_ (white or bluish).--Moist woods; common
northward, and southward along the mountains. Aug., Sept.--Involucre 1/2'
broad; the outer scales rigid, oblong or ovate-oblong, the innermost
much larger and thinner.

Sec. 3. ASTER proper. _Scales imbricated in various degrees, with
herbaceous or leaf-like summits, or the outer entirely foliaceous; rays
numerous; pappus simple, soft and nearly uniform (coarser and more rigid
in the first group); achenes flattened._ (All flowering late in summer
or in autumn.)

[*] 1. _Scales well imbricated, coriaceous, with short herbaceous mostly
obtuse spreading tips; pappus of rigid bristles; stem-leaves all
sessile, none heart-shaped or clasping; heads few, or when several
corymbose, large and showy._

[+] _Lowest leaves ovate or ovate-oblong, some rounded or subcordate at
base._

4. A. Herveyi, Gray. Slightly scabrous, 1--2 deg. high, the summit and
peduncles glandular-puberulent; leaves roughish, obscurely serrate, the
lower ovate on nearly naked petioles, the upper lanceolate; heads
loosely corymbose, 1/2' high; involucre nearly hemispherical, the scales
obscurely glandular, all erect, with very short or indistinct green
tips; rays violet, 1/2' long.--Borders of oak woods, in rather moist soil,
E. Mass, and R. I.; Mt. Desert. An ambiguous species, approaching the
last.

[+][+] _Radical leaves all tapering into margined petioles; involucres
squarrose (hardly so in n. 8); rootstocks slender._

5. A. spectabilis, Ait. Stems 1--2 deg. high, roughish and
glandular-puberulent above; leaves oblong-lanceolate, or the lower
spatulate-oblong, obscurely serrate or the upper entire; heads few,
hemispherical, 1/2' high; _scales glandular-puberulent and viscid_; mostly
with the _upper half herbaceous and spreading_; rays about 20, bright
violet, nearly 1' long.--sandy soil, Mass. to Del., near the coast, and
perhaps southward. Sept.--Nov. One of the handsomest species of the
genus.

6. A. surculosus, Michx. Stems 1 deg. high or less, _from long filiform
rootstocks; leaves entire_ or nearly so, _rigid_, lanceolate or the
upper linear; _heads_ few or solitary, as in the last but generally
_smaller_, the _scales hardly glandular_.--Moist ground, coast of N. J.,
and southward.

7. A. gracilis, Nutt. Rootstocks occasionally tuberous-thickened; stems
slender, 1 deg. high; leaves oblong-lanceolate, entire or nearly so, small
(1--2' long); heads few or several; involucre top-shaped, 3--4'' long,
glabrous, not glandular nor viscid, the _coriaceous whitish scales with
very short deltoid or ovate tips_; rays 9--12, 3--6'' long.--Pine
barrens, N. J. to N. C., E. Ky. and Tenn.

8. A. radula, Ait. Stem simple or corymbose at the summit, smooth or
sparsely hairy, many-leaved (1--3 deg. high); _leaves oblong-lanceolate,
pointed, sharply serrate in the middle, very rough both sides and
rugose-veined_, closely sessile (2--3' long), nearly equal; _scales of
the bell-shaped involucre oblong, appressed, with very short and
slightly spreading herbaceous tips_; achenes smooth.--Bogs and low
grounds, Del. to Maine and northward, near the coast; also Pocono
Mountain, Penn. A dwarf form (var. STRICTUS, Gray) has oblong- to
linear-lanceolate nearly entire leaves, and usually solitary heads;
White Mountains, N. H., to Lab. Aug.--Rays light violet. Involucre
nearly smooth, except the ciliate margins.

[*] 2. _Involucre and usually the branchlets viscidly or
pruinose-glandular, well imbricated or loose; pubescence not silky;
leaves entire (or the lower with few teeth), the cauline all sessile or
clasping; rays showy, violet to purple._

[+] _Heads small; involucre not squarrose. Extreme western._

9. A. Fendleri, Gray. Rigid, 1 deg. high or less; leaves firm, linear,
1-nerved, hispid-ciliate, 1' long or mostly much less; heads scattered,
3'' high; scales linear-oblong, obtuse, or the inner acute.--Central
Kan. (Ellis, _Dr. L. Watson_) and southwestward.

[+][+] _Heads larger; involucral scales spreading, in few or many
ranks._

10. A. grandiflorus, L. _Rough with minute hispid hairs_; stems slender,
loosely much branched (1--3 deg. high); _leaves very small_ (1/4--1' long),
oblong-linear, obtuse, rigid, the uppermost passing into scales of the
hemispherical squarrose many-ranked involucre; rays bright violet (1'
long); achenes hairy.--Dry open places, Va. and southward.--Heads large
and very showy.

11. A. oblongifolius, Nutt. _Minutely glandular-puberulent_, much
branched above, rigid, paniculate-corymbose (1--2 deg. high); _leaves
narrowly oblong or lanceolate_, mucronate-pointed, partly clasping,
thickish (1--2' long by 2--5'' wide); involucral scales nearly equal,
broadly linear, appressed at the base; rays violet-purple; achenes
canescent.--Banks of rivers, from Penn. and Va. to Minn. and
Kan.--Heads middle-sized or smaller.

Var. rigidulus, Gray. Low, with more rigid and hispidulous scabrous
leaves.--In drier places, Ill., Wisc., and southwestward.

12. A. Novae-Angliae, L. _Stem stout, hairy_ (3--8 deg. high), corymbed at the
summit; _leaves very numerous, lanceolate, entire, acute,
auriculate-clasping, clothed with minute pubescence_, 2--5' long;
_scales nearly equal, linear-awl-shaped, loose, glandular-viscid_, as
well as the branchlets; rays violet-purple (in var. ROSEUS
rose-purple), very numerous; achenes hairy.--Moist grounds;
common.--Heads large. A peculiar and handsome species.

13. A. modestus, Lindl. Pubescent or glabrate; stem slender, simple,
with few large heads terminating slender branchlets; leaves lanceolate,
very acute, narrowed to a sessile base, sparingly serrate or serrulate;
scales linear-attenuate, equal, mostly herbaceous; rays blue.--N. Dak.
and westward.

[*] 3. _Leaves whitened, silvery-silky both sides, all sessile and
entire, mucronulate; involucre imbricated in 3 to several rows; rays
showy, purple-violet._

14. A. sericeus, Vent. Stems slender, branched; leaves silver-white,
lanceolate or oblong, _heads mostly solitary_, terminating the short
branchlets; _scales of the globular involucre similar to the leaves,
spreading_, except the short coriaceous base; _achenes smooth_,
many-ribbed.--Prairies and dry banks, Wisc. and Minn. to Ky., and
southward.--Heads large; rays 20--30.

15. A. concolor, L. Stems wand-like, nearly simple; _leaves crowded,
oblong or lanceolate, appressed_, the upper reduced to little bracts;
_heads in a simple or compound wand-like raceme_; scales of the obovoid
involucre closely imbricated in several rows, appressed, rather rigid,
silky, lanceolate; _achenes silky_.--Dry sandy soil near the coast,
R. I., N. J., and southward.--Plant 1--3 deg. high, with the short leaves 1'
or less in length, grayish-silky both sides.

[*] 4._Leaves entire, the lower not heart-shaped, the cauline all with
sessile and cordate-clasping base, the auricles generally meeting around
the stem._

16. A. patens, Ait. Rough-pubescent; stem loosely panicled above (1--3 deg.
high), with widely spreading branches, the heads mostly solitary,
terminating slender branchlets; leaves oblong-lanceolate or
ovate-oblong, often contracted below the middle, rough, especially above
and on the margins; scales of the minutely roughish involucre with
spreading pointed tips; achenes silky.--Var. PHLOGIFOLIUS, Nees, is a
form of shady moist places, with larger and elongated thin scarcely
rough leaves, downy underneath, sometimes a little toothed above, mostly
much contracted below the middle.--Dry ground; common, Mass. to Minn.,
and southward. Heads 1/2' broad, with showy deep blue-purple rays.

[*] 5 _Lower leaves heart-shaped and petioled; no glandular or viscid
pubescence; heads with short and appressed green-tipped scales (except
in n. 16 and 23), mostly small and numerous, racemose or panicled._

[+] _Heads middle-sized, with many rays, and squarrose foliaceous
involucre._

17. A. anomalus, Engelm. Somewhat pubescent and scabrous; stems slender
(2--4 deg. high), simple or racemose-branched above; leaves ovate or
ovate-lanceolate, pointed, entire, the upper small and almost sessile;
scales of the hemispherical involucre imbricated in several rows,
appressed, with linear spreading leafy tips; achenes smooth.--Limestone
cliffs, W. Ill. and Mo. to Ark.--Rays violet-purple.

[+][+] _Rays 10--20; involucral scales appressed or erect._

[++] _Leaves entire or slightly serrate; heads middle-sized; rays
bright-blue._

18. A. azureus, Lindl. Stem rather rough, erect, racemose-compound at
the summit, the branches slender and rigid; _leaves rough, the lower
ovate-lanceolate or oblong, heart-shaped, on long often hairy petioles;
the others lanceolate or linear, sessile_, on the branches awl-shaped;
involucre inversely conical.--Copses and prairies, western N. Y., and
Ohio to Minn., and southwestward. Involucre much as in A. laevis, but
smaller and slightly pubescent.

19. A. Shortii, Hook. Stem slender, spreading, nearly smooth, bearing
very numerous heads in racemose panicles; _leaves smooth above, minutely
pubescent underneath, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, elongated_,
tapering gradually to a sharp point, _all but the uppermost more or less
heart-shaped at base, and on naked petioles_, none clasping; involucre
bell-shaped.--Cliffs and banks, Ohio to Ill., and southward.--A pretty
species, 2--4 deg. high; leaves 3--5' long.

20. A. undulatus, L. Pale or somewhat hoary with close pubescence; stem
spreading, bearing numerous heads in racemose panicles; _leaves ovate or
ovate-lanceolate, with wavy or slightly toothed margins, roughish above,
downy underneath_, the lowest heart-shaped on margined petioles, the
others _abruptly contracted into short broadly winged petioles which are
dilated and clasping at the base_, or directly sessile by a heart-shaped
base; involucre obovoid, the scales less rigid.--Dry copses; common.

[++][++] _Leaves conspicuously serrate; heads small; rays pale blue or
nearly white._

21. A. cordifolius, L. Stem much branched above, _the spreading or
diverging branches bearing very numerous panicled heads_; lower leaves
all heart-shaped, on slender and mostly naked ciliate petioles; _scales
of the inversely conical involucre all appressed and tipped with very
short green points, obtuse or acutish_.--Woodlands; very common.--Heads
profuse, but quite small. Varies with the stem and leaves either smooth,
roughish, or sometimes hairy, also with the leaves all narrower.
Apparent hybrids with n. 35 also occur.

22. A. sagittifolius, Willd. Stem rigid, erect, with _ascending branches
bearing numerous racemose heads_; leaves ovate-lanceolate, pointed; the
lower heart-shaped at base, on margined petioles; the upper lanceolate
or linear, pointed at both ends; _scales of the oblong involucre linear,
tapering into awl-shaped slender and loose tips_.--Dry ground, N. Y. and
Penn. to Ky., and northward.--Green, but usually more or less hairy or
downy; the heads rather larger than in the last, almost sessile.

23. A. Drummondii, Lindl. Pale with fine gray pubescence; _leaves
cordate to cordate-lanceolate, mostly on margined petioles_, the
uppermost lanceolate and sessile; _scales acute or acutish_.--Passing
into the last. Open ground, etc., Ill. to Minn. and Kan.

24. A. Lindleyanus, Torr. & Gray. Rather stout, 1--2 deg. high, sparsely
pubescent or nearly glabrous; _radical and lowest leaves ovate,
moderately or obscurely cordate_, the uppermost sessile and pointed at
both ends; _heads larger_, rather few in a loose thyrse or panicle, _the
linear-attenuate scales looser and less imbricated_; rays pale
violet.--Lab. to L. Superior; Lisbon, N. H. (_C. E. Faxon_), and
Mt. Desert (_Rand_).

[*] 6. _Without heart-shaped petioled leaves, the radical and lower all
acute or attenuate at base; not glandular nor viscid, nor
silky-canescent._

[+] _Smooth and glabrous throughout (or nearly so, except forms of
n. 29), and usually pale and glaucous; involucral scales closely
imbricated, firm and whitish-coriaceous below, green-tipped; leaves
firm, usually entire._

[++] _Rays violet or blue; scales rather abruptly green-tipped; leaves
on the branchlets reduced to rigid subulate bracts._

25. A. turbinellus, Lindl. Stem slender, 3 deg. high, paniculately branched;
leaves oblong to narrowly lanceolate, tapering to each end, with rough
margins; _involucre elongated-obconical_ or almost club-shaped (1/2'
long); the scales linear, with very short and blunt green tips; rays
violet-blue; achenes nearly smooth.--Dry hills, etc., Ill., Mo., and
southwestward.--Well-marked and handsome.

26. A. laevis, L. Stouter, 2--4 deg. high; heads in a close panicle; leaves
thickish, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, chiefly entire, the upper more
or less clasping by an auricled or heart-shaped base; scales of the
_short-obovoid or hemispherical involucre_ with short abrupt green tips;
rays sky-blue; achenes smooth.--Borders of woodlands; common. A variable
and elegant species.

27. A. virgatus, Ell. Slender, strict and simple, with few or several
_racemose or terminal heads_, like those of the last; _leaves lanceolate
or linear, the lower usually long and narrow_.--S. W. Va., and
southward.

28. A. concinnus, Willd. Not glaucous, slender, 1--3 deg. high; leaves
lanceolate, mostly somewhat serrate, the lowest spatulate-lanceolate on
winged petioles; _heads smaller_ than in the preceding, _numerous,
panicled_; rays violet.--Rare; Penn. and southward.

[++][++] _Rays white or turning purplish; scales narrow, subulately
green-tipped; leaves mostly narrow, narrowed at base, on the branchlets
lax and attenuate._

29. A. polyphyllus, Willd. Often tall (4 or 5 deg. high), with virgate
branches; cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate or linear, 4 or 5' long;
heads paniculate; scales lanceolate-subulate, the outermost much
shorter; rays 4'' long.--N. Vt. to Wisc., and southward. Heads larger
and flowering earlier than the next.

30. A. ericoides, L. Smooth or sparingly hairy (1--3 deg. high); the simple
branchlets or peduncles racemose along the upper side of the wand-like
spreading branches; lowest leaves oblong-spatulate, sometimes toothed;
the others linear-lanceolate or linear-awl-shaped; heads 3'' high or
less; involucral scales often nearly equal, with attenuate or awl-shaped
green tips.--Dry open places, S. New Eng. to Minn., and southward.--Var.
VILLOSUS, Torr. & Gray, is a hairy form, often with broader leaves;
chiefly in the Western States.--Var. PUSILLUS, Gray, is a dwarf slender
and glabrous form of the barrens of Lancaster, Penn. (_Porter_), with
very narrow or filiform leaves and very small few-flowered heads.--Var.
PRINGLEI, Gray, a low strict form, with few erect branches and rather
small heads. About Lake Champlain.

[+][+] _Hoary-pubescent or hirsute; herbaceous tips of the involucral
scales squarrose or spreading; cauline leaves small, linear, entire,
scarcely narrowed at the sessile or partly clasping base; heads
numerous, small, racemose._

31. A. amethystinus, Nutt. Tall (2--5 deg. high), upright, much branched,
puberulent or somewhat hirsute; leaves not rigid; heads 3'' high, the
tips of the scales merely spreading; rays light clear blue.--Moist
grounds, E. Mass. to Ill. and Iowa. With the habit of n. 11.

32. A. multiflorus, Ait. Pale or hoary with minute close pubescence (1 deg.
high), much branched and bushy; the heads much crowded on the spreading
racemose branches; leaves rigid, crowded, spreading, with rough or
ciliate margins, the uppermost passing into the spatulate obtuse scales;
heads 2--3'' long; rays white or rarely bluish, 10--20.--Dry sandy soil;
common.

[+][+][+] _Scales glabrous, closely imbricated (the outer regularly
shorter), not coriaceous, with short appressed green tips; branches
slender, divaricate or divergent; leaves lanceolate to subulate; heads
small (2--3'' high) and numerous._

[++] _Heads scattered, terminating minutely foliose slender branchlets._

33. A. dumosus, L. Smooth or nearly so, 1--3 deg. high; leaves linear or the
upper oblong, crowded, entire, with rough margins; scales linear
spatulate, obtuse, in 4--6 rows.--Thickets; common.--A variable species,
loosely branched, with small leaves, especially the upper, and an
obconical or bell-shaped involucre, with more abrupt green tips than any
of the succeeding. Rays pale purple or blue, larger than in n. 34. Runs
into several peculiar forms.

[++][++] _Heads racemosely unilateral upon very short minutely leafy
branchlets._

34. A. vimineus, Lam. _Smooth or smoothish_, 2--5 deg. high, bushy; leaves
linear or narrowly lanceolate, elongated, the larger ones remotely
serrate in the middle with fine sharp teeth; _scales of the involucre
narrowly linear, acute or acutish_, in 3 or 4 rows. (A. Tradescanti, of
previous ed.)--Var. FOLIOLOSUS, Gray, has linear entire leaves, the
ascending branches with more scattered paniculate heads.--Moist banks;
very common.--Heads very numerous, and usually crowded, smaller than in
the last. Rays white or nearly so.

35. A. diffusus, Ait. _More or less pubescent_, much branched; _leaves_
lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, tapering or pointed at each end,
_sharply serrate in the middle; scales of the involucre linear, acute or
rather obtuse_, imbricated in 3 or 4 rows. (A. miser, of previous
ed.)--Thickets, fields, etc.; very common, and extensively variable.
Leaves larger than in either of the preceding (2--5'); the involucre
intermediate between them, as to the form of the scales. Rays mostly
short, white or pale bluish-purple.--Var. THYRSOIDEUS, Gray, with
ovate-oblong to lanceolate leaves, the branches ascending and often
short, and the thyrsoid or spicate-glomerate heads less secund. N. Y.
to Ill.--Var. HIRSUTICAULIS, Gray, the slender stem and the midveins of
the long narrow leaves very hirsute. N. Y. and Ky.--Var. BIFRONS, Gray,
a luxuriant form with large thin leaves and rather larger heads loosely
disposed on the spreading branches. Ky. to Ill.

[+][+][+][+] _Involucre various, the heads when numerous densely or
loosely paniculate on erect or ascending branches._

[++] _Cauline leaves sessile, but the base not cordate nor auriculate
(except in forms of n. 41), nor winged-petiole-like; glabrous or nearly
so._

[=] _Heads small or middle-sized; scales narrow, in several lengths, the
erect green tips not dilated._

36. A. Tradescanti, L. Stem much branched (2--4 deg. high); the numerous
heads (2--3'' high) somewhat panicled or racemed; leaves lanceolate to
linear, tapering to a long slender point (2--6' long), the lower
somewhat serrate in the middle; involucral scales linear, acutish,
partly green down the back. (A. tenuifolius, previous ed.)--Low grounds,
Mass. to Minn., and south to Va. and Ill. Rays short and narrow, white
or purplish. Some forms approach n. 32--34, others differ from A.
paniculatus only in the smaller heads and shorter ray.

37. A. paniculatus, Lam. Stem (2--8 deg. high) much branched; the branches
and scattered heads (about 4'' high) loosely paniculate; leaves
long-oblong to narrowly lanceolate, pointed, the lower serrate; scales
narrowly linear, with attenuate green tips or the outermost wholly
green. (A. simplex, previous ed.)--Shady moist banks; common. Rays white
or purplish, 3--4'' long. Approaches in its different forms the
preceding and the two following. A slender form with linear leaves, in
northern bogs, resembles n. 40.

38. A. salicifolius, Ait. Like the last; the leaves commonly shorter,
firmer, often scabrous, less serrate or entire; involucre more
imbricated, the firmer linear scales with shorter acute or
obtusish green tips; heads as large, disposed to be thyrsoid or
racemose-clustered; rays rarely white. (A. carneus, previous ed.)--Low
grounds, N. Eng. to Minn., and southward; most abundant westward.--Var.
SUBASPER, Gray, a rigid scabrous form, with contracted leafy
inflorescence, the broad heads usually leafy-bracteate and the broader
scales often obtuse. Ill. to Tex.

[=][=] _Heads small or middle-sized, the looser linear scales somewhat
equal and erect, and the acute green tips not dilated, the outer often
wholly herbaceous._

39. A. junceus, Ait. Slender, 1--3 deg. high, simple with few heads or
loosely branching; leaves linear or narrow, 3--5' long, entire or the
lower sparsely denticulate; heads small (3'' high); scales small,
narrow, in 2 or 3 rows, the outer more or less shorter; rays light
purple, 4--5'' long. (A. aestivus, previous ed., mainly.)--Wet meadows
and cold bogs, N. Scotia and N. Y. to Mich. and Minn.

40. A. longifolius, Lam. (not of previous ed.) Stem 1--3 deg. high, more or
less branched and corymbosely panicled; leaves long-lanceolate to
linear-lanceolate (3--7' long), narrowed to both ends, entire or
sparsely serrulate; heads 4--5'' high, the scales nearly equal and
usually little imbricated, the outer looser; rays 3--4'' long, violet or
purplish, rarely whitish.--Low grounds, Lab. and northern N. Eng. to
Minn.--Var. VILLICAULIS, Gray, a low simple form, with few or solitary
heads, and the stem and midrib of the leaves densely white-villous
beneath. N. Maine, at Fort Kent (_Miss Furbish_).

[=][=][=] _Heads middle-sized; scales in few to several rows, more or
less unequal, linear to spatulate, more herbaceous and firmer, the tips
often slightly spreading or squarrose._

41. A. Novi-Belgii, L. Rarely tall; leaves oblong to linear-lanceolate,
entire or sparsely serrate, the upper partly clasping and often somewhat
auriculate; heads 4--5'' long; rays bright blue-violet. (A. longifolius,
previous ed.)--N. Brunswick to Ill. and Ga. The commonest late-flowered
Aster of the Atlantic border, and very variable. The typical form has
thin narrowly to oblong-lanceolate leaves, sometimes scabrous above, and
linear scales with narrow acute spreading or recurved tips.--Var.
LAEVIGATUS, Gray, is usually glabrous throughout, the thin leaves mostly
oblong-lanceolate, the upper half-clasping by an abrupt base; scales
nearly equal, loosely erect, with short acutish tips. N. Eng. and
eastward.--Var. LITOREUS, Gray, rigid, usually low, very leafy; leaves
thickish, usually very smooth, oblong to lanceolate, the upper sometimes
auriculate; scales in several loose rows, all but the innermost with
broadish obtuse tips, the outer usually spatulate. Salt-marshes and
shores, Can. to Ga.--Var. ELODES, Gray, slender, often low and simple;
leaves thickish, long, narrowly linear, entire, the uppermost small and
bract-like; scales narrow, with short and mostly spreading acutish tips.
Swamps, N. J. to Va.

[++][++] _Cauline leaves conspicuously contracted into a
winged-petiole-like base or auriculate-clasping; involucre lax._

42. A. patulus, Lam. Glabrous or subpubescent, 1--4 deg. high; leaves ovate-
or oblong-lanceolate, sharply serrate in the middle, narrowed at both
ends, the lower to a winged petiole, none auriculate or only obscurely
so; heads loosely panicled, about 4'' high; scales unequal, erect or
nearly so; rays light purple or white.--N. Brunswick and eastern
N. England.

43. A. tardiflorus, L. Glabrous or stem somewhat pubescent (not hispid),
1--2 deg. high; leaves lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, mostly
with gradually narrowed and somewhat auricled base; heads often few,
corymbose, 4--5'' high; scales subequal, the outer foliaceous; rays pale
violet.--Lab. to the Mass. coast and White Mts. Not late-flowering.

44. A. prenanthoides, Muhl. Stem 1--3 deg. high, corymbose-panicled, hairy
above in lines; leaves rough above, smooth underneath, ovate-lanceolate,
sharply cut-toothed in the middle, conspicuously taper-pointed, and
rather abruptly narrowed to a long contracted entire portion, which is
abruptly dilated into a conspicuously auricled base; heads mostly 4''
high, on short divergent peduncles; scales narrowly linear, tips
recurved spreading; rays light blue.--Borders of streams and rich woods,
W. New Eng. to Penn., Iowa, and Wisc.

45. A. puniceus, L. Stem tall and stout 3--7 deg. high, rough-hairy all over
or in lines, usually purple below, panicled above; leaves
oblong-lanceolate, not narrowed or but slightly so to the auricled base,
coarsely serrate to sparingly denticulate in the middle, rough above,
nearly smooth beneath, pointed; heads 4--6'' high, subsessile; scales
narrowly linear, acute, loose, equal, in about 2 rows; rays long and
showy (lilac-blue, paler in shade).--Low thickets and swamps, very
common.--Var. LAEVICAULIS, Gray; stem mostly green, smooth and naked
below, sparsely hirsute above, 1--3 deg. high; leaves serrate.--Var.
LUCIDULUS, Gray; the very leafy stems glabrous or sparingly hispidulous;
leaves lanceolate, entire or slightly denticulate, glabrous and somewhat
shining; heads usually numerous, the scales less loose and less
attenuate.

Sec. 4. DOELLINGERIA. _Pappus manifestly double, the inner of long
capillary bristles (some thickened at top), the outer of very short and
rigid bristles; scales short, without herbaceous tips; heads small,
corymbose or solitary; rays rather few, white; leaves not rigid, veiny._

46. A. umbellatus, Mill. Smooth, leafy to the top (2--7 deg. high); _leaves
lanceolate, elongated, taper-pointed_ and tapering at the base (3--6'
long); heads very numerous in compound flat corymbs; involucral scales
rather close, obtusish, scarcely longer than the achenes. (Diplopappus
umbellatus, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Moist thickets; common, especially
northward. Aug.--Var. PUBENS, Gray; the lower surface of the leaves and
the branchlets tomentulose. Upper Mich. to Minn.--Var. LATIFOLIUS,
Gray; with shorter leaves ovate-lanceolate to ovate, less narrowed or
even rounded at base. (D. amygdalinus, _Torr. & Gray_.) Pine barrens,
etc., N. J., Penn., and southward.

47. A. infirmus, Michx. Stem slender, often flexuous, 1--3 deg. high, less
leafy, bearing few or several heads on divergent peduncles; leaves
obovate to ovate or oblong-lanceolate, narrowed at base and ciliate, the
midrib hairy beneath; scales more imbricated, thicker and more obtuse;
pappus more rigid. (D. cornifolius, _Darl._)--Open woodlands, E. Mass.
to Tenn., and southward.

Sec. 5. IANTHE. _Pappus less distinctly double, the inner of bristles not
thickened at top, the outer shorter; scales well imbricated, appressed,
without herbaceous tips; rays violet; achenes narrow, villous; leaves
numerous, rigid, small, linear, 1-nerved and veinless._

48. A. linariifolius, L. Stems 3--20' high, several from a woody root;
heads solitary or terminating simple branches, rather large; leaves
about 1' long, rough-margined, passing above into the rigid acutish
scales. (D. linariifolius, _Hook_.)--Dry soil, common. Sept., Oct. Ray
rarely white.

Sec. 6. ORTHOMERIS. _Pappus simple; scales imbricated, appressed, without
herbaceous tips, often scarious-edged or dry. Perennial, as all the
preceding._

49. A. ptarmicoides, Torr. & Gray. Smooth or roughish; stems clustered
(6--20' high), simple; _leaves linear-lanceolate, acute, rigid_, entire,
tapering to the base, 1--3-nerved, with rough margins (2--4' long);
_heads small, in a flat corymb_; scales imbricated in 3 or 4 rows,
short; _rays white_ (2--4'' long).--Dry rocks, W. New Eng. to Minn.,
along the Great Lakes, and northward. Aug.--Var. LUTESCENS, Gray; rays
small, pale yellow.--N. Ill. to Sask.

50. A. acuminatus, Michx. Somewhat hairy; stem (about 1 deg. high) simple,
zigzag, panicled-corymbose at the summit; peduncles slender; _leaves
oblong-lanceolate, conspicuously pointed, coarsely toothed_ above,
wedge-form and entire at the base; involucral scales few and loosely
imbricated, linear-lanceolate, pointed, thin (3--5'' long); heads few or
several; rays 12--18, white, or slightly purple.--Cool rich woods; S.
Lab. to Penn., and southward along the Alleghanies. Aug.--There is a
depauperate narrow-leaved variety on the White Mountains. A monstrous
form occurs in Maine, having a chaffy receptacle and the flowers turned
to tufts of chaffy paleae.

51. A. nemoralis, Ait. Minutely roughish-pubescent; stem slender, simple
or corymbose at the summit, very leafy (1--2 deg. high); _leaves_ small
(1--11/2' long), rather _rigid, lanceolate_, nearly _entire, with revolute
margins_; scales of the inversely conical involucre narrowly
linear-lanceolate, the outer passing into awl-shaped bracts; rays
lilac-purple, elongated.--Bogs and swamps, N. J. to Newf. and Hudson's
Bay. Sept.

52. A. tenuifolius, L. Very glabrous; stem often zigzag, simple or
forked, 6'--2 deg. high; heads rather large, terminal; _leaves few,
long-linear, tapering to both ends, rather thick and fleshy, entire_,
the upper subulate, pointed; involucre top-shaped, the scales
subulate-lanceolate with attenuate acute points; rays large, numerous,
pale purple. (A. flexuosus, _Nutt._)--Salt marshes, Mass. to Fla. Sept.

Sec. 7. OXYTRIPOLIUM. _Involucre as in Sec. 6; pappus simple, fine and soft;
glabrous annuals, bearing numerous small heads and with narrow entire
leaves._

53. A. subulatus, Michx. Stem 6--24' high; leaves linear-lanceolate,
pointed, flat, on the branches awl-shaped; scales of the oblong
involucre linear-awl-shaped, in few rows; rays somewhat in two rows,
short, not projecting beyond the disk, more numerous than the
disk-flowers, purplish. (A. linifolius, of previous ed.)--Salt marshes
on the coast, Maine to Va. Aug.--Oct.

Sec. 8. CONYZOPSIS. _Scales of the campanulate involucre in 2 or 3 rows,
nearly equal, linear, the outer foliaceous and loose; pappus copious,
very soft; rays very short or without ligules; low annuals with numerous
rather small heads._

54. A. angustus, Torr. & Gray. Branching, 6--20' high, nearly glabrous;
leaves linear, entire, more or less short-ciliate; ray-flowers reduced
to a tube much shorter than the elongated style.--Minn. to Sask. and
westward, spreading east to Chicago, etc. (Siberia.)


26. ERIGERON, L. FLEABANE.

Heads many-flowered, radiate, mostly flat or hemispherical; the narrow
rays very numerous, pistillate. Involucral scales narrow, equal and
little imbricated, never coriaceous, foliaceous, nor green-tipped.
Receptacle flat or convex, naked. Achenes flattened, usually pubescent
and 2-nerved; pappus a single row of capillary bristles, with minuter
ones intermixed, or with a distinct short outer pappus of little
bristles or chaffy scales.--Herbs, with entire or toothed and generally
sessile leaves, and solitary or corymbed naked-pedunculate heads. Disk
yellow; ray white or purple. (Name from [Greek: e~)r], _spring_, and
[Greek: ge/ron], _an old man_, suggested by the hoariness of some vernal
species.)

Sec. 1. CAENOTUS. _Rays inconspicuous, in several rows, scarcely longer than
the pappus; pappus simple; annuals._

1. E. Canadensis, L. (HORSE-WEED. BUTTER-WEED.) Bristly-hairy; _stem
erect, wand-like_ (1--5 deg. high); leaves linear, mostly entire, the
radical cut-lobed; _heads_ very numerous and small, cylindrical,
_panicled_.--Waste places; a common weed, now widely diffused over the
world. July--Oct.--Ligule of the ray-flowers much shorter than the tube,
white.

2. E. divaricatus, Michx. _Diffuse and decumbent_ (3'--1 deg. high); leaves
linear or awl-shaped, entire; _heads loosely corymbed; rays purple_;
otherwise like n. 1.--Ind. to Minn., and southward.

Sec. 2. TRIMORPHAEA. _Like Sec. 1, but a series of filiform rayless pistillate
flowers within the outer row of ray-flowers; biennial or sometimes
perennial._

3. E. acris, L. Hirsute-pubescent or smoothish; stem erect (10--20'
high); leaves lanceolate or the lower spatulate-oblong, entire; heads
several or rather numerous, racemose or at length corymbose, nearly
hemispherical (4--5'' long), hirsute; rays purplish or bluish, equalling
or a little exceeding the copious pappus.--Lower St. Lawrence, across
the continent and northward. The var. DROEBACHENSIS, Blytt, more
glabrous and with the green involucre nearly or quite naked, occurs on
the shores of L. Superior. (Eu.)

Sec. 3. ERIGERON proper. _Rays elongated (short in a form of n. 5), crowded
in one or more rows._

[*] _Annuals (or sometimes biennial), leafy-stemmed and branching;
pappus double, the outer a crown of minute scales, the inner of
deciduous fragile bristles, usually wanting in the ray._

4. E. annuus, Pers. (DAISY FLEABANE. SWEET SCABIOUS.) Stem stout (3--5 deg.
high), branched, _beset with spreading hairs; leaves coarsely and
sharply toothed; the lowest ovate_, tapering into a margined petiole,
the upper ovate-lanceolate, acute and entire at both ends; heads
corymbed; rays white, tinged with purple, not twice the length of the
bristly involucre.--Fields and waste places; a very common weed.
June--Aug. (Nat. in Eu.)

5. E. strigosus, Muhl. (DAISY FLEABANE.) Stem panicled-corymbose at the
summit, _roughish_ like the leaves _with minute appressed hairs, or
almost smooth; leaves entire_ or nearly so, the upper _lanceolate_,
scattered, the lowest oblong or spatulate, tapering into a slender
petiole; rays white, twice the length of the minutely hairy
involucre.--Fields, etc., common. June--Aug.--Stem smaller and more
simple than the last, with smaller heads but longer rays. A form with
the rays minute, scarcely exceeding the involucre, occurs in S. New
England.

[*][*] _Leafy-stemmed perennials; pappus simple (double in n. 6)._

6. E. glabellus, Nutt. Stem (6--15' high) stout, hairy above, the
leafless summit bearing 1--7 large heads; leaves nearly glabrous, except
the margins, entire, the upper oblong-lanceolate and pointed, closely
sessile or partly clasping, the lower spatulate and petioled; rays (more
than 100, purple) more than twice the length of the hoary-hispid
involucre; pappus double, the outer of minute bristles.--Plains of
N. Wisc., and westward. June.

7. E. hyssopifolius, Michx. Slightly pubescent, slender (6--12' high),
from filiform rootstocks; leaves short, very numerous, narrowly linear;
branches prolonged into slender naked peduncles, bearing solitary small
heads; rays 20--30, rose-purple or whitish. (Aster graminifolius,
_Pursh._)--Northern borders of N. Eng., L. Superior, and northward.

8. E. bellidifolius, Muhl. (ROBIN'S PLANTAIN.) Hairy, _producing offsets
from the base; stem simple, rather naked above_, bearing few (1--9)
large heads on slender peduncles; root-leaves obovate and spatulate,
sparingly toothed, the cauline distant, lanceolate-oblong,
partly clasping, entire; _rays (about 50) rather broad, light
bluish-purple._--Copses and moist banks; common. May.

9. E. Philadelphicus, L. (COMMON FLEABANE.) Hairy; _stem leafy_,
corymbed, bearing several small heads; leaves thin, with a broad midrib,
oblong; the upper smoothish, clasping by a heart-shaped base, mostly
entire, the lowest spatulate, toothed; _rays innumerable and very
narrow, rose-purple_ or flesh-color.--Moist ground; common. June--Aug.

[*][*][*] _Perennial by rosulate offsets, with scape-like stems; pappus
simple._

10. E. nudicaulis, Michx. Glabrous; leaves clustered at the root, oval
or spatulate; scape leafless, slender (1--2 deg. high), bearing 5--12 small
corymbed heads; rays white. (E. vernum, _Torr. & Gray_).--Low grounds,
E. Va. and southward. May.


27. BACCHARIS, L. GROUNDSEL-TREE.

Heads many-flowered; the flowers all tubular, dioecious, i.e., the
pistillate and staminate borne by different plants. Involucre
imbricated. Corolla of the pistillate flowers very slender and
thread-like; of the staminate, larger and 5-lobed. Anthers tailless.
Achenes ribbed; pappus of capillary bristles, in the sterile plant
scanty and tortuous; in the fertile very long and copious.--Shrubs,
commonly smooth and resinous or glutinous. Flowers whitish or yellow,
autumnal. (Name of some shrub anciently dedicated to _Bacchus_.)

1. B. halimifolia, L. Smooth and somewhat scurfy; branches angled;
leaves obovate and wedge-form, petiolate, coarsely toothed, or the upper
entire; heads scattered or in leafy panicles; scales of the involucre
acutish.--Sea beaches, Mass. to Va., and southward.--Shrub 6--12 deg. high;
the fertile plant conspicuous in autumn by its very long and white
pappus.

2. B. glomeruliflora, Pers. Leaves spatulate-oblong, sessile or nearly
so; heads larger, sessile in the axils or in clusters; scales of the
bell-shaped involucre broader, very obtuse.--Pine barrens, E. Va. (?),
and southward.


28. PLUCHEA, Cass. MARSH-FLEABANE.

Heads many-flowered; the flowers all tubular; the central perfect, but
sterile, few, with a 5-cleft corolla; all the others with a
thread-shaped truncate corolla, pistillate and fertile. Involucre
imbricated. Receptacle flat, naked. Anthers with tails. Achenes grooved;
pappus capillary, in a single row.--Herbs, somewhat glandular, emitting
a strong or camphoric odor, the heads cymosely clustered. Flowers
purplish, in summer. (Dedicated to the Abbe _Pluche_.)

1. P. bifrons, DC. _Perennial_, 2--3 deg. high; _leaves closely sessile or
half-clasping_, oblong to lanceolate, sharply denticulate, veiny (only
2--3' long); heads clustered in a corymb; scales lanceolate.--Low
ground, Cape May, N. J., and southward.

2. P. camphorata, DC. (SALT-MARSH FLEABANE.) _Annual, pale_ (2--5 deg.
high); _leaves scarcely petioled_, oblong-ovate or lanceolate, thickish,
obscurely veiny, serrate; corymb flat; involucral scales ovate to
lanceolate. (P. foetida, _DC._)--Salt marshes, Mass. to Va., and
southward, and on river-banks westward to Ky., Ill., and Neb. (?)


29. EVAX, Gaertn.

Heads rather many-flowered, discoid; flowers as in Pluchea, the central
usually sterile. Involucral scales few, woolly. Receptacle convex to
subulate, chaffy, the scarious chaff not embracing the smooth dorsally
compressed achenes. Anthers with tails or acutely sagittate; pappus
none.--Low, densely floccose-woolly annuals; extreme western. (Name of
uncertain signification.)

1. E. prolifera, Nutt. A span high or less, simple or branching from the
base; leaves numerous, small and spatulate; heads in dense proliferous
clusters; receptacle convex; chaff subtending the sterile flowers
woolly-tipped, the rest more scarious and naked, oval or oblong.--Dak.
and W. Kan. to Tex.


30. FILAGO, Tourn. COTTON-ROSE.

Heads and flowers as in Evax. Receptacle elongated or top-shaped, naked
at the summit, but chaffy at the margins or toward the base; the chaff
resembling the proper involucral scales, each covering a single
pistillate flower. Achenes terete; pappus of the central flowers
capillary, of the outer ones mostly none.--Annual, low, branching woolly
herbs, with entire leaves, and small heads in capitate clusters. (Name
from _filum_, a thread, in allusion to the cottony hairs of these
plants.)

F. GERMANICA, L. (HERBA IMPIA.) Stem erect, short, clothed with
lanceolate and upright crowded leaves, producing a capitate cluster of
woolly heads, from which rise one or more branches, each terminated by a
similar head, and so on;--hence the common name applied to it by the old
botanists, as if the offspring were undutifully exalting themselves
above the parent.--Dry fields, N. Y. to Va. July--Oct. (Nat. from Eu.)


31. ANTENNARIA, Gaertn. EVERLASTING.

Heads many-flowered, dioecious; flowers all tubular; pistillate corollas
very slender. Involucre dry and scarious, white or colored, imbricated.
Receptacle convex or flat, not chaffy. Anthers caudate. Achenes terete
or flattish; pappus a single row of bristles, in the fertile flowers
capillary, united at base so as to fall in a ring, and in the sterile
thickened and club-shaped or barbellate at the summit.--Perennial
white-woolly herbs, with entire leaves and corymbed (rarely single)
heads. Corolla yellowish. (Name from the resemblance of the sterile
pappus to the _antennae_ of certain insects.)

1. A. plantaginifolia, Hook. (PLANTAIN-LEAVED EVERLASTING.) Spreading by
offsets and runners, low (3--18' high); leaves silky-woolly when young,
at length green above and hoary beneath; those of the simple and
scape-like flowering stems small, lanceolate, appressed; the radical
obovate or oval-spatulate, petioled, ample, 3-nerved; heads in a small
crowded corymb; scales of the (mostly white) involucre obtuse in the
sterile, and acutish and narrower in the fertile plant.--Sterile knolls
and banks; common. March--May.


32. ANAPHALIS, DC. EVERLASTING.

Characters as of Antennaria, but the pappus in the sterile flowers not
thickened at the summit or scarcely so, and that of the fertile flowers
not at all united at base; fertile heads usually with a few perfect but
sterile flowers in the centre. (Said to be an ancient Greek name of some
similar plant.)

1. A. margaritacea, Benth. & Hook. (PEARLY EVERLASTING.) Stem erect
(1--2 deg. high), corymbose at the summit, with many heads, leafy; leaves
broadly to linear-lanceolate, taper-pointed, sessile, soon green above;
involucral scales pearly-white, very numerous, obtuse or rounded,
radiating in age. (Antennaria margaritacea, _R. Br._)--Dry hills and
woods, common northward. Aug. (N. E. Asia.)


33. GNAPHALIUM, L. CUDWEED.

Heads many-flowered; flowers all tubular, the outer pistillate and very
slender, the central perfect. Scales of the involucre dry and scarious,
white or colored, imbricated in several rows. Receptacle flat, naked.
Anthers caudate. Achenes terete or flattish; pappus a single row of
capillary rough bristles.--Woolly herbs, with sessile or decurrent
leaves, and clustered or corymbed heads; fl. in summer and autumn.
Corolla whitish or yellowish. (Name from [Greek: gna/phalon], _a lock of
wool_, in allusion to the floccose down.)

Sec. 1. GNAPHALIUM proper. _Bristles of the pappus distinct._

1. G. polycephalum, Michx. (COMMON EVERLASTING.) Erect, woolly annual
(1--3 deg. high), fragrant; _leaves lanceolate, tapering at the base_, with
undulate margins, _not decurrent_, smoothish above; _heads clustered at
the summit of the panicled-corymbose branches_, ovate-conical before
expansion, then obovate; scales (whitish) ovate and oblong, rather
obtuse; perfect flowers few.--Old fields and woods; common.

2. G. decurrens, Ives. (EVERLASTING.) Stout, erect (2 deg. high), annual or
biennial, branched at the top, clammy-pubescent, white-woolly on the
branches, bearing numerous _heads in dense corymbed clusters; leaves
linear-lanceolate, partly clasping, decurrent_; scales yellowish-white,
oval, acutish.--Hillsides, N. J. and Penn. to Maine, Mich., Minn., and
northward.

3. G. uliginosum, L. (LOW CUDWEED.) _Diffusely branched_,
appressed-woolly annual (3--6' high); leaves spatulate-oblanceolate or
linear, not decurrent; _heads (small) in terminal sessile capitate
clusters_ subtended by leaves; scales brownish, less imbricated.--Low
grounds; common, especially east and northward; perhaps introduced.
(Eu.)

4. G. supinum, Villars. (MOUNTAIN CUDWEED.) Dwarf and tufted perennial
(2' high); leaves linear, woolly; heads solitary or few and spiked on
the slender simple flowering stems; scales brown, lanceolate, acute,
nearly glabrous; achenes broader and flatter.--Alpine summit of Mount
Washington; very rare. (Eu.)

Sec. 2. GAMOCHAETA. _Bristles of the pappus united at the very base into a
ring, so falling off all together._

5. G. purpureum, L. (PURPLISH CUDWEED.) Annual, simple or branched from
the base, ascending (6--20' high), silvery-canescent with dense white
wool; leaves oblong-spatulate, obtuse, not decurrent, green above;
_heads_ in sessile clusters in the axils of the upper leaves, and spiked
at the wand-like summit of the stem; scales tawny, the inner often
marked with purple.--Sandy or gravelly soil, coast of Maine to Va., and
southward.


34. ADENOCAULON, Hook.

Heads 5--10-flowered; the flowers all tubular and with similar corollas;
the marginal ones pistillate, fertile; the others perfect but sterile.
Involucral scales few, equal, in a single row, not scarious. Receptacle
flat, naked. Anthers caudate. Achenes elongated at maturity,
club-shaped, beset with stalked glands above; pappus none.--Slender
perennials, with the alternate thin and petioled leaves smooth and green
above, white-woolly beneath, and few small (whitish) heads in a loose
panicle, beset with glands (whence the name, from [Greek: a)de/n], _a
gland_, and [Greek: kaulo/s], _a stem_).

1. A. bicolor, Hook. Leaves triangular, rather heart-shaped, with
angular-toothed margins; petioles margined.--Moist woods, shore of Lake
Superior, and westward. Stem 1--3 deg. high.


35. INULA, L. ELECAMPANE.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; disk-flowers perfect and fertile.
Involucre imbricated, hemispherical, the outer scales herbaceous or
leaf-like. Receptacle naked. Anthers caudate. Achenes more or less
4--5-ribbed; pappus simple, of capillary bristles.--Coarse herbs, not
floccose-woolly, with alternate simple leaves, and large yellow flowers.
(The ancient Latin name.)

I. HELENIUM, L. (ELECAMPANE.) Stout perennial (3--5 deg. high); leaves
large, woolly beneath; those from the thick root ovate, petioled, the
others partly clasping; rays very many, narrow.--Roadsides and damp
pastures. Aug.--Heads very large. Root mucilaginous. (Nat. from Eu.)


36. POLYMNIA, L. LEAF-CUP.

Heads broad, many-flowered, radiate, rays several (rarely abortive),
pistillate; disk-flowers perfect but sterile. Involucral scales in two
rows; the outer about 5, leaf-like, large and spreading; the inner small
and membranaceous, partly embracing the thick triangular-obovoid
achenes. Receptacle flat, membranous-chaffy. Pappus none.--Tall
branching perennial herbs, viscid-hairy, exhaling a heavy odor. Leaves
large and thin, opposite, or the uppermost alternate, lobed, and with
dilated appendages like stipules at the base. Heads in panicled corymbs.
Flowers light yellow; in summer and autumn. (Dedicated to the Muse,
_Polyhymnia_, for no obvious reason.)

1. P. Canadensis, L. _Clammy-hairy_, 2--5 deg. high; lower leaves deeply
pinnatifid, the uppermost triangular-ovate and 3--5-lobed or angled,
petioled; heads small; _rays 5, obovate or wedge-form, shorter than the
involucre_, often minute or abortive, whitish-yellow; achenes 3-costate,
not striate.--Moist shaded ravines, Conn. to W. Vt., Minn., and
southward.--Var. RADIATA, Gray; ligules more developed, 3-lobed, 3--6''
long, whitish. Ill. to Kan., and southward.

2. P. Uvedalia, L. _Roughish-hairy, stout_ (4--10 deg. high); leaves broadly
ovate, angled and toothed, nearly sessile; the lower palmately lobed,
abruptly narrowed into a winged petiole; outer involucral scales very
large; _rays 10--15, linear-oblong, much longer than the inner scales of
the involucre_, yellow; achenes strongly striate.--Rich soil,
W. New York and N. J. to Mo., and southward.


37. SILPHIUM, L. ROSIN-WEED.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; rays numerous, pistillate and fertile,
their broad flat ovaries imbricated in 2 or 3 rows; disk-flowers
apparently perfect, but with entire style and sterile. Scales of the
broad and flattish involucre imbricated in several rows, thickish, broad
and with loose leaf-like summits, except the innermost, which resemble
the linear chaff of the flat receptacle. Achenes broad and flat,
dorsally compressed, surrounded by a wing notched at the top, without
pappus, or with 2 teeth confluent with the winged margin, the achene and
its subtending chaff usually falling together; those of the disk sterile
and stalk-like.--Coarse and tall rough perennial herbs, with copious
resinous juice, and large corymbose-panicled, yellow-flowered heads.
([Greek: Si/lphion], the ancient name of some resinous plant,
transferred by Linnaeus to this American genus.)

[*] _Stem terete, alternate-leaved (root very large and thick)._

1. S. laciniatum, L. (ROSIN-WEED. COMPASS-PLANT.) _Rough-bristly
throughout_, stem stout (3--12 deg. high), leafy; _leaves pinnately parted_,
petioled but dilated and clasping at the base; _their divisions
lanceolate or linear_, acute, _cut-lobed or pinnatifid_, rarely entire;
heads few (1--2' broad), sessile or short-peduncled along the naked
summit; _scales ovate, tapering into long and spreading rigid points_;
achenes broadly winged and deeply notched, 6'' long.--Prairies, Mich. to
Dak., and southward. July.--Lower and root-leaves vertical, 12--30'
long, ovate in outline; on the wide open prairies disposed to present
their edges north and south; hence called _Compass-Plant_.

2. S. terebinthinaceum, L. (PRAIRIE DOCK.) _Stem smooth, slender_
(4--10 deg. high), panicled at the summit and bearing several or many, large
heads, leafless except toward the base; _leaves ovate_ and ovate-oblong,
somewhat heart-shaped, _serrate-toothed_, thick, rough, especially
beneath (1--2 deg. long, on slender petioles); _scales roundish, obtuse_,
smooth; achenes narrowly winged, slightly notched and 2-toothed.--Var.
PINNATIFIDUM, Gray, has the leaves deeply cut or pinnatifid, but varies
into the ordinary form.--Prairies and oak-openings, Ohio and Mich. to
Minn., and southward. July--Sept.

[*][*] _Stem terete or slightly 4-angled, leafy; leaves undivided (not
large), some opposite._

3. S. trifoliatum, L. _Stem smooth, often glaucous_, rather slender
(4--7 deg. high), branched above; stem-_leaves lanceolate, pointed, entire_
or scarcely serrate, rough, _short-petioled, in whorls of 3 or 4_, the
uppermost opposite; heads loosely panicled; achenes rather broadly
winged, and sharply 2-toothed at the top.--Dry plains and banks, Penn.
to Ohio, and southward. Aug.

4. S. Asteriscus, L. _Stem hispid_ (2--4 deg. high); _leaves opposite, or
the lower rarely in whorls of 3, the upper alternate, oblong or
oval-lanceolate, coarsely toothed_, rarely entire, _rough-hairy_, the
lower short-petioled; heads nearly solitary (large), squarrose; achenes
obovate, winged, 2-toothed, the teeth usually awn-like.--Dry sandy soil,
Va. and southward.

5. S. integrifolium, Michx. _Stem smooth or rough_, rather stout (2--4 deg.
high), rigid, 4-angular and grooved; _leaves all opposite, rigid,
lanceolate-ovate_, entire or denticulate, tapering to a sharp point
_from a roundish heart-shaped and partly clasping base_, rough-pubescent
or nearly smooth, thick (3--5' long); heads in a close forking corymb,
short-peduncled; achenes broadly winged, deeply notched.--Prairies,
Mich. to Minn., and southward. Aug.

[*][*][*] _Stem square; leaves opposite, connate (thin and large, 6--15'
long)._

6. S. perfoliatum, L. (CUP-PLANT.) Stem stout, often branched above
(4--8 deg. high), leafy; leaves ovate, coarsely toothed, the upper united by
their bases and forming a cup-shaped disk, the lower abruptly narrowed
into winged petioles which are connate by their bases; heads corymbose;
scales ovate; achenes winged and variously notched.--Rich soil along
streams, Mich. to Minn., and southward; common. Also escaped from
gardens eastward. July.


38. BERLANDIERA, DC.

With the characters of Silphium, but the 5--12 fertile ray-flowers in a
single series. Involucral scales in about 3 series, thinner, the inner
dilated obovate, exceeding the disk, the outer smaller and more
foliaceous. Achenes obovate, not winged nor notched at the apex, and
without pappus, deciduous with the subtending scale and 2 or 3 of the
inner chaff.--Alternate-leaved perennials of the southern and
southwestern States; head pedunculate. (Named for _J. L. Berlandier_, a
Swiss botanist who collected in Texas and Mexico.)

1. B. Texana, DC. Hirsute-tomentose or villous, 2--3 deg. high, very leafy;
leaves crenate, the radical oblong, petiolate, the cauline
oblong-cordate to subcordate-lanceolate, the upper closely sessile;
heads somewhat cymose, 1/2' broad.--S. W. Mo. to La. and Tex.


39. CHRYSOGONUM, L.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; the rays about 5, pistillate and fertile;
the disk-flowers perfect but sterile. Involucre of about 5 outer
leaf-like oblong scales, which exceed the disk, and as many interior
shorter and chaff-like concave scales. Receptacle flat, with a linear
chaff to each disk-flower. Achenes all in the ray, obovate,
obcompressed, 4-angled, each one partly enclosed by the short scale of
the involucre behind it; pappus a small chaffy crown, 2--3-toothed, and
wanting on the inner side.--A hairy, perennial herb, with opposite
long-petioled leaves, and solitary long-peduncled heads of yellow
flowers, nearly stemless when it begins to flower, the flowerless shoots
forming runners. (The Greek name of some plant, composed of [Greek:
chryso/s], _golden_, and [Greek: go/ny], _knee_.)

1. C. Virginianum, L. Usually low (2--15' high); leaves ovate, mostly
obtuse, crenate, rarely somewhat cordate, or the radical obovate with
cuneate base; rays 1/2' long.--Dry soil, from southern Penn. to Fla.
May--Aug.--Var. DENTATUM, Gray; leaves deltoid-ovate, acute, coarsely
dentate-serrate; involucral scales more acute.--High Island at the Falls
of the Potomac.


40. ENGELMANNIA, Torr. & Gray.

Heads and flowers of the preceding genera. Rays 8--10. Involucre of
about 10 outer loose foliaceous scales, more or less dilated and
coriaceous at base, and several firm-coriaceous, oval or obovate,
concave inner ones with short abrupt green tips. Chaff of the flat
receptacle firm and persistent. Achenes flat, obovate, wingless, tardily
deciduous with the attached scale and chaff; pappus a firm scarious
hispid crown, more or less lobed.--A coarse hispid perennial, with
alternate deeply pinnatifid leaves, and somewhat paniculately disposed
heads on slender naked peduncles; flowers yellow. (Named for the eminent
botanist, _Dr. George Engelmann_.)

1. E. pinnatifida, Torr. & Gray. Stems 1--2 deg. high; heads 1/2' broad, and
rays 1/2' long.--Central Kan. to La., and westward.


41. PARTHENIUM, L.

Heads many-flowered, inconspicuously radiate; ray-flowers 5, with very
short and broad obcordate ligules not projecting beyond the woolly disk,
pistillate and fertile; disk-flowers staminate with imperfect styles,
sterile. Involucre hemispherical, of 2 ranks of short ovate or roundish
scales. Receptacle conical, chaffy. Achenes only in the ray,
obcompressed, surrounded by a slender callous margin, crowned with the
persistent ray-corolla and a pappus of 2 small chaffy scales.--Leaves
alternate. Heads small, corymbed; the flowers whitish. (An ancient name
of some plant, from [Greek: parthe/nos], _virgin_.)

1. P. integrifolium, L. Rough-pubescent perennial (1--3 deg. high); leaves
oblong or ovate, crenate-toothed, or the lower (3--6' long) cut-lobed
below the middle; heads many in a very dense flat corymb.--Dry soil, Md.
to Ill., Minn., and southward. June--Aug.


42. IVA, L. MARSH ELDER. HIGHWATER-SHRUB.

Heads several flowered, not radiate; the pistillate fertile and the
staminate sterile flowers in the same heads, the former few (1--5) and
marginal, with a small tubular or no corolla; the latter with a
funnel-form 5-toothed corolla. Anthers nearly separate. Scales of the
involucre few, roundish. Receptacle small, with narrow chaff among the
flowers. Achenes obovoid or lenticular, pappus none.--Herbaceous or
shrubby coarse plants, with thickish leaves, the lower opposite, and
small nodding greenish-white heads of flowers; in summer and autumn.
(Name of unknown derivation.)

Sec. 1. _Heads spicate or racemose in the axils of leaves or leaf-like
bracts; fertile flowers with evident corolla._

1. I. frutescens, L. _Shrubby at the base, nearly smooth_ (3--8 deg. high);
leaves oval or lanceolate, coarsely and sharply toothed, rather fleshy,
the upper reduced to linear bracts, in the axils of which the heads are
disposed, in leafy panicled racemes; fertile flowers and scales of the
involucre 5.--Salt marshes, coast of Mass. to Va. and southward.

2. I. ciliata, Willd. _Annual_ (2--6 deg. high), _rough and hairy; leaves_
ovate, pointed, coarsely toothed, _downy beneath, on slender ciliate
petioles_; heads in dense spikes, with conspicuous ovate-lanceolate
rough-ciliate bracts; scales of the involucre and fertile flowers
3--5.--Moist ground, from Ill. southward.

Sec. 2. CYCLACHAENA. _Heads in panicled spikes, scarcely bracteate; corolla
of the 5 fertile flowers a mere rudiment or none._

3. I. xanthiifolia, Nutt. Annual, tall, roughish; leaves nearly all
opposite, hoary with minute down, ovate, rhombic, or the lowest
heart-shaped, doubly or cut-toothed, or obscurely lobed; heads small,
crowded, in axillary and terminal panicles.--N. W. Wisc. to Minn., Kan.,
and westward.


43. AMBROSIA, Tourn. RAGWEED.

Sterile and fertile flowers occupying different heads on the same plant;
the fertile 1--3 together and sessile in the axil of leaves or bracts,
at the base of the racemes or spikes of sterile heads. Sterile
involucres flattish or top-shaped, of 7--12 scales united into a cup,
containing 5--20 funnel-form staminate flowers, with slender chaff
intermixed, or none. Anthers almost separate. Fertile involucre (fruit)
oblong or top-shaped, closed, pointed, resembling an achene (usually
with 4--8 tubercles or horns near the top in one row), and enclosing a
single flower which consists of a pistil only; the elongated
style-branches protruding. Achenes ovoid; pappus none.--Coarse homely
weeds, with opposite or alternate lobed or dissected leaves, and
inconspicuous greenish flowers, in late summer and autumn; ours annuals,
except the last. (The Greek and later Latin name of several plants, as
well as of the food of the gods.)

Sec. 1. _Sterile heads sessile in a dense spike, the top-shaped involucre
extended on one side into a large, lanceolate, hooded, bristly-hairy
tooth or appendage; fertile involucre oblong and 4-angled._

1. A. bidentata, Michx. Hairy (1--3 deg. high), very leafy; leaves
alternate, lanceolate, partly clasping, nearly entire, except a short
lobe or tooth on each side near the base; fruit with 4 stout spines and
a central beak.--Prairies of Ill., Mo., and southward.

Sec. 2. _Sterile heads in single or panicled racemes or spikes, the
involucre regular._

[*] _Leaves opposite, only once lobed; sterile involucre 3-ribbed on one
side._

2. A. trifida, L. (GREAT RAGWEED.) Stem stout (3--12 deg. high),
rough-hairy, as are the large deeply 3-lobed leaves, the lobes oval
lanceolate and serrate; petioles margined; fruit obovate, 5--6-ribbed
and tubercled.--Var. INTEGRIFOLIA, Torr. & Gray, is only a smaller
form, with the upper leaves, or all of them, undivided, ovate or
oval.--Moist river-banks; common.

[*][*] _Leaves many of them alternate, all once or twice pinnatifid._

3. A. artemisiaefolia, L. (ROMAN WORMWOOD. HOG-WEED. BITTER-WEED.) Much
branched (1--3 deg. high), hairy or roughish-pubescent; _leaves thin,
twice-pinnatifid_, smoothish above, paler or hoary beneath; _fruit_
obovoid or globular, _armed with about 6 short acute teeth or
spines_.--Waste places everywhere.--Extremely variable, with finely cut
leaves, on the flowering branches often undivided; rarely the spikes
bear all fertile heads.

4. A. psilostachya, DC. Paniculate-branched (2--5 deg. high), rough and
somewhat hoary with short hispid hairs; _leaves once pinnatifid,
thickish_, the lobes acute, those of the lower leaves often incised;
_fruit_ obovoid, _without tubercles or with very small ones_,
pubescent.--Prairies and plains, Ill., Wisc., Minn., and southwestward.
Perennial, with slender running rootstocks.


44. XANTHIUM, Tourn. COCKLEBUR. CLOTBUR.

Sterile and fertile flowers occupying different heads, the latter
clustered below, the former in short spikes or racemes above. Sterile
involucres and flowers as in Ambrosia, but the scales separate and
receptacle cylindrical. Fertile involucre closed, coriaceous, ovoid or
oblong, clothed with hooked prickles so as to form a rough bur,
2-celled, 2-flowered; the flower consisting of a pistil and slender
thread-form corolla. Achenes oblong, flat, destitute of pappus.--Coarse
and vile weeds, with annual roots, low and branching stout stems, and
alternate toothed or lobed petioled leaves; flowering in summer and
autumn. (The Greek name of some plant that was used to dye the hair
yellow; from [Greek: xantho/s], _yellow_.)

[*] _Leaves attenuate to both ends, with triple spines at the base._

X. SPINOSUM, L. (SPINY CLOTBUR.) Hoary-pubescent; stems slender, with
slender yellow 3-parted spines at the axils; leaves lanceolate or
ovate-lanceolate, tapering to a short petiole, white-downy beneath,
often 2--3-lobed or cut; fruit ({1/3}' long) pointed with a single short
beak.--Waste places on the sea-board and along rivers, Mass. and
southward. (Nat. from Trop. Amer.)

[*][*] _Leaves cordate or ovate, 3-nerved, dentate and often lobed,
long-petiolate; axils unarmed; fruit 2-beaked._

X. STRUMARIUM, L. Low (1--2 deg. high); fruit 6--8'' long, glabrous or
puberulent, with usually straight beaks and rather slender spines.--A
weed of barnyards, etc., sparingly nat. from Eu. (?) or Ind. (?).

1. X. Canadense, Mill. Stouter, the stem often brown-punctate; fruit
about 1' long, densely prickly and more or less hispid, the stout beaks
usually hooked or incurved.--River-banks and waste places, common.--Var.
ECHINATUM, Gray, usually low, with still denser and longer,
conspicuously hirsute or hispid prickles. Sandy sea-shores and on the
Great Lakes.


45. TETRAGONOTHECA, Dill.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; the rays 6--9, fertile. Involucre double;
the outer of 4 large and leafy ovate scales, united below by their
margins into a 4-angled or winged cup; the inner of small chaffy scales,
as many as the ray-flowers, and partly clasping their achenes.
Receptacle convex or conical, with narrow and membranaceous chaff.
Achenes very thick and obovoid, flat at the top; pappus none.--Erect
perennial herbs, with opposite coarsely toothed leaves, their sessile
bases sometimes connate, and large single heads of pale yellow flowers,
on terminal peduncles. (Name compounded of [Greek: tetra/gonos],
_four-angled_, and [Greek: the/ke], _a case_, from the shape of the
involucre.)

1. T. helianthoides, L. Villous and somewhat viscid, 1--2 deg. high, simple;
leaves ovate or rhombic-oblong, sessile by a narrow base; involucral
scales and rays about 1' long.--Sandy soil, Va. and southward. June.


46. ECLIPTA, L.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; rays short; disk-flowers perfect,
4-toothed, all fertile. Involucral scales 10--12, in 2 rows, leaf-like,
ovate-lanceolate. Receptacle flat, with almost bristle-form chaff.
Achenes short, 3--4-sided, or in the disk laterally flattened, roughened
on the sides, hairy at the summit; pappus none, or an obscure
denticulate crown.--An annual rough herb, with slender stems and
opposite leaves. Heads solitary, small. Flowers white; anthers brown.
(Name from [Greek: e)klei/po], _to be deficient_, alluding to the
absence of pappus.)

1. E. alba, Hassk. Rough with fine appressed hairs; stems procumbent, or
ascending and 1--3 deg. high; leaves lanceolate or oblong, acute at each
end, mostly sessile, slightly serrate; rays equalling the disk. (E.
procumbens, _Michx._)--Wet river-banks, N. J. to Ill. and southward.
Peduncles very variable. (All tropical countries.)


47. HELIOPSIS, Pers. OX-EYE.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; rays 10 or more, fertile. Involucral
scales in 2 or 3 rows, nearly equal; the outer leaf-like and somewhat
spreading, the inner shorter than the disk. Receptacle conical; chaff
linear. Achenes smooth, thick, 4-angular, truncate; pappus none, or a
mere border.--Perennial herbs, like Helianthus. Heads showy, peduncled,
terminal. Leaves opposite, petioled, triple-ribbed, serrate. Flowers
yellow. (Name composed of [Greek: e(/lios], _the sun_, and [Greek:
o)/psis], _appearance_, from the likeness to the Sunflower.)

1. H. laevis, Pers. Nearly smooth (1--4 deg. high); leaves ovate-lanceolate
or oblong-ovate, rather narrowly pointed, occasionally ternate; scales
(as in the next) with a rigid strongly nerved base; rays linear; pappus
none or of 2--4 obscure teeth.--Banks and copses, N. Y. to Ill. and
southward. Aug.

2. H. scabra, Dunal. Roughish, especially the leaves, which are disposed
to be less narrowly pointed, the upper sometimes entire; rays broadly
oblong to linear or oblanceolate; pappus coroniform and chaffy or of 2
or 3 conspicuous teeth. (H. laevis, var. scabra, _Torr. &
Gray_.)--Western N. Y. to Minn., Mo., and southward.


48. ECHINACEA, Moench. PURPLE CONE-FLOWER.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; the rays very long, drooping, pistillate
but sterile. Scales of the involucre imbricated, lanceolate, spreading.
Receptacle conical; the lanceolate carinate spiny-tipped chaff longer
than the disk-flowers. Achenes thick and short, 4-sided; pappus a small
toothed border.--Perennial herbs, with the stout and nearly simple stems
naked above and terminated by a single large head; leaves chiefly
alternate, 3--5-nerved. Rays rose-purple, rather persistent; disk
purplish. (Name formed from [Greek: e)chi~nos], _the hedgehog_, or
_sea-urchin_, in allusion to the spiny chaff of the disk.)

1. E. purpurea, Moench. _Leaves_ rough, often serrate; the lowest
_ovate, 5-nerved_, veiny, long-petioled; the others _ovate-lanceolate_;
involucre imbricated in 3--5 rows; stem smooth, or in one form
rough-bristly, as well as the leaves.--Prairies and banks, from W. Penn.
and Va. to Iowa, and southward; occasionally adv. eastward. July.--Rays
15--20, dull purple (rarely whitish), 1--2' long or more. Root thick,
black, very pungent to the taste, used in popular medicine under the
name of _Black Sampson_.--Very variable, and probably connects with

2. E. angustifolia, DC. _Leaves_, as well as the slender simple stem,
_bristly-hairy, lanceolate and linear-lanceolate, attenuate at base,
3-nerved, entire_; involucre less imbricated and heads often smaller;
rays 12--15 (2' long), rose-color or red.--Plains from Ill. and Wisc.,
southwestward. June--Aug.


49. RUDBECKIA, L. CONE-FLOWER.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; the rays neutral. Scales of the involucre
leaf-like, in about 2 rows, spreading. Receptacle conical or columnar;
the short chaff concave, not rigid. Achenes 4-angular (in our species),
smooth, not margined, flat at the top, with no pappus, or a minute
crown-like border.--Chiefly perennial herbs, with alternate leaves, and
showy terminal heads; the rays generally long, yellow, often darker at
base. (Named in honor of the _Professors Rudbeck_, father and son,
predecessors of Linnaeus at Upsal.)

[*] _Disk columnar in fruit, dull greenish-yellow; leaves divided and
cut._

1. R. laciniata, L. Stem smooth, branching (2--7 deg. high); leaves smooth
or roughish, the lowest pinnate, with 5--7 cut or 3-lobed leaflets;
upper leaves irregularly 3--5-parted, the lobes ovate-lanceolate,
pointed, or the uppermost undivided; heads long-peduncled; disk at first
globular or hemispherical; chaff truncate, downy at the tip; rays
oblanceolate (1--2' long), drooping.--Low thickets; common.
July--Sept.--Var. HUMILIS, Gray, low and glabrous, some of the radical
leaves undivided or with roundish divisions; heads smaller (1/2' high) and
ray shorter. Mountains of Va. and southward.

[*][*] _Disk hemispherical to oblong-ovoid in fruit, dark purple or
brown._

[+] _Lower leaves 3-lobed or parted._

2. R. triloba, L. Hairy, biennial, much branched (2--5 deg. high), the
branches slender and spreading; upper leaves ovate-lanceolate, sparingly
toothed, the lower 3-lobed, tapering at the base, coarsely-serrate
(those from the root pinnately parted or undivided); rays 8, oval or
oblong; chaff of the black-purple depressed-globular disk smooth,
awned.--Dry soil, Penn. to Mich., Mo., and southward. Aug.--Heads small,
but numerous and showy.

3. R. subtomentosa, Pursh. Stem branching above (3--4 deg. high), downy, as
well as the petiolate ovate or ovate-lanceolate serrate leaves beneath;
heads short-peduncled; disk globular, dull brown; receptacle
sweet-scented; chaff downy at the blunt apex.--Prairies, Wisc., Ill.,
Mo., and southward.

[+][+] _Leaves undivided, rarely laciniately toothed._

4. R. hirta, L. _Biennial_, very rough and bristly-hairy throughout;
stems simple or branched near the base, stout (1--2 deg. high), naked above,
bearing single large heads; _leaves nearly entire; the upper oblong or
lanceolate, sessile_; the lower spatulate, triple-nerved, petioled; rays
(about 14) more or less exceeding the involucre; _chaff of the dull
brown disk hairy at the tip_, acutish.--Dry soil, western N. Y. to
Wisc., and southward. Now common as a weed in eastern meadows,
introduced with clover-seed from the West. June--Aug.

5. R. fulgida, Ait. Hairy, the branches naked at the summit and bearing
single heads; _leaves spatulate-oblong_ or lanceolate, _partly clasping,
triple-nerved, the upper entire, mostly obtuse_; rays about 12,
equalling or exceeding the ample involucre; _chaff of the dark purple
disk nearly smooth_ and blunt.--Dry soil, N. J. and Penn. to Ky., Mo.,
and southward.--Variable, 1--3 deg. high; the rays orange-yellow.

6. R. spathulata, Michx. Pubescence short and appressed; slender, 8'--3 deg.
high; leaves obovate or spatulate or the upper ovate to lanceolate,
sometimes all lanceolate or oblanceolate to linear, denticulate; heads
long-peduncled, smaller than in the preceding, the rays fewer and
broader.--Pine woods, Va. to Tenn., and southward.

7. R. speciosa, Wenderoth. Roughish-hairy (1--2 deg. high), branched; the
branches upright, elongated and naked above, terminated by single large
heads; _leaves lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, pointed at both ends,
petioled, 3--5-nerved, coarsely and unequally toothed or incised_;
involucre much shorter than the numerous elongated (1--11/2') rays; chaff
of the dark purple disk acutish, smooth.--Dry soil, W. Penn. to Mich.,
Mo., and southward. July.


50. LEPACHYS, Raf.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; the rays few, neutral. Involucral scales
few and small, spreading. Receptacle oblong or columnar; the chaff
truncate, thickened and bearded at the tip, partly embracing the
flattened and margined achenes. Pappus none or 2 teeth.--Perennial
herbs, with alternate pinnately divided leaves; the grooved stems or
branches naked above, bearing single showy heads. Rays yellow or
party-colored, drooping; disk grayish. (Name from [Greek: lepi/s], _a
scale_, and [Greek: pachy/s], _thick_, from the thickened tips of the
chaff.)

1. L. pinnata, Torr. & Gray. Hoary with minute appressed hairs, slender
(4 deg. high), branching; leaflets 3--7, lanceolate, acute; disk oblong,
much shorter than the large and drooping light-yellow rays (which are 2'
long).--Dry soil, western N. Y. to Minn., and southward. July.--The
receptacle exhales a pleasant anisate odor when bruised. Achenes
slightly margined on the inner edge, obscurely 2-toothed at the top.

2. L. columnaris, Torr. & Gray. Branching from the base, 1--2 deg. high;
leaflets 5--9, oblong to narrowly linear, entire or 2--3-cleft; disk
columnar, often 1' long or more; ray as long or shorter, yellow or (var.
PULCHERRIMA, Torr. & Gray) in part or wholly brown-purple.--Minn. to
Tex.


51. BORRICHIA, Adans. SEA OX-EYE.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; rays fertile. Scales of the hemispherical
involucre imbricated. Receptacle flat, covered with lanceolate rigid and
persistent chaff. Achenes somewhat wedge-shaped, 3--4-angled; pappus a
short 4-toothed crown.--Shrubby low maritime plants, coriaceous or
fleshy, with opposite nearly entire leaves, and solitary peduncled
terminal heads of yellow flowers; anthers blackish. (Named for _Olof
Borrich_, a Danish botanist.)

1. B. frutescens, DC. Whitened with a minute silky pubescence (6'--3 deg.
high); leaves obovate to spatulate-oblong or lanceolate, often toothed
near the base; chaff rigidly pointed.--Va. and southward.


52. HELIANTHUS, L. SUNFLOWER.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; rays several or many, neutral. Involucre
imbricated, herbaceous or foliaceous. Receptacle flat or convex; the
persistent chaff embracing the 4-sided and laterally compressed smooth
achenes, which are neither winged nor margined. Pappus very deciduous,
of 2 thin chaffy scales on the principal angles, and sometimes 2 or more
small intermediate scales.--Coarse and stout herbs, with solitary or
corymbed heads, and yellow rays; flowering toward autumn. (Named from
[Greek: e(/lios], _the sun_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _a flower_.)

Sec. 1. _Annuals; leaves mostly alternate, petiolate; receptacle flat; disk
brownish._

1. H. annuus, L. (COMMON SUNFLOWER.) Tall, rough; leaves triple-ribbed,
ovate or the lower cordate, serrate; involucral scales broadly ovate to
oblong, long-pointed, ciliate; disk usually 1' broad or more.--Minn. to
Tex., and westward; long cultivated, and occasionally found in waste
grounds.

2. H. petiolaris, Nutt. More slender, 1--3 deg. high; leaves oblong- or
ovate-lanceolate, smaller (1--3' long), mostly entire; scales lanceolate
or oblong-lanceolate, seldom ciliate; disk 1/2' broad or more.--Minn. to
Tex., and westward.

Sec. 2. _Perennials; receptacle convex or at length low-conical; lower
leaves usually opposite._

[*] _Involucral scales loose, becoming squarrose, narrowly lanceolate,
pointed (1/2' long); disk usually purple or brownish; leaves linear,
1-nerved._

3. H. orgyalis, DC. Stem glabrous, tall, very leafy; leaves mostly
alternate, linear to filiform and entire, or the lowest lanceolate and
serrulate; scales filiform-attenuate.--Dry plains, Mo. to Neb., south
and westward.

4. H. angustifolius, L. Stem slender (2--6 deg. high), usually scabrous;
leaves long and linear, sessile, entire, with revolute margins; heads
loosely corymbed, long-peduncled; scales acute or pointed.--Low pine
barrens, N. J. to Ky., and southward.

[*][*] _Involucral scales closer, more imbricated, short, unequal and
not foliaceous; leaves lanceolate to ovate, mostly opposite and
3-nerved._

[+] _Disk dark._

5. H. atrorubens, L. _Rough-hairy; stem slender_ (2--4 deg. high), smooth
and naked and forking above; _leaves thinnish, ovate or oval to
oblong-lanceolate_, or the lowest heart-shaped (3--6' long), serrate,
abruptly contracted into a margined petiole; heads small, corymbed;
scales ovate, obtuse, ciliolate, appressed; rays 10--16; pappus of 2
fringed scales.--Dry soil, Va. to Ark., and southward.

6. H. rigidus, Desf. _Stem stout_ (2--6 deg. high or more), simple or
sparingly branched, rough; _leaves very thick and rigid, rough both
sides, oblong-lanceolate_, usually pointed at both ends, nearly sessile,
entire or serrate, the lowest oval; heads nearly solitary, pretty large;
scales ovate or oblong, obtuse, or mostly acute, ciliate, appressed;
rays 20--25, pappus of 2 large and often several small scales.--Dry
prairies, Mich. to Ill., and westward.

[+][+] _Disk yellow._

7. H. laetiflorus, Pers. Closely resembling the last; leaves rather
thinner; heads single or corymbed; scales rather fewer (in 2 or 3 rows),
narrower and acute or mostly acuminate.--Dry open places, Ohio to Wisc.
and Minn., and southward.--Rays showy, 1--2' long.

8. H. occidentalis, Riddell. Somewhat hairy, stem _slender, simple,
naked above_ (1--3 deg. high, sending out runners from the base), bearing
1--5 small heads on long peduncles; _lowest leaves oval or
lanceolate-ovate_, entire or obscurely serrate, _roughish-pubescent
beneath, abruptly contracted into long hairy petioles; the upper small
and remote_; scales ovate to lanceolate, acute or pointed, sometimes
ciliate.--Dry barrens, Ohio to Wisc. and Minn., and southward.

[*][*][*] _Involucre looser, the scales more acuminate or elongated or
foliaceous; disk yellow (anthers dark)._

[+] _Leaves all opposite, sessile, serrulate; pubescence rather soft._

9. H. mollis, Lam. Stem simple, leafy to the top (2--3 deg. high); leaves
ovate to lanceolate, with broad cordate clasping base, pointed; scales
lanceolate, seldom exceeding the disk.--Dry barrens, Ohio to Iowa and
southward.

[+][+] _Leaves mostly alternate and 3-nerved, soft-pubescent beneath,
scabrous above; scales very long and loose, hairy; tips of chaff and
corolla-lobes hirsute._

10. H. tomentosus, Michx. Stem hairy, stout (4--8 deg. high); leaves
oblong-lanceolate, or the lowest ovate, tapering at both ends, obscurely
serrate, large (5--12' long), somewhat petioled; disk 1' broad; rays
12--16, about 1' long.--Rich woods, Ill.(?), Va., and southward along
the mountains.

[+][+][+] _Leaves narrow, chiefly alternate, not 3-nerved, scabrous both
sides; heads rather small; scales loose, attenuate._

11. H. grosse-serratus, Martens. _Stem smooth and glaucous_, 6--10 deg.
high; _leaves elongated-lanceolate_ or ovate-lanceolate, taper-pointed,
sharply serrate or denticulate, acute or attenuate at base,
_petioled_, often whiter and finely pubescent beneath; scales
lance-awl-shaped, slightly ciliate.--Dry plains, Ohio to Dak., Mo., and
southwestward.--Probably runs into the next.

12. H. giganteus, L. _Stem hairy or rough_ (3--10 deg. high), branched
above; _leaves lanceolate_, pointed, minutely serrate or nearly entire,
green both sides, narrowed and ciliate at base, but _nearly sessile_;
scales long, linear-lanceolate, pointed, hairy or strongly
ciliate.--Var. AMBIGUUS, Torr. & Gray; leaves mostly opposite and
closely sessile by an obtuse base; perhaps a hybrid with n. 17.--Low
thickets and swamps; common. Heads somewhat corymbed; the pale yellow
rays 15--20; roots often becoming tuber-like.

13. H. Maximiliani, Schrad. Resembling the last; stout, often simple,
1--10 deg. high; leaves becoming rigid and very scabrous, entire or
sparingly denticulate; heads rather large, usually short-peduncled,
terminal and in the upper axils; scales longer attenuate, more
rigid.--Prairies, Minn. to Tex.

[+][+][+][+] _Leaves all or most of them opposite, 3-nerved (faintly in
n. 15)._

[++] _Heads very small (about 4'' broad); rays 5--8; scales few, short,
irregularly imbricated, the outer with spreading foliaceous pointed
tips; stems smooth._

14. H. parviflorus, Bernh. Stem 3--6 deg. high, with numerous slender
branches above; _leaves thin, ovate-lanceolate, taper-pointed_, somewhat
serrate, petioled, _rough above_, pale and puberulent beneath; peduncles
slender, rough; scales ovate and ovate-lanceolate, ciliate. (H.
microcephalus, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Thickets, Penn. to Ill., and southward.

15. H. laevigatus, Torr. & Gray. Stem slender (1--6 deg. high), simple or
sparingly branched, glaucous, _glabrous throughout_, as well as the
slightly serrate _lanceolate leaves_ which are usually narrow and
attenuate to the base.--Dry soil, Alleghany Mts., and southward.

[++][++] _Heads larger; rays usually over 10; spreading by creeping root
stocks._

[=] _Leaves sessile or subsessile to short-petiolate, serrulate or
entire._

16. H. doronicoides, Lam. Finely pubescent and roughish, 3--7 deg. high;
leaves _sessile_, ovate-oblong, acute, _triply-nerved above, the broadly
cuneate base, serrulate_; scales loose, attenuate, mostly 6--8'' long,
hairy. (H. cinereus, var. Sullivantii, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Dry ground,
Ohio to Mo.

17. H. divaricatus, L. Stem simple or forked and corymbed at the top
(1--4 deg. high), _smooth below; leaves all opposite and divaricate,
ovate-lanceolate, 3-nerved from the rounded or truncate sessile base_,
tapering gradually to a sharp point (3--6' long), serrate, _thickish,
rough both sides_; scales narrowly lanceolate, attenuate, ciliate,
equalling the disk; rays 8--12.--Thickets and barrens; common.--Disk 6''
wide; rays 1' long.

18. H. hirsutus, Raf. _Stem_ simple or forked above, stout (1--4 deg. high),
_bristly-hairy; leaves all shortly petioled, ovate-lanceolate_,
gradually pointed, _slightly serrate_, rounded or obtuse at the base,
_very rough_ above, usually rough-hairy beneath; scales
ovate-lanceolate, pointed, equalling the disk; rays about 12.--Dry
plains, Ohio to Wisc., and southward.

19. H. strumosus, L. Stem (3--6 deg. high) very smooth below, often
glaucous; _leaves ovate-lanceolate, tapering gradually to a point_, or
the lower ovate and acute, abruptly contracted into short margined
petioles, rough above, _whitish and naked or minutely downy underneath_;
scales broadly lanceolate with spreading tips, ciliate, equalling the
disk; rays 9--15.--Var. MOLLIS, Torr. & Gray, has the leaves downy
underneath, often subcordate, the scales looser and more
attenuate.--River-banks and low copses; common, especially westward.

20. H. tracheliifolius, Willd. Like the last; leaves thinner and nearly
equally green both sides, more sharply serrate, all distinctly petioled;
scales all loose and spreading, exceeding the disk, often much
elongated.--Copses, Penn. and Ohio to Minn., and southward.

[=][=] _Leaves longer-petiolate, thinnish or soft, coarsely serrate,
commonly broad; scales loose, hirsute-ciliate._

21. H. decapetalus, L. Stem branching (2--5 deg. high), smooth below; leaves
smooth or roughish, ovate, pointed, abruptly contracted into margined
petioles; scales lanceolate-linear, elongated, loosely spreading,
sometimes foliaceous, the outer longer than the disk; rays about
10.--Copses and low banks of streams; N. Eng. to Minn. and southward,
common.

22. H. tuberosus, L. (JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE.) Pubescent or hirsute, 5--10 deg.
high; leaves ovate or subcordate to oblong-lanceolate, acuminate,
scabrous above, minutely pubescent or cinereous beneath; scales
lanceolate, attenuate, little exceeding the disk; rays 12--20. (H.
doronicoides, former ed.)--Penn. to Minn., and southward; often
cultivated.--Var. SUBCANESCENS, Gray; usually dwarf, the lower side of
the leaves whitish with soft fine pubescence. Minn. to Mo.


53. VERBESINA, L. CROWNBEARD.

Heads several--many-flowered; the rays pistillate, or sometimes neutral
and sterile, few, or sometimes none. Involucral scales imbricated in 2
or more rows. Receptacle rather convex (conical in n. 3); the chaff
concave. Achenes flat (compressed laterally), winged or wingless,
2-awned.--Mostly perennial herbs; the toothed leaves decurrent on the
stem. Flowers mostly yellow. ("Name metamorphosed from Verbena.")

[*] _Heads narrow, small, cymosely paniculate; rays few, pistillate,
usually fertile; involucre erect._

1. V. occidentalis, Walt. Stem tall, 4-winged; _leaves opposite_, ovate
to oblong-lanceolate, triple-nerved, serrate, pointed at both ends,
often pubescent beneath (large and thin); heads in compound corymbs;
receptacle flattish; _flowers yellow_; rays 1--5, lanceolate; achenes
wingless. (V. Siegesbeckia, _Michx._)--Rich soil, S. Penn. to Ill., and
southward. July.

2. V. Virginica, L. Stem narrowly or interruptedly winged,
_downy-pubescent, like the lower surface of the_ ovate-lanceolate
feather-veined _alternate leaves_; heads in compound corymbs; receptacle
convex; _flowers white_; rays 3--4, oval; achenes winged.--Dry soil,
Penn.(?) to Ill., and southward. Aug.

[*][*] _Heads broader, solitary or few._

3. V. helianthoides, Michx. Perennial; stem hairy (1--3 deg. high), widely
winged by the ovate to the ovate-lanceolate sessile alternate leaves,
which are rough above and soft-hairy beneath; involucre appressed; rays
8--15, pistillate or neutral, usually sterile; achenes winged, tipped
with 2 fragile awns. (Actinomeris helianthoides, _Nutt._)--Prairies and
copses, Ohio to Iowa and southward. July.

4. V. encelioides, Benth. & Hook. Annual, branching, 1--2 deg. high,
cinereous; leaves alternate, ovate or cordate to deltoid-lanceolate, the
petioles mostly winged and auriculate at base; involucral scales linear,
equal, foliaceous, spreading; rays numerous, fertile.--Kan. to Tex., and
westward.


54. ACTINOMERIS, Nutt.

Heads many-flowered; rays neutral, few or none. Involucral scales few,
herbaceous, nearly equal, soon deflexed beneath the globular disk.
Receptacle small, chaffy. Achenes flat, obovate, winged or wingless, at
maturity spreading in all directions; pappus of 2 or 3 smooth persistent
awns.--Tall branching perennials, with serrate feather-veined leaves,
tapering to the base and mostly decurrent on the stem. Heads corymbed;
flowers chiefly yellow. (Name from [Greek: a)kti/s], _a ray_, and
[Greek: meri/s], _a part_; alluding to the irregularity of the rays.)

1. A. squarrosa, Nutt. Stem somewhat hairy, usually winged above (4--8 deg.
high); leaves alternate or the lower opposite, oblong or
ovate-lanceolate, pointed at both ends; rays 2--8, irregular.--Rich
soil, Penn. and W. New York to Iowa, and southward. Sept.


55. COREOPSIS, L. TICKSEED.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; rays mostly 8, neutral, rarely wanting.
Involucre double; each of about 8 scales, the outer rather foliaceous
and somewhat spreading; the inner broader and appressed, nearly
membranaceous. Receptacle flat, with membranaceous chaff deciduous with
the fruit. Achenes flat, obcompressed (i.e., parallel with the scales of
the involucre), often winged, not narrowed at the top, 2-toothed or
2-awned, or sometimes naked at the summit, the awns not barbed
downwardly.--Herbs, generally with opposite leaves, and yellow or
party-colored, rarely purple, rays. (Name from [Greek: ko/ris], _a bug_,
and [Greek: o)/psis], _resemblance_; from the form of the achene.)

Sec. 1. _Style-tips truncate or nearly so; outer involucre small and short;
rays rose-color or yellow with brown base; pappus an obscure border or
none._

1. C. rosea, Nutt. Perennial; stem branching, leafy, smooth (6--20'
high); leaves linear, entire; heads small, somewhat corymbed, on short
peduncles; rays rose-color, 3-toothed; achenes oblong, wingless.--Sandy
grassy swamps, Plymouth, Mass., to N. J., and southward; rare. Aug.

2. C. cardaminefolia, Torr. & Gray. Annual, 6'--2 deg. high; leaves
1--2-pinnately divided, the lobes oval to lanceolate or above linear;
rays yellow with brown-purple base; achenes short, smooth or papillose,
winged.--Kan. to La. and Tex.

3. C. tinctoria, Nutt. Annual, glabrous, 2--3 deg. high; leaves
1--2-pinnately divided, the lobes lanceolate to linear; achenes oblong,
wingless; rays yellow with more or less of crimson-brown.--Minn. to
Tex., etc.; common in cultivation.

Sec. 2. _Style-tips abruptly cuspidate, hispid; involucres nearly equal;
achenes roundish, winged, incurved, often papillose and with a callus
inside at base and apex; pappus 2 small teeth or none; ray mostly yellow
and palmately lobed; perennials, with long-pedunculate heads; lower
leaves petiolate._

4. C. lanceolata, L. Smooth or hairy (1--2 deg. high), tufted, branched only
at the base; leaves all entire (the lower rarely with a pair of small
lateral lobes), lanceolate, the lowest oblanceolate or spatulate; outer
scales ovate-lanceolate.--Rich or damp soil, Mich. and Ill. to Va., and
southward. July. Also cultivated in gardens. Heads showy; rays 1'
long.--Var. ANGUSTIFOLIA, Torr. & Gray, is a low form with crowded
narrow leaves and elongated peduncles.--Var. VILLOSA, Michx., is hirsute
below, the leaves rather broad.

5. C. grandiflora, Nutt. Mostly glabrous; lower leaves lanceolate and
spatulate, entire, the _upper 3--5-parted with lanceolate to linear and
sometimes 2--3-parted lobes_; heads as in the last or larger.--S. Mo. to
Tex. and Ga.

6. C. pubescens, Ell. More leafy, 1--4 deg. high, pubescent or nearly
glabrous; leaves thickish, oblong or the lower oval-obovate and the
upper oblong-lanceolate, entire or with 2--4 small lateral lobes; heads
usually smaller.--Va. to S. Ill., Mo., and southward.

7. C. auriculata, Linn. Pubescent or glabrous; stems 1--4 deg. high,
branching, sometimes with runners; leaves mostly petioled, the upper
oblong or oval-lanceolate, entire; the lower oval or roundish, some of
them variously 3--5-lobed or divided; outer scales oblong-linear or
lanceolate; achenes narrowly winged and strongly involute.--Rich woods
and banks, Va. to Ill., and southward. June--Sept.

Sec. 3. _Style-tips cuspidate; achenes oblong, nearly straight, without
callus, the wing narrow or none; rays yellow, mostly entire or slightly
toothed._

[*] _Outer scales narrow, about the length of the inner, all more or
less united at base; rays mostly entire, acute; pappus 2-toothed or
none; leaves opposite, sessile, mostly 3-divided, appearing as if
whorled; perennial, 1--3 deg. high._

[+] _Leaves 3-cleft, but not to the base._

8. C. palmata, Nutt. Nearly smooth, simple; leaves broadly wedge-shaped,
rigid; the lobes broadly linear, entire, or the middle one
3-lobed.--Prairies, Mich. to Minn., and southwestward. July.

[+][+] _Leaves divided to the base, uppermost and lowest sometimes
simple._

9. C. senifolia, Michx. Plant minutely soft-pubescent; leaves each
divided into 3 sessile _ovate-lanceolate entire leaflets_, therefore
appearing like 6 in a whorl.--Sandy woods, Va. and southward. July.

Var. stellata, Torr. & Gray. Glabrous, and the leaves narrower.--Va.,
Ky., and southward.

10. C. delphinifolia, Lam. Glabrous or nearly so; leaves divided into 3
sessile _leaflets_ which are 2--5-_parted, their divisions lance-linear_
(1--3'' broad), rather rigid; disk brownish.--Pine woods, Va. and
southward. July.

11. C. verticillata, L. Glabrous; leaves divided into 3 sessile
_leaflets_ which are 1--2-_pinnately parted into narrowly linear or
filiform divisions_.--Damp soil, from Ont. and Mich. to Md., Ark., and
southward. Cultivated in old gardens, but not showy. July--Sept.

[*][*] _Outer scales narrow, shorter, all united at base; rays entire,
obtuse; pappus none; leaves petiolate, pinnately 3--5-divided;
perennial._

12. C. tripteris, L. (TALL COREOPSIS.) Smooth; stem simple (4--9 deg. high),
corymbed at the top; leaflets lanceolate, acute, entire.--Penn. to
Wisc., Iowa, and southward. Aug.--Sept.--Heads exhaling the odor of
anise when bruised; disk turning brownish.

[*][*][*] _Scales mostly distinct, the outer leafy, reflexed or
spreading; achenes flat, obovate or cuneate-oblong, 1-nerved on each
face, 2-toothed or 2-awned (rarely 4-awned); leaves petiolate, usually
pinnately 3--7-divided, the lobes serrate; annuals (or biennial),
branching. Approaching_ Bidens.

[+] _Rays conspicuous, golden yellow._

[++] _Achenes cuneate, obscurely ciliate or naked; outer scales about
8._

13. C. aurea, Ait. Nearly glabrous, 1--3 deg. high; leaves variable,
commonly 3--7-divided, or some or all undivided, the segments incisely
serrate or lobed; _achenes broadly cuneate_, 1--2'' long, with 2 _very
short blunt spreading teeth_.--Wet ground, Va. to Fl.

14. C. trichosperma, Michx. (TICKSEED SUNFLOWER.) Smooth, branched;
leaves short-petioled, nearly all 3--7-divided; leaflets lanceolate or
linear, cut-toothed, or the upper leaves only 3--5-cleft and almost
sessile; heads panicled-corymbose; _achenes narrowly wedge-oblong or the
inner ones wedge-linear_, about 4'' long, smooth or sparsely hairy,
marginless, _crowned with 2 erect triangular or awl-shaped stout
teeth_.--Swamps, Mass. to Va. near the coast. Also Buffalo, N. Y., to
Ill., where is a var. TENUILOBA, Gray, with shorter achenes, approaching
the last. Aug.--Oct.

[++][++] _Achenes obovate, very flat, with thin ciliate margins._

15. C. aristosa, Michx. Somewhat pubescent; leaves 1--2-pinnately
5--7-divided, petioled; leaflets lanceolate, cut-toothed or pinnatifid;
heads panicled-corymbose; outer scales 8--10, not exceeding the inner,
barely ciliate; _achenes_ with 2 (rarely 4) _long and slender diverging
awns_ as long as the achene itself.--Swamps, Ohio to Mich., Minn., and
southwestward. Aug.--Oct.--Var. MUTICA has two short divergent teeth or
points in place of the awns.--W. Ill. and southwestward. Forms occur
with the barbs of the awns spreading or retrorse, hybrids with _Bidens
frondosa_ or other species.

16. C. involucrata, Nutt. Heads rather larger, the outer scales 12--20,
mostly exceeding the inner, slender and hispid; achenes with 2 short
acute teeth.--W. Ill. to Kan. and Tex.

[+][+] _Rays none, or rarely rudimentary; outer scales usually 3--5,
loose, leafy, commonly surpassing the short-pedunculate heads; achenes
narrowly cuneate; plants glabrous, 1--3 deg. high; leaves petiolate._

17. C. bidentoides, Nutt. Paniculately branched; _leaves undivided,
lanceolate_, coarsely toothed, tapering at both ends; heads 6--10''
long; _achenes nearly subulate_, bearing a pair of _very slender_
upwardly roughened _awns surpassing the corolla_ (4'' long), but shorter
than the achene, often also 2 minute teeth alternate with the
awns.--Shores of Delaware River, near Philad., and Delaware Bay, to Md.
Hybridizes with _Bidens frondosa_.

18. C. discoidea, Torr. & Gray. Diffusely branched, 1--2 deg. high;
_leaves ternately divided_, slender-petioled; leaflets
ovate-lanceolate, pointed, coarsely serrate; heads 2--3'' long; _achenes
linear-wedge-shaped_ (2--3'' long), bearing a pair of _short and stout_
upwardly-barbed _awns of the length of the corolla_.--Wet banks and
swamps, Conn. to Ohio, Ill., and southward. July.


56. BIDENS, L. BUR-MARIGOLD.

Heads many-flowered; the rays when present 3--8, neutral. Involucre
double, the outer commonly large and foliaceous. Receptacle flattish;
the chaff deciduous with the fruit. Achenes flattened parallel with the
scales of the involucre, or slender and 4-sided, crowned with 2 or more
rigid and persistent awns which are downwardly barbed.--Annual or
perennial herbs, with opposite various leaves, and mostly yellow
flowers. (Latin, _bidens_, two-toothed.)

[*] _Achenes flat, not tapering at the summit; outer involucre
foliaceous; annuals._

[+] _Heads erect, nearly rayless; leaves mostly petiolate._

1. B. frondosa, L. (COMMON BEGGAR-TICKS. STICK-TIGHT.) Smooth or rather
hairy, tall (2--6 deg. high), branching, _leaves 3--5-divided; leaflets
mostly stalked_, lanceolate, pointed, coarsely toothed; outer involucre
much longer than the head, ciliate below; _achenes wedge-obovate,
2-awned, ciliate_ (the bristles ascending except near the
summit).--Moist waste places; a coarse troublesome weed, the achenes, as
in the other species, adhering to clothing, etc., by their retrorsely
barbed awns. Hybrids occur with _Coreopsis aristosa_ and other species.
July--Oct.

2. B. connata, Muhl. (SWAMP BEGGAR-TICKS.) Smooth (1--2 deg. high); _leaves
lanceolate_ or oblong-lanceolate, pointed, sharply serrate, tapering
into margined slightly united petioles; _the lower often 3-divided,
their lateral divisions united at the base and decurrent on the
petiole_; outer scales longer than the head, few, mostly obtuse; _rays
none; achenes narrowly wedge-form, 3- (2--4-) awned, the margins
minutely retrorsely ciliate_.--E. New Eng. to Minn., and
southward.--Var. COMOSA, Gray, is stouter, the leaves commonly all
simple, upper ones nearly sessile, the heads larger and with very leafy
involucre. Ill., Ky., and westward. Aug.--Oct.--Var. PINNATA, Watson;
leaves nearly all pinnately divided, the 5--7 narrow divisions sparingly
incised; achenes 4-awned. Hennepin Co., Minn. (_F. L. Conillard_).

[+][+] _Heads somewhat nodding, commonly radiate; leaves sessile,
undivided._

3. B. cernua, L. (SMALLER BUR-MARIGOLD.) Nearly smooth (5'--3 deg. high),
_leaves lanceolate, unequally serrate, scarcely connate; heads_ nodding,
_with or without_ (light yellow) _rays_; outer involucre longer than the
head; achenes wedge-obovate, 4-awned, the margins downwardly
barbed.--Wet places, N. Eng. to Va., Mo., Minn., and northward.
July--Sept.--Rays, if any, smaller than in n. 4, and the outer involucre
more leaf-like. (Eu.)

4. B. chrysanthemoides, Michx. (LARGER BUR-MARIGOLD.) Smooth, erect, or
reclining at the base (6'--2 deg. high); _leaves lanceolate_, tapering at
both ends, more or less connate, _regularly serrate_; outer involucre
mostly shorter than the _showy golden-yellow (1' long) rays_; achenes
wedge-shaped, with almost prickly downwardly barbed margins; awns 2, 3,
or 4.--Swamps; common. Aug.--Oct.

[*][*] _Achenes linear, 4-sided, the inner longer and tapering upward._

5. B. bipinnata, L. (SPANISH NEEDLES.) Smooth annual, branched; leaves
1--3-pinnately parted, petioled; leaflets ovate-lanceolate, mostly
wedge-shaped at the base; heads small, on slender peduncles; outer
involucre of linear scales equalling the short pale yellow rays, achenes
4-grooved and angled, nearly smooth, 3--4-awned.--Damp soil, R. I. to
N. Y., Ill., and southward.

[*][*][*] _Achenes terete, truncate at both ends, with 3--6 very long
awns smooth below._

6. B. Beckii, Torr. (WATER MARIGOLD.) Aquatic, perhaps perennial,
smooth; stems long and slender; immersed leaves crowded, capillary, many
times dissected, the few emerging ones lanceolate, slightly connate,
toothed; heads single, short-peduncled; involucre much shorter than the
showy (golden yellow) rays; achenes thickish, smooth (1/2' long), the
stout divergent awns (1' long) barbed only toward the apex.--Ponds and
slow deep streams, Mass. to N. J., Mo., and northward. Aug.--Oct.


57. THELESPERMA, Less.

Heads many-flowered; rays about 8, neutral, or none. Involucre as in
Coreopsis, the inner connate to the middle, scarious-margined.
Receptacle flat, the scarious chaff falling with the nearly terete
wingless and beakless achenes; pappus of 2 stout subulate retrorsely
hispid awns.--Smooth herbs, with opposite dissected leaves and
pedunculate heads of yellow flowers. (From [Greek: thele/], _a nipple_,
and [Greek: spe/rma], _seed_, on account of the papillose achenes.)

1. T. gracile, Gray. Perennial, rather rigid, 1--2 deg. high; leaves with
narrow or filiform divisions or the upper entire; outer scales very
short; rays short or usually none; achenes papillose.--Kan., south and
westward.


58. BALDWINIA, Nutt.

Heads globular, many-flowered, radiate, the long and narrowly
wedge-shaped rays neutral. Involucre short, of many thickish small
scales imbricated in 3 or 4 rows, the outer obovate and obtuse.
Receptacle strongly convex, with deep honeycomb-like cells containing
the obconical or oblong silky-villous achenes; pappus of 7--9
lance-oblong erect chaffy scales.--A perennial herb, smoothish, with
slender simple stems (2--3 deg. high), bearing alternate oblanceolate
leaves, and a large showy long-pedunculate head. Rays yellow (1' long);
the disk often turning dark purple. (Named for the late _Dr. William
Baldwin_.)

1. B. uniflora, Nutt.--Borders of swamps, Va. (?) and southward. Aug.


59. MARSHALLIA, Schreb.

Heads many-flowered; flowers all tubular and perfect, the corolla-lobes
slender and spreading. Involucral scales linear-lanceolate, foliaceous,
erect, in one or two rows, nearly equal. Receptacle convex or conical,
with narrowly linear rigid chaff. Achenes top-shaped, 5-angled; pappus
of 5 or 6 membranaceous and pointed chaffy scales.--Smooth and low
perennials, with alternate entire 3-nerved leaves, and long-pedunculate
heads (like those of a Scabious) terminating the simple stem or
branches. Flowers purplish; anthers blue. (Named for _Humphrey
Marshall_, of Pennsylvania, author of _Arbustum Americanum_, one of the
earliest works on the trees and shrubs of this country.)

1. M. latifolia, Pursh. Stems leafy; leaves ovate-lanceolate, pointed,
sessile.--Dry soil, Va. and southward.

2. M. caespitosa, Nutt. Stem commonly leafy only at base; leaves narrowly
oblanceolate to linear or the radical spatulate, obtuse.--Kan. to Tex.


60. GALINSOGA, Ruiz & Pavon.

Heads several-flowered, radiate; rays 4--5, small, roundish, pistillate.
Involucre of 4 or 5 ovate thin scales. Receptacle conical, with narrow
chaff. Achenes angled; pappus of small oblong cut-fringed chaffy scales
(sometimes wanting).--Annual herbs, with opposite triple-nerved thin
leaves, and small heads; disk yellow; rays whitish. (Named for
_Galinsoga_, a Spanish botanist.)

G. PARVIFLORA, Cav. Smoothish (1 deg. high); leaves ovate, acute, somewhat
toothed; scales of the pappus 8--16.--Waste places, especially eastward;
spreading from year to year. (Adv. from S. Amer.)


61. HYMENOPAPPUS, L'Her.

Heads many-flowered; flowers all tubular and perfect, with large
revolute corolla-lobes. Involucral scales 6--12, loose and broad, thin,
the upper part petal-like (usually white). Receptacle small, naked.
Achenes top-shaped, with a slender base, striate; pappus of 15--20 blunt
scales in a single row, very thin (whence the name of the genus, from
[Greek: y(me/n], _membrane_, and [Greek: pa/ppos], _pappus_.)--Biennial
or perennial herbs, with alternate mostly dissected leaves, and corymbed
small heads of usually whitish flowers.

[*] _Pappus of very small roundish nerveless scales._

1. H. scabiosaeus, L'Her. Somewhat flocculent-woolly when young, leafy to
the top (1--3 deg. high); leaves 1--2-pinnately parted into linear or oblong
lobes; involucral scales roundish, mainly whitish.--Sandy barrens, Ill.
and southward. May, June.

2. H. corymbosus, Torr. & Gray. More slender, glabrate, naked above;
scales obovate-oblong, petaloid at apex.--Neb. to Ark. and Tex.

[*][*] _Pappus of conspicuous spatulate 1-nerved scales; involucre
greener._

3. H. tenuifolius, Pursh. Slightly tomentose or glabrate, leafy, 1--2 deg.
high; divisions of the leaves narrowly linear or filiform, revolute;
involucral scales obovate-oblong; achenes long-villous.--Neb. to Ark.
and Tex.


62. ACTINELLA, Pers., Nutt.

Heads many-flowered; rays several, wedge-oblong, 3-toothed, pistillate.
Scales of the hemispherical involucre ovate or lanceolate, membranaceous
or coriaceous, nearly equal, appressed in 2 or 3 ranks, little shorter
than the disk. Receptacle hemispherical or conical, naked. Achenes
top-shaped, densely silky-villous; pappus of 5 or more ovate or
lanceolate very thin chaffy scales.--Low herbs, with narrow alternate
leaves, dotted or sprinkled with resinous atoms as in the next genus and
bitter-aromatic; the solitary heads terminating scapes or slender naked
peduncles; flowers yellow. (Name a diminutive of _Actinea_, from [Greek:
a)kti/s], _ray_.)

[*] _Involucre of numerous distinct not rigid scales; leaves entire._

1. A. linearifolia, Torr. & Gray. Annual or biennial, villous or
glabrate, 1 deg. high or less, simple or branched; leaves linear; peduncles
filiform.--S. Kan. to La., and Tex.

2. A. acaulis, Nutt. Perennial, densely cespitose, the branches of the
caudex short and thick, with scape-like peduncles, canescently villous
or silky; leaves spatulate to linear, short.--Hills and plains bordering
the Rocky Mts. and scarcely reaching our limits; the var. GLABRA, Gray
(A. scaposa, var. glabra, _Man._), a greener glabrate form, has been
found on an Indian mound near Joliet, Ill. The less densely cespitose A.
SCAPOSA, Nutt., more loosely villous and the caudex with more slender
branches, is probably in S. Kan.

[*][*] _Scales rigid, in 2 rows, the outer connate at base; leaves
ternately parted._

3. A. odorata, Gray. Annual, 1--2 deg. high, branching, leafy, somewhat
floccose-woolly; heads small, scattered; leaves 1--3-pinnately divided,
the lobes filiform.--Central Kan. to Tex., and westward.


63. HELENIUM, L. SNEEZE-WEED.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; rays several, wedge-shaped, 3--5-cleft,
fertile or rarely sterile. Involucre small, reflexed, the scales linear
or awl-shaped. Receptacle globose or oblong, naked. Achenes top-shaped,
ribbed; pappus of 5--8 thin and 1-nerved chaffy scales, the nerve
usually extended into a bristle or point.--Erect, branching herbs (ours
perennial), with alternate leaves decurrent on the angled stem and
branches, which are terminated by single or corymbed (yellow, rarely
purple) heads; often sprinkled with bitter aromatic resinous globules.
(The Greek name of some plant, said to be named after _Helenus_, son of
Priam.)

1. H. nudiflorum, Nutt. Somewhat puberulent, 1--3 deg. high; leaves narrowly
lanceolate or oblong to linear, entire, or the radical spatulate and
dentate; heads mostly small; disk brownish, globose; ray yellow or
partly brown-purple, sterile (neutral or style abortive), shorter than
or exceeding the disk. (Leptopoda brachypoda, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Ill.
and Mo. to N. Car. and Tex.; nat. near Philadelphia. Hybridizes with the
next. June--Aug.

2. H. autumnale, L. Nearly smooth, 1--6 deg. high; leaves mostly toothed,
lanceolate to ovate-oblong; heads larger (about 6'' broad); disk yellow;
ray fertile, yellow.--Alluvial river-banks and wet ground, Conn. to
Minn., south and westward. Sept.


64. GAILLARDIA, Foug.

Heads many-flowered; rays 3-cleft or -toothed, neutral or sometimes
fertile, or none. Involucral scales in 2--3 rows, the outer larger,
loose and foliaceous. Receptacle convex to globose, beset with
bristle-like or subulate or short and soft chaff. Achenes top-shaped,
5-costate, villous; pappus of 5--10 long thin scales, awn-tipped by the
excurrent nerve.--Erect herbs with alternate leaves and large showy
heads of yellow or purplish fragrant flowers on terminal or scapiform
peduncles. (Named after _Gaillard de Merentonneau_.)

1. G. simplex, Scheele. Annual; leaves all radical, usually spatulate,
pinnatifid to entire; head globose on a naked scape, usually
rayless.--S. Kan. to Tex.

2. G. lanceolata, Michx. Annual, leafy-stemmed, branched, 1--2 deg. high,
finely pubescent; leaves oblanceolate to linear, mostly entire; rays
rather few or none; chaff very short or obsolete.--S. Kan. to Tex. and
Fla.

3. G. aristata, Pursh. Perennial, hirsute, often 2 deg. high; leaves
lanceolate to oblanceolate, broad or narrow, entire to coarsely
pinnatifid; rays usually numerous and long; chaff bristly or
subulate.--Dak., west and southward.


65. DYSODIA, Cav. FETID MARIGOLD.

Heads many-flowered, usually radiate; rays pistillate. Involucre of one
row of scales united into a firm cup, at the base some loose bractlets.
Receptacle flat, not chaffy, but beset with short chaffy bristles.
Achenes slender, 4-angled; pappus a row of chaffy scales dissected into
numerous rough bristles.--Herbs, mostly annuals or biennials, dotted
with large pellucid glands, which give a strong odor (as in Tagetes, the
FRENCH MARIGOLD of the gardens, which belongs to the same group); heads
terminating the branches; flowers yellow. (Name [Greek: dysodi/a], _an
ill smell_, which the plants exemplify.)

1. D. chrysanthemoides, Lag. Nearly smooth, diffusely branched (6--18'
high); leaves opposite, pinnately parted, the narrow lobes
bristly-toothed or cut; rays few, scarcely exceeding the
involucre.--Roadsides, and banks of rivers, Minn. to Ill., Tenn., and
southwestward. Aug.--Oct.


66. ANTHEMIS, L. CHAMOMILE.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; rays pistillate or (in n. 1) neutral.
Involucre hemispherical, of many small imbricated dry and scarious
scales shorter than the disk. Receptacle conical, with slender chaff at
least near the summit. Achenes terete or ribbed, glabrous, truncate;
pappus none or a minute crown.--Branching strong-scented herbs, with
finely pinnately dissected leaves and solitary terminal heads; rays
white; disk yellow. ([Greek: A)nthemi/s], the ancient Greek name of the
Chamomile.)

A. COTULA, DC. (MAY-WEED.) Annual, acrid; rays mostly neutral;
receptacle without chaff near the margin; pappus none; leaves finely
3-pinnately dissected. (Maruta Cotula, _DC._)--Common by roadsides.
(Nat. from Eu.)

A. ARVENSIS, L. (CORN CHAMOMILE.) Pubescent _annual or biennial_,
resembling May-weed, but not ill-scented; leaves less finely
1--2-pinnately parted; chaff of the receptacle lanceolate, pointed;
pappus a minute border.--Waste places; rare. (Adv. from Eu.)

A. NOBILIS, L. (GARDEN CHAMOMILE.) More downy and _perennial_,
pleasantly strong-scented; sterile shoots depressed or creeping; leaves
very finely dissected; chaff of the receptacle blunt; pappus
none.--Established near Lewiston, Delaware, _Nuttall._ (Adv. from Eu.)


67. ACHILLEA, L. YARROW.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; the rays few, fertile. Involucral scales
imbricated, with scarious margins. Receptacle chaffy, flattish. Achenes
oblong, flattened, margined; pappus none.--Perennial herbs, with small
corymbose heads. (So named because its virtues are said to have been
discovered by _Achilles_.)

1. A. Millefolium, L. (COMMON YARROW or MILFOIL.) Stems simple; _leaves
twice-pinnately parted_; the divisions linear, 3--5-cleft, crowded;
corymb compound, flat-topped; _involucre oblong; rays 4--5, short_,
white (sometimes rose-color).--Fields and hills; common. Green and more
glabrate in fields in the Atlantic States, and perhaps in such cases
introduced. Aug. (Eu.)

A. PTARMICA, L. (SNEEZEWORT.) _Leaves simple, lance-linear_, sharply
serrate with appressed teeth; corymb loose; _rays 8--12, much longer
than the broader campanulate involucre_; flowers white.--Mass., Mich.,
etc.; rare. Apparently indigenous on the Lower St. Lawrence. (Adv. from
Eu.)


68. MATRICARIA, Tourn. WILD CHAMOMILE.

Heads many-flowered; rays pistillate, or wanting. Scales of the
involucre imbricated, with scarious margins. Receptacle conical, at
least in fruit, naked. Achenes 3--5-ribbed, wingless; pappus a
membranaceous crown or border, or none.--Smooth and branching herbs
(ours annuals or biennials) with finely divided leaves and single or
corymbed heads. Rays white or none; disk yellow. (Named for reputed
medicinal virtues.)

M. INODORA, L. Leaves twice-pinnately divided into fine almost filiform
lobes; _heads large_, naked-peduncled, and _with many long rays_;
achenes strongly 3-ribbed; pappus a short crown or border.--(Wild far
northward.) Roadsides, Eastport, Maine, _Prof. Verrill_. Aug. (Adv. from
Eu.)

M. DISCOIDEA, DC. Low (6--9' high); leaves 2--3-pinnately parted into
short linear lobes; _heads rayless_, short-peduncled; scales oval, with
broad margins, much shorter than the conical disk; achenes more terete;
pappus obsolete.--Banks of the Mississippi opposite St. Louis. An
immigrant from Oregon, extending eastward and becoming naturalized near
railroad stations; also established in N. Europe. July--Sept.


69. CHRYSANTHEMUM, Tourn. OX-EYE DAISY.

Heads many-flowered; rays numerous, fertile. Scales of the broad and
flat involucre imbricated, with scarious margins. Receptacle flat or
convex, naked. Disk-corollas with a flattened tube. Achenes of disk and
ray similar, striate, without pappus.--Perennial herbs, with toothed,
pinnatifid, or divided leaves, and single or corymbed heads. Rays white;
disk yellow. (Old Greek name, [Greek: chrysa/nthemon], i.e. golden
flower.)

C. LEUCANTHEMUM, L. (OX-EYE or WHITE DAISY. WHITE-WEED.) Stem erect,
nearly simple, naked above and bearing a single large head; root-leaves
spatulate, petioled, the others partly clasping, all cut or
pinnatifid-toothed; scales of the involucre with rusty-brown margins.
(Leucanthemum vulgare, _Lam._)--Fields and meadows; abundant eastward.
June, July. A pernicious weed, with large and showy heads. It occurs
with abortive, deformed, or tubular and laciniate rays. (Nat. from Eu.)

C. PARTHENIUM, Pers. (FEVERFEW.) Tall, branched, leafy; leaves
twice-pinnately divided, the _divisions ovate, cut; heads corymbed_,
rather small. (Leucanthemum Parthenium, _Godron_.)--Escaped from gardens
in some places. (Adv. from Eu.)


70. TANACETUM, L. TANSY.

Heads many-flowered, nearly discoid; flowers all fertile, the marginal
chiefly pistillate and 3--5-toothed. Involucre imbricated, dry.
Receptacle convex, naked. Achenes angled or ribbed, with a large flat
top; pappus a short crown.--Bitter and acrid strong scented herbs (ours
perennial), with 1--3-pinnately dissected leaves, and corymbed heads.
Flowers yellow; in summer. (Name of uncertain derivation.)

T. VULGARE, L. (COMMON TANSY.) Stem (2--4 deg. high) smooth; leaflets and
the wings of the petiole cut-toothed; corymb dense; pistillate flowers
terete, with oblique 3-toothed limb; pappus 5-lobed.--Var. CRISPUM has
the leaves more cut and crisped.--Escaped from gardens to roadsides;
Atlantic States. (Nat. from Eu.)

1. T. Huronense, Nutt. Hairy or woolly when young, stout (1--3 deg. high);
lobes of the leaves oblong; heads large (1/2--{2/3}' wide) and
usually few; pistillate flowers flattened, 3--5-cleft; pappus
toothed.--St. John's River, Maine (_G. L. Goodale_), shores of the upper
Great Lakes, and westward.


71. ARTEMISIA, L. WORMWOOD.

Heads discoid, few--many-flowered; flowers all tubular, the marginal
ones pistillate, or sometimes all similar and perfect. Involucre
imbricated, dry and scarious. Receptacle small and flattish, naked.
Achenes obovoid, with a small summit and no pappus.--Herbs or shrubby
plants, bitter and aromatic, with small commonly nodding heads in
panicled spikes or racemes; flowering in summer. Corolla yellow or
purplish. (Ancient name of the Mugwort, in memory of _Artemisia_, wife
of Mausolus.)

Sec. 1. _Receptacle smooth; marginal flowers pistillate and fertile;
disk-flowers perfect but sterile, the style mostly entire; root
perennial, except in n. 1._

[*] _Leaves dissected._

1. A. caudata, Michx. Smooth (2--5 deg. high); upper leaves pinnately, the
lower 2--3-pinnately divided; _the divisions thread-form_, diverging;
_heads small, the racemes in a wand-like elongated panicle_; root
biennial.--Sandy soil, coast of N. H. to Va.; also Mich. to Minn., and
southward.

2. A. Canadensis, Michx. Smooth, or hoary with silky down (1--2 deg. high);
lower leaves twice-pinnately divided, the upper 3--7-divided, _the
divisions linear, rather rigid; heads rather large, in panicled
racemes_.--Northern N. Eng. to the Great Lakes, Minn., and northward.
(Eu.)

[*][*] _Leaves entire or some 3-cleft._

3. A. dracunculoides, Pursh. Tall (2--5 deg.), somewhat woody at base,
slightly hoary or glabrous; leaves linear and entire or the lower
3-cleft; heads small and numerous, panicled.--Sandy banks of streams,
Minn. to Ill., Mo., and westward.

4. A. glauca, Pall. Strict, 1--2 deg. high, somewhat woody at base, minutely
silky-pubescent or glabrate; leaves linear- to oblong-lanceolate; heads
as in the last.--Sask. to Minn. (Sib.)

5. A. filifolia, Torr. Suffruticose, finely canescent, 1--3 deg. high;
leaves all filiform, the lower commonly 3-parted; heads very small and
numerous, crowded in a long leafy panicle.--Central Kan. to Neb., and
southwestward.

Sec. 2. _Receptacle smooth; flowers all fertile, a few pistillate, the
others perfect._

Two cultivated shrubby species, from Europe, with filiformly divided
leaves, have occasionally escaped from gardens and become spontaneous,
viz., A. ABROTINUM, L. (the SOUTHERNWOOD), of strict habit, with leaves
1--2-pinnatifid and pubescent heads, and A. PROCERA, L., with more
spreading branches, all the leaves finely 2-pinnatifid, and heads
glabrous.

[*] _Tall (1--5 deg.) and branching perennials, whitened with fine and
close-pressed wool; heads small, in leafy panicles._

6. A. serrata, Nutt. Very leafy, 6--9 deg. high; leaves lanceolate or the
upper linear, serrate, white-tomentose beneath, green above; heads
greenish, oblong, 2'' long or less.--Ill. to Dak.

7. A. longifolia, Nutt. Stem 2--5 deg. high; leaves linear or
linear-lanceolate, entire, usually glabrate above; heads oblong,
canescent, 2--3'' long--Minn. to Neb., and westward.

8. A. Ludoviciana, Nutt. (WESTERN MUGWORT.) _Whitened woolly_
throughout; _leaves lanceolate_, the upper _mostly entire_, the lower
usually cut-lobed, toothed or pinnatifid, the upper surface sometimes
glabrate and green; heads campanulate, mostly sessile in narrow
panicles.--Dry banks, Sask. to Mich., Ill., Tex., and westward. Very
variable.

A. VULGARIS, L. (COMMON MUGWORT.) _Leaves mostly glabrous and green
above_, beneath and the branches white-woolly, all pinnatifid, with the
divisions often cut-lobed, linear-lanceolate; heads small in open
panicles.--Waste places, near dwellings. (Adv. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Densely white-tomentose perennial; heads large,
racemose-glomerate._

9. A. Stelleriana, Bess. Stout, 1--2 deg. high, from a creeping base; leaves
obovate or spatulate, pinnatifid, the lobes obtuse.--Sandy sea-beaches,
E. Mass.; locally nat. from N. E. Asia?

[*][*][*] _Less branched (1--3 deg.), biennial or annual, glabrous._

10. A. biennis, Willd. Strict, 1--3 deg. high; lower leaves twice-pinnately
parted, the upper pinnatifid; lobes linear, acute, in the lower leaves
cut-toothed; heads in short axillary spikes or clusters, crowded in a
narrow and glomerate leafy panicle.--Gravelly banks, Ohio to Tenn., Mo.,
and northwestward; rapidly extending eastward by railroad to Buffalo,
Philadelphia, etc.

A. ANNUA, L. Tall, much branched; leaves 2-pinnately divided, the oblong
segments deeply pinnatifid; heads small, in a loose ample panicle.--Ind.
to Kan. (Nat. from Old World.)

Sec. 3. _Receptacle hairy; flowers all fertile, the marginal ones
pistillate._

A. ABSINTHIUM, L. (WORMWOOD.) Rather shrubby (2--3 deg. high), silky-hoary;
leaves 2--3-pinnately parted, lobes lanceolate; heads hemispherical,
panicled.--Roadsides, escaped from gardens. (Adv. from Eu.)

11. A. frigida, Willd. Low (6--20' high), in tufts, slightly woody at
the base, white-silky; leaves pinnately parted and 3--5-cleft, the
divisions narrow-linear; heads globose, racemose.--Dry hills and rocks,
Sask. to Minn., W. Tex., and westward.


72. TUSSILAGO, Tourn. COLTSFOOT.

Head many-flowered; ray-flowers in several rows, narrowly ligulate,
pistillate, fertile; disk-flowers with undivided style, sterile.
Involucre nearly simple. Receptacle flat. Achenes cylindrical-oblong;
pappus copious, soft and capillary.--A low perennial, with horizontal
creeping rootstocks, sending up simple scaly scapes in early spring,
bearing a single head, and producing rounded-heart-shaped angled or
toothed leaves later in the season, woolly when young. Flowers yellow.
(Name from _tussis_, a cough, for which the plant is a reputed remedy.)

T. FARFARA, L.--Wet places, and along brooks, N. Eng., N. Y., and Penn.;
thoroughly wild. (Nat. from Eu.)


73. PETASITES, Tourn. SWEET COLTSFOOT.

Heads many-flowered, somewhat dioecious; in the substerile plant with a
single row of ligulate pistillate ray-flowers, and many tubular sterile
ones in the disk; in the fertile plant wholly or chiefly of
pistillate flowers, tubular or distinctly ligulate. Otherwise as
Tussilago.--Perennial woolly herbs, with the leaves all from the
rootstock, white-woolly beneath, the scape with sheathing scaly bracts,
bearing heads of purplish or whitish fragrant flowers, in a corymb. (The
Greek name for the coltsfoot, from [Greek: pe/tasos], a broad-brimmed
hat, on account of its large leaves.)

[*] _Pistillate flowers ligulate; flowers whitish._

1. P. palmata, Gray. Leaves rounded, somewhat kidney-form, palmately and
deeply 5--7-lobed, the lobes toothed and cut. (Nardosmia palmata,
_Hook._)--Swamps, Maine and Mass. to Mich., Minn., and northwestward;
rare. April, May.--Full-grown leaves 6--10' broad.

2. P. sagittata, Gray. Leaves deltoid-oblong to reniform-hastate, acute
or obtuse, repand-dentate.--N. Minn. and westward.

[*][*] _Ligules none; flowers purplish._

P. VULGARIS, Desf. Rootstock very stout; leaves round-cordate,
angulate-dentate and denticulate.--About Philadelphia. (Nat. from Eu.)


74. ARNICA, L.

Heads many-flowered, radiate; rays pistillate. Scales of the bell-shaped
involucre lanceolate, equal, somewhat in 2 rows. Receptacle flat,
fimbrillate. Achenes slender or spindle-shaped; pappus a single row of
rather rigid and strongly roughened-denticulate bristles.--Perennial
herbs, chiefly of mountains and cold northern regions, with simple
stems, bearing single or corymbed large heads and opposite leaves.
Flowers yellow. (Name thought to be a corruption of _Ptarmica_.)

1. A. Chamissonis, Less. Soft-hairy; _stem leafy_ (1--2 deg. high), bearing
1 to 5 heads; _leaves thin, veiny_, smoothish when old, toothed; the
upper _ovate-lanceolate_, closely sessile, the lower narrower, tapering
to a margined petiole; scales pointed; pappus almost plumose. (A.
mollis, _Hook_.)--N. Maine, mountains of N. H. and northern N. Y.,
shores of L. Superior, and westward. July.

2. A. nudicaulis, Nutt. Hairy and rather glandular (1--3 deg. high); _leaves
thickish, 3--5-nerved, ovate or oblong_, all sessile, mostly entire and
near the root, the _cauline small_ and only one or two pairs; heads
several, corymbed, showy.--Damp pine barrens, S. Penn. and southward.
April, May.


75. SENECIO, Tourn. GROUNDSEL.

Heads many-flowered; rays pistillate, or none; involucre cylindrical to
bell-shaped, simple or with a few bractlets at the base, the scales
erect-connivent. Receptacle flat, naked. Pappus of numerous very soft
and slender capillary bristles.--Herbs, in the United States, with
alternate leaves and solitary or corymbed heads. Flowers chiefly yellow.
(Name from _senex_, an old man, alluding to the hoariness of many
species, or to the white hairs of the pappus.)

[*] _Root annual or in n. 3 biennial; heads several or many in a corymb;
herbage glabrous or soon becoming so._

[+] _Rays none or minute._

S. VULGARIS, L. (COMMON GROUNDSEL.) Low, corymbosely branched, glabrate;
leaves pinnatifid and toothed; clasping tips of involucral scales
blackish; rays none.--Waste grounds. July--Sept. (Adv. from Eu.)

S. VISCOSUS, L. Coarser, viscid-pubescent and strong-scented; leaves
2-pinnatifid; scales not black-tipped; rays minute.--Waste grounds,
coast of N. Eng. (Nat. from Eu.)

[+][+] _Heads conspicuously radiate._

1. S. lobatus, Pers. (BUTTER-WEED.) Rather tall; leaves somewhat fleshy,
_lyrate or pinnate_, the divisions or leaflets crenate or cut-lobed,
variable; heads small in a naked corymb; _rays 6--12, conspicuous_.--Wet
grounds, N. Car. to S. Ill., Mo., and southward. April--July.

2. S. palustris, Hook. Annual or biennial, loosely woolly or glabrate;
stem stout, 6'--2 deg. high; _leaves_ oblong-lanceolate, _irregularly
toothed or laciniate_, the upper with a heart-shaped clasping base;
_rays 20 or more_, short, pale yellow; pappus copious and becoming very
long.--Wet ground, Iowa to N. Wisc., Minn., and northward. June. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Root perennial; heads small or middle-sized, in a naked corymb._

3. S. aureus, L. (GOLDEN RAGWORT. SQUAW-WEED.) _Smooth, or
floccose-woolly when young_ (1--3 deg. high); leaves thin, the radical
_simple and rounded_, the larger ones mostly heart-shaped,
crenate-toothed, _long-petioled_; _lower stem-leaves lyrate_; upper ones
lanceolate, cut-pinnatifid, sessile or partly clasping; corymb
umbel-like; rays 8--12.--Common everywhere. May, June. Varies greatly.

Var. obovatus, Torr. & Gray. Root-leaves thicker, round-obovate with a
cuneate or truncate base, or the earliest almost sessile in rosulate
tufts. (S. Elliottii, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Open grounds, Can. to Ind. and
Ga.

Var. Balsamitae, Torr. & Gray. Less glabrate; root-leaves oblong,
spatulate, or lanceolate, narrowed to the petiole, serrate, the upper
lyrate-pinnatifid; heads rather small and numerous.--Common.

4. S. tomentosus, Michx. (WOOLLY RAGWORT.) _Clothed with scarcely
deciduous hoary wool_ (1--2 deg. high); _root-leaves oblong_, obtuse,
crenate or entire, often large, on elongated stout petioles; the upper
sessile, similar or lyrate-pinnatifid; corymb flat-topped; rays
12--15.--Del. and mountains of Penn. (_Pursh._), to Fla. and Ark. May.

5. S. canus, Hook. Usually low, persistently tomentose, rarely at all
glabrate; leaves much smaller, spatulate to oblong, all entire or some
cut-toothed or pinnatifid; achenes glabrous.--N. Minn., Dak., and
westward.

6. S. integerrimus, Nutt. Woolly pubescent when young, soon glabrate and
green; leaves oblong-lanceolate or oblong, entire or denticulate, the
upper bract-like, attenuate from a broad base; heads rather large (6''
high), with green-tipped scales.--Sask. to Minn., and westward.

7. S. lugens, Richards. Like the last; leaves usually repand- or
callous-denticulate; heads usually smaller, with mostly black-tipped
scales.--Subarc. Amer. to New Mex., in the mountains; reported from
Minn. and N. Iowa.

[*][*][*] _Root perennial; heads large and often solitary._

8. S. Pseudo-Arnica, Less. Loosely white-woolly, sometimes becoming
glabrous; stem stout, 6--12' high, leafy to the top; leaves oblong,
repand, tapering into a narrow petiole-like base; heads 1--4, over an
inch in diameter; rays 20 or more, large.--Grand Manan Island, off Maine
(_Prof. Verrill_), to Lab., and northward.


76. CACALIA, L. INDIAN PLANTAIN.

Heads 5--many-flowered; the flowers all tubular and perfect. Involucral
scales in a single row, erect-connivent, with a few bractlets at the
base. Receptacle naked. Corolla deeply 5-cleft. Achenes oblong, smooth;
pappus of numerous soft capillary bristles.--Smooth and tall perennial
herbs, with alternate often petioled leaves, and rather large heads, in
flat corymbs. Flowers white or whitish. (An ancient name, of uncertain
meaning.)

[*] _Involucre 25--30-flowered, with several bracts at its base;
receptacle flat._

1. C. suaveolens, L. Stem grooved (3--5 deg. high); _leaves
triangular-lanceolate, halberd-shaped_, pointed, serrate, those of the
stem on winged petioles.--Rich woods, Conn. to Mich., Iowa, and
southward; rare. Sept.

[*][*] _Involucre 5-leaved and 5-flowered, its bracts minute or none;
receptacle bearing a more or less evident scale-like pointed appendage
in the centre._

2. C. reniformis, Muhl. (GREAT INDIAN PLANTAIN.) Not glaucous; stem
(4--9 deg. high) grooved and angled; _leaves green both sides, dilated
fan-shaped, or the lowest kidney-form_ (1--2 deg. broad), _repand-toothed_
and angled, palmately veined, petioled; the teeth pointed; corymbs
large.--Rich damp woods, N. J. to Ill., Minn., and southward along the
mountains. Aug.

3. C. atriplicifolia, L. (PALE INDIAN P.) Glaucous; stem terete (3--6 deg.
high); leaves _palmately veined and angulate-lobed_, the lower
triangular-kidney-form or slightly heart-shaped, the upper rhomboid or
wedge-form, _toothed_.--Rich woodlands, western N. Y. to Wisc., Minn.,
and southward. Aug.

4. C. tuberosa, Nutt. (TUBEROUS INDIAN P.) Stem angled and grooved
(2--6 deg. high), from a thick or tuberous root; _leaves green both sides_,
thick, strongly _5--7-nerved_; the lower _lance-ovate or oval_, nearly
entire, tapering into long petioles; the upper on short margined
petioles, sometimes toothed at the apex.--Wet prairies, etc., Ohio to
Wisc., Minn., and southward. June.


77. ERECHTITES, Raf. FIREWEED.

Heads many-flowered; the flowers all tubular and fertile; the marginal
pistillate, with a slender corolla. Scales of the cylindrical involucre
in a single row, linear, acute, with a few small bractlets at the base.
Receptacle naked. Achenes oblong, tapering at the end; pappus copious,
of very fine and white soft hairs.--Erect and coarse annuals, of rank
smell, with alternate simple leaves, and paniculate-corymbed heads of
whitish flowers. (The ancient name of some species of Groundsel,
probably called after _Erechtheus_.)

1. E. hieracifolia, Raf. (FIREWEED.) Often hairy; stem grooved (1--6 deg.
high); leaves lanceolate or oblong, acute, cut-toothed, sessile, the
upper auricled at base.--Moist woods; common, especially northward, and
in recent clearings that have been burned over; whence the popular name.
July--Sept.


78. ARCTIUM, L. BURDOCK.

Heads many-flowered; flowers all tubular, perfect and similar. Involucre
globular; the imbricated scales coriaceous and appressed at base,
attenuate to long stiff points with hooked tips. Receptacle bristly.
Achenes oblong, flattened, wrinkled transversely; pappus short, of
numerous rough bristles, separate and deciduous.--Coarse biennial weeds,
with large unarmed and petioled leaves, and small solitary or clustered
heads; flowers purple, rarely white. (Name probably from [Greek:
a)/rktos], _a bear_, from the rough involucre.)

A. LAPPA, L. Stout, 1--3 deg. high; leaves roundish or ovate and mostly
cordate, or lanceolate with cuneate base, smooth above, somewhat
floccose-tomentose beneath, mostly sinuate-denticulate. (Lappa
officinalis, _All._)--The several reputed species of the genus are
scarcely distinguishable even as varieties. Var. MINUS, has rather small
ovoid subracemose heads (about 8'' broad), on short peduncles, glabrous
or somewhat cottony, the inner scales somewhat purplish-tipped,
equalling the flowers; leaves occasionally cut-toothed. By roadsides;
very common.--Var. MAJUS, with broader (1') green and glabrous
subcorymbose rather long-pedunculate heads. Less frequent.--Var.
TOMENTOSUM, a form of the last with more spherical webbed heads, with
purplish scales shorter than the flowers. Rare.--July--Oct. (Nat. from
Eu.)


79. CNICUS, Tourn. COMMON or PLUMED THISTLE.

Heads many-flowered; flowers all tubular, perfect and similar, rarely
imperfectly dioecious. Scales of the ovoid or spherical involucre
imbricated in many rows, tipped with a point or prickle. Receptacle
thickly clothed with soft bristles or hairs. Achenes oblong, flattish,
not ribbed; pappus of numerous bristles united into a ring at the base,
plumose to the middle, deciduous.--Herbs, mostly biennial, with sessile
alternate leaves, often pinnatifid, prickly. Heads usually large,
terminal. Flowers reddish-purple, rarely white or yellowish; in summer.
(Latin name of the Safflower, from the Greek [Greek: kne~kos].)

[*] _Scales of the involucre all tipped with spreading prickles._

C. LANCEOLATUS, Hoffm. (COMMON THISTLE.) Leaves decurrent on the stem,
forming prickly lobed wings, pinnatifid, rough and bristly above, woolly
with deciduous webby hairs beneath, prickly; flowers purple. (Cirsium,
_Scop._)--Pastures and roadsides, everywhere, at the North. (Nat. from
Eu.)

[*][*] _Heads leafy-bracteate at base_ (see also n. 8); _proper scales
not prickly._

1. C. horridulus, Pursh. (YELLOW THISTLE.) Stem stout (1--3 deg. high),
webby-haired when young; leaves partly clasping, green, soon smooth,
lanceolate, pinnatifid, the short toothed and cut lobes very spiny with
yellowish prickles; heads (1--11/2' broad) surrounded by leaf-like and
very prickly bracts, which usually equal the narrow scales; flowers pale
yellow or purple. (Cirsium, _Michx._)--Sandy fields, Mass. to Va., and
southward, near the coast.

[*][*][*] _Scales appressed, the inner not at all prickly._

[+] _Leaves white-woolly beneath, and sometimes also above; outer scales
successively shorter, and tipped with short prickles._

2. C. Pitcheri, Torr. _White-woolly throughout_, low; stem very leafy;
_leaves all pinnately parted into rigid narrowly linear and elongated,
sometimes again pinnatifid divisions_, with revolute margins; flowers
cream-color. (Cirsium, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Sandy shores of Lakes Michigan,
Huron, and Superior.

3. C. undulatus, Gray. _White-woolly throughout_, low and stout, leafy;
_leaves lanceolate-oblong_, partly clasping, undivided,
_undulate-pinnatifid_, or rarely pinnately parted, moderately prickly;
flowers reddish-purple. (Cirsium, _Spreng._)--Islands of L. Huron to
Minn., Kan., and westward. The heads vary much in size.

4. C. altissimus, Willd. Stem downy, branching (3--10 deg. high), _leafy
quite to the heads; leaves_ roughish-hairy above, whitened with close
wool beneath, _oblong-ovate to narrowly lanceolate, undivided,
sinuate-toothed, undulate-pinnatifid, or twice pinnatifid_, the lobes or
teeth weakly prickly; heads 11/2--2' high; flowers chiefly purple.
(Cirsium, _Spreng._)--Fields and copses, Mass. to Minn., and southward.

Var. discolor, Gray. Stem 2--6 deg. high; leaves nearly all deeply
pinnatifid into lanceolate or linear lobes. (Cirsium discolor,
_Spreng._)--Common; N. Eng. to Ill., and southward.

5. C. Virginianus, Pursh. Stem woolly, slender, simple or sparingly
branched (1--3 deg. high), the _branches or long peduncles naked; leaves
lanceolate_, green above, whitened with close wool beneath, ciliate with
prickly bristles, _entire or sparingly sinuate-lobed_, sometimes the
lower deeply sinuate-pinnatifid; heads small; outer scales scarcely
prickly; flowers purple. (Cirsium, _Michx._)--Woods and plains, Va.,
Ohio, and southward.

[+][+] _Leaves green both sides, or only with loose cobwebby hairs
underneath; heads large; scales scarcely prickly-pointed._

6. C. muticus, Pursh. (SWAMP THISTLE.) _Stem tall_ (3--8 deg. high), angled,
smoothish, panicled at the summit; branches sparingly leafy, bearing
single or few rather large _heads; leaves_ somewhat hairy above,
whitened _with loose webby hairs beneath_ when young, _deeply
pinnatifid, the divisions lanceolate_, acute, cut-lobed,
prickly-pointed; _scales of the webby and glutinous_ (sometimes
glabrate) _involucre_ closely appressed, _pointless_ or barely
mucronate; flowers purple. (Cirsium, _Michx._)--Swamps and low woods;
common.

7. C. pumilus, Torr. (PASTURE THISTLE.) _Stem low_ and stout (1--2 deg.
high), hairy, bearing 1--3 very large _heads_ (11/2' broad), which are
often _leafy-bracted_ at the base; _leaves green_, lanceolate-oblong,
partly clasping, _somewhat hairy, pinnatifid, with short and cut very
prickly-margined lobes; outer scales prickly-pointed_, the inner very
slender; flowers purple or rarely white (fragrant, 2' long). (Cirsium,
_Spreng._)--Dry fields, Maine to Penn., near the coast.

[*][*][*][*] _Outer scales of the appressed involucre barely
prickly-pointed; heads imperfectly dioecious, small and numerous._

C. ARVENSIS, Hoffm. (CANADA THISTLE.) Perennial, slender, 1--2 deg. high,
the roots extensively creeping; leaves oblong or lanceolate, smooth, or
slightly woolly beneath, sinuate-pinnatifid, prickly-margined; flowers
rose-purple. (Cirsium, _Scop._)--Cultivated fields, pastures, and
roadsides, common; a most troublesome weed, extremely difficult to
eradicate. (Nat. from Eu.)


80. CARDUUS, Tourn. PLUMELESS THISTLE.

Bristles of the pappus naked (not plumose), merely rough or denticulate.
Otherwise as in Cnicus. (The ancient Latin name.)

C. NUTANS, L. (MUSK THISTLE.) Biennial; leaves decurrent, sinuate,
spiny; heads solitary, drooping; flowers purple.--Fields near
Harrisburg, Pa., _Prof. Porter_. (Adv. from Eu.)


81. ONOPORDON, Vaill. COTTON or SCOTCH THISTLE.

Receptacle deeply honeycombed, not setose. Pappus not plumose. Otherwise
as Cnicus.--Coarse, branching annuals, or biennials, with the stems
winged by the decurrent base of the lobed and toothed somewhat prickly
leaves. Heads large; flowers purple. (The ancient Greek name of the
plant.)

O. ACANTHIUM, L. Stem (2--4 deg. high) and leaves cotton-woolly; scales
linear-awl-shaped.--Roadsides and waste places in the Atlantic States;
rather rare. July--Sept. (Adv. from Eu.)


82. CENTAUREA, L. STAR-THISTLE.

Heads many-flowered; flowers all tubular, the marginal often much larger
(as it were radiate) and sterile. Receptacle bristly. Involucre ovoid or
globose, imbricated, the scales margined or appendaged. Achenes obovoid
or oblong, attached obliquely at or near the base; pappus setose or
partly chaffy or none.--Herbs with alternate leaves and single heads.
(Named from the _Centaur_, Chiron, famous for his skill in healing.)

[*] _Achenes terete, 10-dentate; pappus of 10 long bristles and 10 short
inner ones._

C. BENEDICTA, L. Low branching annual, with clasping scarcely pinnatifid
cut leaves, and large sessile leafy-bracted heads; flowers yellow.
(Cnicus benedictus, _L._)--Roadsides and waste grounds, S. Atlantic
States; rare. (Adv. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Achenes compressed or 4-angled; pappus very short or none._

C. CYANUS, L. (BLUEBOTTLE.) Scales of the globular involucre
fringe-margined; _false rays large_; pappus very short; _leaves linear,
entire_, or toothed at the base; root annual.--Roadsides, escaped from
gardens. July.--Flowers blue, varying to purplish or white. (Adv. from
Eu.)

C. NIGRA, L. (KNAPWEED.) Scales of the globular involucre appendaged,
and with a black pectinately ciliate fringe; _rays wanting_; pappus very
short; _leaves lanceolate_, entire, or the lower lyrate-toothed, rough;
root perennial.--Waste places, E. New Eng. Aug.--Flowers purple. (Adv.
from Eu.)

C. CALCITRAPA, L. (STAR-THISTLE.) Stem diffusely much branched; _leaves
pinnately lobed_ or spinulose-toothed; heads sessile, the middle _scales
of the ovoid involucre spiny_; pappus none; flowers purple; root
annual.--Seaports, N. Y., and southward. (Adv. from Eu.)

C. JACEA, L. Like the last; heads rather larger, the brownish
scale-appendages lacerate; rays conspicuous, palmate.--Charlotte, Vt.
(_Pringle_); near N. Y., etc., on ballast. (Nat. from Eu.)


83. LAMPSANA, Tourn. NIPPLE-WORT.

Heads 8--12-flowered. Scales of the cylindrical involucre 8, erect, in
one row. Receptacle naked. Achenes oblong; pappus none.--Slender
branching annuals, with angled or toothed leaves, and loosely panicled
small heads; flowers yellow. (The [Greek: lampsa/ne] of Dioscorides was
evidently a wild Mustard.)

L. COMMUNIS, L. Nearly smooth, 1--2 deg. high; lower leaves ovate, sometimes
lyre-shaped.--Roadsides, N. Eng. to N. Y. and Penn. (Nat. from Eu.)


84. KRIGIA, Schreber. DWARF DANDELION.

Heads several--many-flowered. Involucral scales several, in about 2
rows, thin. Achenes short and truncate, top-shaped or columnar, terete
or angled; pappus double, the outer of thin pointless chaffy scales, the
inner of delicate bristles.--Small herbs, branched from the base; the
leaves chiefly radical, lyrate or toothed; the small heads terminating
the naked scapes or branches. Flowers yellow. (Named after _D. Krieg_,
an early German botanical collector in this country.)

Sec. 1. KRIGIA proper. _Achenes turbinate, 5-angled; pappus of 5--7 short
roundish chaff and as many alternating bristles. Annual._

1. K. Virginica, Willd. Stems or scapes several (1--10' high), becoming
branched and leafy; earlier leaves roundish and entire, the others
narrower and often pinnatifid.--New Eng. to Minn., and southward.
April--Aug.

Sec. 2. CYNTHIA. _Achenes more slender; pappus of 10--15 small oblong chaff
and 15--20 bristles. Perennial._

2. K. Dandelion, Nutt. Roots slender, tuberiferous; _scapes leafless_,
6--18' high; leaves varying from spatulate-oblong to linear-lanceolate,
entire or few-lobed. (Cynthia, _DC._)--Moist ground, Md. to Ky., and
southward. March--July.

3. K. amplexicaulis, Nutt. _Roots fibrous; stem-leaves 1--3_, oblong or
oval, clasping, mostly entire; the radical ones on short winged
petioles, often toothed, rarely pinnatifid; peduncles 2--5. (Cynthia
Virginica, _Don._)--Moist banks, Conn. to Minn., and southward.
June.--Stem 1--2 deg. high.


85. CICHORIUM, Tourn. SUCCORY or CHICORY.

Heads several-flowered. Involucre double, herbaceous, the inner of 8--10
scales, the outer 5, short and spreading. Achenes striate; pappus of
numerous small chaffy scales, forming a short crown.--Branching
perennials, with deep roots; the sessile heads 2 or 3 together, axillary
and terminal. Flowers bright blue, varying to purple or pink, showy.
(Altered from the Arabian name of the plant.)

C. INTYBUS, L. Stem-leaves oblong or lanceolate, partly clasping, the
lowest runcinate, those of the rigid flowering branches
minute.--Roadsides; N. Eng. to Iowa and Minn. July--Oct. (Nat. from
Eu.)


86. TRAGOPOGON, L. GOAT'S-BEARD.

Heads many-flowered. Involucre simple, of several erect lanceolate
attenuate equal scales. Achenes narrowly fusiform, 5--10-ribbed,
long-beaked; pappus of numerous long-plumose bristles.--Stout glabrous
biennials or perennials, with entire grass-like clasping leaves and
large solitary heads of yellow or purple flowers. (Name from [Greek:
tra/gos], _goat_, and [Greek: po/gon], _beard_.)

T. PORRIFOLIUS, L. (SALSIFY. OYSTER-PLANT.) Stem 2--3 deg. high; peduncle
thickened and fistulous below the head; flowers purple; achenes and
pappus 3' long.--Sparingly escaped from cultivation. (Nat. from Eu.)

T. PRATENSIS, L. (GOAT'S-BEARD.) Very similar; leaves somewhat broader
at base; peduncle little thickened; flowers yellow.--Fields, etc.,
N. Eng. to N. J. and Minn. (Nat. from Eu.)


87. LEONTODON, L., Juss. HAWKBIT.

Heads many-flowered. Involucre scarcely imbricated, but with several
bractlets at the base. Achenes spindle-shaped, striate, all alike;
pappus persistent, composed of plumose bristles which are enlarged and
flattened toward the base.--Low and stemless perennials, with toothed or
pinnatifid root-leaves, and scapes bearing one or more yellow heads.
(Name from [Greek: le/on], _a lion_, and [Greek: o)dou/s], _a tooth_, in
allusion to the toothed leaves.)--The following belongs to the subgenus
OPORINIA, with a tawny pappus of a single row of equal bristles.

L. AUTUMNALIS, L. (FALL DANDELION.) Leaves laciniate-toothed or
pinnatifid, somewhat pubescent; scape branched, 5--15' high; peduncles
thickened at the summit, scaly-bracteate.--Meadows and roadsides;
N. Eng. to Penn. June--Nov. (Nat. from Eu.)


88. PICRIS, L.

Heads many-flowered, terminating leafy stems. Outer scales loose or
spreading. Achenes terete, with 5--10 rugose ribs; pappus of 1 or 2
rows of plumose bristles.--Coarse rough-bristly annuals or biennials,
with yellow flowers. (The Greek name of some allied bitter herb, from
[Greek: pikro/s], _bitter_.)

P. HIERACIOIDES, L. Rather tall, corymbosely branched, the bristles
somewhat barbed at tip; leaves lanceolate or broader, clasping,
irregularly toothed; achenes oblong, with little or no beak.--Sparingly
introduced. (Nat. from Eu.)


89. HIERACIUM, Tourn. HAWKWEED.

Heads 12--many-flowered. Involucre more or less imbricated. Achenes
short, oblong or columnar, striate, not beaked; pappus a single row of
tawny and fragile capillary rough bristles.--Hispid or hirsute and often
glandular perennials, with entire or toothed leaves, and single or
panicled heads of mostly yellow flowers; summer and early autumn. (Name
from [Greek: i(e/rax], _a hawk_.)

Sec. 1. _Involucre not much imbricate, scarcely calyculate; achenes oblong;
pappus not copious._

H. AURANTIACUM, L. Low, long-hirsute, above hispid and glandular, the
involucral hairs dark; leaves all near the base of the simple peduncle;
heads clustered; flowers deep orange to flame-color.--Roadsides and
fields; N. Eng. to N. Y. (Nat. from Eu.)

H. PRAEALTUM, Vill. Glaucous, 2 deg. high, only the base and lanceolate
leaves hairy; heads in an open cyme; flowers yellow.--N. New York
(_Ward_). (Nat. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. _Heads large; involucre irregularly imbricated; achenes columnar;
pappus copious, unequal._

H. MURORUM, L. Stem scape-like, low; leaves oval or oblong, obtuse,
toothed toward the subcordate base; heads few, dark-glandular.--Open
woods near Brooklyn, N. Y. (Nat. from Eu.)

1. H. Canadense, Michx. Stems simple, leafy, corymbed at the summit
(1--3 deg. high); leaves sessile, lanceolate or ovate-oblong, acute,
remotely and very coarsely toothed, somewhat hairy, the uppermost
slightly clasping.--Dry woods, N. Eng. to Penn., Minn., and northward.

Sec. 3. _Heads small; involucre cylindrical, scarcely imbricated._

[*] _Achenes columnar, not attenuate upward when mature; panicle not
virgate._

2. H. paniculatum, L. _Stem slender, leafy, diffusely branched_, hairy
only below (1--3 deg. high); leaves lanceolate, acute at both ends, slightly
toothed, smooth; _heads_ (very small) _in a loose panicle_, on slender
and diverging pedicels, _12--20-flowered; achenes short_.--Open woods;
rather common.

3. H. venosum, L. (RATTLESNAKE-WEED.) Stem or _scape_ (1--2 deg. high)
_naked or with a single leaf, smooth and slender, forking above into a
spreading loose corymb_; leaves all radical or near the base, obovate or
oblong, nearly entire, scarcely petioled, thin and pale, purplish and
glaucous underneath (often hairy along the midrib), marked above with
purple veins; pedicels very slender; involucre 12--35-flowered; _achenes
linear_.--Dry plains and pine woods; common from the Atlantic to Minn.
and Iowa.

4. H. Marianum, Willd. _Somewhat leafy_, 2--3 deg. high, hairy below; leaves
obovate-oblong, narrowed below, _the radical petiolate, rarely
purplish-veiny_; heads 20--40-flowered in a very open cymose panicle,
_the slender inflorescence commonly whitish-tomentulose and sparingly
glandular-hispid_.--Open woods and clearings; R. I. to western N. Y.,
and southward.--Var. SPATHULATUM, Gray, a mountain form with leaves all
or mainly radical and very hairy. On Two-top Mountain, Penn.

5. H. scabrum, Michx. Stem rather stout (1--3 deg. high), leafy,
_rough-hairy_, the stiff panicle at first racemose, at length rather
corymbose; the thickish pedicels and the hoary 40--50-flowered involucre
densely clothed with dark glandular bristles; leaves obovate or oval,
nearly entire, hairy.--Dry open woods; common.

[*][*] _Achenes tapering upward; heads 15--30-flowered in a narrow or
virgate panicle._

6. H. Gronovii, L. (HAIRY H.) Stem wand-like, mostly simple (1--3 deg.
high), _leafy and very hairy below, naked above_ and forming a long and
narrow panicle; leaves oblong or obovate, nearly entire, hairy; slender
peduncles and involucre sparingly glandular-bristly; _achenes with a
very taper summit_.--Dry sterile soil; common, especially southward.

7. H. longipilum, Torr. (LONG-BEARDED H.) Stem wand-like, simple, stout
(2--3 deg. high), _very leafy toward the base, naked above_, and bearing a
small racemed panicle; the lower portion and both sides of the
oblong-lanceolate or spatulate entire leaves thickly _clothed with very
long and upright bristles_ (often 1' long); peduncles and involucre
glandular-bristly; _achenes narrowed at the apex_.--Prairies, Mich. to
Minn., and southwestward.


90. CREPIS, L.

Involucre few--many-flowered, commonly of a single row of equal scales,
often becoming thickened at base. Pappus copious, white and soft.
Annuals or biennials, not pilose. Otherwise as Hieracium. (The Greek
name of some plant, from [Greek: krepi/s], _a sandal_.)

C. BIENNIS, L. Somewhat pubescent, 2 deg. high, leafy; leaves
runcinate-pinnatifid; heads rather large, corymbose; achenes oblong,
glabrous.--Vt., Mass.; rare. (Nat. from Eu.)

C. TECTORUM, L. Slender, branching from the base, 1 deg. high; leaves
narrow, runcinate; heads small, in a loose panicle; achenes fusiform,
the ribs scabrous.--In fields, Lansing, Mich., and on ballast. (Nat.
from Eu.)


91. PRENANTHES, Vaill. RATTLESNAKE-ROOT.

Heads 5--30-flowered. Involucre cylindrical, of 5 to 14 linear scales in
a single row, and a few small bractlets at base. Achenes short,
linear-oblong, striate or grooved, not contracted at the apex. Pappus of
copious straw-color or brownish and rough capillary bristles.--Perennial
herbs, with upright leafy stems arising from spindle-shaped (extremely
bitter) tubers, very variable leaves, and racemose-panicled mostly
nodding heads. Flowers greenish-white or yellowish, often tinged with
purple; late summer and autumn. Our species belong to the subgenus
_Nabalus_. The original European species has soft white pappus. (Name
from [Greek: prene/s], _drooping_, and [Greek: a)/nthe], _blossom_.)

[*] _Heads rather broad, 25--35-flowered, in a corymbose panicle._

1. P. crepidinea, Michx. Somewhat smooth; stem stout (5--9 deg. high),
bearing numerous nodding heads in loose clusters; leaves large (6--12'
long), broadly triangular-ovate or halberd-form, strongly-toothed,
contracted into winged petioles; pappus brown. (Nabalus, _DC._)--Rich
soil, Penn. and western N. Y. to Minn., and southward.--Flowers
cream-color.

[*][*] _Heads narrow, 8--15-flowered, in a long raceme-like or thyrsoid
inflorescence; stems simple; cauline leaves sessile; pappus
straw-color._

[+] _Inflorescence pubescent, strict; heads nearly erect,
12--15-flowered._

2. P. racemosa, Michx. Stem 2--5 deg. high, smooth and glaucous, as well as
the oval or oblong-lanceolate denticulate leaves; the lower tapering
into winged petioles (rarely cut-pinnatifid), the upper partly clasping;
heads in crowded clusters; flowers purplish. (Nabalus, _DC._)--Plains,
N. Maine to N. J., Mo., and northward.--Var. PINNATIFIDA, Gray, the
leaves all lyrately pinnatifid. Hackensack marshes, N. J.

3. P. aspera, Michx. Stem 2--4 deg. high, rough-pubescent, as well as the
oval-oblong or broadly lanceolate toothed leaves; upper leaves not
clasping; heads in small clusters; flowers larger, cream-color. (Nabalus
asper, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Dry prairies and barrens, Ohio to Iowa, and
southward.

[+][+] _Whole plant glabrous; heads nodding, 8--12-flowered; thyrse
looser._

4. P. virgata, Michx. (SLENDER RATTLESNAKE-ROOT.) Slightly glaucous;
stem 2--4 deg. high, prolonged into a naked and slender spiked raceme
(1{1/2}--2 deg. long); heads clustered and mostly unilateral; leaves
lanceolate, acute, closely sessile, the upper reduced to bracts, the
lower toothed or pinnatifid; involucre (purplish) of about 8 scales.
(Nabalus, _DC._)--Sandy pine barrens, N. J. to Va., and southward.

5. P. Mainensis, Gray. Stem 2 deg. high, leafy; leaves as in n. 2, but the
radical ovate and more abruptly narrowed to the short petiole; heads
persistently drooping on slender pedicels.--St. John's River, N. Maine
(_Pringle_). Perhaps a hybrid between n. 2 and 7.

[*][*][*] _Heads 5--18-flowered, racemose or paniculate, commonly
pendulous; leaves variable, mostly petiolate, the lower cordate or
truncate or hastate at base._

[+] _Involucre cylindrical; scales scarious-margined, the outer very
short, appressed._

[++] _Pappus reddish-brown; stem tall, generally purplish._

6. P. alba, L. (WHITE LETTUCE. RATTLESNAKE-ROOT.) Smooth and glaucous
(2--4 deg. high); stem corymbose-panicled at the summit; leaves angulate or
triangular-halberd-form, sinuate-toothed or 3--5-cleft, the uppermost
oblong and undivided; involucre (purplish) of about 8 scales,
8--12-flowered. (Nabalus, _Hook_.)--Borders of rich woods; common,
especially northward.

[++][++] _Pappus dirty straw-color or whitish; leaves very variable._

7. P. serpentaria, Pursh. (LION'S-FOOT. GALL-OF-THE-EARTH.) Nearly
smooth; stem corymbose-panicled at the summit, commonly 2 deg. high; leaves
mostly deltoid, roughish; the lower variously 3--7-lobed, on margined
petioles; the upper oblong-lanceolate, mostly undivided, nearly sessile;
involucre (greenish, rarely purplish, sometimes slightly bristly) of
about 8 scales, 8--12-flowered; flowers purplish, greenish white, or
cream-color. (Nabalus Fraseri, _DC._)--Dry sandy or sterile soil,
New Eng. to Va., and southward.

Var. nana, Gray. Stem more simple and strict, 6--16' high, smooth and
glabrous; inflorescence contracted, the clusters often sessile in most
of the axils. (Nabalus nanus, _DC._)--Mountains of northern N. Eng. and
N. Y., and northeastward.

8. P. altissima, L. Smooth; stem tall and slender (3--7 deg. high); the
heads in small axillary and terminal loose clusters forming a long and
wand-like leafy panicle; leaves membranaceous, all petioled, ovate,
heart-shaped, or triangular, and merely toothed or cleft, with naked or
winged petioles, or frequently 3--5-parted, with the divisions entire or
again cleft; involucre slender (greenish), of 5 scales, 5--6-flowered.
(Nabalus, _Hook._)--Rich moist woods; N. Eng. to Minn., and southward in
the mountains to Ga.

[+][+] _Involucre campanulate-oblong; secondary basal scales 2--3,
linear, loose._

9. P. Boottii, Gray. Stem simple, dwarf (5--6' high), pubescent at the
summit; the heads in an almost simple raceme; lowest leaves
halberd-shaped or heart-shaped, the middle oblong, the upper lanceolate,
nearly entire, tapering into a margined petiole; involucre (livid)
10--18-flowered, the proper scales 10--15, very obtuse; pappus
straw-color.--Alpine region, mountains of Maine, N. H., and N. New York.


92. LYGODESMIA, Don.

Heads and flowers (5--10) nearly as in Nabalus; the cylindrical
involucre more elongated, and the achenes long and slender, tapering at
the summit; pappus whitish.--Smooth, often glaucous, low perennials,
with single erect heads of rose-purple flowers terminating almost
leafless or rush-like stems or branches. (Name composed of [Greek:
ly/gos], _a pliant twig_, and [Greek: de/sme], _a bundle_, from the
fascicled twiggy or rush-like stems.)

1. L. juncea, Don. Stems (1 deg. high) tufted, branched, striate; lower
leaves lance-linear, 1--2' long, rigid, the upper awl-shaped and minute;
heads 5-flowered.--St. Croix River, Wisc., to Kan., and westward. July.


93. TROXIMON, Nutt.

Head large, solitary, many-flowered. Scales of the bell-shaped involucre
ovate or lanceolate, pointed, loosely imbricated in 2 or 3 rows. Achenes
smooth, 10-ribbed, with distinct beak or none, pappus longer
than the achene, white, of copious and unequal rigid capillary
bristles.--Perennial scapose herbs, with elongated linear tufted
root-leaves, and yellow flowers. (Name probably from [Greek: tro/go],
_to chew_, of no obvious application.)

1. T. cuspidatum, Pursh. Scape 1 deg. high, from a thickened caudex, leaves
lanceolate, elongated, tapering to a sharp point, entire, woolly on the
margins; scales of the involucre lanceolate, sharp-pointed, achene
beakless.--Prairies, Wisc., N. Ill., and westward. April, May.

2. T. glaucum, Nutt. Scape 1--2 deg. high; leaves linear to lanceolate,
entire to dentate or laciniate; head often pubescent or villous; achene
long-beaked.--Minn. to Neb. and southwestward.


94. TARAXACUM, Haller. DANDELION.

Head many-flowered, large, solitary on a slender hollow scape. Involucre
double, the outer of short scales; the inner of long linear scales,
erect in a single row. Achenes oblong-ovate to fusiform, 4--5-ribbed,
the ribs roughened, the apex prolonged into a very slender beak, bearing
the copious soft and white capillary pappus.--Perennials or biennials;
leaves radical, pinnatifid or runcinate; flowers yellow. (Name from
[Greek: tara/sso], _to disquiet_ or _disorder_, in allusion to medicinal
properties.)

T. OFFICINALE, Weber. (COMMON DANDELION.) Smooth, or at first pubescent;
outer involucre reflexed. (T. Dens-leonis, _Desf._)--Pastures and fields
everywhere. Indigenous forms occur northward and in the Rocky Mountains.
April--Sept.--After blossoming, the inner involucre closes, and the
slender beak elongates and raises up the pappus while the fruit is
forming; the whole involucre is then reflexed, exposing to the wind the
naked fruits, with the pappus displayed in an open globular head. (Eu.)


95. PYRRHOPAPPUS, DC. FALSE DANDELION.

Heads, etc., nearly as in Taraxacum, but the soft pappus reddish or
rusty-color, and surrounded at base by a soft-villous ring.--Mostly
annual or biennial herbs, scapose or often branching and leafy below.
Heads solitary, terminating the naked summit of the stem or branches.
Flowers deep yellow. (Name composed of [Greek: pyr)r(o/s],
_flame-colored_, and [Greek: pappo/s], pappus.)

1. P. Carolinianus, DC. Annual or biennial, stem branching (1--2 deg. high);
leaves oblong or lanceolate, entire, cut, or pinnatifid, the stem-leaves
partly clasping.--Sandy fields, from Maryland southward. April--July.

2. P. scaposus, DC. Low, scapose, perennial by roundish tubers; leaves
all radical, pinnatifid.--Prairies; Kan. to Tex.


96. CHONDRILLA, Tourn.

Heads few-flowered. Involucre cylindrical, of several narrow linear
equal scales, and a row of small bractlets at base. Achenes terete,
several-ribbed, smooth below, roughened at the summit by little scaly
projections, from among which springs an abrupt slender beak; pappus of
copious very fine and soft capillary bristles, bright white.--Herbs of
the Old World, with wand-like branching stems, and small heads of yellow
flowers. (A name of Dioscorides for some plant which exudes a gum.)

C. JUNCEA, L. Biennial, bristly-hairy below, smooth above (1--3 deg. high);
root-leaves runcinate; stem-leaves few and small, linear; heads
scattered on nearly leafless branches, 6--8'' long.--Fields and
roadsides, abundant in Md. and northern Va. Aug. (Adv. from Eu.)


97. LACTUCA, Tourn. LETTUCE.

Heads several--many-flowered. Involucre cylindrical or in fruit conical;
scales imbricated in 2 or more sets of unequal lengths. Achenes flat
(obcompressed, parallel to the scales), abruptly contracted into a beak,
which is dilated at the apex, bearing a copious and fugacious
very soft and white capillary pappus, its bristles falling
separately.--Leafy-stemmed herbs, with panicled heads; flowers of
variable color, produced in summer and autumn. (The ancient name of the
Lettuce, _L. sativa_; from _lac_, milk, in allusion to the milky juice.)

Sec. 1. SCARIOLA. _Achenes very flat, orbicular to oblong, 1-nerved on each
face, with a filiform beak; biennial or annual; cauline leaves
sagittate-clasping._

L. SCARIOLA, L. (PRICKLY LETTUCE.) Stem below sparsely prickly-bristly,
as also the midrib on the lower face of the oblong or lanceolate
spinulose-denticulate vertical leaves; panicle narrow; heads small,
6--12-flowered; achenes striate.--Waste grounds and roadsides, Atlantic
States to Mo. and Minn. (Adv. from Eu.)

1. L. Canadensis, L. (WILD LETTUCE.) Mostly tall (4--9 deg. high), very
leafy, smooth or nearly so, glaucous; leaves 6--12' long, pale beneath,
mostly sinuate-pinnatifid, the upper lanceolate and entire (rarely all
but the lower narrow and entire); heads about 20-flowered, 3--6'' long,
numerous, in long and narrow or diffuse panicles; flowers pale yellow;
achene oval, rather longer than the beak.--Rich damp soil, borders of
fields or thickets; common.

2. L. integrifolia, Bigel. Less leafy, 3--4 deg. high, loosely branched
above or heads loosely panicled; leaves undivided, oblong-lanceolate,
pointed, denticulate or entire; flowers yellow or purplish. (L.
Canadensis, var. integrifolia, _Torr. & Gray_.)--N. Eng. to Ill., and
southward.

3. L. hirsuta, Muhl. Rather few-leaved, 2--3 deg. high, commonly hirsute at
base; leaves hirsute both sides or only on the midrib, mostly
runcinate-pinnatifid; heads in a loose open panicle; achenes
oblong-oval, about as long as the beak; flowers yellow-purple, rarely
whitish. (L. Canadensis, var. sanguinea, _Torr. & Gray_.)--E. Mass. to
Minn., and southward.

4. L. Ludoviciana, DC. Glabrous, leafy, 2--5 deg. high; leaves oblong,
sinuate-pinnatifid and spinulosely dentate, ciliate; heads in an open
panicle; involucre more imbricate; flowers yellow.--Minn., Iowa, and
southwestward.

Sec. 2. LACTUCASTRUM. _Achenes flat, lanceolate-oblong, tapering to a short
slender beak; perennial; flowers blue._

5. L. pulchella, DC. Pale or glaucous; stem simple, 1--2 deg. high; leaves
sessile, oblong- or linear-lanceolate, entire, or the lower
runcinate-pinnatifid; heads few and large, racemose, erect on
scaly-bracted peduncles; involucral scales imbricated in 3 or 4 ranks.
(Mulgedium, _Nutt._)--Upper Mich. to Minn.; common on the plains
westward.

Sec. 3. MULGEDIUM. _Achenes thickish, oblong, contracted into a short thick
beak or neck; annual or biennial; flowers chiefly blue._

6. L. acuminata, Gray. Tall biennial (3--7 deg. high), with many small heads
in a loose panicle, on diverging peduncles; leaves ovate to
oblong-lanceolate, pointed, sharply and sometimes doubly serrate,
sometimes hairy on the midrib beneath, contracted into a winged petiole,
the lowest occasionally sinuate or cleft at base, and the cauline
sagittate or hastate; achenes beakless; pappus white. (Mulgedium,
_DC._)--Borders of woods, N. Y. to Ill. and Fla.

7. L. Floridana, Gaertn. Leaves all lyrate or runcinate, the upper often
with a heart-shaped clasping base; panicle larger; achenes distinctly
beaked; otherwise as n. 7.--Rich soil, Penn. to Ill., and southward.

8. L. leucophaea, Gray. Nearly smooth biennial; stem tall (3--12 deg. high),
very leafy; leaves irregularly pinnatifid, sometimes runcinate, coarsely
toothed, the upper cauline sessile and auriculate, sometimes clasping;
heads in a large and dense compound panicle; flowers bluish to
cream-color; achene short-beaked; pappus tawny. (Mulgedium, _DC._)--Low
grounds; rather common.--Var. INTEGRIFOLIA, Gray. Leaves undivided, or
the lower sinuate-pinnatifid. Ohio to Ill.


98. SONCHUS, L. SOW-THISTLE.

Heads many-flowered, becoming tumid at base. Involucre more or less
imbricated. Achenes obcompressed, ribbed or striate, not beaked; pappus
copious, of very white exceedingly soft and fine bristles mainly falling
together.--Leafy-stemmed coarse weeds, chiefly smooth and glaucous, with
corymbed or umbellate heads of yellow flowers; produced in summer and
autumn. (The ancient Greek name.)

[*] _Annual (1--5 deg. high); flowers pale yellow._

S. OLERACEUS, L. (COMMON SOW-THISTLE.) Stem-leaves runcinate-pinnatifid,
or rarely undivided, slightly toothed with soft spiny teeth, clasping by
a heart-shaped base, the auricles acute; involucre downy when young;
achenes striate, also wrinkled transversely.--Waste places in manured
soil and around dwellings. (Nat. from Eu.)

S. ASPER, Vill. (SPINY-LEAVED S.) Stem leaves less divided and more
spiny-toothed, the auricles of the clasping base rounded; achenes
margined, 3-nerved on each side, smooth.--With and like the last. (Nat.
from Eu.)

[*][*] _Perennial, with creeping rootstocks; flowers bright yellow, in
large heads._

S. ARVENSIS, L. (FIELD S.) Leaves runcinate-pinnatifid, spiny-toothed,
clasping by a heart-shaped base; peduncles and involucre bristly;
achenes transversely wrinkled on the ribs.--Roadsides, etc., N. Eng. and
N. Y.; becoming more common. (Nat. from Eu.)


ORDER 56. LOBELIACEAE. (LOBELIA FAMILY.)

_Herbs with acrid milky juice, alternate leaves, and scattered flowers,
an irregular monopetalous 5-lobed corolla, the 5 stamens free from the
corolla, and united into a tube commonly by their filaments and always
by their anthers._--Calyx-tube adherent to the many-seeded pod. Style 1;
stigma often fringed. Seeds anatropous, with a small straight embryo, in
copious albumen.--Nearly passing into the following order.


1. LOBELIA, L.

Calyx 5-cleft, with a short tube. Corolla with a straight tube, split
down on the (apparently) upper side, somewhat 2-lipped; the upper lip of
2 rather erect lobes, the lower lip spreading and 3-cleft. Two of the
anthers in our species bearded at the top. Pod 2-celled, many-seeded,
opening at the top.--Flowers axillary or chiefly in bracted racemes, in
summer and early autumn. (Dedicated to _Matthias De l'Obel_, an early
Flemish herbalist.)

[*] _Flowers deep red, large; stem simple._

1. L. cardinalis, L. (CARDINAL-FLOWER.) Tall (2--4 deg. high), smoothish;
leaves oblong-lanceolate, slightly toothed; raceme elongated, rather
1-sided; the pedicels much shorter than the leaf-like bracts.--Low
grounds, common.--Perennial by offsets, with large and very showy
intensely red flowers, varying rarely to rose-color or even white.
Hybrids with the next species also occur.

[*][*] _Flowers blue, or blue variegated with white._

[+] _Flowers rather large (corolla-tube 5--6'' long), spicate-racemose;
stems leafy, 1--3 deg. high; perennial._

[++] _Leaves ovate to lanceolate, numerous; lip of corolla glabrous._

2. L. syphilitica, L. (GREAT LOBELIA.) _Somewhat hairy; leaves thin,
acute at both ends_ (2--6' long), irregularly serrate; flowers (nearly
1' long) pedicelled, longer than the leafy bracts; calyx hirsute, the
_sinuses with conspicuous deflexed auricles_, the short _tube
hemispherical_.--Low grounds, common.--Flowers light blue, rarely white.

3. L. puberula, Michx. _Finely soft-pubescent; leaves thickish, obtuse_
(1--2' long), with small glandular teeth; spike rather 1-sided; bracts
ovate; _sinuses of the calyx with short and rounded or often
inconspicuous auricles, the hairy tube top-shaped_.--Moist sandy
grounds, N. J. to Iowa, and south to Tex. and Fla.--Corolla bright
blue, 1/2' long.

4. L. amoena, Michx. _Glabrous_ or nearly so; raceme virgate; leaves
narrower; bracts lanceolate or linear, often glandular-denticulate;
calyx-lobes long and very slender, usually without auricles, the tube
glabrous.--S. Atlantic States, in swamps.--Var. GLANDULIFERA, Gray; a
slender form with secund raceme, oval to lance-oblong obtuse
gland-toothed leaves, and the bracts and calyx-teeth beset with slender
gland-tipped teeth. S. Va. and southward.

[++][++] _Leaves long and narrow, sparse above; lip of corolla pubescent
at base._

5. L. glandulosa, Walt. Glabrous, or sparingly pubescent; leaves,
bracts, and usually the lobes of the calyx, strongly glandular-toothed;
calyx-tube densely hispid, rarely sparsely so or smoothish, the sinuses
not auriculate.--Pine-barren swamps, S. Va. to Fla.

[+][+] _Flowers smaller (corolla-tube not more than 2--3'' long)._

[++] _Stem leafy, mostly simple, continued into an elongated virgate
spike-like raceme; leaves lanceolate to obovate, barely denticulate or
repand._

6. L. leptostachys, A. DC. Smooth above; leaves obtuse, denticulate,
oblong-lanceolate, the upper gradually reduced to awl-shaped bracts;
calyx-lobes nearly equalling the corolla, with 10 _reflexed awl-shaped
appendages as long as the hemispherical tube_.--Sandy soil, Ohio to Ill.
and Mo.; also Va. to Ga.

7. L. spicata, Lam. Stem slender, _strict_ (1--4 deg. high) from a biennial
(?) root, below and the barely denticulate leaves minutely pubescent;
lower and root-leaves obovate or spatulate, the upper reduced to linear
or club-shaped bracts; calyx-tube short, obconical or becoming almost
hemispherical, _sinuses not appendaged_.--Moist or dry, mostly gravelly
or sandy soil, N. New Eng. to Sask., south to Ark. and La. Fl. through
summer.--Var. PARVIFLORA, Gray, a small form, with calyx-lobes broadly
subulate, and pale corolla but 3'' long. Swamps, Lancaster, Penn.
(_Porter_); beginning to flower in June.--Var. HIRTELLA, Gray; with
somewhat scabrous pubescence, and minutely hirsute-ciliate bracts and
calyx-lobes. Chiefly toward and beyond the Mississippi.

[++][++] _Stem leafy, often paniculately branched; flowers loosely
racemose; sinuses of calyx not appendaged; annual or biennial._

[=] _Leaves chiefly linear, entire or denticulate; pod not inflated._

8. L. Canbyi, Gray. Stem strict (1--2 deg. high), minutely angled; _pedicels
shorter than the bracts and flowers_, minutely roughened under a lens;
_bractlets none; calyx-tube top-shaped, acute at base, only half the
length of the lobes_ (which, with the linear leaves, are sparsely
glandular-denticulate), in fruit becoming oblong, covering the whole
pod; corolla deep blue (fully 5'' long), more or less _bearded in the
throat_.--Wet places, N. J., Del., and S. C.

9. L. Kalmii, L. Stem mostly low (4--18' high), minutely angled;
_pedicels filiform, not exceeding_ the linear or setaceous _bracts but
as long as the flower, minutely 2-bracteolate or 2-glandular above the
middle; calyx-tube top-shaped or obovoid_, fully half the length of the
lobes, in fruit rather longer than they, covering the whole pod, corolla
light blue, 4--5'' long.--Wet limestone rocks and banks, N. Eng. to
L. Winnipeg, south to Penn., Ind., and Minn.

10. L. Nuttallii, Roem. & Schult. Stem very slender (1--2 deg. high),
terete; _pedicels mostly longer than the bract and shorter than the
flower_, usually with very minute bractlets near the base; _calyx-tube
very short, depressed-hemispherical in fruit_, the globular pod half
free; corolla pale blue, barely 3'' long.--Sandy swamps, N. J. and Penn.
to Ga.

[=][=] _Leaves ovate or oblong, obtusely toothed; pod inflated, wholly
inferior._

11. L. inflata, L. (INDIAN TOBACCO.) Stems paniculately much branched
from an annual root, pubescent with spreading hairs (1--2 deg. high); leaves
gradually diminishing into leaf-like bracts, which exceed the lower
short-pedicelled flowers; calyx-tube ovoid.--Dry open fields.--Corolla
only 11/2--2'' long. Plant poisonous and a noted quack medicine.

[++][++][++] _Stem scape-like, mostly simple, hollow; leaves fleshy;
fibrous-rooted perennials, very glabrous, mostly aquatic, with pale blue
or whitish flowers._

12. L. paludosa, Nutt. Nearly smooth; stem slender (1--4 deg. high); _leaves
flat, scattered near the base, linear-spatulate_ or oblong-linear,
glandular-denticulate, mostly tapering into a petiole; lower lip of
corolla bearded in the middle; calyx-tube about half the length of the
short lobes, hemispherical in fruit.--In water (but foliage emerged),
Del. to Fla. and La.

13. L. Dortmanna, L. (WATER LOBELIA.) Very smooth; _scape thickish_
(5--12' high), _few-flowered; leaves all tufted at the root, linear,
terete, hollow_, with a partition lengthwise; lower lip of corolla
slightly hairy; calyx-tube about as long as the lobes, in fruit much
longer.--Borders of ponds (often immersed), N. Eng. to N. Penn.,
L. Superior, and northward. (Eu.)


ORDER 57. CAMPANULACEAE. (CAMPANULA FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with milky juice, alternate leaves, and scattered flowers; calyx
adherent to the ovary; the regular 5-lobed corolla bell-shaped, valvate
in the bud; the 5 stamens usually free from the corolla and
distinct._--Style 1, usually beset with collecting hairs above; stigmas
2 or more. Capsule 2--several-celled, many-seeded. Seed small,
anatropous, with a straight embryo in fleshy albumen. Flowers generally
blue and showy.


1. SPECULARIA, Heister. VENUS'S LOOKING-GLASS.

Calyx 5- (or 3--4-) lobed. Corolla wheel-shaped, 5-lobed. Stamens 5,
separate; the membranaceous hairy filaments shorter than the anthers.
Stigmas 3. Capsule prismatic or elongated-oblong, 3-celled, opening by
3 small lateral valves.--Low annuals, with axillary blue or purplish
flowers, in American species dimorphous, the earlier being
cleistogamous. (Name from _Speculum Veneris_, the early name of the
common European species.)

1. S. perfoliata, A. DC. Somewhat hairy (3--20' high); _leaves roundish
or ovate, clasping by the heart-shaped base_, toothed; flowers sessile,
solitary or 2--3 together in the axils, only the upper or later ones
having a conspicuous and expanding corolla; _capsule oblong, short,
straight, opening rather below the middle_; seeds lenticular.--Sterile
open ground; common. May--Aug.

2. S. leptocarpa, Gray. Minutely hirsute or nearly glabrous (6--12'
high); _leaves lanceolate_, with flowers closely sessile in their axils;
calyx-lobes of lower flowers 3; _capsule nearly cylindrical (6--9''
long, 1'' thick), inclined to curve, opening by one or two uplifted
valves near the summit_; seeds oblong.--W. Mo. and Ark. to Col. and
W. Tex. Expanded corolla 6--9'' wide.


2. CAMPANULA, Tourn. BELLFLOWER.

Calyx 5-cleft. Corolla generally bell-shaped, 5-lobed. Stamens 5,
separate; the filaments broad and membranaceous at the base. Stigmas and
cells of the capsule 3 in our species, the short pod opening on the
sides by as many valves or holes.--Herbs, with terminal or axillary
flowers; in summer. (A diminutive of the Italian _campana_, a bell, from
the shape of the corolla.)

[*] _Style straight; openings of capsule below the middle._

[+] _Coarse pubescent many-flowered European species, sparingly
naturalized; perennial._

C. RAPUNCULOIDES, L. Smoothish, slender, erect; stem-leaves
ovate-lanceolate, pointed, the lower long-petioled and heart-shaped;
flowers nodding, single in the axil of bracts, forming racemes; corolla
oblong, 1' long.--Roadsides and fields, Canada and N. Eng. to Penn.

C. GLOMERATA, L. (CLUSTERED B.) Somewhat hairy, stout and erect, 1 deg.
high; stem-leaves oblong or lanceolate, cordate-clasping; flowers
sessile, clustered in the upper axils, forming a leafy head; corolla
open-bell-shaped, 1' long.--Roadsides, E. Mass.

[+][+] _Slender perennials, mostly glabrous; flowers one or few, on
slender peduncles._

1. C. rotundifolia, L. (HAREBELL.) Slender, branching (5--12' high),
1--10-flowered; _root-leaves round-heart-shaped_ or ovate, mostly
toothed or crenate, long-petioled, early withering away; _stem-leaves_
numerous, _linear or narrowly lanceolate, entire, smooth; calyx-lobes
awl-shaped_, from {1/3} to {2/3} the length of the bright-blue corolla
(which is 6--9'' long); _capsule nodding_.--Rocky shaded banks,
throughout the northern part of our range, and southward in the
mountains.--A delicate and pretty species, but with a most inappropriate
name, since the round root-leaves are rarely obvious. (Eu.)

Var. arctica, Lange. Stems more upright and rather rigid; lowest leaves
spatulate; the very slender calyx-lobes soon spreading or deflexed;
corolla {2/3}--1' long. (C. rotundifolia, var. linifolia, _of
Man_.)--Shores of the Great Lakes, and northward. (Eu.)

Var. velutina, DC., has the whole herbage canescently
pubescent.--Sand-hills of Burt Lake, Mich. (_E. J. Hill_).

2. C. aparinoides, Pursh. (MARSH BELLFLOWER.) _Stem simple and slender,
weak_ (8--20' high), few-flowered, somewhat 3-angled, _rough backward on
the angles, as are the_ slightly toothed _edges and midrib of the
linear-lanceolate leaves; peduncles diverging_, slender; _lobes of the
calyx triangular_, half the length of the bell-shaped nearly white
corolla; _capsule erect_.--Wet grassy grounds, throughout our range.
With somewhat the habit of a Galium.

3. C. divaricata, Michx. Very smooth; stem loosely branched (1--3 deg.
high); _leaves oblong-lanceolate_, pointed at both ends, _coarsely and
sharply toothed; flowers numerous_ on the branches of the large compound
panicle; _calyx-lobes awl-shaped_, about half the length of the
pale-blue small corolla (3'' long); style exserted.--Dry woods and
rocks, mountains of Va., E. Ky., and southward.

[*][*] _Style declined and upwardly curved, much longer than the rotate
corolla; openings of the capsule close to the summit; inflorescence
spicate._

4. C. Americana, L. (TALL BELLFLOWER.) Annual; stem mostly simple (3--6 deg.
high); leaves ovate and ovate-lanceolate, taper-pointed, serrate, mostly
on margined petioles, thin, somewhat hairy (21/2--6' long); spike 1--2 deg.
long; corolla light blue, 1' broad.--Moist rich soil, western N. Y. to
Minn., south to Ga. and Ark.


ORDER 58. ERICACEAE. (HEATH FAMILY.)

_Shrubs, sometimes herbs, with the flowers regular or nearly so; stamens
as many or twice as many as the 4--5-lobed or 4--5-petalled corolla,
free from but inserted with it; anthers 2-celled, commonly appendaged,
or opening by terminal chinks or pores, introrse_ (except in Suborder
3); _style 1; ovary 3--10-celled_. Pollen compound, of 4 united grains
(except in Suborder 4). Seeds small, anatropous. Embryo small, or
sometimes minute, in fleshy albumen.--A large family, very various in
many of the characters, comprising four well-marked suborders, as
follows:--

SUBORDER I. Vaccinieae. (WHORTLEBERRY FAMILY.) Calyx-tube adherent to the
ovary, which forms an edible berry or berry-like fruit, crowned with the
short calyx-teeth. Anther-cells opening at the apex.--Shrubs or somewhat
woody plants, with scaly buds.

1. Gaylussacia. Ovary 10-celled, with a single ovule in each cell. Fruit
a berried drupe with 10 small seed-like nutlets.

2. Vaccinium. Berry 4--5-celled (or imperfectly 8--10-celled by false
partitions), many-seeded. Anther-cells tapering upward into a tube.

3. Chiogenes. Berry 4-celled, many-seeded, its summit free. Anther-cells
not prolonged into a tube, but each 2-pointed. Slender trailing
evergreen.

SUBORDER II. Ericineae. (HEATH FAMILY proper.) Calyx free from the ovary.
Corolla monopetalous, rarely polypetalous, hypogynous.--Shrubs or small
trees.

Tribe I. ARBUTEAE. Fruit indehiscent, a berry or drupe. Corolla
deciduous.

4. Arctostaphylos. Corolla urn-shaped. Drupe berry-like, 5--10-seeded.

Tribe II. ANDROMEDEAE. Fruit a loculicidal capsule (berry-like in n. 6).
Corolla deciduous.

[*] Anther cells opening through their whole length, not appendaged.

5. Epigaea. Corolla salver-shaped. Calyx of 5 separate dry and pointed
sepals.

[*][*] Anther-cells opening only at the top. Corolla not salver-shaped.

[+] Calyx becoming enlarged and berry-like in fruit.

6. Gaultheria. Calyx 5-cleft, in fruit enclosing the capsule. Anthers
4-awned at top.

[+][+] Calyx dry, not becoming fleshy after flowering.

[++] Corolla urceolate to cylindrical, 5-toothed; not heath-like.

7. Andromeda. Calyx valvate and very early open, naked. Capsule
globular. Seeds mostly hanging on the central placenta.

8. Oxydendrum. Calyx short, early open, naked. Capsule oblong-pyramidal.
Seeds all ascending. A small tree.

9. Leucothoe. Calyx slightly or much imbricated, naked or bibracteate.
Corolla cylindraceous. Capsule depressed, 5-lobed, the valves entire.

10. Cassandra. Calyx of rigid imbricated ovate sepals, bibracteate.
Corolla cylindraceous. Capsule splitting when ripe into an outer and
inner layer, the inner of 10 valves.

[++][++] Corolla campanulate, 4--5-lobed or -parted; heath-like, with
acerose imbricated leaves.

11. Cassiope. Calyx of ovate imbricated sepals. Capsule globular-ovoid,
4--5-valved, the valves 2-cleft.

Tribe III. ERICEAE. Corolla persistent, becoming scarious. Capsule
septicidal.

12. Calluna. Corolla bell-shaped, 4-parted. Leaves minute, opposite,
imbricate.

Tribe IV. RHODODENDREAE. Fruit a septicidal capsule. Corolla deciduous.

[*] Anther-cells opening by a hole or chink at the top.

[+] Flowers not from scaly buds; the bracts leaf-like or coriaceous.

13. Bryanthus. Corolla ovate or urn-shaped. Leaves narrow and
heath-like.

14. Kalmia. Corolla broadly bell-shaped or wheel-shaped, with 10 pouches
receiving as many anthers. Leaves oblong or linear.

[+][+] Flowers developed from large scaly buds, the scales or bracts
caducous.

15. Menziesia. Corolla globular-bell-shaped, 4-toothed. Stamens 8.
Leaves deciduous.

16. Rhododendron. Flowers usually 5-merous. Corolla bell-shaped or
funnel-form, lobed or parted, often somewhat irregular. Leaves deciduous
or evergreen.

17. Ledum. Corolla regular, all 5 petals nearly separate. Stamens 5--10.
Leaves evergreen.

[*][*] Anther-cells opening lengthwise. Leaves evergreen. Bud-scales
firm and persistent.

18. Leiophyllum. Corolla of 5 separate petals. Stamens 10, exserted.

19. Loiseleuria. Corolla deeply 5-cleft. Stamens 5, included.

SUBORDER III. Pyroleae. (PYROLA FAMILY.) Calyx free from the ovary.
Corolla polypetalous. Anthers extrorse in the bud, opening by pores at
the base (inverted in the flower). Seeds with a loose and translucent
cellular coat much larger than the nucleus.

Tribe I. CLETHREAE. Shrubs or trees, with deciduous foliage (in ours).
Pollen-grains simple. Capsule 3-celled.

20. Clethra. Sepals and petals 5. Stamens 10. Style 3-cleft at the apex.

Tribe II. PYROLEAE. Herbs or nearly so, with evergreen foliage.
Pollen-grains compound. Capsules 5- (rarely 4-) celled.

21. Chimaphila. Stems leafy. Flowers corymbed or umbelled. Petals widely
spreading. Style very short and top-shaped. Valves of the capsule
smooth on the edges.

22. Moneses. Scape 1-flowered. Petals widely spreading. Style straight,
exserted; stigma 5-rayed. Valves of the capsule smooth on the edges.

23. Pyrola. Acaulescent. Flowers in a raceme. Petals not widely
spreading. Filaments awl-shaped. Style long. Valves of the capsule
cobwebby on the edges.

SUBORDER IV. Monotropeae. (INDIAN-PIPE FAMILY.) Flowers nearly as in
Suborders 2 or 3, but the plants herbaceous, root-parasitic, entirely
destitute of green foliage, and with the aspect of Beech-drops. Seeds
as in Suborder 3.

[*] Corolla monopetalous; anthers 2-celled.

24. Pterospora. Corolla ovate, 5-toothed; anthers 2-awned on the back,
opening lengthwise.

25. Schweinitzia. Corolla broadly bell-shaped, 5-lobed; anthers opening
at the top.

[*][*] Corolla of 4 or 5 separate petals; calyx imperfect or bract-like.

26. Monotropa. Petals narrow. Anthers kidney-shaped, opening across the
top.


1. GAYLUSSACIA, HBK. HUCKLEBERRY.

Corolla tubular, ovoid, or bell-shaped; the border 5-cleft. Stamens 10;
anthers awnless; the cells tapering upward into more or less of a tube,
opening by a chink at the end. Fruit a berry-like drupe, containing 10
seed-like nutlets.--Branching shrubs, with the aspect of Vaccinium,
commonly sprinkled with resinous dots; the flowers (white tinged with
purple or red) in lateral and bracted racemes. (Named for the
distinguished chemist, _Gay-Lussac_.)

[*] _Leaves thick and evergreen, somewhat serrate, not resinous-dotted._

1. G. brachycera, Gray. (BOX-HUCKLEBERRY.) Very smooth (1 deg. high); leaves
oval, finely crenate-toothed; racemes short and nearly sessile; pedicels
very short; corolla cylindrical-bell-shaped.--Wooded hills, Perry Co.,
Penn., to Del. and Va. May.--Leaves resembling those of the Box.

[*][*] _Leaves deciduous, entire, sprinkled more or less with resinous
or waxy atoms._

2. G. dumosa, Torr. & Gray. (DWARF HUCKLEBERRY.) _Somewhat hairy_ and
glandular, low (1--5 deg. high from a creeping base), bushy; _leaves_
obovate-oblong, _mucronate, green both sides_, rather thick and shining
when old; racemes elongated; _bracts leaf-like, oval, persistent, as
long as the pedicels; ovary bristly or glandular_; corolla bell-shaped,
fruit black (insipid).--Var. HIRTELLA has the young branchlets, racemes,
and often the leaves hairy.--Sandy swamps, Newf., along the coast to
Fla. and La.; the var. chiefly southward. June.

3. G. frondosa, Torr. & Gray. (BLUE TANGLE. DANGLEBERRY.) _Smooth_
(3--6 deg. high); branches slender and divergent; _leaves_ obovate-oblong,
blunt, _pale, glaucous beneath_; racemes slender, loose, _bracts oblong
or linear, deciduous, shorter than the slender drooping pedicels_;
corolla globular-bell-shaped; fruit dark blue with a white bloom (sweet
and edible).--Low copses, coast of N. Eng. and mountains of Penn. to
Ky., south to La. and Fla. May, June.

4. G. resinosa, Torr. & Gray. (BLACK HUCKLEBERRY.) Much branched, rigid,
_slightly pubescent_ when young (1--3 deg. high), _leaves_ oval,
oblong-ovate or oblong, thickly clothed and at first _clammy, as well as
the flowers, with shining resinous globules_, racemes short, clustered,
one-sided; pedicels about the length of the flowers; _bracts and
bractlets (reddish) small and deciduous_, corolla ovoid-conical, or at
length cylindrical with an open mouth; fruit black, without bloom
(pleasant, very rarely white).--Rocky woodlands and swamps, Newf. to
Minn., south to N. Ga. May, June.--The common _Huckleberry_ of the
markets.


2. VACCINIUM, L. BLUEBERRY. BILBERRY. CRANBERRY.

Corolla various in shape; the limb 4--5-cleft, revolute. Stamens 8 or
10; anthers sometimes 2-awned on the back; the cells separate and
prolonged upward into a tube, opening by a hole at the apex. Berry
4--5-celled, many-seeded, or sometimes 8--10-celled by a false partition
stretching from the back of each cell to the placenta.--Shrubs with
solitary, clustered, or racemed flowers; the corolla white or reddish.
(Ancient Latin name, of obscure derivation.)

Sec. 1. BATODENDRON. _Corolla open-campanulate, 5-lobed; anthers with long
tubes, and 2-awned on the back; berry (hardly edible) spuriously
10-celled; leaves deciduous but firm; flowers solitary or in
leafy-bracted racemes, slender-pedicelled._

1. V. arboreum, Marshall. (FARKLE-BERRY.) _Tall_ (6--25 deg. high),
smoothish; leaves obovate to oblong, entire or denticulate, mucronate,
bright green, shining above, at the south evergreen; _corolla white;
anthers included_; berries black, globose, small, many-seeded.--Sandy
soil, S. Ill. to Tex., Fla., and N. C.

2. V. stamineum, L. (DEERBERRY. SQUAW HUCKLEBERRY.) Diffusely branched
(2--3 deg. high), somewhat pubescent; leaves ovate or oval, pale, glaucous
or whitish underneath; _corolla greenish-white or purplish; anthers much
exserted_; berries greenish or yellowish, globular or pear-shaped,
large, few-seeded.--Dry woods, Maine to Minn., south to Fla. and La.

Sec. 2. CYANOCOCCUS. (BLUEBERRIES.) _Corolla cylindraceous to campanulate,
5-toothed; filaments hairy; anthers included, awnless; berry (sweet and
edible) blue or black with bloom, completely or incompletely 10-celled;
flowers in fascicles or short racemes, short-pedicelled, appearing from
large scaly buds with or before the leaves._

[*] _Corolla cylindraceous when developed._

3. V. virgatum, Ait. Low, more or less pubescent; leaves ovate-oblong to
cuneate-lanceolate, usually acute and minutely serrulate, thinnish,
shining at least above; flower-clusters sometimes virgate on naked
branches; corolla rose-color; berry black.--In swamps, south of our
range, but represented by

Var. tenellum, Gray. Low form, mostly small-leaved, with smaller nearly
white flowers in shorter or closer clusters.--Va. to Ark., and
southward.

[*][*] _Corolla shorter and broader._ (BLUEBERRIES or BLUE
HUCKLEBERRIES.)

4. V. Pennsylvanicum, Lam. (DWARF BLUEBERRY.) Dwarf (6--15' high),
smooth, with green warty stems and branches; _leaves lanceolate or
oblong, distinctly serrulate with bristle-pointed teeth, smooth and
shining both sides_ (or sometimes downy on the midrib underneath);
corolla short, cylindrical-bell-shaped; berries bluish-black and
glaucous.--Dry hills, N. J. to Ill., north to Newf. and Sask. The lowest
and earliest ripened of the blueberries.--Var. ANGUSTIFOLIUM, Gray; a
dwarfer high-mountain or northern form, with narrower lanceolate
leaves.--White Mts. of N. H., Newf., and far northward.

5. V. Canadense, Kalm. Low (1--2 deg. high); _leaves oblong-lanceolate or
elliptical, entire, downy both sides_, as well as the crowded
branchlets; corolla shorter; otherwise as the last.--Swamps or moist
woods, N. New Eng. to mountains of Penn., Ill., Minn., and northward.

6. V. vacillans, Solander. (LOW BLUEBERRY.) _Low_ (1--21/2 deg. high),
_glabrous_, with yellowish-green branchlets; _leaves obovate or oval,
very pale or dull, glaucous_, at least underneath, minutely
ciliolate-serrulate or entire; corolla between bell-shaped and
cylindraceous, the mouth somewhat contracted.--Dry places, especially in
sandy soil, New Eng. to Mich. and Iowa, south to N. C. and Mo.--Berries
ripening later than those of n. 4.

7. V. corymbosum, L. (COMMON or SWAMP-BLUEBERRY.) _Tall_ (5--10 deg. high);
_leaves ovate, oval, oblong, or elliptical-lanceolate_; corolla varying
from turgid-ovate and cylindrical-urn-shaped to oblong-cylindrical,
3--4'' long.--Swamps and low thickets, throughout our range and
southward. This yields the common _blueberry_ or _blue huckleberry_ of
the latter part of the season. The typical form has leaves with naked
entire margins, and may be pubescent or glabrous (var. GLABRUM, _Gray_,
Man.) Numerous gradations unite the following varieties:--

Var. amoenum, Gray. Leaves bristly-ciliate, shining above, green both
sides, beneath somewhat pubescent on the veins.--Middle Atlantic States.

Var. pallidum, Gray. Leaves mostly glabrous, pale or whitish, glaucous
especially underneath, serrulate with bristly teeth.--Common in the
Alleghanies southward, mostly on the higher ridges.

Var. atrococcum, Gray. The most distinct form; leaves entire, downy or
woolly underneath even when old, as also the branchlets; berries
smaller, black, without bloom.--New Eng. to Penn.

Sec. 3. VACCINIUM proper. (BILBERRIES.) _Corolla ovate to globular,
4--5-toothed; filaments glabrous; anthers 2-awned on the back, included;
berry 4--5-celled; leaves deciduous; flowers on drooping pedicels,
solitary or few together, appearing with or after the leaves; mostly
glabrous._

[*] _Parts of the flower mostly in fours; stamens 8._

8. V. uliginosum, L. (BOG BILBERRY.) Low and spreading (4'--2 deg. high),
tufted; leaves entire, dull, obovate or oblong, pale and slightly
pubescent underneath; flowers single or 2--3 together from a scaly bud,
almost sessile; corolla short, urn-shaped; berries black with a bloom,
sweet.--Alpine tops of the high mountains of N. Eng. and N. Y., shore of
L. Superior, and northwestward. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Parts of the flower in fives; stamens 10; leaves membranaceous;
flowers solitary on short axillary peduncles, nodding._

9. V. caespitosum, Michx. Dwarf (3--6' high), tufted, _leaves obovate_,
narrowed at the base, smooth and _shining, serrate; corolla oblong_,
slightly urn-shaped; berries blue.--Alpine region of the White Mts., and
high northward.--Var. CUNEIFOLIUM, Nutt., is a foot high or less,
bushy, with cuneate-spatulate leaves rounded at the apex, passing in one
form to spatulate-lanceolate and acute.--Shores of L. Superior and
westward.

10. V. myrtilloides, Hook. More erect, 1--5 deg. high; branchlets somewhat
angled; _leaves mostly ovate and acute or pointed_, sharply and closely
_serrulate, bright green_, nearly smooth; border of the calyx almost
entire; _corolla depressed-globular_, rather large; berries large,
black, rather acid.--Damp woods, shores of L. Superior, and
northwestward. May, June.--Pedicels 3--6'' long, drooping in flower,
erect in fruit.

11. V. ovalifolium, Smith. Straggling, 2--12 deg. high; _leaves elliptical,
obtuse, nearly entire, pale_, mostly glaucous beneath, smooth; _corolla
ovoid_; berries blue.--Peat-bogs, shores of L. Superior, and
northwestward. May.

Sec. 4. VITIS-IDAEA. _Corolla, berry, etc., as in Sec. 3; filaments hairy;
anthers awnless; leaves coriaceous and persistent; flowers in clusters
from separate buds, 4-merous (in our species); mostly glabrous; leaves
3--6'' long._

12. V. Vitis-Idaea, L. (COWBERRY. MOUNTAIN CRANBERRY. FOXBERRY.) Low
(6--10' high); branches erect from tufted creeping stems; leaves obovate
with revolute margins, dark green, smooth and shining above, dotted with
blackish bristly points underneath; corolla bell-shaped, 4-cleft;
berries dark red, acid and rather bitter, edible when cooked. Coast and
mountains of N. Eng. to N. shore of L. Superior, and far northward.
June. (Eu.)

Sec. 5. OXYCOCCUS. _Corolla deeply 4-parted or -cleft, with linear reflexed
lobes; anthers exserted, awnless, with very long terminal tubes; berry
4-celled; flowers axillary or terminal, nodding on long filiform
pedicels._

[*] _Stem upright and leaves deciduous, as in common Blueberries;
flowers axillary and solitary; corolla deeply 4-cleft; berries light
red, turning purple, insipid._

13. V. erythrocarpon, Michx. Smooth, divergently branched (1--4 deg. high);
leaves oblong-lanceolate, taper-pointed, bristly serrate, thin.--Damp
woods, higher Alleghanies, Va. to Ga. July.

[*][*] _Stems very slender, creeping or trailing; leaves small, entire,
whitened beneath, evergreen; pedicels erect, the pale rose-colored
flower nodding; corolla 4-parted; berries red, acid._--CRANBERRIES.

14. V. Oxycoccus, L. (SMALL CRANBERRY.) Stems very slender (4--9' long);
_leaves ovate, acute, with strongly revolute margins_ (2--3'' long);
pedicels 1--4, terminal; filaments fully 1/2 as long as the
anthers.--Peat-bogs, N. Eng. and Penn. to Minn., and northward.
June.--Berry 3--4'' broad, often speckled with white when young, seldom
gathered for market. (Eu., Asia.)

15. V. macrocarpon, Ait. (LARGE or AMERICAN CRANBERRY.) Stems elongated
(1--4 deg. long), the flowering branches ascending; _leaves oblong, obtuse_,
less revolute (4--6'' long); pedicels several, becoming lateral,
filaments scarcely one third the length of the anthers.--Peat-bogs,
N. C. to Minn. and everywhere northward, but scarcely westward.
June.--Berry 1/2--1' long.


3. CHIOGENES, Salisb. CREEPING SNOWBERRY.

Calyx-tube adherent to the ovary; limb 4-parted, persistent. Corolla
bell-shaped, deeply 4-cleft. Stamens 8, included, inserted on an
8-toothed disk, filaments very short and broad; anther-cells
ovate-oblong, separate, not awned on the back, but each minutely
2-pointed at the apex, and opening by a large chink down to the middle.
Berry white, globular, rather dry, 4-celled, many-seeded.--A trailing
and creeping evergreen, with very slender and scarcely woody stems, and
small Thyme-like, ovate and pointed leaves on short petioles, with
revolute margins, smooth above, the lower surface and the branches beset
with rigid rusty bristles. Flowers very small, solitary in the axils, on
short nodding peduncles, with 2 large bractlets under the calyx. (Name
from [Greek: chio/n], _snow_, and [Greek: ge/nos], _offspring_, in
allusion to the snow-white berries.)

1. C. serpyllifolia, Salisb. Leaves 3--4'' long; berries 3'' broad,
bright white. (C. hispidula, _Torr. & Gray_.)--Peat-bogs, and mossy
woods, N. J. and Penn. to Minn., and northward; also southward in the
Alleghanies to N. C. May.--Plant with the aromatic flavor of Gaultheria
or Sweet Birch.


4. ARCTOSTAPHYLOS, Adans. BEARBERRY.

Corolla ovate and urn-shaped, with a short revolute 5-toothed limb.
Stamens 10, included; anthers with 2 reflexed awns on the back near the
apex, opening by terminal pores. Drupe berry-like, with 5--10 seed-like
nutlets.--Shrubs, with alternate leaves, and scaly-bracted nearly white
flowers in terminal racemes or clusters. Fruit austere. (Name composed
of [Greek: a)/rktos], _a bear_, and [Greek: staphyle/], _a grape_ or
_berry_, the Greek of the popular name.)

1. A. Uva-ursi, Spreng. (BEARBERRY.) Trailing; _leaves thick and
evergreen_, obovate or spatulate, _entire, smooth; fruit red_.--Rocks
and bare hills, N. J. and Penn. to Mo., and far north and westward. May.
(Eu., Asia.)

2. A. alpina, Spreng. (ALPINE BEARBERRY.) Dwarf, tufted and depressed;
_leaves deciduous, serrate, wrinkled_ with strong netted veins, obovate;
_fruit black_.--Alpine summits in N. Eng., and high northward.
(Arctic-alpine around the world.)


5. EPIGAEA, L. GROUND LAUREL. TRAILING ARBUTUS.

Corolla salver-form; the tube hairy inside, as long as the
ovate-lanceolate pointed and scale-like nearly distinct sepals. Stamens
10, with slender filaments; anthers oblong, awnless, opening lengthwise.
Style slender, its apex (as in Pyrola) forming a sort of ring or collar
around and partly adnate to the 5 little lobes of the stigma. Capsule
depressed-globular, 5-lobed, 5-celled, many-seeded.--A prostrate or
trailing scarcely shrubby plant, bristly with rusty hairs, with
evergreen and reticulated rounded and heart-shaped alternate leaves, on
slender petioles, and with rose-colored flowers in small axillary
clusters, from scaly bracts. (Name composed of [Greek: e)pi/], _upon_,
and [Greek: ge~], _the earth_, from the trailing growth.)

1. E. repens, L.--Sandy woods, or in rocky soil, especially in the shade
of pines, Newf. to Minn., south to Fla., and Ky.--Flowers appearing in
early spring, exhaling a rich spicy fragrance, dimorphous as to style
and stamens and subdioecious. In New England called MAYFLOWER.


6. GAULTHERIA, Kalm. AROMATIC WINTERGREEN.

Corolla cylindrical-ovoid or a little urn-shaped, 5-toothed. Stamens 10,
included; anther-cells each 2-awned at the summit, opening by a terminal
pore. Capsule depressed, 5-lobed, 5-celled, 5-valved, many-seeded,
enclosed when ripe by the calyx, which thickens and turns fleshy, so as
to appear as a globular red berry!--Shrubs, or almost herbaceous plants,
with alternate evergreen leaves and axillary (nearly white) flowers;
pedicels with 2 bractlets. (Dedicated by Kalm to "_Dr. Gaulthier_," of
Quebec.)

1. G. procumbens, L. (CREEPING WINTERGREEN.) Stems slender and
extensively creeping on or below the surface; the flowering branches
ascending, leafy at the summit (3--5' high); leaves obovate or oval,
obscurely serrate; flowers few, mostly single in the axils,
nodding.--Cool damp woods, mostly in the shade of evergreens, Maine to
Minn., and southward to N. Ga.; also far northward. July.--The bright
red berries (formed of the calyx) and the foliage have the well-known
spicy-aromatic flavor of the Sweet Birch. Usually called _Wintergreen_,
or sometimes in the interior _Tea-berry_. Eastward it is often called
_Checkerberry_ or _Partridge-berry_ (names also applied to Mitchella,
the latter especially so), also _Boxberry_.


7. ANDROMEDA, L.

Calyx without bractlets, of 5 nearly or partly distinct sepals, valvate
in the bud, but very soon separate or open. Corolla urceolate (in ours),
5-toothed. Stamens 10; anthers fixed near the middle, the cells opening
by a terminal pore. Capsule globular, 5-celled, 5-valved; the
many-seeded placentae borne on the summit or middle of the columella.
Seeds pendulous or spreading.--Shrubs, with umbelled, clustered, or
panicled and racemed (mostly white) flowers. (Fancifully named by
Linnaeus in allusion to the fable of _Andromeda_.)

[*] _Anthers awned; capsule more or less globose; leaves thick and
evergreen._

1. A. polifolia, L. _Glabrous_, 6--18' high; leaves linear to
lanceolate-oblong, strongly revolute, _white beneath_; flowers in
terminal umbels; pedicels from axils of persistent scaly bracts; _each
anther-cell with a slender terminal ascending awn_.--Wet bogs, N. J. and
Penn. to Minn., and northward.

2. A. floribunda, Pursh. Very leafy, 2--6 deg. high; _young branchlets,
etc., strigose-hairy_; leaves lanceolate-oblong, acute or acuminate,
ciliate-serrulate, _glandular-dotted beneath_ (2' long); _racemes
crowded in short terminal panicles_, densely flowered; _each anther-cell
with a slender deflexed awn on the back_.--Moist hillsides, in the
Alleghanies from Va. to Ga.

[*][*] _Anthers awnless; capsule 5-angled, with a thickened ridge at the
dorsal sutures; leaves thinnish and deciduous._

3. A. Mariana, L. (STAGGER-BUSH.) _Mostly glabrous_, 2--4 deg. high; leaves
oblong or oval (1--3' long); _fascicles of nodding flowers racemose on
naked shoots; filaments 2-toothed near the apex; capsule
ovate-pyramidal, truncate at the contracted apex_.--Low grounds, R. I.
to Fla.; also in Tenn. and Ark. Foliage said to poison lambs and
calves.

4. A. ligustrina, Muhl. _Minutely pubescent_, 3--10 deg. high; leaves
obovate to lanceolate-oblong (1--2' long), serrulate or entire; _racemes
crowded in naked or leafy panicles; filaments flat, not appendaged;
capsule globular_.--Wet grounds, Canada to Fla. and Ark.--Var.
PUBESCENS, Gray, is a form with dense soft pubescence.--Va. to Ga.


8. OXYDENDRUM, DC. SORREL-TREE. SOUR-WOOD.

Calyx without bractlets, of 5 almost distinct sepals, valvate in the
bud. Corolla ovate, 5-toothed, puberulent. Stamens 10; anthers fixed
near the base, linear, awnless, the cells tapering upward and opening by
a long chink. Capsule oblong-pyramidal, 5-celled, 5-valved; the
many-seeded placentae at the base of the cells. Seeds _all ascending_,
slender, the thin and loose reticulated coat extended at both ends into
awl-shaped appendages.--A tree with deciduous, oblong-lanceolate,
pointed, soon smooth, serrulate leaves, on slender petioles, and white
flowers in long one-sided racemes clustered in an open panicle,
terminating the branches of the season. Bracts and bractlets minute,
deciduous. Foliage acid (whence the name, from [Greek: o)xy/s], _sour_,
and [Greek: de/ndron], _tree_.)

1. O. arboreum, DC. Tree 15--40 deg. high; leaves in size and shape like
those of the peach.--Rich woods, from Penn. to Ind., and southward,
mostly along the Alleghanies, to Fla. June, July.


9. LEUCOTHOE, Don.

Calyx of 5 nearly distinct sepals, imbricated in the bud. Corolla ovate
or cylindraceous, 5-toothed. Stamens 10; anthers naked, or the cells
with 1 or 2 erect awns at the apex, opening by a pore. Capsule
depressed, more or less 5-lobed, 5-celled, 5-valved, the sutures not
thickened; valves entire; the many-seeded placentae borne on the summit
of the short columella. Seeds mostly pendulous.--Shrubs with petioled
and serrulate leaves, and white scaly-bracted flowers in dense axillary
or terminal spiked racemes. (A mythological name.)

[*] _Anthers awnless; stigma 5-rayed; racemes sessile, dense, with
persistent bracts, in the axils of thick and shining evergreen leaves;
calyx not bracteolate._

1. L. axillaris, Don. _Leaves lanceolate-oblong or oval, abruptly
pointed_ or acute, somewhat spinulose-serrulate, _on very short
petioles; sepals broadly ovate_.--Low grounds, Va. to Fla. and Ala.
Feb.--April.--Shrub 2--4 deg. high.

2. L. Catesbaei, Gray. _Leaves ovate-lanceolate, taper-pointed_,
serrulate with ciliate-spinulose appressed teeth, _conspicuously
petioled_ (3--6' long); _sepals ovate-oblong_, often acute.--Moist banks
of streams, Va. to Ga. along the mountains. May.--Shrub 2--4 deg. high,
with long spreading or recurved branches. Flowers exhaling the
unpleasant scent of Chestnut-blossoms.

[*][*] _Anthers awned; stigma simple; flowers very short-pedicelled, in
long one-sided racemes mostly terminating the branches; bracts
deciduous; leaves membranaceous and deciduous, serrulate; calyx
bibracteolate._

3. L. recurva, Buckley. _Branches and racemes recurved-spreading_;
leaves lanceolate or ovate, taper-pointed; _sepals ovate; anther-cells
1-awned; pod 5-lobed, seeds flat and cellular-winged_.--Dry hills,
Alleghanies of Va. to Ala. April.--Lower and more straggling than the
next.

4. L. racemosa, Gray. _Branches and racemes mostly erect_; leaves oblong
or oval-lanceolate, acute; _sepals ovate-lanceolate; anther-cells each
2-awned; pod not lobed; seeds angled and wingless_.--Moist thickets,
Mass. to Fla. and La., near the coast. May, June.--Shrub 4--10 deg. high.
Corolla cylindrical.


10. CASSANDRA, Don. LEATHER-LEAF.

Calyx of 5 distinct rigid ovate and acute sepals, imbricated in the bud,
and with a pair of similar bractlets. Corolla cylindrical-oblong,
5-toothed. Stamens 10; anther-cells tapering into a tubular beak, and
opening by a pore at the apex, awnless. Capsule depressed, 5-celled,
many-seeded, the pericarp of 2 layers, the outer 5-valved, the
cartilaginous inner layer at length 10-valved. Seeds flattened,
wingless.--Low and much branched shrubs, with nearly evergreen and
coriaceous leaves, which are scurfy, especially underneath. Flowers
white, in the axils of the upper small leaves, forming small 1-sided
leafy racemes. (_Cassandra_, a daughter of Priam and Hecuba.)

1. C. calyculata, Don. Leaves oblong, obtuse, flat.--Bogs, Newf. to
Minn., and south to Ga.


11. CASSIOPE, Don.

Calyx without bractlets, of 4 or 5 nearly distinct ovate sepals,
imbricated in the bud. Corolla broadly campanulate, deeply 4--5-cleft.
Stamens 8 or 10; anthers fixed by the apex; the ovoid cells each opening
by a large terminal pore, and bearing a long recurved awn behind.
Capsule ovoid or globular, 4--5-celled, 4--5-valved, the valves 2-cleft;
placentae many-seeded, pendulous from the summit of the columella. Seeds
smooth and wingless.--Small, arctic or alpine evergreen plants,
resembling Club-Mosses or Heaths. Flowers solitary, nodding on slender
erect peduncles, white or rose-color. (_Cassiope_ was the mother of
Andromeda.)

1. C. hypnoides, Don. Tufted and procumbent, moss-like (1--4' high);
leaves needle-shaped, imbricated; corolla 5-cleft; style short and
conical.--Alpine summits of N. New Eng. and N. Y., and high northward.


12. CALLUNA, Salisb. HEATHER. LING.

Calyx of 4 colored sepals. Corolla bell-shaped, 4-parted, much shorter
and less conspicuous than the calyx, both becoming scarious and
persistent. Stamens 8, distinct; anthers with a pair of deflexed
appendages on the back, the cells opening each by a long chink. Capsule
4-celled, septicidally 4-valved.--Evergreen undershrub, with no scaly
buds, opposite and minute leaves (mostly extended at base into 2 sharp
auricles), crowded and imbricated on the branches. Flowers axillary, or
terminating very short shoots and crowded on the branches, forming close
mostly one-sided spikes or spike-like racemes, rose-colored or sometimes
white, small, bracted by 2 or 3 pairs of leaves, the innermost of which
are more or less scarious. (Named from [Greek: kally/no], _to brush_ or
_sweep_, brooms being made of its twigs.)

1. C. vulgaris, Salisb. Low grounds, Mass., at Tewksbury and W.
Andover; Maine, at Cape Elizabeth; also N. Scotia, C. Breton, Newf.,
etc. Probably only introduced.

Two European heaths, ERICA CINEREA and E. TETRALIX, have been found in
small patches on Nantucket Island.


13. BRYANTHUS, Steller.

Corolla urn-shaped or bell-shaped, 5-toothed or 5-cleft, deciduous.
Stamens 10, anthers pointless, shorter than the filaments, opening by
terminal pores. Capsule 5-celled, 5-valved, septicidal (as are all the
succeeding), many-seeded.--Low alpine Heath-like evergreen undershrubs,
clothed with scattered linear and obtuse smooth or rough-margined
leaves. Flowers usually nodding on solitary or umbelled peduncles at the
summit of the branches. Our species belongs to Sec. Phyllodoce. ([Greek:
Bry/on], _moss_, and [Greek: a)/nthos] _flower_, because growing among
mosses.)

1. B. taxifolius, Gray. Calyx pubescent; corolla oblong-urn-shaped,
5-toothed, purplish, smooth; style included. (Phyllodoce taxifolia,
_Salisb._)--Alpine summits of the mountains of N. H. and Maine, and
northward. July.


14. KALMIA, L. AMERICAN LAUREL.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla between wheel-shaped and bell-shaped, 5-lobed,
furnished with 10 depressions in which the 10 anthers are severally
lodged; filaments long and thread-form. Capsule globose, 5-celled,
many-seeded.--Evergreen mostly smooth shrubs, with alternate or opposite
entire coriaceous leaves, naked buds, and showy flowers. (Dedicated to
_Peter Kalm_, a pupil of Linnaeus, who travelled in this country about
the middle of the last century, afterwards Professor at Abo.)

Sec. 1. _Flowers in simple or clustered naked umbel-like corymbs; pedicels
from the axils of small and firm foliaceous persistent bracts; calyx
smaller than the pod, persistent; leaves and branches glabrous, or
nearly so._

1. K. latifolia, L. (CALICO-BUSH. MOUNTAIN LAUREL. SPOON-WOOD.) _Leaves
mostly alternate, bright green both sides, ovate-lanceolate_ or oblong,
acute at each end, petioled; flowers profuse, large and very showy,
varying from deep rose-color to nearly white; _corymbs terminal_,
many-flowered, clammy-pubescent; pod depressed, glandular.--Rocky hills
and damp soil, Canada and Maine, chiefly along the mountains to W. Fla.,
west to Ohio, Ky., and Tenn. Usually a shrub 4--8 deg. high, but in the
mountains from Penn. southward forming dense thickets and often
tree-like (10--30 deg. high). May, June.

2. K. angustifolia, L. (SHEEP LAUREL. LAMBKILL. WICKY.) Shrub 1--3 deg.
high; _leaves commonly opposite or in threes, pale or whitish
underneath, light green above, narrowly oblong_, obtuse, petioled;
_corymbs lateral_ (appearing later than the shoots of the season),
slightly glandular, many-flowered; pod depressed, nearly smooth;
_pedicels recurved in fruit_.--Hillsides, Newf. to Mich., south to
N. Ga.; common. May, June. The flowers more crimson and two thirds
smaller than in the last.

3. K. glauca, Ait. (PALE LAUREL.) _Branchlets 2-edged; leaves opposite,
nearly sessile, oblong, white-glaucous beneath, with revolute margins_;
corymbs terminal, few-flowered, smooth; bracts large; flowers 1/2' broad,
lilac-purple; pod ovoid, smooth.--Cold peat-bogs and mountains, Newf. to
Penn., Minn., and northward. May, June.--Straggling, about 1 deg. high.

Sec. 2. _Flowers scattered, solitary in the axils; calyx leafy, larger than
the pod, nearly equalling the corolla, deciduous; leaves and branches
bristly-hairy._

4. K. hirsuta, Walt. Branches terete; leaves oblong or lanceolate (4''
long), becoming glabrous.--Sandy pine-barren swamps, S. E. Va. to Fla.
May--Sept.--Shrub 1 deg. high; corolla rose-color.


15. MENZIESIA, Smith.

Calyx very small and flattish, 4-toothed or 4-lobed. Corolla
cylindraceous-urn-shaped and soon bell-shaped, obtusely 4-lobed. Stamens
8, included; anther-cells opening at the top by an oblique pore. Capsule
ovoid, woody, 4-celled, 4-valved, many-seeded. Seeds narrow, with a
loose coat.--A low shrub; the straggling branches and the alternate
deciduous leaves usually hairy and ciliate with rusty rather chaff-like
bristles. Flowers small, developed with the leaves, in terminal clusters
from scaly buds, greenish-white and purplish, nodding. (Named for
_Archibald Menzies_, who in Vancouver's voyage brought the original
species from the Northwest Coast.)

1. M. glabella, Gray. Strigose-chaffy scales mostly wanting; leaves
obovate, barely mucronate-tipped, _glabrous_ or nearly so (1--2' long);
_filaments ciliate below; capsule glabrous_ or nearly so; _seeds
long-caudate at each end_.--Minnesota Point, L. Superior, and
northwestward.

2. M. globularis, Salisb. More or less chaffy, 2--5 deg. high; leaves
obovate-oblong, prominently glandular-mucronate, _strigose-hirsute_
especially above; _filaments glabrous; capsule beset with short
gland-tipped bristles; seeds merely apiculate_. (M. ferruginea, var.
globularis, of Manual.)--In the Alleghanies from Penn. to Ga.


16. RHODODENDRON, L. ROSE BAY, AZALEA, etc.

Flowers almost always 5-merous. Calyx mostly small or minute. Corolla
various (but not contracted at the orifice), lobed or cleft, or even
parted, often somewhat irregular. Stamens sometimes as few as the
corolla-lobes, more commonly twice as many, usually declined;
anther-cells opening by a round terminal pore. Capsule 5-celled,
5-valved, many-seeded. Seeds scale-like.--Shrubs or small trees, of
diverse habit and character, with chiefly alternate entire leaves, and
large and showy flowers in umbelled clusters from large scaly-bracted
terminal buds. ([Greek: R(ododendron], _rose-tree_; the ancient name.)

Sec. 1. AZALEA. _Leaves deciduous, glandular-mucronate; stamens (5 to 10)
and style more or less exserted and declined._

[*] _Flower-buds of numerous much imbricated scales; corolla with
conspicuous funnel-form tube; stamens (chiefly 5) and style
long-exserted; 3--10 deg. high, with leaves obovate to oblong-oblanceolate._

[+] _Flowers appearing after the leaves._

1. R. arborescens, Torr. (SMOOTH AZALEA.) _Branchlets smooth; leaves_
obovate, obtuse, _very smooth both sides, shining above_, glaucous
beneath, the margins bristly-ciliate; _calyx-lobes long and
conspicuous_, corolla slightly clammy. (Azalea arborescens,
_Pursh._)--Mountains of Penn. to N. C. June. Rose-colored flowers very
fragrant.

2. R. viscosum, Torr. (CLAMMY A. WHITE SWAMP-HONEYSUCKLE.) _Branchlets
bristly_, as well as the margins and midrib of the oblong-obovate
otherwise smooth leaves; _calyx-lobes minute; corolla clammy, the tube
much longer than the lobes_. (Azalea viscosa, _L._)--Swamps, mostly near
the coast, Canada and Maine, to Fla. and Ark. June, July.--Var. GLAUCUM,
Gray. Leaves paler, often white-glaucous underneath or on both sides,
sometimes rough-hairy. N. Eng. to Va.--Var. NITIDUM, Gray. Dwarf, with
oblanceolate leaves green both sides. Mountains, N. Y. to Va.

[+][+] _Flowers appearing before or with the leaves._

3. R. nudiflorum, Torr. (PURPLE A. PINXTER-FLOWER.) Leaves downy
underneath; _tube of the corolla scarcely longer than the ample lobes,
slightly glandular_. (Azalea nudiflora, _L._)--Swamps, Canada to Fla.,
Ill., Mo., and Tex. April, May. The showy flowers vary from flesh-color
to pink and purple. There are numberless varieties, some of them with 10
stamens.

4. R. calendulaceum, Torr. (FLAME-COLORED AZALEA.) Leaves hairy; _tube
of the corolla shorter than the lobes, hairy_. (Azalea calendulacea,
_Michx._)--Woods, mountains of Penn. to Ga. May. Covered just when the
leaves appear with a profusion of large orange blossoms, usually turning
to flame-color, not fragrant.

[*][*] _Flower-buds of fewer and early caducous scales; corolla
irregular, with short or hardly any tube, anteriorly divided to the
base; the limb equalling the 10 stamens and style._

5. R. Rhodora, Don. Young parts sparingly strigose-hairy (1--2 deg. high);
leaves oblong, pale, more or less pubescent; corolla hardly 1' long,
purplish-rose-color, bilabiate, with the posterior lip 3-lobed, the
anterior of 2 oblong-linear and recurving nearly or quite distinct
petals. (Rhodora Canadensis, _L._)--Cool bogs, Newf. and N. Eng. to
mountains of Penn.

Sec. 2. RHODODENDRON proper. _Leaves coriaceous and persistent; stamens
(commonly 10) and style rarely exserted, somewhat declined, or sometimes
equally spreading._

6. R. maximum, L. (GREAT LAUREL.) _Leaves_ 4--10' long, very thick,
_elliptical-oblong_ or lance-oblong, _acute, narrowed toward the base,
very smooth_, with somewhat revolute margins; pedicels viscid; corolla
bell-shaped, 1' broad, pale rose-color or nearly white, greenish in the
throat on the upper side, and spotted with yellow or reddish.--Damp deep
woods, rare from Maine to Ohio, but very common through the Alleghanies
from N. Y. to Ga. July.--Shrub or tree 6--35 deg. high.

7. R. Catawbiense, Michx. _Leaves oval or oblong, rounded at both ends,
smooth_, pale beneath (3--5' long); corolla broadly bell-shaped,
lilac-purple; pedicels rusty-downy.--High Alleghanies, Va. to Ga. June.
Shrub 3--6 deg. (rarely 20 deg.) high.

8. R. Lapponicum, Wahl. _Dwarf_, prostrate in broad tufts (6' high);
_leaves_ (1/2' long) _elliptical, obtuse, dotted_ (like the branches) with
rusty scales; umbels few-flowered; corolla open bell-shaped, dotted,
violet-purple; _stamens_ 5--10.--Alpine summits of northern N. Y. and
N. Eng., to the Arctic Coast. July. (Arct. Eu. and Asia.)


17. LEDUM, L. LABRADOR TEA.

Calyx 5-toothed, very small. Corolla of 5 obovate and spreading distinct
petals. Stamens 5--10; anthers opening by terminal pores. Capsule
5-celled, splitting from the base upward, many-seeded; placentae borne on
the summit of the columella.--Low shrubs, with the alternate entire
leaves clothed with rusty wool underneath, persistent, the margins
revolute; herbage slightly fragrant when bruised. Flowers white, small,
in terminal umbel-like clusters from large scaly buds; bracts or scales
thin and caducous. ([Greek: Le~don], the ancient Greek name of the
Cistus.)

1. L. latifolium, Ait. Erect, 1--3 deg. high; leaves oblong or linear-oblong
(1--2' long), mostly 1/2' wide, very obtuse; stamens 5--7; capsule oblong,
acutish.--N. Eng. to Penn., Mich., Minn., and northward, in cold bogs
and mountain woods.

L. PALUSTRE, L., with linear leaves, 10 stamens, and short-oval capsule,
is found in Newfoundland and northwestward. (Eu.)


18. LEIOPHYLLUM, Pers. SAND MYRTLE.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla of 5 distinct obovate-oblong petals, spreading.
Stamens 10, exserted; anthers opening lengthwise. Style filiform.
Capsule 2--3-celled, splitting from the apex downward, many-seeded.--A
low much-branched evergreen, with the aspect, foliage, etc., of the last
genus, but the crowded leaves sometimes opposite, scarcely petioled.
Flowers small, white, in terminal umbel-like clusters. (Name formed of
[Greek: lei~os], _smooth_, and [Greek: phy/llon], _leaf_.)

1. L. buxifolium, Ell. Shrub 6--10' high; leaves oval or oblong, smooth
and shining, 3--6'' long.--Sandy pine barrens, N. J. to Fla. May.


19. LOISELEURIA, Desv. ALPINE AZALEA.

Calyx 5-parted, nearly as long as the bell-shaped and deeply 5-cleft
regular corolla. Stamens 5, not declined, included; anthers opening
lengthwise. Style short. Capsule ovoid, 2--3-celled, many-seeded,
2--3-valved; valves 2-cleft from the apex; placentae borne on the middle
of the columella.--A small depressed shrubby evergreen, much branched
and tufted, smooth, with coriaceous opposite elliptical leaves, on short
petioles, with revolute margins. Flowers small, white or rose-color,
2--5 in a cluster, from a terminal scaly bud; scales or bracts thick and
persistent. (Named for _Loiseleur-Delongchamps_, a French botanist.)

1. L. procumbens, Desv.--Alpine summits of the White Mountains, N. H.,
and northward. June. (Eu., Asia.)


20. CLETHRA, Gronov. WHITE ALDER.

Calyx of 5 sepals, imbricated in the bud. Corolla of 5 distinct
obovate-oblong petals. Stamens 10, often exserted; anthers arrow-shaped,
erect in the bud, becoming inverted and opening by basal pores or short
slits. Style slender, 3-cleft at the apex. Capsule 3-valved, 3-celled,
many-seeded, enclosed in the calyx.--Shrubs or trees, with alternate
serrate deciduous leaves, and white flowers in terminal hoary racemes.
Bracts deciduous. ([Greek: Kle/thra], the ancient Greek name of the
Alder, which this genus somewhat resembles in foliage.)

1. C. alnifolia, L. (SWEET PEPPERBUSH.) Shrub 3--10 deg. high; _leaves
wedge-obovate, sharply serrate_, entire toward the base, prominently
straight-veined, smooth, green both sides, _racemes upright_, panicled;
_bracts shorter than the flowers_; filaments smooth.--Wet copses, Maine
to Va., near the coast, and southward. Covered in July and August with
handsome fragrant blossoms.

2. C. acuminata, Michx. A tall shrub or small tree; _leaves oval or
oblong, pointed_, thin, finely serrate (3--7' long), pale beneath;
_racemes solitary, drooping; bracts longer than the flowers_; filaments
and pods hairy.--Woods in the Alleghanies, Va. to Ga. July.


21. CHIMAPHILA, Pursh. PIPSISSEWA.

Petals 5, concave, orbicular, widely spreading. Stamens 10; filaments
enlarged and hairy in the middle; anthers as in Pyrola, but more or less
conspicuously 2-horned. Style very short, inversely conical, nearly
immersed in the depressed summit of the globular ovary; stigma broad and
orbicular, disk-shaped, the border 5-crenate. Capsule, etc., as in
Pyrola, but splitting from the apex downward, the edges of the valves
not woolly.--Low, nearly herbaceous plants, with long running
underground shoots, and evergreen thick and shining leaves, somewhat
whorled or scattered along the short ascending stems; the fragrant
(white or purplish) flowers corymbed or umbelled on a terminal peduncle.
(Name from [Greek: chei~ma], _winter_, and [Greek: phile/o], _to love_,
in allusion to one of the popular names, viz., _Wintergreen_.)

1. C. umbellata, Nutt. (PRINCE'S PINE. PIPSISSEWA.) Leafy, 4--10' high;
_leaves wedge-lanceolate_, sharply serrate, _not spotted_; peduncles
4--7-flowered; petals flesh-color; anthers violet.--Dry woods, Nova
Scotia to Ga., west to the Pacific. June. (Eu.)

2. C. maculata, Pursh. (SPOTTED WINTERGREEN.) _Leaves ovate-lanceolate,
obtuse at the base_, remotely toothed, _the upper surface variegated
with white_; peduncles 1--5-flowered.--Dry woods, N. Eng. to Ga., west
to Minn. and Miss. June, July.--Plant 3--6' high.


22. MONESES, Salisb. ONE-FLOWERED PYROLA.

Petals 5, widely spreading, orbicular. Filaments awl-shaped, naked;
anthers as in Pyrola, but conspicuously 2-horned. Style straight,
exserted; stigma large, peltate, with 5 narrow and conspicuous radiating
lobes. Valves of the capsule naked. (Flowers occasionally tetramerous.)
Scape 1-flowered. Otherwise as Pyrola; intermediate between it and
Chimaphila. (Name formed of [Greek: mo/nos], _single_, and [Greek:
e( sis], _delight_, from the pretty solitary flower.)

1. M. grandiflora, Salisb. A small perennial, with the rounded and veiny
serrate thin leaves (6--9'' long) clustered at the ascending apex of
creeping subterranean shoots; the 1--2-bracted scape (2--4' high)
bearing a white or rose-colored terminal flower 6'' wide. (M. uniflora,
_Gray_.)--Deep cold woods, Labrador to Penn., Ind., Minn., and westward.
June. (Eu.)


23. PYROLA, Tourn. WINTERGREEN. SHIN-LEAF.

Calyx 5-parted, persistent. Petals 5, concave and more or less
converging, deciduous. Stamens 10; filaments awl-shaped, naked; anthers
extrorse in the bud, but in the flower inverted by the inflexion of the
apex of the filament, more or less 4-celled, opening by a pair of pores
at the blunt or somewhat 2-horned base (by inversion the apparent apex).
Style generally long; stigma 5-lobed or 5-rayed. Capsule
depressed-globose, 5-lobed, 5-celled, 5-valved from the base upward
(loculicidal); the valves cobwebby on the edges. Seeds minute,
innumerable, resembling sawdust, with a very loose cellular-reticulated
coat.--Low and smooth perennial herbs, with running subterranean shoots,
bearing a cluster of rounded petioled evergreen root-leaves, and a
simple raceme of nodding flowers, on an upright more or less
scaly-bracted scape. (Name a diminutive of _Pyrus_, the Pear-tree, from
some fancied resemblance in the foliage.)

[*] _Style straight, much narrower than the peltate 5-rayed stigma,
petals and stamens erect and connivent; anthers not narrowed below the
openings._

1. P. minor, L. Scape 5--10' high; _leaves roundish_, slightly
crenulate, thickish, mostly longer than the margined petiole; flowers
small, crowded, white or rose-color; calyx-lobes triangular-ovate, very
much shorter than the nearly _globose corolla; style short and
included_.--Cold woods, Lab., White Mts., L. Superior, and northward.

2. P. secunda, L. Subcaulescent, 3--6' high; _leaves ovate, thin_,
longer than the petiole, scattered, _finely serrate_; racemes dense and
spike-like, the numerous small (greenish-white) _flowers all turned to
one side_, scarcely nodding; calyx-lobes ovate, very much shorter than
the oblong-oval petals; _style long, exserted_.--Rich woods, Lab. to
Minn., south to Md., and far northward. July. (Eu.)

Var. pumila, Gray, is a smaller form, with rounded leaves 6'' or little
more in diameter, and 3--8-flowered scape.--High peat-bogs, N. Y. to
L. Superior, and northward. July, Aug.

[*][*] _Style strongly declined, the apex curved upward, longer than the
connivent or spreading petals; stigma much narrower than the truncate
excavated ring-like apex of the style; anthers contracted below the
openings, forming a short neck; leaves denticulate or entire._

[+] _Petals and leaves acute, the latter ovate, coriaceous._

3. P. oxypetala, C. F. Austin. Leaves ovate, small (8--12'' long),
shorter than the slender petiole; scape (7--8' high) several-flowered;
flowers on ascending pedicels, not nodding; calyx-lobes
triangular-ovate, acute, short; petals lanceolate-oblong, acuminate,
greenish; anthers conspicuously mucronate at the apex, obtusely 2-horned
at base, not inverted; style straightish, scarcely exserted.--Wooded
hill near Deposit, Delaware Co., N. Y. (_C. F. Austin_, in 1860). Not
since found; probably monstrous.

[+][+] _Petals and leaves orbicular to oblong, very obtuse._

4. P. chlorantha, Swartz. _Leaves small_ (1' long), _roundish, thick,
dull, shorter than the petiole; scape few-flowered_, naked (5--8' high);
_calyx-lobes roundish-ovate, very short_; the elliptical petals
converging (greenish-white); _anther-cells contracted into a distinct
neck_; style little exserted.--Open woods, Lab. to Penn., Minn., north
and westward. June, July.

5. P. elliptica, Nutt. (SHIN-LEAF.) _Leaves thin and dull, elliptical or
obovate-oval, longer than the margined petiole_; raceme many-flowered;
_calyx-lobes ovate, acute, not one fourth the length of the_ obovate
rather spreading (greenish-white) _petals; anther-cells blunt_.--Rich
woods, N. Eng. to Md., Iowa, Minn., and northward. June.

6. P. rotundifolia, L. _Leaves orbicular, thick, shining_, usually
shorter than the petiole; scape many-bracted (6--12' high), raceme
elongated, many-flowered; _calyx-lobes lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate_,
acutish, with somewhat spreading tips, _one half or one third the length
of the_ roundish-obovate rather spreading (chiefly white) _petals;
anther-cells nearly blunt_.--Damp or sandy woods, throughout the
continent, south to N. Ga. Exhibits many varieties, such as, Var.
INCARNATA, DC., with flesh-colored to rose-purple flowers, and
triangular-lanceolate calyx-lobes. Cold woods and bogs, N. Eng. to
Minn., and northward.--Var. ASARIFOLIA, Hook., with oblate or
round-reniform leaves, and shorter ovate calyx-lobes; petals flesh- or
rose-colored (rarely white). With same range.--Var. ULIGINOSA, Gray,
with short broadly ovate calyx-lobes, subcordate to obovate dull leaves,
and rose-colored or purple flowers. Same range. (Eu.)


24. PTEROSPORA, Nutt. PINE-DROPS.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla ovate, urn-shaped, 5-toothed, persistent.
Stamens 10; anthers 2-celled, awned on the back, opening lengthwise.
Style short; stigma 5-lobed. Capsule globose, depressed, 5-lobed,
5-celled, loculicidal, but the valves cohering with the columella. Seeds
very numerous, ovoid, tapering to each end, the apex expanded into a
broad reticulated wing many times larger than the body of the seed.--A
stout and simple purplish-brown clammy-pubescent root-parasitic herb
(1--2 deg. high); the wand-like stem furnished towards the base with
scattered lanceolate scales in place of leaves, above bearing many
nodding (white) flowers, in a long bracted raceme. (Name from [Greek:
ptero/n], _a wing_, and [Greek: spora/], _seed_, alluding to the
singular wing borne by the seeds.)

1. P. Andromedea, Nutt.--Hard clay soil, parasitic apparently on the
roots of pines, from W. New Eng. to N. Penn., N. Mich., and westward;
rare.


25. SCHWEINITZIA, Ell. SWEET PINE-SAP.

Calyx of 5 oblong-lanceolate acute scale-like sepals, erect, persistent.
Corolla persistent, bell-shaped, rather fleshy, 5-lobed, slightly
5-gibbous at the base. Stamens 10; anthers much shorter than the
filaments, fixed near the summit, awnless; the two sac-shaped cells
opening at the top. Capsule ovoid, 5-celled, with a short and thick
style, and a large 5-angular stigma. Seeds innumerable.--A low and
smooth brownish plant, 3--4' high, with the aspect of Monotropa,
scaly-bracted, the flowers several in a terminal spike, at first
nodding, flesh-color, with the fragrance of violets. (Named for the late
_L. D. von Schweinitz_.)

1. S. odorata, Ell.--Woods, parasitic on the roots of herbs, Md. (near
Baltimore) to N. C. April.


26. MONOTROPA, L. INDIAN PIPE. PINE-SAP.

Calyx of 2--5 lanceolate bract-like scales, deciduous. Corolla of 4 or 5
separate erect spatulate or wedge-shaped scale-like petals, which are
gibbous or saccate at the base, and tardily deciduous. Stamens 8 or 10;
filaments awl-shaped; anthers kidney-shaped, becoming 1-celled, opening
across the top. Style columnar; stigma disk-like, 4--5-rayed. Capsule
ovoid, 8--10-grooved, 4--5-celled, loculicidal; the very thick placentae
covered with innumerable minute seeds, which have a very loose
coat.--Low and fleshy herbs, tawny, reddish, or white, parasitic on
roots, or growing on decomposing vegetable matter like a Fungus; the
clustered stems springing from a ball of matted fibrous rootlets,
furnished with scales or bracts in place of leaves, 1--several-flowered;
the summit at first nodding, in fruit erect. (Name composed of [Greek:
mo/nos], _one_, and [Greek: tro/pos], _turn_, from the summit of the
stem turned to one side.)

Sec. 1. MONOTROPA proper. _Plant inodorous, 1-flowered; calyx of 2--4
irregular scales or bracts; anthers transverse, opening equally by 2
chinks; style short and thick._

1. M. uniflora, L. (INDIAN PIPE. CORPSE-PLANT.) Smooth, waxy-white
(turning blackish in drying, 3--8' high); stigma naked.--Dark and rich
woods, nearly throughout the continent. June--Aug. (Asia.)

Sec. 2. HYPOPITYS. _Plant commonly fragrant; flowers several in a scaly
raceme; the terminal one usually 5-merous, the rest 3--4-merous;
bract-like sepals mostly as many as the petals; anthers opening by a
continuous line into 2 very unequal valves; style longer than the ovary,
hollow._

2. M. Hypopitys, L. (PINE-SAP. FALSE BEECH-DROPS.) Somewhat pubescent or
downy, tawny, whitish, or reddish (4--12' high); pod globular or oval;
stigma ciliate.--Oak and pine woods, from Canada to Fla., west to
Oregon. June--Aug. (Eu.)


ORDER 59. DIAPENSIACEAE.

_Low perennial herbs or suffruticulose tufted plants, glabrous or nearly
so, with simple leaves, no stipules, regular 5-merous flowers (except
the 3-celled ovary), stamens adnate to the corolla and sometimes
monadelphous (those opposite its lobes when present reduced to
staminodia); pollen simple; loculicidal capsule and seeds of_
Ericaceae.--Flowers solitary or racemose. Style 1, with 3-lobed stigma.
Distinguished from the Ericaceae chiefly by the insertion of the stamens
upon the corolla.

Tribe I. DIAPENSIEAE. Dwarf woody evergreens, with small entire crowded
coriaceous leaves. Staminodia none; filaments adnate to the campanulate
corolla up to the sinuses; anthers 2-celled. Calyx conspicuously
bracteolate. Flowers solitary.

1. Pyxidanthera. Flowers sessile on short leafy branchlets. Anther-cells
awn-pointed at base, opening transversely.

2. Diapensia. Flower (or at least fruit) on a scape-like peduncle.
Anther-cells blunt, obliquely dehiscent.

Tribe II. GALACINEAE. Acaulescent, with creeping rootstocks sending up
long-petioled evergreen leaves, and a 1--several-flowered scape.
Staminodia present.

3. Galax. Calyx minutely 2-bracteolate. Stamens monadelphous; anthers 1
celled.


1. PYXIDANTHERA, Michx.

Sepals thin. Anther-cells awn-pointed at base, opening by a strictly
transverse line. Otherwise much as in Diapensia.--Prostrate and
creeping, with narrowly oblanceolate and awl-pointed leaves, mostly
alternate on the sterile branches and somewhat hairy near the base.
Flowers solitary and sessile, very numerous, white or rose-color. (Name
from [Greek: pyxi/s], _a small box_, and [Greek: a)nthe/ra], _anther_,
the anther opening as if by a lid.)

1. P. barbulata, Michx. (FLOWERING MOSS. PYXIE.) Leaves 3'' long.--Sandy
pine barrens of N. J. to N. C. April, May.


2. DIAPENSIA, L.

Calyx of 5 concave imbricated coriaceous sepals. Corolla bell-shaped,
5-lobed; lobes rounded. Filaments broad and flat, adherent to the
corolla up to the sinuses, short; anthers adnate, of 2 ovoid
pointless cells, diverging below, each opening therefore by a
transverse-descending line. Capsule, enclosed in the calyx,
cartilaginous; cells few-seeded.--Alpine, growing in very dense convex
tufts, with the stems imbricated below with cartilaginous narrowly
spatulate mostly opposite leaves, terminated by a scape-like 1-flowered
peduncle, 3-bracted under the calyx. Corolla white (1/2' wide). (Said to
be an ancient Greek name of the Sanicle, of obscure meaning, strangely
applied by Linnaeus to this plant.)

1. D. Lapponica, L. Leaves 3--5'' long; peduncle at length 1--2'
long.--Alpine summits of N Eng. and N. Y., and northward to Lab. and the
Arctic coast. July. (Eu., Asia.)


3. GALAX, L.

Calyx 5-parted, imbricate, persistent. Petals 5, hypogynous,
obovate-spatulate, rather erect, deciduous. Filaments united in a
10-toothed tube, slightly cohering with the base of the petals, the 5
teeth opposite the petals naked, the alternate ones shorter and bearing
roundish 1-celled anthers, which open across the top. Style short,
stigma 3-lobed. Capsule ovoid, 3-celled; columella none. Seeds numerous,
the cellular loose coat tapering to each end.--Evergreen herb, with a
thick matted tuft of scaly creeping rootstocks, beset with fibrous red
roots, sending up round heart-shaped crenate-toothed and veiny shining
leaves (about 2' wide) on slender petioles, and a slender naked scape,
1--2 deg. high, bearing a wand-like spike or raceme of small and
minutely-bracted white flowers. (Name from [Greek: ga/la], _milk_,--of
no conceivable application to this plant.)

1. G. aphylla, L.--Open woods, Va. to Ga. June.


ORDER 60. PLUMBAGINACEAE. (LEADWORT FAMILY.)

_Maritime herbs, with regular 5-merous flowers, a plaited calyx, the 5
stamens opposite the separate petals or the lobes of the corolla, and
the free ovary one-celled, with a solitary ovule hanging from a long
cord which rises from the base of the cell._--Only the STATICEAE or
MARSH-ROSEMARY TRIBE is represented in our region, in gardens by the
Thrift (_Armeria vulgaris_), on the coast by a single species of


1. STATICE, Tourn. SEA-LAVENDER. MARSH-ROSEMARY.

Flowers scattered or loosely spiked and 1-sided on the branches,
2--3-bracted. Calyx funnel-form, dry and membranaceous, persistent.
Corolla of 5 nearly or quite distinct petals, with long claws, the 5
stamens severally attached to their bases. Styles 5, rarely 3, separate.
Fruit membranous and indehiscent, in the bottom of the calyx. Embryo
straight, in mealy albumen.--Sea-side perennials, with thick and stalked
radical leaves; the naked flowering stems or scapes branched into
panicles. ([Greek: Statike/], an ancient name given to this or some
other herb, on account of its astringency.)

1. S. Limonium, L. Root thick and woody, very astringent; leaves oblong,
spatulate or obovate-lanceolate, 1-ribbed, tipped with a deciduous
bristly point, petioled; scape much-branched, corymbose-panicled (1--2 deg.
high); spikelets 1--3-flowered; flowers lavender-color; calyx-tube hairy
on the angles, the lobes ovate-triangular, with as many teeth in the
sinuses. (Eu.)

Var. Caroliniana, Gray, the plant of the Northern States, has more erect
branches, rather panicled inflorescence with at length scattered
flowers, and very acute or acuminate calyx-lobes.--Salt marshes along
the coast, from Lab. to Tex. Aug., Sept.


ORDER 61. PRIMULACEAE. (PRIMROSE FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with simple leaves, and regular perfect flowers, the stamens as
many as the lobes of the monopetalous (rarely polypetalous) corolla and
inserted opposite them_ (on the tube or base), _and a 1-celled ovary
with a central free placenta rising from the base, bearing several or
many seeds._--Calyx free from the ovary, or in Samolus partly coherent.
(Corolla none in Glaux.) Stamens 4 or 5, rarely 6 or 8. Style and stigma
one. Seeds with a small embryo in fleshy albumen. Ovules amphitropous,
except in Tribe I.

Tribe I. HOTTONIEAE. Ovary wholly free; ovules anatropous. Aquatic;
immersed leaves pectinate.

1. Hottonia. Corolla short salver-form. Flowers verticillate and
racemose.

Tribe II. PRIMULEAE. Ovary wholly free.

[*] Stemless, leaves all in a cluster from the root; capsule dehiscent
by valves or teeth.

2. Dodecatheon. Corolla reflexed, 5-parted. Stamens exserted, connivent
in a cone.

3. Primula. Corolla funnel-form or salver-shaped, open at the throat.
Stamens included.

4. Androsace. Corolla short, very small, constricted at the throat.
Stamens included.

[*][*] Stems leafy; corolla rotate (none in Glaux); leaves entire.

[+] Capsule dehiscent vertically by valves or irregularly, mostly
globose.

5. Trientalis. Corolla mostly 7-parted. Stem leafy only at the summit.

6. Steironema. Corolla 5-parted. Five slender staminodia between the
fertile stamens.

7. Lysimachia. Corolla 5--6-parted or 5--6-petalled. Staminodia none.
Leaves dotted.

8. Glaux. Corolla none; the calyx petal-like. Flowers axillary.

[+][+] Globose capsule circumscissile, the top falling off as a lid;
flowers axillary.

9. Anagallis. Corolla longer than the calyx, 5-parted. Leaves opposite.

10. Centunculus. Corolla shorter than the calyx, 4--5-cleft. Leaves
alternate.

Tribe III. SAMOLEAE. Ovary connate at base with the base of the calyx.

11. Samolus. Corolla bell-shaped, with 5 staminodia in the sinuses.
Flowers racemose.


1. HOTTONIA, L. FEATHERFOIL. WATER VIOLET.

Calyx 5-parted, the divisions linear. Corolla salver-shaped, with a
short tube; limb 5-parted. Stamens 5, included. Capsule many-seeded,
5-valved; the valves cohering at the base and summit. Seeds
anatropous.--Aquatic perennials, with pectinate immersed leaves, and the
erect hollow flower-stems almost leafless. Flowers white or whitish,
whorled at the joints, forming an interrupted raceme. (Named for _Prof.
Hotton_, a botanist of Leyden.)

1. H. inflata, Ell. Leaves dissected into thread-like divisions,
scattered on the floating and rooting stems, and crowded at the base of
the cluster of peduncles, which are strongly inflated between the joints
(often as thick as one's finger); pedicels short.--Pools and ditches,
Mass. to S. Ind., and south to the Gulf. June--Aug.


2. DODECATHEON, L. AMERICAN COWSLIP.

Calyx deeply 5-cleft, the divisions lanceolate, reflexed. Corolla with a
very short tube, thickened throat, and 5-parted reflexed limb; the
divisions long and narrow. Filaments short, monadelphous at base;
anthers long and linear, approximate in a slender cone.--Perennial
smooth herb, with fibrous roots, a cluster of oblong or spatulate
leaves, and a simple naked scape, involucrate with small bracts at the
summit, bearing an ample umbel of showy flowers, nodding on slender
pedicels. Corolla rose-color, or sometimes white. (Name from [Greek:
do/deka], _twelve_, and [Greek: theoi/], _gods_, given by Pliny to the
primrose, which was believed to be under the care of the superior gods.)

1. D. Meadia, L. (SHOOTING-STAR.) Rich woods, Penn. and Md. to Wisc.,
south to Ga. and Tex. May, June.--Very handsome in cultivation.


3. PRIMULA, L. PRIMROSE. COWSLIP.

Calyx tubular, angled, 5-cleft. Corolla salver-shaped, enlarging above
the insertion of the stamens; the 5 lobes often notched or inversely
heart-shaped. Stamens 5, included. Capsule many-seeded, splitting at
the top into 5 valves or 10 teeth.--Low perennial herbs, producing a
tuft of veiny leaves at the root, and simple scapes, bearing the flowers
in an umbel. (Name a diminutive of _primus_, from the flowering of the
true Primrose in early spring.)

1. P. farinosa, L. (BIRD'S-EYE PRIMROSE.) Scape 3--10' high; leaves
elliptical or obovate-lanceolate, denticulate, _the lower side_ and the
3--20-flowered _involucre, etc., covered with a white mealiness_, at
least when young; corolla pale lilac with a yellow eye.--Maine to N.
shore of L. Superior, and northward. June, July. (Eu., Asia.)

2. P. Mistassinica, Michx. Scape 2--6' high; leaves spatulate or
wedge-oblong, thin and veiny, _not mealy_; involucre 1--8-flowered;
lobes of the flesh-colored corolla broadly and deeply obcordate.--Wet
banks and shores, northern N. Eng. and N. Y. to L. Superior, and
northward. May. (Eu.)


4. ANDROSACE, Tourn.

Calyx 5-cleft; tube short. Corolla salver-shaped or funnel-form; the
tube shorter than the calyx, contracted at the throat; limb 5-parted.
Stamens and style included. Capsule 5-valved.--Small herbs, with
clustered root-leaves, and very small solitary or umbelled flowers. (An
ancient Greek name of a polyp, formerly believed to be a plant.)

1. A. occidentalis, Pursh. Smoothish annual; scapes diffuse (2--4'
high), many-flowered; leaves and leaflets of the involucre oblong-ovate,
entire, sessile; calyx-lobes leafy, triangular-lanceolate, longer than
the (white) corolla.--Bare hills, from Minn. to Ill. and Ark., and west
to the mountains.


5. TRIENTALIS, L. CHICKWEED-WINTERGREEN.

Calyx mostly 7-parted; the divisions linear-lanceolate, pointed. Corolla
mostly 7-parted, spreading, flat, without tube. Filaments slender,
united in a ring at the base; anthers oblong, revolute after flowering.
Capsule few-seeded.--Low and smooth perennials, with simple erect stems,
bearing a few alternate usually minute and scale-like leaves below, and
a whorl of thin veiny leaves at the summit. Peduncles one or more, very
slender, bearing a delicate white and star-shaped flower. (A Latin name,
meaning the third part of a foot, alluding to the height of the plant.)

1. T. Americana, Pursh. (STAR-FLOWER.) Spreading by very slender
elongated rootstocks; leaves elongated-lanceolate, tapering to both
ends; petals finely pointed.--Damp cold woods, from Lab. to Minn., south
to N. Ind., and the mountains of Va. May.--Rootstocks often 1--2 deg. long
(_Hitchings_).


6. STEIRONEMA, Raf.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla rotate, with no proper tube, deeply 5-parted,
the sinuses rounded; divisions ovate, cuspidate-pointed,
erose-denticulate above, each separately involute around its stamen.
Filaments distinct or nearly so on the ring at base of corolla,
alternating with 5 subulate staminodia; anthers linear. Capsule
10--20-seeded.--Leafy-stemmed perennials, glabrous except the ciliate
petioles, not punctate, the leaves all opposite, but mostly in seeming
whorls on the flowering branches. Peduncles slender, axillary, bearing
yellow flowers. (From [Greek: stei~ros], _sterile_, and [Greek: ne~ma],
_thread_, referring to the staminodia.)

1. S. ciliatum, Raf. _Stem erect_ (2--4 deg. high); _leaves
lanceolate-ovate_ (2--6' long), tapering to an acute point, _rounded or
heart-shaped at base_, all on long and fringed petioles; _corolla longer
than the calyx_. (Lysimachia ciliata, _L._)--Low grounds and thickets,
common. July.

2. S. radicans, Gray. _Stem slender, soon reclined_, the elongated
branches often rooting in the mud; _leaves ovate-lanceolate, mostly
rounded at base, on slender petioles_; corolla about the length of the
calyx. (Lysimachia radicans, _Hook._)--Swampy river-banks, W. Va. to
Ark. and La.--Leaves and flowers nearly one half smaller than in the
last.

3. S. lanceolatum, Gray. _Stem erect_ (10'--2 deg. high); _leaves
lanceolate, varying to oblong and linear, narrowed into a short margined
petiole_ or tapering base, or the lowest short and broad on long
petioles. (Lysimachia lanceolata, _Walt._)--Low grounds and thickets,
Ont. to Fla., Dak., and Tex. Polymorphous; the extremes are var.
HYBRIDUM, Gray, with cauline leaves from oblong to broadly linear,
common north and west,--and var. ANGUSTIFOLIUM, Gray, with stems more
branched, a span to 2 deg. high, and the cauline leaves linear, acute at
both ends, more sessile, 1--2'' broad; mainly southward.

4. S. longifolium, Gray. _Stem erect_, 4-angled, slender (1--3 deg. high),
often branched below; _stem-leaves sessile, narrowly linear, elongated_
(2--4' long, 2--3'' wide), smooth and shining, rather rigid, obtuse, the
margins often a little revolute, the veins obscure; the lowest oblong or
spatulate; corolla (8--9'' broad) longer than the calyx, the lobes
conspicuously pointed. (Lysimachia longifolia, _Pursh._)--Banks of
streams, from western N. Y. to Va., Minn., and Iowa. July--Sept.


7. LYSIMACHIA, Tourn. LOOSESTRIFE.

Calyx 5--6 parted. Corolla rotate, the divisions entire, convolute in
bud. Filaments commonly monadelphous at base; anthers oblong or oval;
staminodia none. Capsule few--several-seeded.--Leafy-stemmed perennials,
with herbage commonly glandular-dotted. (In honor of King _Lysimachus_,
or from [Greek: ly/sis], _a release from_, and [Greek: ma/che],
_strife_.)

Sec. 1. LYSIMACHIA proper. _Corolla yellow, rotate, and very deeply parted,
and with no teeth between the lobes; stamens more or less monadelphous,
often unequal; leaves opposite or whorled, or some abnormally
alternate._

[*] _Flowers (middle-sized) in a terminal leafy panicle; corolla without
marks._

L. VULGARIS, L., a coarse and tall European species, pubescent and
branching, with ovate-lanceolate distinctly petioled leaves, and
glandular filaments united to near the middle.--Naturalized in a few
places in E. Mass.

[*][*] _Flowers (small) in a virgate terminal raceme or in the upper
axils; corolla dark-dotted or streaked; filaments conspicuously
monadelphous, unequal._

1. L. quadrifolia, L. Somewhat hairy; stem simple (1--2 deg. high); _leaves
whorled_ in fours or fives (sometimes in twos, threes, or sixes, rarely
only opposite or partly alternate), ovate-lanceolate; _flowers_ on long
capillary peduncles _from the axils of the leaves_; lobes of the corolla
ovate-oblong.--Moist or sandy soil, N. Brunswick to Minn., and Ga. June.

2. L. stricta, Ait. Stems 1--2 deg. high, often bearing oblong or moniliform
bulblets in the axils; smooth, at length branched, very leafy; _leaves
opposite_ or rarely alternate, lanceolate, acute at each end; _flowers_
on slender pedicels _in a long raceme_ (5--12'), leafy at base; lobes of
the corolla lance-oblong.--Low grounds, Newf. to Minn., Ark., and N. Ga.
June--Aug.

[*][*][*] _Flowers (rather large) solitary in the axils of ordinary
leaves; corolla not dark-dotted nor streaked; filaments slightly
monadelphous._

L. NUMMULARIA, L. (MONEYWORT.) Smooth; stems trailing and creeping;
leaves roundish, small, short-petioled; peduncles axillary, 1-flowered;
divisions of the corolla broadly ovate, obtuse, longer than the
lance-ovate calyx-lobes and stamens.--Escaped from gardens into damp
ground in some places. July--Sept. (Nat. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. NAUMBURGIA. _Corolla very deeply 5- (or 6--7-) parted into linear
divisions (somewhat purplish-dotted), with a small tooth in each sinus;
filaments distinct, equal; leaves opposite, the lowest scale-like._

3. L. thyrsiflora, L. (TUFTED LOOSESTRIFE.) Smooth; stem simple (1--2 deg.
high); all but the lower leaves lanceolate, the axils of one or two
middle pairs bearing short-peduncled head-like or spike-like clusters of
small light yellow flowers.--Cold swamps, from Penn. to S. Ill., Iowa,
and northwestward. June, July. (Eu.)


8. GLAUX, Tourn. SEA-MILKWORT.

Calyx bell-shaped, 5-cleft; lobes ovate, petal-like. Corolla wanting.
Stamens 5, on the base of the calyx, alternate with its lobes. Capsule
5-valved, few-seeded.--A low and leafy fleshy perennial, with opposite
oblong and entire sessile leaves, and solitary nearly sessile (purplish
and white) flowers in their axils. (An ancient Greek name, from [Greek:
glauko/s], _sea-green_.)

1. G. maritima, L.--Sea-shore of N. Eng. from Cape Cod northward. Also
in subsaline soil, Minn. to Neb., and westward. June. (Eu.)


9. ANAGALLIS, Tourn. PIMPERNEL.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla wheel-shaped, with almost no tube, 5-parted,
longer than the calyx; the divisions broad. Stamens 5; filaments
bearded. Capsule membranaceous, circumscissile, the top falling off like
a lid, many-seeded.--Low, spreading or procumbent herbs, mostly annuals,
with opposite or whorled entire leaves, and solitary flowers on axillary
peduncles. (The ancient Greek name, probably from [Greek: a)na/],
_again_, and [Greek: a)ga/llo], _to delight in_.)

A. ARVENSIS, L. (COMMON PIMPERNEL.) Leaves ovate, sessile, shorter than
the peduncles; petals obovate, obtuse, fringed with minute teeth or
stalked glands.--Waste sandy fields. June--Aug.--Flowers variable in
size, scarlet, sometimes purple, blue, or white, quickly closing at the
approach of bad weather; whence the English popular name of "_Poor Man's
Weather-glass_." (Nat. from Eu.)


10. CENTUNCULUS, Dill. CHAFFWEED.

Calyx 4--5-parted. Corolla shorter than the calyx, 4--5-cleft,
wheel-shaped, with an urn-shaped short tube, usually withering on the
summit of the pod (which is like that of Anagallis). Stamens 4 or 5;
filaments beardless.--Small annuals, with alternate entire leaves, and
solitary inconspicuous flowers in their axils. (Derivation obscure.)

1. C. minimus, L. Stems ascending (2--6' long); leaves ovate, obovate or
spatulate-oblong; flowers nearly sessile, the parts mostly in
fours.--Low grounds, from Ill. and Minn, to Fla. and Tex., and westward.
(Eu.)


11. SAMOLUS, Tourn. WATER PIMPERNEL. BROOK-WEED.

Calyx 5-cleft; the tube adherent to the base of the ovary. Corolla
somewhat bell-shaped, 5-cleft, commonly with 5 sterile filaments in the
sinuses. True stamens 5, on the corolla-tube, included. Capsule globose,
5-valved at the summit, many-seeded.--Smooth herbs, with alternate
entire leaves, and small white racemed flowers. ("According to Pliny, an
ancient Druidical name.")

1. S. Valerandi, L. Stem erect (6--12' high), leafy; leaves obovate or
spatulate, the basal rosulate; bracts none; slender pedicels ascending,
bracteolate in the middle. (Eu.)--Var. Americanus, Gray. More slender,
becoming diffuse; racemes often panicled, the pedicels longer and
spreading.--Wet places, through the U. S. June--Sept.


ORDER 62. SAPOTACEAE. (SAPODILLA FAMILY.)

_Trees or shrubs, mostly with a milky juice, simple and entire alternate
leaves (often rusty-downy beneath), small and perfect regular flowers
usually in axillary clusters; the calyx free and persistent; the fertile
stamens commonly as many as the lobes of the hypogynous short corolla
and opposite them, inserted on its tube, along with one or more rows of
appendages and scales (or sterile stamens); anthers turned outward;
ovary 4--12-celled, with a single anatropous ovule in each cell; seeds
large._--Albumen mostly none; but the large embryo with thickened
cotyledons. Style single, pointed.--A small, mostly tropical order,
producing the Sapodilla or Star-apple, and some other edible fruits.


1. BUMELIA, Swartz.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla 5-cleft, with a pair of internal appendages at
each sinus. Fertile stamens 5; anthers arrow-shaped. Sterile stamens 5,
petal-like, alternate with the lobes of the corolla. Ovary 5-celled.
Fruit small, resembling a cherry, black, containing a large ovoid and
erect seed, with a roundish scar at its base.--Flowers small, white, in
fascicles from the axils of the leaves. Branches often spiny. Leaves
often fascicled on short spurs. Wood very hard. (The ancient name of a
kind of Ash.)

1. B. lycioides, Pers. (SOUTHERN BUCKTHORN.) Spiny (10--25 deg. high);
_leaves wedge-oblong varying to oval-lanceolate_, with a tapering base,
often acute, _reticulated, nearly glabrous_ (2--4' long); _clusters
densely many-flowered_, glabrous, fruit ovoid.--Moist ground, Va. to
S. Ill., Fla., and Tex. May, June.

2. B. lanuginosa, Pers. Spiny (10--40 deg. high); _leaves oblong-obovate or
wedge-obovate, rusty-woolly beneath_, obtuse (11/2--3' long); _clusters
6--12-flowered_, pubescent; fruit globular.--Woods, S. Ill. to Fla. and
Tex. July.


ORDER 63. EBENACEAE. (EBONY FAMILY.)

_Trees or shrubs, with alternate entire leaves, and polygamous regular
flowers which have a calyx free from the 3--12-celled ovary; the stamens
2--4 times as many as the lobes of the corolla, often in pairs before
them, their anthers turned inward, and the fruit a several-celled berry.
Ovules 1 or 2, suspended from the summit of each cell._ Seeds
anatropous, mostly single in each cell, large and flat, with a smooth
coriaceous integument; the embryo shorter than the hard albumen, with a
long radicle and flat cotyledons. Styles wholly or partly
separate.--Wood hard and dark-colored. No milky juice.--A small family,
chiefly tropical.


1. DIOSPYROS, L. DATE-PLUM. PERSIMMON.

Calyx 4--6-lobed. Corolla 4--6-lobed, convolute in the bud. Stamens
commonly 16 in the sterile flowers, and 8 in the fertile, in the latter
imperfect. Berry large, globular, surrounded at base by the thickish
calyx, 4--8-celled, 4--8-seeded.--Flowers dioeciously polygamous, the
fertile axillary and solitary, the sterile smaller and often clustered.
(Name, [Greek: Dio/s], _of Jove_, and [Greek: puro/s], _grain_.)

1. D. Virginiana, L. (COMMON PERSIMMON.) Leaves thickish, ovate-oblong,
smooth or nearly so; peduncles very short; calyx 4-parted; corolla pale
yellow, thickish, between bell-shaped and urn-shaped, 6--8'' long in the
fertile flowers, much smaller in the sterile; styles 4, two-lobed at the
apex; ovary 8-celled.--Woods and old fields, R. I. and N. Y. to Iowa,
and south to Fla. and La. June.--Tree 20--70 deg. high, with very hard
blackish wood; plum-like fruit 1' in diameter, exceedingly astringent
when green, yellow when ripe, and sweet and edible after exposure to
frost.


ORDER 64. STYRACACEAE. (STORAX FAMILY.)

_Shrubs or trees, with alternate simple leaves destitute of stipules,
and perfect regular flowers; the calyx either free or adherent to the
2--5-celled ovary; the corolla of 4--8 petals, commonly more or less
united at base; the stamens twice as many as the petals or more
numerous, monadelphous or polyadelphous at base; style 1; fruit dry or
drupe-like, 1--5-celled, the cells commonly 1-seeded._--Seeds
anatropous. Embryo nearly the length of the albumen; radicle slender, as
long as or longer than the flat cotyledons. Corolla hypogynous when the
calyx is free; the stamens adherent to its base. Ovules 2 or more in
each cell.--A small family, mostly of warm countries, comprising two
very distinct tribes.

Tribe I. STYRACEAE. Calyx 4--8-toothed or entire. Stamens 2--4 times as
many as the petals, in one series; anthers linear or oblong, adnate,
introrse. Cotyledons flat.--Flowers white, handsome. Pubescence soft and
stellate.

1. Styrax. Calyx coherent only with the base of the 3-celled ovary.
Corolla mostly 5-parted. Fruit 1-celled, 1-seeded.

2. Halesia. Calyx coherent with the whole surface of the 2--4-celled
ovary, which is 2--4-winged and 2--4-celled in fruit. Corolla 4-lobed.

Tribe II. SYMPLOCINEAE. Calyx 5-cleft, imbricate. Stamens in several
series; anthers short, innate. Embryo terete. Flowers yellow. Pubescence
simple.

3. Symplocos. Calyx coherent. Petals 5, united merely at the base.


1. STYRAX, Tourn. STORAX.

Calyx truncate, somewhat 5-toothed, the base (in our species) coherent
with the base of the 3-celled many-ovuled ovary. Corolla 5-parted
(rarely 4--8-parted), large, the lobes mostly soft-downy. Stamens twice
as many as the lobes of the corolla; filaments flat, united at the base
into a short tube; anthers linear, adnate. Fruit globular, its base
surrounded by the persistent calyx, 1-celled, mostly 1-seeded, dry,
often 3-valved. Seed globular, erect, with a hard coat.--Shrubs or small
trees, with commonly deciduous leaves, and axillary or leafy-racemed
white and showy flowers on drooping peduncles; produced in spring.
Pubescence scurfy or stellate. (The ancient Greek name of the tree which
produces _storax_.)

1. S. grandifolia, Ait. Shrub 4--12 deg. high; leaves obovate, acute or
pointed, _white-tomentose beneath_ (3--6' long); _flowers mostly in
elongated racemes_; corolla ({1/3}' long) convolute-imbricated in
bud.--Woods, S. Va. to Fla.

2. S. pulverulenta, Michx. Shrub 1--4 deg. high; leaves oval or obovate (1
or 2' long), _above sparingly puberulent, and scurfy-tomentose beneath;
flowers_ (1/2' long) _1--3 together in the axils_ and at the tips of the
branches, fragrant.--Low pine barrens, S. Va. to Fla. and Tex.

3. S. Americana, Lam. Shrub 4--8 deg. high; leaves oblong, acute at both
ends (1--3' long), _smooth, or barely pulverulent beneath; flowers
axillary or in 3--4-flowered racemes_ (1/2' long); corolla valvate in the
bud.--Along streams, Va. to Fla., La., and Ark.


2. HALESIA, Ellis. SNOWDROP or SILVER-BELL-TREE.

Calyx inversely conical, 4-toothed; the tube 4-ribbed, coherent with the
2--4-celled ovary. Petals 4, united at base, or oftener to the middle,
into an open bell-shaped corolla, convolute or imbricated in the bud.
Stamens 8--16; filaments united into a ring at base, and usually a
little coherent with the base of the corolla; anthers linear-oblong.
Ovules 4 in each cell. Fruit large and dry, 2--4-winged, within bony and
1--4-celled. Seeds single, cylindrical.--Shrubs or small trees, with
large and veiny pointed deciduous leaves, and showy white flowers,
drooping on slender pedicels, in clusters or short racemes, from
axillary buds of the preceding year. Pubescence partly stellate. (Named
for _Stephen Hales_, author of Vegetable Statics, &c.)

1. H. tetraptera, L. Leaves oblong-ovate; fruit 4-winged, 11/2'
long.--Banks of streams, W. Va. to Ill., south to Fla.


3. SYMPLOCOS, Jacq. SWEET-LEAF.

Calyx 5-cleft, the tube coherent with the lower part of the 3-celled
ovary. Petals 5, imbricated in the bud, lightly united at base. Stamens
very numerous, in 5 clusters, one cohering with the base of each petal;
filaments slender; anthers very short. Fruit drupe-like or dry, mostly
1-celled and 1-seeded.--Shrubs or small trees, the leaves commonly
turning yellowish in drying, and furnishing a yellow dye. Flowers in
axillary clusters or racemes, yellow. (Name [Greek: sy/mplokos],
_connected_, from the union of the stamens.)

1. S. tinctoria, L'Her. (HORSE-SUGAR, &c.) Leaves elongated-oblong,
acute, obscurely toothed, thickish, almost persistent, minutely
pubescent and pale beneath (3--5' long); flowers 6--14, in close and
bracted clusters, odorous.--Rich ground, Del. to Fla. and La.
April.--Leaves sweet, greedily eaten by cattle.


ORDER 65. OLEACEAE. (OLIVE FAMILY.)

_Trees or shrubs, with opposite and pinnate or simple leaves, a 4-cleft
(or sometimes obsolete) calyx, a regular 4-cleft or nearly or quite
4-petalous corolla, sometimes apetalous; the stamens only 2 (rarely or
accidentally 3 or 4); the ovary 2-celled, with 2 (rarely more) ovules in
each cell._--Seeds anatropous, with a large straight embryo in hard
fleshy albumen, or without albumen.--The Olive is the type of the true
Oleaceae, to which belongs the Lilac (_Syringa_), etc.; and the Jessamine
(_Jasminum_) represents another division of the order.

Tribe I. FRAXINEAE. Fruit dry, indehisccnt, winged, a samara. Leaves
pinnate.

1. Fraxinus. Flowers dioecious, mostly apetalous, sometimes also without
calyx.

Tribe II. OLEINEAE. Fruit, a drupe, or rarely a berry. Leaves simple.

2. Forestiera. Flowers apetalous, dioecious or polygamous, from a scaly
catkin-like bud. Stamens 2--4.

3. Chionanthus. Flowers complete, sometimes polygamous. Calyx and
corolla 4-merous, the latter with long and linear divisions.

4. Ligustrum. Corolla funnel-form, 4-cleft, the tube longer than the
calyx.


1. FRAXINUS, Tourn. ASH.

Flowers polygamous or (in our species) dioecious. Calyx small and
4-cleft, toothed, or entire, or obsolete. Petals 4, or altogether
wanting in our species. Stamens 2, sometimes 3 or 4; anthers linear or
oblong, large. Style single; stigma 2-cleft. Fruit a 1--2-celled samara
or _key-fruit_, flattened, winged at the apex, 1--2-seeded. Cotyledons
elliptical; radicle slender.--Light timber-trees, with petioled pinnate
leaves of 3--15 either toothed or entire leaflets; the small flowers in
crowded panicles or racemes from the axils of last year's leaves. (The
classical Latin name.)

[*] _Leaflets petiolulate; anthers linear-oblong; calyx small,
persistent._

[+] _Fruit winged only at the upper part of the terete or nearly terete
body._

1. F. Americana, L. (WHITE ASH.) _Branchlets and petioles glabrous_;
leaflets 7--9, ovate- or lance-oblong, pointed, pale and either smooth
or pubescent underneath, entire or sparingly serrate or denticulate;
_fruit_ (about 11/2' long) _marginless below, abruptly dilated into a
lanceolate, oblanceolate, or wedge-linear wing_ 2 or 3 times as long as
the terete cylindraceous body.--Rich or moist woods, common from the
Atlantic to Minn., E. Neb. and Kan. April, May.--A large and very
valuable forest tree, with gray furrowed bark, smooth gray branchlets
and rusty-colored buds. Monoecious flowers rarely occur.

[++][++] _Body of fruit more slender, tapering gradually from summit to
base, more or less margined upward by the decurrent wing._

2. F. pubescens, Lam. (RED ASH.) _Branchlets and petioles
velvety-pubescent_; leaflets 7--9, ovate or oblong-lanceolate,
taper-pointed, almost entire, pale or more or less pubescent beneath;
_fruit 11/2--2' long, the edges gradually dilated into the linear or
spatulate wing_.--Low grounds, throughout our range; rare west of
Ohio.--Tree of middle or large size; inner face of outer bark of the
branches red or cinnamon-color when fresh.

3. F. viridis, Michx. f. (GREEN ASH.) _Glabrous throughout; leaflets
5--9_, ovate or oblong-lanceolate, often wedge-shaped at the base and
serrate above, _bright green both sides; fruit_ much as in n. 2.--Along
streams; common.--Intermediate forms occur with paler leaves somewhat
pubescent beneath. A small or middle-sized tree.

[+][+] _Fruit with compressed and wing-margined body._

4. F. platycarpa, Michx. (WATER-ASH.) _Branchlets terete_, glabrous or
pubescent; leaflets 5--7, ovate or oblong, acute at both ends,
short-stalked; _fruit broadly winged_ (not rarely 3-winged), _oblong_
(9'' wide), _with a tapering base_.--Deep river-swamps, Va. to La.
March. Tree of middle size.

5. F. quadrangulata, Michx. (BLUE ASH.) _Branchlets square_, at least on
vigorous shoots, glabrous; leaflets 7--9, short-stalked, oblong-ovate or
lanceolate, pointed, sharply serrate, green both sides; _fruit narrowly
oblong, blunt, and of the same width at both ends_, or slightly narrowed
at the base, often notched at the apex (11/2' long, 3--4'' wide).--Dry or
moist rich woods, Ohio to Mich. and Minn., south to Tenn.--Large timber
tree, the inner bark yielding a blue color to water.

[*][*] _Lateral leaflets sessile; anthers short-oblong; flowers wholly
naked_.

6. F. sambucifolia, Lam. (BLACK ASH.) Branchlets and petioles glabrous;
leaflets 7--11, oblong-lanceolate, tapering to a point, serrate, obtuse
or rounded at the base, green and smooth both sides, when young with
some rusty hairs along the midrib; fruit linear-oblong or narrowly
elliptical, blunt at both ends.--Swamps and wet banks, N. Scotia to
Minn., south to Va. and Mo.--Small or middle-sized tree, with very tough
and fissile wood. Bruised foliage exhales the odor of Elder.


2. FORESTIERA, Poir.

Flowers dioecious, crowded in catkin-like scaly buds from the axils of
last year's leaves, imbricated with scales. Corolla none. Calyx of 4
minute sepals. Stamens 2--4; anthers oblong. Ovary ovate, 2-celled,
with 2 pendulous ovules in each cell; style slender; stigma somewhat
2-lobed. Drupe small, ovoid, 1-celled, 1-seeded.--Shrubs, with opposite
and often fascicled deciduous leaves and small flowers. Fertile
peduncles short, 1--3-flowered. (Named for _M. Forestier_, a French
physician.)

1. F. acuminata, Poir. Glabrous, somewhat spinescent, 5--10 deg. high;
leaves thin, oblong-ovate or ovate-lanceolate, acuminate at both ends,
often serrulate; drupe elongated-oblong, usually pointed.--Wet river
banks, S. W. Ind. to Mo., south to Tex. April.


3. CHIONANTHUS, L. FRINGE-TREE.

Calyx 4-parted, very small, persistent. Corolla of 4 long and linear
petals, which are barely united at base. Stamens 2 (rarely 3 or 4), on
the very base of the corolla, very short. Stigma notched. Drupe fleshy,
globular, becoming 1-celled, 1--3-seeded.--Low trees or shrubs, with
deciduous and entire petioled leaves, and delicate flowers in loose and
drooping graceful panicles, from lateral buds. (Name from [Greek:
chio/n], _snow_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _blossom_, alluding to the light
and snow-white clusters of flowers.)

1. C. Virginica, L. Leaves oval, oblong, or obovate-lanceolate; flowers
on slender pedicels; petals 1' long, narrowly linear, acute, varying to
5 or 6 in number; drupe purple, with a bloom, ovoid (6--8''
long).--River banks, N. J. and S. Penn. to Fla., Tex., and Mo.; very
ornamental in cultivation. June.


4. LIGUSTRUM, Tourn. PRIVET.

Calyx short-tubular, 4-toothed, deciduous. Stamens 2, on the tube of the
corolla, included. Berry 2-celled, 1--2 seeded.--Shrubs, with entire
leaves and small white flowers in terminal panicles. (The classical
name.)

L. VULGARE, L. (PRIVET, or PRIM.) Leaves very smooth; berries
black.--Used for low hedges, and naturalized eastward; from Europe.


ORDER 66. APOCYNACEAE. (DOGBANE FAMILY.)

_Plants almost all with milky acrid juice, entire (chiefly opposite)
leaves without stipules, regular 5-merous and 5-androus flowers; the 5
lobes of the corolla convolute and twisted in the bud; the filaments
distinct, inserted on the corolla, and the pollen granular_; calyx free
from the two ovaries, which (in our genera) are distinct (forming
follicles), though their styles or stigmas are united into one.--Seeds
amphitropous or anatropous, with a large straight embryo in sparing
albumen, often bearing a tuft of down (comose).--Chiefly a tropical
family (of acrid-poisonous plants), represented in gardens by the
Oleander and Periwinkle.

1. Amsonia. Seeds naked. Corolla-tube bearded inside. Anthers longer
than the filaments. Leaves alternate.

2. Trachelospermum. Seeds comose. Corolla funnel-form, not appendaged.
Filaments slender. Calyx glandular inside. Leaves opposite.

3. Apocynum. Seeds comose. Corolla bell-shaped, appendaged within.
Filaments short, broad and flat. Calyx not glandular. Leaves opposite.


1. AMSONIA, Walt.

Calyx 5-parted, small. Corolla with a narrow funnel-form tube bearded
inside, especially at the throat; the limb divided into 5 long linear
lobes. Stamens 5, inserted on the tube, included; anthers obtuse at
both ends, longer than the filaments. Ovaries 2; style 1; stigma
rounded, surrounded with a cup-like membrane. Pod (follicles) 2, long
and slender, many-seeded. Seeds cylindrical, abrupt at both ends, packed
in one row, naked.--Perennial herbs, with _alternate leaves_, and pale
blue flowers in terminal panicled cymes. (Said to be named for a _Mr.
Charles Amson_.)

1. A. Tabernaemontana, Walt. Loosely pubescent or hairy when young, soon
glabrous; leaves from ovate-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate,
taper-pointed; calyx-lobes short, awl-shaped; tube of the bluish corolla
little longer than the lobes, the upper part either hairy when young or
glabrous.--Low grounds, N. C. to S. Ind. and Mo., south to Fla. and Tex.
May, June.


2. TRACHELOSPERMUM, Lemaire.

Calyx 5-parted, with 3--5 glands at its base inside. Corolla
funnel-form, not appendaged; limb 5-lobed. Stamens 5, included;
filaments slender; anthers arrow-shaped, with an inflexed tip. Pods
(follicles) 2, slender, many-seeded. Seeds oblong, with a tuft of
down.--Twining plants, more or less woody, with opposite leaves and
small flowers in cymes. (Name from [Greek: tra/xelos], _a neck_, and
[Greek: spe/rma], _seed_, upon the supposition that the seed was
beaked.)

1. T. difforme, Gray. Nearly herbaceous and glabrous; leaves
oval-lanceolate, pointed, thin; calyx-lobes taper-pointed; corolla pale
yellow. (Forsteronia difformis, _A. DC._)--Damp grounds, Va. to Fla. and
Tex. April.


3. APOCYNUM, Tourn. DOGBANE. INDIAN HEMP.

Calyx 5-parted, the lobes acute. Corolla bell-shaped, 5-cleft, bearing 5
triangular appendages below the throat opposite the lobes. Stamens 5, on
the very base of the corolla; filaments flat, shorter than the arrow
shaped anthers, which converge around the stigma, and are slightly
adherent to it. Style none; stigma large, ovoid, slightly 2-lobed. Fruit
of 2 long (2--7') and slender follicles. Seeds comose, with a tuft of
long silky down at the apex.--Perennial herbs, with upright branching
stems, opposite mucronate-pointed leaves, a tough fibrous bark, and
small and pale cymose flowers on short pedicels. (Ancient name of the
Dogbane, composed of [Greek: a)po/], _from_, and [Greek: ky/on], _a
dog_.)

1. A. androsaemifolium, L. (SPREADING DOGBANE.) Smooth, or rarely
soft-tomentose, branched above; _branches divergently forking; leaves
ovate, distinctly petioled; cymes loose, spreading_, mostly longer than
the leaves; _corolla_ (pale rose-color, 4'' broad) _open-bell-shaped,
with revolute lobes, the tube much longer than the ovate pointed
divisions of the calyx_.--Borders of thickets; common. June, July.

2. A. cannabinum, L. (INDIAN HEMP.) Glabrous or more or less
soft-pubescent; stem and branches _upright or ascending_ (2--3 deg. high),
terminated by _erect and close many-flowered cymes_, which are usually
shorter than the leaves; leaves from oval to oblong and even lanceolate,
short-petioled or sessile, with rounded or obscurely cordate base;
_corolla_ (greenish-white) _with nearly erect lobes, the tube not longer
than the lanceolate divisions of the calyx_.--Moist grounds and banks of
streams; common. Very variable. July, Aug.


ORDER 67. ASCLEPIADACEAE. (MILKWEED FAMILY.)

_Plants with milky juice, and opposite or whorled (rarely scattered)
entire leaves; the follicular pods, seeds, anthers (connected with the
stigma), sensible properties, etc., just as in the last family, from
which they differ in the commonly valvate corolla, and in the singular
connection of the anthers with the stigma, the cohesion of the pollen
into wax-like or granular masses_ (pollinia), etc., as explained under
the typical genus Asclepias.

PERIPLOCA GRAECA, L., a woody climbing plant of the Old World, in
ornamental cultivation, and in one or two places inclined to be
spontaneous, represents a tribe with granulose pollen loosely aggregated
in two masses in each anther-cell. It has a brownish rotate corolla,
very hairy within, and with 5 awned scales in the throat.

Tribe I. CYNANCHEAE. Anthers tipped with an inflexed or sometimes erect
scarious membrane, the cells lower than the top of the stigma; pollinia
suspended.

[*] Stems erect or merely decumbent.

1. Asclepiodora. Corolla rotate, merely spreading. Crown of 5 hooded
fleshy bodies, with a salient crest in each. Leaves alternate.

2. Asclepias. Corolla reflexed, deeply 5-parted. Crown as in n. 1, but
with an incurved horn rising from the cavity of each hood. Leaves
usually opposite.

3. Acerates. Corolla reflexed or merely spreading. Crown as in n. 1, but
with neither crest nor horn inside. Leaves mainly alternate.

[*][*] Stems twining. Leaves mostly opposite.

4. Enslenia. Corolla erect. Crown of 5 membranaceous flat bodies,
terminated by a 2-cleft tail or awn.

5. Vincetoxicum. Corolla rotate, spreading. Crown a fleshy 5--10-lobed
ring or disk.

Tribe II. GONOLOBEAE. Anthers with short if any scarious tip, borne on
the margin of or close under the disk of the stigma; pollinia
horizontal.

6. Gonolobus. Corolla rotate. Crown a wavy-lobed fleshy ring. Stems
twining.


1. ASCLEPIODORA, Gray.

Nearly as in Asclepias, but the corolla-lobes ascending or spreading,
and the hoods destitute of a horn, widely spreading and somewhat
incurved, slipper-shaped and laterally compressed, the cavity divided at
the apex by a crest-like partition.--Umbels solitary and terminal or
corymbed, loosely-flowered. Follicles oblong or ovate, often somewhat
muricate with soft spinous projections. ([Greek: A)sklepio/s] and
[Greek: do~ron] or [Greek: dorea/], _the gift of AEsculapius_.)

1. A. viridis, Gray. Almost glabrous; stems short (1 deg. high); leaves
alternate, short-petioled, ovate-oblong to lanceolate, 1--2' wide;
umbels several in a cluster, short-peduncled; flowers large (1' in
diameter), green, with a purplish crown. (Acerates paniculata,
_Decaisne_.)--Prairies, Ill. to Tex. and S. Car. June.


2. ASCLEPIAS, L. MILKWEED. SILKWEED.

Calyx 5-parted, persistent; the divisions small, reflexed. Corolla
deeply 5-parted, the divisions valvate in the bud, reflexed, deciduous.
_Crown_ of 5 hooded bodies seated on the tube of stamens, each
containing an incurved horn. Stamens 5, inserted on the base of the
corolla; filaments united in a tube which encloses the pistil, anthers
adherent to the stigma, each with 2 vertical cells, tipped with a
membranaceous appendage, each cell containing a flattened pear-shaped
and waxy pollen-mass; the two contiguous pollen-masses of adjacent
anthers, forming pairs which hang by a slender prolongation of their
summits from 5 cloven glands that grow on the angles of the stigma
(extricated from the cells by insects, and directing copious
pollen-tubes into the point where the stigma joins the apex of the
style). Ovaries 2, tapering into very short styles; the large depressed
5-angled fleshy stigmatic disk common to the two. Follicles 2, one of
them often abortive, soft, ovate or lanceolate. Seeds anatropous, flat,
margined, bearing a tuft of long silky hairs (_coma_) at the hilum,
downwardly imbricated all over the large placenta, which separates from
the suture at maturity. Embryo large, with broad foliaceous cotyledons
in thin albumen.--Perennial upright herbs, with thick and deep roots;
peduncles terminal or lateral and between the usually opposite petioles,
bearing simple many-flowered umbels, in summer. (The Greek name of
_AEsculapius_, to whom the genus is dedicated.)

Sec. 1. _Corneous anther-wings broadest and usually angulate-truncate and
salient at base; horn conspicuous._

[*] _Flowers orange-color; leaves mostly scattered; juice not milky._

1. A. tuberosa, L. (BUTTERFLY-WEED. PLEURISY-ROOT.) Roughish-hairy
(1--2 deg. high); stems erect or ascending, very leafy, branching at the
summit, and bearing usually numerous umbels in a terminal corymb; leaves
from linear to oblong-lanceolate, sessile or slightly petioled;
divisions of the corolla oblong (greenish-orange); hoods narrowly
oblong, bright orange, scarcely longer than the nearly erect and slender
awl-shaped horns; pods hoary, erect on deflexed pedicels.--Dry fields,
common, especially southward.--Var. DECUMBENS, Pursh. Stems reclining;
leaves broader and more commonly opposite, and umbels from most of the
upper axils.--Ohio to Ga., etc.

[*][*] _Corolla bright red or purple; follicles naked, fusiform, erect
on the deflexed pedicels_ (except in n. 5); _leaves opposite, mostly
broad_.

[+] _Flowers rather large; hoods about 3'' long and exceeding the
anthers; leaves transversely veined._

2. A. paupercula, Michx. Glabrous; stem slender (2--4 deg. high); leaves
elongated-lanceolate or linear (5--10' long), tapering to both ends,
slightly petioled, _umbels 5--12-flowered_; divisions of the red corolla
narrowly oblong; the _bright orange hoods_ broadly oblong, obtuse, much
exceeding the incurved horn.--Wet pine-barrens on the coast, N. J. to
Fla. and Tex.

3. A. rubra, L. _Glabrous; leaves ovate or lanceolate and tapering from
a rounded or heart-shaped base_ to a very acute point, sessile or nearly
so (2--6' long, 1/2--21/2' wide), bright green; umbels many-flowered;
divisions of the corolla and hoods _oblong-lanceolate, purple-red; the
horn long and slender, straightish_.--Wet pine-barrens, etc., N. J. and
Penn. to Fla., La., and Mo.

4. A. purpurascens, L. (PURPLE M.) Stem rather slender (1--3 deg. high);
_leaves elliptical or ovate-oblong_, the upper taper-pointed, _minutely
velvety-downy underneath_, smooth above, _contracted at base into a
short petiole; pedicels_ shorter than the peduncle, _3--4 times the
length of the dark purple lanceolate-ovate divisions of the corolla_;
hoods oblong, abruptly narrowed above; _the horn broadly scythe-shaped,
with a narrow and abruptly inflexed horizontal point_.--Dry ground,
N. Eng. to Minn., Tenn., and southward.--Flowers 6'' long.

[+][+] _Flowers small; hoods 1'' long, equalling the anthers; veins
ascending._

5. A. incarnata, L. (SWAMP MILKWEED.) Smooth, or nearly so, in the
typical form, the stem with two downy lines above and on the branches of
the peduncles (2--3 deg. high), very leafy; leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute
or pointed, obtuse or obscurely heart-shaped at base; flowers
rose-purple; hoods scarcely equalling the slender needle-pointed
horn.--Swamps, common.--Var. PULCHRA, Pers.; leaves broader and
shorter-petioled, more or less hairy-pubescent, as well as the stem.
Milky juice scanty.--With the smooth form.

[*][*][*] _Flowers greenish, yellowish, white, or merely
purplish-tinged; leaves opposite or whorled, or the upper rarely
scattered._

[+] _Follicles echinate with soft spinous processes, densely tomentose
(smooth, and only minutely echinate at the apex in n. 8), large (3--5'
long), ovate and acuminate, erect on deflexed pedicels; leaves large and
broad, short-petioled; umbels terminal and lateral._

6. A. speciosa, Torr. Finely canescent-tomentose or glabrate, _the
many-flowered umbel and calyx densely tomentose_; leaves
_subcordate-oval_ to oblong; corolla-lobes purplish, ovate-oblong,
4--5'' long; hoods 5--6'' long, with a short inflexed horn, _the
truncate summit abruptly produced into a very long lanceolate-ligulate
appendage_.--Along streams, Minn. to Ark., and westward.

7. A. Cornuti, Decaisne. (COMMON MILKWEED or SILKWEED.) Stem tall and
stout, finely soft-pubescent; _leaves_ oval-oblong (4--8' long), pale,
_minutely downy beneath, as well as the peduncles_, etc.; corolla-lobes
dull purple to white, 3--4'' long; _hoods_ rather longer than the
anthers, _ovate, obtuse, with a tooth each side of the short stout
claw-like horn_.--Rich ground, everywhere.

8. A. Sullivantii, Engelm. _Very smooth_ throughout, tall; leaves
ovate-oblong with a somewhat heart-shaped base, nearly sessile; _hoods
obovate_, entire, _obtusely 2-eared at the base_ outside; flowers
larger (9'' long) and more purple than in the last; anther-wings
2-toothed at base; _pod_ nearly glabrous, obscurely _spiny chiefly on
the beak_.--Low grounds, Ohio to Kan. and Minn.

[+][+] _Follicles wholly unarmed, either glabrous or
tomentulose-pubescent_.

[++] _Erect or ascending on the deflexed or decurved fruiting pedicels._

[=] _Umbel solitary, on a naked terminal peduncle; leaves sessile,
broad, transversely veined, wavy; glabrous and pale or glaucous._

9. A. Obtusifolia, Michx. Stem 2--3 deg. high; _leaves oblong with a
heart-shaped clasping base_, very obtuse or retuse (21/2--5' long);
peduncle 3--12' long; corolla pale greenish purple; hoods truncate,
somewhat toothed at the summit, shorter than the slender awl-pointed
horn.--Sandy woods and fields, not rare, especially southward. A second
umbel at the base of the peduncle occasionally occurs.

10. A. Meadii, Torr. Stem slender (1--2 deg. high); leaves _ovate or
oblong-ovate_, obtuse or acutish (11/2--21/2' long), peduncle only twice the
length of the upper leaves, pedicels rather short, corolla
greenish-white; hoods rounded-truncate at summit, and with a sharp tooth
at each margin, somewhat exceeding the stouter horn.--Dry ground, Ill.
and Iowa. June.

[=][=] _Umbels mostly more than one; peduncle not overtopping the
leaves._

[a.] _Leaves large, orbicular to oblong-lanceolate; hoods broad, little
if at all exceeding the anthers; glabrous or some minute pubescence on
young parts._

11. A. Jamesii, Torr. Stem stout (1 deg. high or more); leaves about 5
pairs, approximate, _remarkably thick, rounded or broadly oval, often
emarginate, subcordate at base, nearly sessile_; umbels 2--3, densely
many-flowered, on short peduncles, corolla-lobes ovate, _greenish_;
hoods truncate, entire.--Plains of central Kansas and southwestward.

12. A. phytolaccoides, Pursh. (POKE-MILKWEED.) Stem 3--5 deg. high; _leaves
broadly ovate, or the upper oval-lanceolate and pointed at both ends,
short-petioled_, smooth or slightly downy underneath (5--8' long);
lateral umbels several, _pedicels loose and nodding, numerous, long_ and
slender (1--3' long), equalling the peduncle; _corolla-lobes_
ovate-oblong, greenish; hoods (white) truncate, the margins 2-toothed at
the summit, _the horn with a long projecting awl-shaped point_.--Moist
copses, N. Eng. to Minn., south to Ga. and Ark.

13. A. variegata, L. Stem 1--2 deg. high; _leaves_ (4--5 pairs) _ovate,
oval, or obovate_, somewhat wavy, _contracted into short petioles_,
middle ones sometimes whorled; _pedicels (numerous and crowded) and
peduncle short, downy_; divisions of the _corolla ovate (white)_; hoods
orbicular, entire, purplish or reddish, the horn semilunar with a
horizontal point.--Dry woods, southern N. Y. to Ind., south to Fla.,
Ark., and W. La. July.--Remarkable for its compact umbels of nearly
white flowers.

[b.] _Leaves mostly pubescent or puberulent; hoods obtuse, entire, twice
or thrice the length of the anthers._

14. A. ovalifolia, Decaisne. Low (6--18' high), soft-downy, especially
the lower surface of the ovate or lanceolate-oblong acute short-petioled
leaves (11/2--3' long); umbels loosely 10--18-flowered, sessile or
peduncled; pedicels slender, hoods oblong, yellowish, with a small horn,
about the length of the oval greenish-white corolla-lobes (tinged with
purple outside).--Prairies and oak-openings, N. Ill. and Iowa, to Wisc.
and Dak.

[++][++] _Follicles and pedicels erect; leaves often whorled; glabrous
or nearly so._

[=] _Leaves ovate to broadly lanceolate, thin, rather slender-petioled._

15. A. quadrifolia, L. Stem slender (1--2 deg. high), mostly leafless below,
bearing usually _one or two whorls_ of four in the middle and one or two
pairs _of ovate or ovate-lanceolate_ taper-pointed petioled leaves
(2--4' long); pedicels slender; corolla-lobes (_pale pink_) oblong;
hoods white, elliptical-ovate, the incurved horn short and thick.--Dry
woods and hills, N. Eng. to Minn., south to N. C. and Ark.

16. A. perennis, Walt. Stems (1--2 deg. high) _persistent or somewhat woody
at the base; leaves lanceolate or lanceolate-ovate, tapering to both
ends_, thin, rather slender-petioled; _flowers white_, small; the small
hoods of the crown shorter than the needle-shaped horn; seeds sometimes
destitute of a coma!--Low grounds, S. Ind. and Ill. to Tex., and
eastward.

[=][=] _Leaves narrowly linear to filiform; horn subulate, exserted;
column conspicuous._

17. A. verticillata, L. Stems slender, simple or sparingly branched,
very leafy to the summit, leaves filiform-linear, with revolute margins
(2--3' long, 1'' wide), 3--6 in a whorl; umbels small, lateral and
terminal; divisions of the corolla ovate (greenish-white); hoods
roundish-oval, about half the length of the incurved claw-shaped
horns.--Dry hills, common, especially southward.--Var. PUMILA, Gray, is
low and many-stemmed from a fascicled root; leaves much crowded,
filiform.--Dry plains, Neb. to Kan. and N. Mex.

Sec. 2. _Anther-wings broadly rounded at base and conspicuously
auriculate-notched just above it; hoods with a minute horn exserted from
the 2-lobed apex._

18. A. stenophylla, Gray. Puberulent, but foliage glabrous; stems
slender (1--2 deg. high), leaves narrowly linear (3--7' long, 1--21/2'' wide),
the upper alternate, lower opposite; umbels several, short-peduncled,
10--15-flowered; corolla-lobes oblong, greenish; hoods whitish,
equalling the anthers, conduplicate-concave; follicles erect on
ascending pedicels.--Dry prairies, Neb. to E. Kan., south and westward.


3. ACERATES, Ell. GREEN MILKWEED.

Nearly as in Asclepias; but the hoods destitute of crest or horn (whence
the name, from [Greek: a] privative, and [Greek: ke/ras], _a
horn_).--Flowers greenish, in compact many-flowered umbels. Leaves
opposite or irregularly alternate, short-petioled or sessile.
Pollen-masses slender-stalked. Follicles smooth, slender.

[*] _Crown upon a short column and shorter than the globular mass of
anthers and stigma, leaves mainly alternate-scattered._

1. A. longifolia, Ell. Minutely roughish-hairy or smoothish; stem erect
(1--3 deg. high), very leafy; leaves linear (3--7' long); umbels lateral, on
peduncles of about the length of the slender pedicels; flowers 3'' long
when expanded.--Moist prairies and pine-barrens, Ohio to Minn., south to
Fla. and Tex. July--Oct.

[*][*] _Crown sessile, the oblong hoods nearly equalling the anthers;
leaves often opposite and broader._

2. A. viridiflora, Ell. Minutely _soft-downy, becoming smoothish_; stems
ascending (1--2 deg. high); leaves oval to linear, thick (11/2--4' long);
_umbels nearly sessile, lateral_, dense and globose; flower (when the
corolla is reflexed) nearly 1/2' long, short-pedicelled.--Dry soil,
common, especially southward. July--Sept.--Runs into var. LANCEOLATA,
Gray, with lanceolate leaves 21/2--4' long;--and var. LINEARIS, Gray, with
elongated linear leaves and low stems; umbels often solitary. The latter
form from Minn., Dak., and southward.

3. A. lanuginosa, Decaisne. _Hairy_, low (5--12' high); leaves
lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate; _umbel solitary and terminal,
peduncled_; flowers smaller; _pedicels slender_.--Prairies, N. Ill. to
Minn., and westward. July.


4. ENSLENIA, Nutt.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla 5-parted; the divisions erect, ovate-lanceolate.
Crown of 5 free membranaceous leaflets, which are truncate or obscurely
lobed at the apex, where they bear a pair of flexuous awns united at
base. Anthers nearly as in Asclepias; pollen-masses oblong, obtuse at
both ends, fixed below the summit of the stigma to the descending
glands. Follicles oblong-lanceolate, smooth. Seeds with a tuft, as in
Asclepias.--A perennial twining herb, smooth, with opposite heart-ovate
and pointed long-petioled leaves, and small whitish flowers in
raceme-like clusters, on slender axillary peduncles. (Dedicated to _A.
Enslen_, an Austrian botanist who collected in the Southern United
States early in the present century.)

1. E. albida, Nutt. Climbing 8--12 deg. high; leaves 3--5'
wide.--River-banks, S. Penn. and Va. to Ill., Mo., and Tex. July--Sept.


5. VINCETOXICUM, Moench.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla 5-parted, wheel-shaped. Crown flat and fleshy,
disk-like, 5--10-lobed, simple. Anthers, smooth follicles and seeds much
as in Asclepias.--Herbs, often twining. (Name from _vincens_, binding,
and _toxicum_, poison.)

V. NIGRUM, Moench. More or less twining, nearly smooth; leaves ovate or
lance-ovate; flowers small, dark purple, in an axillary cluster, on a
peduncle shorter than the leaves.--N. Eng. to Penn.; a weed escaping
from gardens. (Adv. from Eu.)


6. GONOLOBUS, Michx.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla 5-parted, wheel-shaped, sometimes
reflexed-spreading; the lobes convolute in the bud. Crown small and
fleshy, annular or cup-shaped, in the throat of the corolla. Anthers
horizontal, partly hidden under the flattened stigma, opening
transversely. Pollen-masses 5 pairs, horizontal. Follicles turgid,
mostly muricate with soft warty projections, sometimes ribbed. Seeds
with a coma.--Twining herbs or shrubs (ours herbaceous), with opposite
heart-shaped leaves, and corymbose-umbelled greenish or dark purple
flowers, on peduncles rising from between the petioles. Our species
belong to the typical section, with the crown simple and unappendaged,
and the corolla nearly veinless. (Name composed of [Greek: goni/a], _an
angle_, and [Greek: lobo/s], _a pod_, from the angled follicles of some
species.)

[*] _Crown a low undulately 10-lobed fleshy disk; follicles unarmed,
glabrous, 3--5-costate or angled._

1. G. suberosus, R. Br. Leaves cordate with an open shallow or sometimes
deeper and narrow sinus, pointed, glabrate or hairy (3--5' long); umbels
3--9-flowered, much shorter than the petiole; _corolla broadly
conical in bud, abruptly pointed, twisted; lobes ovate_ or
triangular-lanceolate, _acute, pubescent inside; calyx half as long_.
(G. macrophyllus, _Chapman_.)--Near the coast, Va. to Fla.

2. G. laevis, Michx. Leaves oblong-cordate with a deep and narrow open
sinus, conspicuously acuminate (3--6' long); umbels 5--10-flowered,
barely equalling the petiole; _corolla elongated-conical in bud, not
twisted; lobes narrowly or linear-lanceolate, obtuse, glabrous inside,
3--4 times as long as the calyx_.--South of our range.--Passes into var.
MACROPHYLLUS, Gray, with _larger_ broadly cordate _leaves_, the _sinus
often closed_, finely pubescent beneath. (G. macrophyllus,
_Michx._)--River-banks, Va. to S. Ind., Mo., S. C., and Tex.

[*][*] _Crown cup-shaped, as high as the anthers; follicles muricate,
not costate._

[+] _Crown fleshy, merely 10-crenate, or the crenatures bidentate._

3. G. obliquus, R. Br. Leaves rounded- to ovate-cordate with a narrow
sinus, abruptly acuminate (3--8' long); _umbel many-flowered; corolla in
bud oblong-conical; its lobes linear-ligulate_ (5--6'' long, 1'' wide),
crimson-purple inside, dull or greenish and _minutely pubescent
outside_.--River-banks, mountains of Penn. and Va., to Ohio and Mo.
Flowers said to be fragrant.

4. G. hirsutus, Michx. Commonly more hairy; leaves with the basal lobes
sometimes overlapping; _peduncles fewer-flowered; corolla in bud ovate,
its lobes elliptical-oblong_ (3--4'' long), _barely puberulent outside_,
dull or brownish-purple.--Md. and Va. to Tenn. and Fla.

[+][+] _Crown thinner, the border lobed or toothed; leaves as in the
preceding._

5. G. Shortii, Gray. Resembles n. 3, but larger-leaved; corolla
oblong-conical in bud, dark crimson-purple, its lobes ligulate (fully
6'' long); _crown about 10-toothed, the alternate teeth thinner,
narrower and longer, either emarginate or 2-parted_.--Along the
mountains, E. Ky. (_Short_) to N. W. Ga. (_Chapman_).

6. G. Carolinensis, R. Br. Flower-bud oblong; corolla brownish-purple;
its lobes oblong or linear-oblong (4--5'' long); _crown undulately and
very obtusely 5-lobed and with a longer bifid subulate process in each
sinus_.--From Va. to La., extending north to Ark. and central Mo.


ORDER 68. LOGANIACEAE. (LOGANIA FAMILY.)

_Herbs, shrubs, or trees, with opposite and entire leaves, and stipules
or a stipular membrane or line between them, and with regular
4--5-merous 4--5-androus perfect flowers, the ovary free from the
calyx_; a connecting group between Gentianaceae, Apocynaceae,
Scrophulariaceae (from all which they are known by their stipules) and
Rubiaceae, from which they differ in their free ovary; our
representatives of the family are all most related to the Rubiaceae, to
which, indeed, they have been appended.

[*] Woody twiners; leaves evergreen, stigmas 4.

1. Gelsemium. Corolla large, the 5 lobes imbricated in the bud. Style
slender.

[*][*] Herbs; stigma single, entire or 2-lobed.

2. Polypremum. Corolla 4-lobed, not longer than the calyx, imbricated in
the bud.

3. Spigelia. Corolla 5-lobed, valvate in the bud. Style single, jointed
in the middle.

4. Mitreola. Corolla 5-lobed, valvate in the bud. Styles 2, short,
converging, united at the summit, and with a common stigma.


1. GELSEMIUM, Juss. YELLOW (FALSE) JESSAMINE.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla open-funnel-form, 5-lobed; the lobes imbricated
in the bud. Stamens 5, with oblong sagittate anthers. Style long and
slender; stigmas 2, each 2-parted, the divisions linear. Capsule
elliptical, flattened contrary to the narrow partition, 2-celled,
septicidally 2-valved. Seeds many or several, winged. Embryo straight,
in fleshy albumen; the ovate flat cotyledons much shorter than the
slender radicle.--Smooth and twining shrubby plants with ovate or
lanceolate leaves, minute deciduous stipules, and showy yellow flowers,
of two sorts as to relative length of stamens and style. (_Gelsomino_,
the Italian name of the Jessamine.)

1. G. sempervirens, Ait. (YELLOW JESSAMINE of the South.) Stem climbing
high; leaves short-petioled, shining, nearly persistent; flowers in
short axillary clusters; pedicels scaly-bracted; flowers very fragrant
(the bright yellow corolla 1--11/2' long); capsule flat, pointed.--Low
grounds, E. Va. to Fla. and Tex. March, April.


2. POLYPREMUM, L.

Calyx 4-parted; the divisions awl-shaped from a broad scarious-margined
base. Corolla not longer than the calyx, almost wheel-shaped, bearded in
the throat; the 4 lobes imbricated in the bud. Stamens 4, very short;
anthers globular. Style 1, very short; stigma ovoid, entire. Capsule
ovoid, a little flattened, notched at the apex, 2-celled, loculicidally
2-valved, many-seeded.--A smooth, diffuse, much-branched, small annual,
with narrowly linear or awl-shaped leaves, connected at base by a slight
stipular line; the small flowers solitary and sessile in the forks and
at the ends of the branches; corolla inconspicuous, white. (Name altered
from [Greek: poly/premnos], _many-stemmed_.)

1. P. procumbens, L.--Dry fields, mostly in sandy soil, Md. to Tex.;
also adventive in Penn. June--Oct.


3. SPIGELIA, L. PINK-ROOT. WORM-GRASS.

Calyx 5-parted; the lobes slender. Corolla tubular-funnel-form, 5-lobed
at the summit, valvate in bud. Stamens 5; anthers linear. Style 1,
slender, hairy above, jointed near the middle. Capsule short, 2-celled,
twin, laterally flattened, separating at maturity from a persistent base
into 2 carpels, which open loculicidally, few-seeded.--Chiefly herbs,
with opposite leaves united by stipules, and the flowers spiked in
one-sided cymes. (Named for _Adrian Spiegel_, latinized _Spigelius_, who
wrote on botany early in the 17th century, and was perhaps the first to
give directions for preparing an herbarium.)

1. S. Marilandica, L. (MARYLAND PINK-ROOT.) Stems simple and erect from
a perennial root (6--18' high); leaves sessile, ovate-lanceolate, acute;
spike simple or forked, short; corolla 11/2' long, red outside, yellow
within; tube 4 times the length of the calyx, the lobes lanceolate;
anthers and style exserted.--Rich woods, N. J. to Wisc. and Tex. June,
July.--A well-known officinal anthelmintic, and a showy plant.


4. MITREOLA, L. MITREWORT.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla little longer than the calyx, somewhat
funnel-form, 5-lobed, valvate in the bud. Stamens 5, included. Ovary at
the base slightly adnate to the bottom of the calyx, 2-celled; styles 2,
short, converging and united above by a common stigma. Capsule exserted,
strongly 2-horned or mitre-shaped, opening down the inner side of each
horn, many-seeded.--Annual smooth herbs, 6'--2 deg. high, with small
stipules between the leaves, and small white flowers spiked along one
side of the branches of a terminal petioled cyme. (Diminutive of
_mitra_, a mitre, from the shape of the pod.)

1. M. petiolata, Torr. & Gray. Leaves thin, oblong-lanceolate,
petioled.--Damp soil, from E. Va. to Tex.


ORDER 69. GENTIANACEAE. (GENTIAN FAMILY.)

_Smooth herbs, with a colorless bitter juice, opposite and sessile
entire and simple leaves_ (except in Tribe II.) _without stipules,
regular flowers with the stamens as many as the lobes of the corolla,
which are convolute (rarely imbricated and sometimes valvate) in the
bud, a 1-celled ovary with 2 parietal placentae, or nearly the whole
inner face of the ovary ovuliferous; the fruit usually a 2-valved and
septicidal many-seeded capsule_.--Flowers solitary or cymose (racemose
in n. 8). Calyx persistent. Corolla mostly withering-persistent; the
stamens inserted on its tube. Seeds anatropous, with a minute embryo in
fleshy albumen. (Bitter-tonic plants.)

SUBORDER I. Gentianeae. Leaves always simple and entire, sessile, never
alternate. AEstivation of corolla never valvate.

[*] Lobes of corolla convolute in the bud.

[+] Style filiform, usually deciduous; anthers oblong to linear, mostly
twisting or curving in age.

1. Erythraea. Parts of flower 5 or 4; corolla salver-form; anthers
twisting spirally.

2. Sabbatia. Parts of flower 5--12; corolla rotate; anthers recurved or
revolute.

3. Eustoma. Parts of flower 5 or 6; corolla campanulate-funnel-form;
anthers versatile, straight or recurving; calyx-lobes long-acuminate.

[+][+] Style stout and persistent or none; anthers remaining straight.

4. Gentiana. Corolla funnel-form or bell-shaped, mostly plaited in the
sinuses, without spurs or glands. Calyx 4--5-cleft.

5. Frasera. Corolla 4-parted, rotate; a fringed glandular spot on each
lobe.

6. Halenia. Corolla 4--5-cleft, campanulate, and 4--5-spurred at the
base.

[*][*] Lobes of corolla imbricate in the bud; no appendages.

7. Bartonia. Calyx 4-parted. Corolla deeply 4-cleft, somewhat
campanulate.

8. Obolaria. Calyx of 2 foliaceous sepals. Corolla 4-lobed,
oblong-campanulate.

SUBORDER II. Menyantheae. Leaves all alternate and mostly petioled,
sometimes trifoliolate or crenate. AEstivation of corolla
induplicate-valvate. Marsh or aquatic perennials.

9. Menyanthes. Corolla bearded inside. Leaves 3-foliolate.

10. Limnanthemum. Corolla naked, or bearded on the margins only. Leaves
simple, rounded.


1. ERYTHRAEA, Richard. CENTAURY.

Calyx 4--5-parted, the divisions slender. Corolla funnel-form or
salver-form, with slender tube and 4--5-parted limb. Anthers exserted,
erect, twisting spirally. Style slender, single; stigma capitate or
2-lipped.--Low and small branching annuals, chiefly with rose-purple or
reddish flowers (whence the name, from [Greek: e)rythro/s], _red_); in
summer.

E. CENTAURIUM, Pers. (CENTAURY.) Stem upright (6--12' high),
_corymbosely branched_ above; leaves oblong or elliptical, acutish, the
basal rosulate, the uppermost linear; _cymes clustered, flat-topped, the
flowers all nearly sessile_; tube of the (purple-rose-colored) corolla
not twice the length of the oval lobes.--Waste grounds, shores of Lakes
Ontario and Michigan. (Adv. from Eu.)

E. RAMOSISSIMA, Pers. Low (2--6' high); _stem many times forked above
and forming a diffuse cyme_; leaves ovate-oblong or oval, not rosulate
below; _flowers all on short pedicels_; tube of the (pink-purple)
corolla thrice the length of the elliptical-oblong lobes.--Wet or shady
places, N. J., E. Penn., and southward. (Nat. from Eu.)

E. SPICATA, Pers. Stem strictly upright (6--10' high); the _flowers
sessile and spiked along one side of the simple or rarely forked
branches_; leaves oval and oblong, rounded at base, acutish; tube of the
(rose-colored or whitish) corolla scarcely longer than the calyx, the
lobes oblong.--Sandy sea-shore, Nantucket, Mass., and Portsmouth, Va.
(Nat. from Eu.)


2. SABBATIA, Adans.

Calyx 5--12-parted, the divisions slender. Corolla 5--12-parted,
wheel-shaped. Stamens 5--12; anthers soon recurved. Style 2-cleft or
-parted, slender.--Biennials or annuals, with slender stems, and
cymose-panicled handsome (white or rose-purple) flowers, in summer.
(Dedicated to _L. Sabbati_, an early Italian botanist.)

[*] _Corolla 5-parted, or rarely 6--7-parted._

[+] _Branches all opposite and stems more or less 4-angled; flowers
cymose; calyx with long and slender lobes._

[++] _Corolla white, often turning yellowish in drying._

1. S. paniculata, Pursh. _Stem brachiately much-branched_ (1--2 deg. high);
_leaves linear or the lower oblong, obtuse, 1-nerved_, nearly equalling
the internodes; calyx-lobes much shorter than the corolla.--Low grounds,
Va. to Fla.

2. S. lanceolata, Torr. & Gray. _Stem simple_ (2--3 deg. high) bearing a
flat-topped cyme; _leaves ovate-lanceolate or ovate, 3-nerved_, the
upper acute, much shorter than the internodes; calyx-lobes longer and
flowers larger than in n. 1.--Wet pine barrens, N. J. to Fla.

[++][++] _Corolla rose-pink, rarely white, with a yellowish or greenish
eye._

3. S. brachiata, Ell. _Stem slightly angled_, simple below (1--2 deg. high);
_leaves linear and linear-oblong, obtuse_, or the upper acute; branches
rather few-flowered, forming an oblong panicle; calyx-lobes nearly half
shorter than the corolla.--Dry or low places, Ind. and N. C. to La. and
Fla.

4. S. angularis, Pursh. _Stem somewhat 4-winged-angled_, much branched
above (1--21/2 deg. high), many-flowered; _leaves ovate_, acutish, 5-nerved,
with a _somewhat heart-shaped clasping_ base; calyx-lobes one third or
half the length of the corolla.--Rich soil, N. Y. to Ont. and Mich.,
south to Fla. and La.

[+][+] _Branches alternate (or the lower opposite in n. 5); peduncles
1-flowered_.

[++] _Calyx-lobes foliaceous._

5. S. calycosa, Pursh. Diffusely forking, pale, 1 deg. high or less;
leaves oblong or lance-oblong, narrowed at base; calyx-lobes
spatulate-lanceolate ({2/3}--1' long), exceeding the rose-colored or
almost white corolla.--Sea-coast and near it, Va. to Tex.

[++][++] _Calyx-lobes slender and tube very short (prominently costate
in n. 6, and longer, nearly or quite enclosing the retuse capsule)._

6. S. campestris, Nutt. Span or two high, divergently branched above;
leaves ovate with subcordate clasping base (1/2--1' long), on the branches
lanceolate; calyx equalling the lilac corolla (11/2--2' broad).--Prairies,
S. E. Kan. and W. Mo. to Tex.

7. S. stellaris, Pursh. Loosely branched and forking; _leaves oblong to
lanceolate_, the upper narrowly linear; _calyx-lobes awl-shaped-linear,
varying from half to nearly the length of the bright rose-purple
corolla_; style nearly 2-parted.--Salt marshes, Mass. to Fla. Appears to
pass into the next; corolla in both at times pink or white.

8. S. gracilis, Salisb. _Stem very slender_, at length diffusely
branched; branches and long peduncles filiform; _leaves linear_, or the
lower lance-linear, the uppermost similar to the _setaceous calyx-lobes,
which equal the rose-purple corolla_; style cleft to the
middle.--Brackish marshes, Nantucket, Mass., and N. J., to Fla. and La.

9. S. Elliottii, Steud. Effusely much branched; _leaves small_, lower
cauline (6'' long or less) thickish, _from obovate to lanceolate_, upper
narrowly linear and rather longer, on the flowering branches subulate;
_calyx-lobes slender-subulate, very much shorter than the white
corolla_; style 2-parted.--Pine barrens, S. Va. (?) to Fla.

[*][*] _Corolla 8--12-parted, large (about 2' broad)._

10. S. chloroides, Pursh. Stem (1--2 deg. high), loosely panicled above;
peduncles slender, 1-flowered; leaves oblong-lanceolate; calyx-lobes
linear, half the length of the deep rose-colored (rarely white)
corolla.--Borders of brackish ponds, Mass. to Fla. and Ala.


3. EUSTOMA, Salisb.

Calyx 5- (rarely 6-) parted; its lobes long-acuminate, with carinate
midrib. Corolla campanulate-funnel-form, deeply 5--6-lobed. Anthers
oblong, versatile, straight or recurving in age. Style filiform, nearly
persistent; stigma of 2 broad lamellae.--Glaucous large-flowered annuals,
with more or less clasping and connate leaves, and slender terminal and
more or less paniculate 1-flowered peduncles. (From [Greek: eu~)],
_well_, and [Greek: sto/ma], _mouth_, alluding to the open-mouthed
corolla.)

1. E. Russellianum, Griseb. One or two feet high; leaves from ovate- to
lanceolate-oblong; lobes of lavender-purple corolla obovate (11/2' long),
4 times longer than the tube; anthers hardly curving in age.--Neb. to
Tex.


4. GENTIANA, Tourn. GENTIAN.

Calyx 4--5-cleft. Corolla 4--5-lobed, regular, usually with intermediate
plaited folds, which bear appendages or teeth at the sinuses. Style
short or none; stigmas 2, persistent. Capsule oblong, 2-valved; the
innumerable seeds either borne on placentae at or near the sutures, or in
most of our species covering nearly the whole inner face of the
pod.--Flowers solitary or cymose, showy, in late summer and autumn.
(Name from _Gentius_, king of Illyria, who used some species
medicinally.)

Sec. 1. GENTIANELLA. _Corolla (not rotate) destitute of extended plaits or
lobes or teeth at the sinuses; root annual._

[*] (FRINGED GENTIANS.) _Flowers large, solitary on long terminal
peduncles, mostly 4-merous; corolla campanulate-funnel-form, its lobes
usually fimbriate or erose, not crowned; a row of glands between the
bases of the filaments. Autumn-flowering._

1. G. crinita, Froel. Stem 1--2 deg. high; _leaves lanceolate or
ovate-lanceolate from a partly heart-shaped or rounded base_; lobes of
the 4-cleft calyx unequal, ovate and lanceolate, as long as the
bell-shaped tube of the blue corolla (2' long), the _lobes_ of which are
_wedge-obovate, and strongly fringed around the summit; ovary
lanceolate_.--Low grounds, N. Eng. to Dak., south to Iowa, Ohio, and in
the mountains to Ga.

2. G. serrata, Gunner. Stem 3--18' high; _leaves linear or
lanceolate-linear_; lobes of the 4- (rarely 5-) cleft calyx unequal,
ovate or triangular and lanceolate, pointed; _lobes of the sky-blue
corolla spatulate-oblong_, with ciliate-fringed margins, _the fringe
shorter or almost obsolete at the summit; ovary elliptical or obovate_.
(G. detonsa, _Manual_.)--Moist grounds, Newf. and W. New York, to Iowa
and Minn., north and westward.

[*][*] _Flowers smaller, 4--5-merous; corolla somewhat funnel-form or
salver-form, its lobes entire; peduncles short or none, terminal and
lateral on the acute-angled stem._

3. G. Amarella, L. Stems 2--20' high; leaves lanceolate to narrowly
oblong, or the lowest obovate-spatulate, the margins minutely scabrous;
calyx-lobes (4--5) foliaceous, lanceolate or linear; corolla mostly
blue, 1/2' long or more, _with a fimbriate crown at the base of the oblong
acute lobes; capsule sessile._--Var. acuta, Hook. f. Calyx almost
5-parted; crown usually of fewer and sometimes very few setae.--Lab. to
N. Vt. and N. Minn., west and northward.

4. G. quinqueflora, Lam. Stem rather slender, branching (1--2 deg. high);
leaves ovate-lanceolate from a partly clasping and heart-shaped base,
3--7-nerved, tipped with a minute point; branches racemed or panicled,
about 5-flowered at the summit; lobes of the small 5-cleft calyx
awl-shaped-linear; corolla pale blue, 6--9'' long, its lobes
_triangular-ovate, bristle-pointed, without crown, but the glands
at the base_ of the slender obconical tube _manifest; capsule
stipitate_.--Moist hills, Maine to Ont., Ill., and south along the
mountains to Fla.--Var. OCCIDENTALIS, Gray. Sometimes 2--3 deg. high, and
paniculately much-branched; calyx-lobes more leaf-like,
linear-lanceolate, reaching to the middle of the broader funnel-form
corolla.--Va. and Ohio to Minn., south to Tenn. and La.

Sec. 2. PNEUMONANTHE. _Corolla (funnel-form or salver-form) with
thin-membranaceous toothed or lobed plaits in the sinuses; no crown nor
glands, capsule stipitate; autumn-flowering perennials, the flowers
large, sessile or short pedunculate and bibracteate (except in n. 12)._

[*] _Anthers unconnected or soon separate; leaves rough-margined; seeds
winged._

5. G. affinis, Griseb. _Stems clustered_, 1 deg. high or less; leaves oblong
or lanceolate to linear; _flowers numerous and thyrsoid-racemose_ or few
or rarely almost solitary; _calyx-lobes_ unequal, the longest rarely
equalling the tube, the shortest sometimes minute; corolla (blue or
bluish) 1' long or less, rather _narrowly funnel-form_, with ovate
spreading lobes, the plaits with _conspicuous laciniate appendages
sometimes equalling the lobes_.--Minn. to the Pacific.

6. G. puberula, Michx. Stems (_mostly solitary_) erect or ascending
(8--16' high), mostly _rough_ and minutely pubescent above; _leaves
rigid_, linear-lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate (1--2' long); _flowers
clustered_, rarely solitary; _calyx-lobes lanceolate_, much shorter than
the _bell-funnel-form open bright-blue corolla_, the spreading ovate
_lobes_ of which are _twice or thrice the length of the cut-toothed
appendages_.--Dry prairies and barrens, western N. Y., Ohio, and Ky., to
Minn. and Kan. Oct.

[*][*] _Anthers cohering in a ring or short tube; flowers in terminal
and often axillary clusters._

[+] _Calyx-lobes and bracts ciliolate-scabrous; seeds conspicuously
winged; leaves rough-margined._

7. G. Saponaria, L. (SOAPWORT G.) Stem erect or ascending, smooth;
leaves ovate-lanceolate, oblong, or lanceolate-obovate, narrowed at the
base; _calyx-lobes linear or spatulate_, acute, _equalling or exceeding
the tube_, half the length of the corolla; _lobes_ of the
club-bell-shaped light-blue corolla obtuse, erect or converging, short
and broad, but _distinct_, and more or less _longer than the
conspicuous_ 2-cleft and minutely toothed _appendages_.--Moist woods,
N. Y. and N. J. to Minn., south to Fla. and La.

8. G. Andrewsii, Griseb. (CLOSED G.) Stems upright, smooth; leaves
ovate-lanceolate and lanceolate from a narrower base, gradually pointed;
_calyx-lobes lanceolate to ovate_, recurved, _shorter than the
top-shaped tube_, and much shorter than the more oblong and truncate
mostly blue corolla, which is closed at the mouth, _its proper lobes
obliterated_, the apparent lobes consisting of the broad fringe-toothed
and notched appendages.--Moist ground, N. Eng. to Minn., south to N. Ga.
Corolla blue with white plaits, or sometimes all white.

[+][+] _Margins of leaves, bracts, etc., smooth and naked; terminal
flower-cluster leafy-involucrate; seeds winged._

9. G. alba, Muhl. Stems upright, stout; flowers sessile and crowded in a
dense terminal cluster; leaves ovate-lanceolate from a heart-shaped
closely clasping base, gradually tapering; calyx-lobes ovate or
subcordate, many times shorter than the tube of the corolla,
reflexed-spreading; corolla white more or less tinged with greenish or
yellowish, inflated-club-shaped, at length open, its short and broad
ovate lobes twice the length of the broad toothed appendages.--Low
grounds and mountain meadows, Ont. to Ill., Ky., and Va.

10. G. linearis, Froel. Stems slender and strict, 1--2 deg. high; flowers
1--5 in the terminal cluster; leaves linear or narrowly lanceolate, with
somewhat narrowed base; bracts sometimes very finely scabrous;
calyx-lobes linear or lanceolate; corolla blue, narrow funnel-form, its
erect roundish-ovate lobes little longer than the triangular acute
appendages. (G. Saponaria, var. linearis, _Gray_.)--Bogs, mountains of
Md. to N. Y., N. Eng., and northward.

Var. lanceolata, Gray. Leaves lanceolate, or the upper and involucrate
ones almost ovate-lanceolate, appendages of corolla sometimes very short
and broad.--Minn. and L. Superior; also Herkimer Co., N. Y.

Var. latifolia, Gray. Stout; leaves closely sessile, not contracted at
base, the lowest oblong-linear, the upper ovate-lanceolate; appendages
broad, acute or subtruncate.--L. Superior; N. Brunswick (flowers blue).

[+][+][+] _Calyx-lobes and bracts with smooth margins or nearly so;
seeds completely marginless._

11. G. ochroleuca, Froel. Stems ascending, mostly smooth; leaves
obovate-oblong, the lowest broadly obovate and obtuse, the uppermost
somewhat lanceolate, all narrowed at base, calyx-lobes linear, unequal,
much longer than its tube, rather shorter than the greenish-white open
corolla, which is painted inside with green veins and lilac-purple
stripes; its lobes ovate, very much exceeding the small and sparingly
toothed oblique appendages.--Dry or damp grounds, Penn. to Fla. and La.

[*][*][*] _Anthers not connected; flowers terminal, solitary, commonly
peduncled and naked; seeds wingless._

12. G. angustifolia, Michx. Stems slender and ascending (6--15' high),
mostly simple; leaves linear or the lower oblanceolate, rigid; corolla
open-funnel-form (2' long), azure-blue, also a greenish and white
variety, about twice the length of the thread-like calyx-lobes,
its ovate spreading lobes twice as long as the cut-toothed
appendages.--Moist pine barrens, N. J. to Fla.

PLEUROGYNE CARINTHIACA, Griseb., var. PUSILLA, Gray, a low few-flowered
annual, with rotate blue or bluish 4--5 parted corolla and a pair of
scale-like appendages on the base of its divisions, is found from the
Arctic Coast to the Lower St. Lawrence and Newfoundland, and was
reported by Pursh from the summits of the White Mountains, but has not
since been found.


5. FRASERA, Walt. AMERICAN COLUMBO.

Calyx deeply 4-parted. Corolla deeply 4-parted, wheel-shaped, each
division with a glandular and fringed pit on the face. Filaments
awl-shaped, usually somewhat monadelphous at base; anthers oblong,
versatile. Style persistent; stigma 2-lobed. Capsule oval, flattened,
4--14-seeded. Seeds large and flat, wing-margined.--Tall and showy
herbs, with a thick root, upright and mostly simple stems, bearing
whorled leaves, and numerous peduncled flowers in open cymes, disposed
in an ample elongated panicle. (Dedicated to _John Fraser_, an
indefatigable collector in this country toward the close of the last
century.)

1. F. Carolinensis, Walt. Smooth biennial or triennial (3--8 deg. high);
leaves mostly in fours, lance-oblong, the lowest spatulate, veiny;
panicle pyramidal, loosely flowered; corolla (1' broad) light
greenish-yellow, marked with small brown-purple dots, its divisions
oblong, mucronate, longer than the narrowly lanceolate calyx-lobes, each
with a large round gland below the middle; capsule much flattened
parallel with the flat valves.--Rich dry soil, western N. Y. to Wisc.,
south to Ga.


6. HALENIA, Borkh. SPURRED GENTIAN.

Calyx 4--5-parted. Corolla short bell-shaped, 4--5-cleft, without folds
or fringe, prolonged at the base underneath the erect lobes into spurs,
which are glandular in the bottom. Stigmas 2, sessile, persistent on the
oblong flattish capsule. Seeds rather numerous, oblong.--Small and
upright herbs, with yellowish or purplish panicled-cymose flowers.
(Named for _John Halen_, a German botanist.)

1. H. deflexa, Grisebach. Leafy annual or biennial (9--18' high), simple
or branched above; leaves 3--5-nerved, the lowest oblong-spatulate and
petioled, the others oblong-lanceolate, acute; spurs cylindrical,
obtuse, curved, descending, half the length of the acutely 4-lobed
corolla.--Damp and cool woods, from N. Maine and W. Mass. to
L. Superior, Minn., and northward.


7. BARTONIA, Muhl.

Calyx 4-parted. Corolla deeply 4-cleft, destitute of glands, fringes, or
folds. Stamens short. Capsule oblong, flattened, pointed with a large
persistent at length 2-lobed stigma. Seeds minute, innumerable, covering
the whole inner surface of the pod.--Small annuals or biennials (3--10'
high), with thread-like stems, and little awl-shaped scales in place of
leaves. Flowers small, white, peduncled. (Dedicated to _Prof. Benjamin
Smith Barton_, of Philadelphia.)

1. B. tenella, Muhl. Stems branched above, the branches or peduncles
mostly opposite, 1--3-flowered; _lobes of the corolla oblong, acutish,
rather longer than the calyx_, or sometimes twice as long; _anthers
roundish_; ovary 4-angled, the cell somewhat cruciform.--Open woods,
Newf. to Wisc., south to Va. and La. Aug.--Scales and branches
occasionally alternate.

2. B. verna, Muhl. Stem 1--few-flowered; flowers 3--4'' long, larger;
_lobes of the corolla spatulate, obtuse, spreading, thrice the length of
the calyx; anthers oblong_; ovary flat.--Bogs near the coast, S. Va. to
Fla. and La. March.


8. OBOLARIA, L.

Calyx of 2 spatulate spreading sepals, resembling the leaves. Corolla
tubular-bell-shaped, withering-persistent, 4-cleft; the lobes
oval-oblong, or with age spatulate, imbricated in the bud! Stamens
inserted at the sinuses of the corolla, short. Style short, persistent;
stigma 2-lipped. Capsule ovoid, 1-celled, the cell cruciform; the seeds
covering the whole face of the walls.--A low and very smooth
purplish-green perennial (3--8' high), with a simple or sparingly
branched stem, opposite wedge-obovate leaves; the dull white or purplish
flowers solitary or in clusters of three, terminal and axillary, nearly
sessile; in spring. (Name from [Greek: o)bolo/s], a small Greek coin,
from the thick rounded leaves.)

1. O. Virginica, L. Herbaceous and rather fleshy, the lower leaves
scale-like; flowers 4'' long.--Moist woods, N. J. to Ill., south to Ga.
and Tex.


9. MENYANTHES, Tourn. BUCKBEAN.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla short funnel-form, 5-cleft, deciduous, the whole
upper surface white-bearded, valvate in the bud with the margins turned
inward. Style slender, persistent; stigma 2-lobed. Capsule bursting
somewhat irregularly, many-seeded. Seed-coat hard, smooth, and
shining.--A perennial alternate-leaved herb, with a thickish creeping
rootstock, sheathed by the membranous bases of the long petioles, which
bear 3 oval or oblong leaflets; the flowers racemed on the naked scape
(1 deg. high), white or slightly reddish. (The ancient Theophrastian name,
probably from [Greek: me/n], _month_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _a flower_,
some say from its flowering for about that time.)

1. M. trifoliata, L.--Bogs, N. J. and Penn. to Ind. and Iowa, and far
north and westward. May, June. (Eu., Asia.)


10. LIMNANTHEMUM, Gmelin. FLOATING HEART.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla almost wheel-shaped, 5-parted, the divisions
fringed or bearded at the base or margins only, folded inward in the
bud, bearing a glandular appendage near the base. Style short or none;
stigma 2-lobed, persistent. Capsule few--many-seeded, at length
bursting irregularly. Seed-coat hard.--Perennial aquatics, with rounded
floating leaves on very long petioles, which, in most species, bear near
the summit the umbel of (polygamous) flowers, along with a cluster of
short and spur-like roots, sometimes shooting forth new leaves from the
same place, and so spreading by a sort of proliferous stolons, flowering
all summer. (Name compounded of [Greek: li/mne], _a marsh_ or _pool_,
and [Greek: a)/nthemon], _a blossom_, from the situations where they
grow.)

1. L. lacunosum, Grisebach. _Leaves entire_, round-heart-shaped (1--2'
broad), thickish, petioles filiform; lobes of the (white) corolla
broadly oval, naked, except the crest-like yellowish gland at the base,
twice the length of the lanceolate calyx-lobes; style none; _seeds
smooth and even_.--Shallow water, from Maine to Minn., south to Fla. and
La.

2. L. trachyspermum, Gray. _Leaves larger_ (2--6' broad) and rounder,
thicker, often wavy-margined or crenate, roughish and dark-punctate or
pitted beneath; petioles stouter; _seeds glandular-roughened_.--Ponds
and streams, Md. and Va. to Fla. and Tex.


ORDER 70. POLEMONIACEAE. (POLEMONIUM FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with alternate or opposite leaves, regular 5-merous and
5-androus flowers, the lobes of the corolla convolute in the bud, a
3-celled ovary and 3-lobed style; capsule 3-celled, 3-valved,
loculicidal, few--many-seeded, the valves usually breaking away from the
triangular central column._--Seeds amphitropous, the coat frequently
mucilaginous when moistened and emitting spiral threads. Embryo straight
in the axis of copious albumen. Calyx persistent, imbricated. Corolla
with a 5-parted border. Anthers introrse. (Insipid and innocent plants;
many are ornamental in cultivation.)

1. Phlox. Corolla salver-form. Calyx narrow. Leaves opposite, entire.

2. Gilia. Corolla tubular-funnel-form or salver-form. Calyx narrow,
partly scarious. Leaves mostly alternate, entire.

3. Polemonium. Corolla open-bell shaped. Calyx herbaceous, bell-shaped.
Filaments slender, equal. Leaves alternate, pinnate or pinnately parted.


1. PHLOX, L.

Calyx narrow, somewhat prismatic, or plaited and angled. Corolla
salver-form, with a long tube. Stamens very unequally inserted in the
tube of the corolla, included. Capsule ovoid, with sometimes 2 ovules
but ripening only a single seed in each cell.--Perennials (except a few
southern species, such as P. Drummondii of the gardens), with opposite
and sessile perfectly entire leaves, the floral often alternate. Flowers
cymose, mostly bracted; the open clusters terminal or crowded in the
upper axils. ([Greek: Phlo/x], _flame_, an ancient name of Lychnis,
transferred to this North American genus.) Most of our species are
cultivated in gardens.

Sec. 1. _Herbaceous, with flat (broad or narrow) leaves._

[*] _Stem strictly erect; panicle pyramidal or oblong, many-flowered;
peduncles and pedicels very short; corolla-lobes entire. (Very common in
gardens.)_

1. P. paniculata, L. Stem stout (2--4 deg. high), smooth; leaves
oblong-lanceolate and ovate-lanceolate, pointed, large, tapering at the
base, the upper often heart-shaped at the base; _panicle ample,
pyramidal-corymbed; calyx-teeth awn-pointed_; corolla pink-purple
varying to white.--Open woods, Penn. to Ill., south to Fla. and La.
June, July.

2. P. maculata, L. (WILD SWEET-WILLIAM.) Smooth, or barely roughish;
_stem spotted with purple_, rather slender (1--2 deg. high); lower leaves
lanceolate, the upper nearly ovate-lanceolate, tapering to the apex from
the broad and rounded or somewhat heart-shaped base, _panicle narrow,
oblong_, leafy below; _calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate, short,
scarcely pointed_; corolla pink-purple.--Rich woodlands and along
streams, N. J. and N. Penn. to Minn., south to Fla. and Ark.--Var.
CANDIDA, Michx., is a white-flowered form, commonly with spotless stem.
With the ordinary form.

[*][*] _Stems, at least the flowering ones, ascending or erect; flowers
in corymbed or simple cymes; corolla-lobes obovate or obcordate._

[+] _Calyx-teeth triangular-subulate; corolla-lobes rounded, entire;
glabrous or nearly so._

3. P. ovata, L. Stems ascending (1/2--2 deg. high), often from a prostrate
base; _leaves oblong-lanceolate, or the upper ovate-lanceolate_, and
sometimes heart-shaped at the base, acute or pointed; flowers pink or
rose-red, crowded, short-peduncled; _calyx-teeth_ short and broad,
_acute_. (P. Carolina, _L._)--Open woods, in the mountain region from
Penn. to Ala. June, July.

4. P. glaberrima, L. Stems slender, erect (1--3 deg. high); _leaves
linear-lanceolate or rarely oblong-lanceolate_, very smooth (except the
rough and sometimes revolute margins), tapering gradually to a point
(3--4' long); cymes few-flowered and loosely corymbed; flowers
peduncled (pink or whitish); _calyx-teeth_ narrower and very
_sharp-pointed_.--Prairies and open woods, N. Va. to Ohio and Minn.,
south to Fla. and Mo. July.

[+][+] _Calyx-teeth long and slender; more or less hairy or
glandular-pubescent._

[++] _No runners or prostrate sterile shoots._

5. P. pilosa, L. Stems slender, nearly erect (1--11/2 deg. high), usually
hairy, as are the _lanceolate or linear leaves_ (1--4' long), which
commonly _taper to a sharp point_; cymes at length open; _calyx-teeth
slender awl-shaped and awn-like_, longer than the tube, loose or
spreading; lobes of the pink-purple or rose-red (rarely white) corolla
obovate, entire.--Dry or sandy woods, prairies, etc., N. J. to Minn.,
south to Fla. and Tex. May, June.

6. P. amoena, Sims. Stems ascending (1/2--11/2 deg. high), mostly simple;
_leaves broadly linear, lanceolate or ovate-oblong_, abruptly acute or
blunt (1/2--11/2' long), on sterile shoots often ovate; _cyme mostly compact
and sessile, leafy-bracted; calyx-teeth awl-shaped or linear_,
sharp-pointed, but seldom awned, rather longer than the tube, straight;
lobes of the corolla obovate and entire (or rarely notched), purple,
pink, or sometimes white. (P. procumbens, _Gray_; not _Lehm._)--Dry
hills and barrens, Va. to Ky., south to Fla.

[++][++] _Sterile shoots from the base creeping or decumbent; leaves
rather broad._

7. P. reptans, Michx. _Runners creeping_, bearing _roundish-obovate_
smoothish and thickish leaves; flowering stems (4--8' high) and their
_oblong or ovate obtuse leaves_ (1/2' long) _pubescent_, often clammy;
cyme close, few-flowered; calyx-teeth linear-awl-shaped, about the
length of the tube; _lobes of the reddish-purple corolla round-obovate,
mostly entire_.--Damp woods, in the Alleghany region, Penn. to Ky. and
Ga. May, June.

8. P. divaricata, L. Stems spreading or ascending from a decumbent base
(9--18' high); _leaves oblong- or lance-ovate_ or the lower
oblong-lanceolate (11/2' long), acutish; cyme corymbose-panicled,
spreading, loosely-flowered; calyx-teeth slender awl-shaped, longer than
the tube; _lobes of the pale lilac or bluish corolla obcordate or
wedge-obovate and notched_ at the end, or _often entire_, 1/2--{2/3}'
long, equalling or longer than the tube, with rather wide sinuses
between them.--Rocky damp woods, W. Canada and N. Y. to Minn., south to
Fla. and Ark. May.--A form occurs near Crawfordsville, Ind., with
reduced flowers, the narrow entire acuminate corolla-lobes scarcely half
as long as the tube.

[*][*][*] _Stems low, diffuse and branching; flowers scattered or barely
cymulose; corolla-lobes narrowly cuneate, bifid; calyx-lobes
subulate-lanceolate._

9. P. bifida, Beck. _Minutely pubescent_; stems ascending, branched
(5--8' high); leaves linear, becoming nearly glabrous (1/2--11/2' long, 11/2''
wide); flowers few, on slender peduncles; calyx-teeth awl-shaped, about
as long as the tube; _lobes of the pale purple corolla 2-cleft to or
below the middle_ (4'' long), equalling the tube, the _divisions
linear-oblong_.--Prairies of Ind. to Iowa and Mo.

10. P. Stellaria, Gray. _Very glabrous_; leaves barely somewhat ciliate
at base, linear (1--2' long, 1'' wide or more), acute, rather rigid;
flowers scattered, mostly long-peduncled; _lobes of the pale blue or
almost white corolla bifid at the apex into barely oblong
lobes_.--Cliffs of Ky. River (_Short_), S. Ill., and Tenn.
(_Gattinger_). May.

Sec. 2. _Suffruticulose and creeping-cespitose, evergreen, with mostly
crowded and fascicled subulate and rigid leaves._

11. P. subulata, L. (GROUND or MOSS PINK.) Depressed, in broad mats,
pubescent (glabrate when old); leaves awl-shaped, lanceolate, or
narrowly linear (3--6'' long); cymes few-flowered; calyx-teeth
awl-shaped, rigid; corolla pink-purple or rose-color with a darker
centre (sometimes white); lobes wedge-shaped, notched, rarely
entire.--Dry rocky hills and sandy banks, southern N. Y. to Mich., south
to Fla. and Ky.


2. GILIA, Ruiz & Pav.

Calyx-lobes narrow and acute, the tube scarious below the sinuses.
Corolla tubular-funnel-form or salver-form. Stamens equally or unequally
inserted. Capsule with solitary to numerous seeds.--Mostly herbs with
alternate leaves. Our species belongs to the Sec. _Collomia_, in which the
flowers are capitate-glomerate and foliose-bracted or scattered, stamens
unequally inserted in the narrow tube of the salver-form corolla, ovules
solitary, and leaves sessile and entire; annuals. (Dedicated to _Philip
Gil_, a Spanish botanist.)

1. G. linearis, Gray. Branching and in age spreading, 6--18' high;
leaves linear- or oblong-lanceolate; calyx-lobes triangular-lanceolate,
acute; corolla 6'' long, from lilac-purple to nearly white, very
slender, with small limb. (Collomia linearis, _Nutt._)--From Minn. west
to the Pacific.


3. POLEMONIUM, Tourn. GREEK VALERIAN.

Calyx bell-shaped, herbaceous. Stamens equally inserted at the summit of
the very short tube of the open-bell-shaped or short funnel-form
corolla; filaments slender, declined, hairy-appendaged at the base.
Capsule few--several-seeded.--Perennials, with alternate pinnate leaves,
the upper leaflets sometimes confluent; the (blue or white) corymbose
flowers nearly bractless. (An ancient name, from [Greek: po/lemos],
_war_, of doubtful application.)

1. P. reptans, L. Smooth throughout or slightly pubescent; stems weak
and spreading (6--10' high, never creeping as the name denotes);
leaflets 5--15, ovate-lanceolate or oblong; corymbs few-flowered;
flowers nodding, calyx-lobes ovate, shorter than the tube; _stamens and
style_ included; corolla light blue, about 1/2' wide; _capsules about
3-seeded_.--Woods, N. Y. to Minn., south to Ala. and Mo. May, June.

2. P. caeruleum, L. (JACOB'S LADDER.) Stem erect (1--3 deg. high); leaflets
9--21, linear-lanceolate, oblong- or ovate-lanceolate, mostly crowded;
flowers numerous, in a thyrsus or contracted panicle; lobes of the calyx
longer than the tube; _stamens and style mostly exserted_ beyond
the bright blue corolla, which is nearly 1' broad; capsule
several-seeded.--Rare in our range, occurring in swamps and on mountains
in N. H., N. Y., N. J., and Md., but common in the western mountains and
far northward.


ORDER 71. HYDROPHYLLACEAE. (WATERLEAF FAMILY.)

_Herbs, commonly hairy, with mostly alternate leaves, regular 5-merous
and 5-androus flowers, in aspect between the foregoing and the next
order; but the ovary entire and 1-celled with 2 parietal 4--many-ovuled
placentae, or rarely 2-celled by the union of the placentae in the axis;
style 2-cleft, or 2 separate styles; fruit a 2-valved 4--many-seeded
capsule._--Seeds mostly reticulated or pitted. Embryo small in copious
albumen.--Flowers chiefly blue or white, in one-sided cymes or false
racemes, which are mostly bractless and coiled from the apex when young,
as in the Borage Family. A small order of plants of no marked
properties; some cultivated for ornament.

Tribe I. HYDROPHYLLEAE. Ovary and capsule 1-celled. Seeds pitted or
reticulated; albumen cartilaginous. Leaves cut-toothed, lobed or
pinnate. Style 2-cleft.

[*] Ovary lined with the dilated and fleshy placentae, which enclose the
ovules and seeds (in our plants only 4) like an inner pericarp.

1. Hydrophyllum. Stamens exserted; anthers linear. Calyx unchanged in
fruit.

2. Nemophila. Stamens included; anthers short. Calyx with appendages at
the sinuses.

3. Ellisia. Stamens included. Calyx destitute of appendages, enlarged in
fruit.

[*][*] Ovary with narrow parietal placentae, in fruit projecting inward
more or less.

4. Phacelia. Corolla-lobes imbricated in the bud. Calyx destitute of
appendages.

Tribe II. HYDROLEAE. Ovary and capsule 2-celled, the placentae often
projecting from the axis far into the cells. Albumen fleshy. Leaves
entire. Styles 2.

5. Hydrolea. Corolla between wheel-shaped and bell-shaped.


1. HYDROPHYLLUM, Tourn. WATERLEAF.

Calyx 5-parted, sometimes with a small appendage in each sinus, early
open in the bud. Corolla bell-shaped, 5-cleft; the lobes convolute in
the bud; the tube furnished with 5 longitudinal linear appendages
opposite the lobes, which cohere by their middle, while their edges are
folded inward, forming a nectariferous groove. Stamens and style mostly
exserted; filaments more or less bearded; anthers linear. Ovary
bristly-hairy (as is usual in the family); the 2 fleshy placentae
expanded so as to line the cell and nearly fill the cavity, soon free
from the walls except at the top and bottom, each bearing a
pair of ovules on the inner face. Capsule ripening 1--4 seeds,
spherical.--Perennials, with petioled ample leaves, and white or pale
blue cymose-clustered flowers. (Name formed of [Greek: y(/dor], _water_,
and [Greek: phy/llon], _leaf_; of no obvious application.)

[*] _Calyx with minute if any appendages; rootstocks creeping,
scaly-toothed._

1. H. macrophyllum, Nutt. _Rough-hairy; leaves oblong, pinnate and
pinnatifid; the divisions 9--13, ovate, obtuse_, coarsely cut-toothed;
root-leaves 1 deg. long; _peduncle shorter than the petiole_; calyx-lobes
lanceolate-pointed from a broad base, very hairy; flowers (6'' long)
crowded in a globular cluster; anthers short-oblong.--Rich woods, Ohio
to Va. and Ala., west to the Mississippi. July.

2. H. Virginicum, L. _Smoothish_ (1--2 deg. high); _leaves pinnately
divided_; _the divisions 5--7, ovate-lanceolate or oblong, pointed_,
sharply cut-toothed, the lowest mostly 2-parted, the uppermost
confluent; _peduncles longer than the petioles_ of the upper leaves,
forked; calyx-lobes narrowly linear, bristly-ciliate; flowers 3'' long;
anthers oblong-linear.--Rich woods. June--Aug.

3. H. Canadense, L. _Nearly smooth_ (1 deg. high); _leaves_ (3--5' broad)
_palmately 5--7-lobed, rounded_, heart-shaped at base, unequally
toothed, those from the root sometimes with 2--3 small and scattered
lateral leaflets; _peduncles mostly shorter than the petioles_, forked,
the nearly white flowers on very short pedicels; calyx-lobes
linear-awl-shaped, nearly smooth, often with minute teeth in the
sinuses.--Damp rich woods, N. Eng. to the mountains of Va., and west to
the Mississippi. June--Aug.--Rootstocks thickened and very strongly
toothed in 2 rows by the persistent bases of the stout petioles.

[*][*] _Calyx with a small reflexed lobe in each sinus; stamens little
exserted._

4. H. appendiculatum, Michx. Hairy; stem-leaves palmately 5-lobed,
rounded, the lobes toothed and pointed, the lowest pinnately divided,
cymes rather loosely flowered; filiform pedicels and calyx
bristly-hairy.--Damp woods, Ont. to mountains of N. C., west to Minn.,
Iowa, and Mo. June, July.


2. NEMOPHILA, Nutt.

Calyx 5-parted, with a reflexed appendage in each sinus, more or less
enlarged in fruit. Corolla bell-shaped or almost wheel-shaped; the lobes
convolute in the bud; the tube mostly with 10 small folds or
scales inside. Stamens included; anthers ovoid or heart-shaped.
Placentae (bearing each 2--12 ovules), capsule and seeds as in
Hydrophyllum.--Diffuse and fragile annuals, with opposite or partly
alternate pinnatifid or lobed leaves, and one-flowered peduncles; the
corolla white, blue, or marked with purple. (Name composed of [Greek:
ne/mos], _a grove_, and [Greek: phile/o], _to love_.) Some handsome
species are garden annuals.

1. N. microcalyx, Fisch. & Meyer. Small, roughish-pubescent; stems
diffusely spreading (2--8' long); leaves parted or deeply cleft into
3--5 roundish or wedge-obovate sparingly cut-lobed divisions, the upper
leaves all alternate; peduncles opposite the leaves, shorter than the
long petioles; flowers minute; corolla white, longer than the calyx;
placentae each 2-ovuled; capsule 1--2-seeded.--Moist woods, Va. to Fla.,
west to Ark. and Tex. April--June.


3. ELLISIA, L.

Calyx 5-parted, without appendages, enlarged and foliaceous in fruit.
Corolla bell-shaped or cylindraceous, not longer than the calyx, 5-lobed
above; the lobes imbricated or convolute in the bud, the tube with 5
minute appendages within. Stamens included. Placentae (each 2-ovuled),
fruit, and seeds much as in Hydrophyllum.--Delicate and branching
annuals, with lobed or divided leaves, the lower opposite, and small
whitish flowers. (Named for _John Ellis_, a distinguished naturalist, an
English correspondent of Linnaeus.)

1. E. Nyctelea, L. Minutely or sparingly roughish-hairy, divergently
branched (6--12' high); leaves pinnately parted into 7--13 lanceolate or
linear-oblong sparingly cut-toothed divisions; peduncles solitary in the
forks or opposite the leaves, 1-flowered; calyx-lobes lanceolate,
pointed, about the length of the cylindraceous (whitish) corolla (in
fruit ovate-lanceolate, nearly 1/2' long), capsule pendulous. (E. ambigua,
_Nutt._; merely a slender form.)--Shady damp places, N. J. to Va., west
to Minn. and Mo. May--July.


4. PHACELIA, Juss.

Calyx 5-parted; the sinuses naked. Corolla open-bell-shaped, 5-lobed;
the lobes imbricated in the bud. Filaments slender, often (with the
2-cleft style) exserted; anthers ovoid or oblong. Ovary with 2 narrow
linear placentae adherent to the walls, in fruit usually projecting
inward more or less, the two often forming an imperfect partition
in the ovoid 4--many seeded capsule. (Ovules 2--30 on each
placenta.)--Perennial or mostly annual herbs, with simple, lobed, or
divided leaves, and often handsome (blue, purple, or white) flowers in
scorpioid raceme-like cymes. (Name from [Greek: pha/kelos], _a
fascicle_.)

Sec. 1. PHACELIA proper. _Seeds and ovules only 4 (two on each placenta);
corolla campanulate, with narrow folds or appendages within, the lobes
entire._

1. P. bipinnatifida, Michx. Biennial; stem upright, hairy (1--2 deg. high),
leaves long-petioled, pinnately 3--5-divided, the divisions or leaflets
ovate or oblong-ovate, acute, coarsely and often sparingly
cut-lobed or pinnatifid, racemes elongated, loosely many-flowered,
glandular-pubescent; pedicels about the length of the calyx, spreading
or recurved.--Shaded banks, in rich soil, Ohio to Ill. and southward.
May, June.--Corolla bright blue, 6'' broad, with 5 pairs of longitudinal
ciliate folds, covering as many externally keeled deep grooves. Stamens
bearded below and with the style exserted.

Sec. 2. COSMANTHUS. _Ovules and seeds as in Sec. 1; corolla almost rotate,
with fimbriate lobes, and no appendages within; filaments
villous-bearded, rarely exserted; leaves pinnatifid, the upper
clasping._

2. P. Purshii, Buckley. Sparsely hairy; stem erect or ascending,
branched (8--12' high); _lobes of the stem-leaves 5--9, oblong or
lanceolate, acute; raceme many-flowered; calyx-lobes lance-linear;
corolla light blue_, varying to white (about 1/2' in diameter).--Moist
wooded banks, W. Penn. to Minn., and southward. April--June.

3. P. fimbriata, Michx. Slightly hairy, slender; stems spreading or
ascending (5--8' long), few-leaved; lowest leaves 3--5-divided into
roundish leaflets; the upper 5--7-cleft or cut-toothed, the _lobes
obtuse; raceme 3--10-flowered; calyx-lobes linear-oblong, obtuse_,
becoming spatulate; _corolla white_ (3--4'' broad).--Woods, high
mountains of Va. to Ala. May.

Sec. 3. COSMANTHOIDES. _Ovules and seeds 2--8 on each placenta; corolla
rotate or campanulate, with entire lobes and no appendages._

4. P. parviflora, Pursh. Somewhat hairy, slender, diffusely spreading
(3--8' high); leaves pinnately cleft or the lower divided into 3--5
short lobes; racemes solitary, loosely 5--15-flowered, pedicels
filiform, at length several times longer than the oblong calyx-lobes;
corolla open-campanulate, bluish-white (4--6'' broad); filaments hairy;
capsule globular, 6--12-seeded, a half shorter than the calyx.--Shaded
banks, Penn. and Ohio to Mo., south to S. C. and Tex. April--June.

Var. hirsuta, Gray. More hirsute and the stems less slender, apparently
growing in more open dry soil; corolla larger, 5--7'' in diameter; seeds
4--8.--Prairies and barrens, S. W. Mo. to E. Tex.; also Va. and Ga.

5. P. Covillei, Watson. Like the last; racemes 2--5-flowered;
calyx-lobes linear, in fruit 3'' long or more; corolla
tubular-campanulate with erect limb; filaments glabrous; capsule
depressed-globose; seeds 4, large.--Larkspur Island in the Potomac, five
miles above Washington. (_F. V. Coville._)

Sec. 4. EUTOCA. _Ovules and seeds numerous on each placenta; corolla
rotate-campanulate, with 10 vertical lamellae within._

6. P. Franklinii, Gray. Soft-hairy; stem erect (6--15' high), rather
stout; leaves pinnately parted into many lanceolate or oblong-linear
lobes, which are crowded and often cut-toothed or pinnatifid; racemes
short, dense, crowded into an oblong spike; calyx-lobes linear; corolla
blue.--Shores of L. Superior, thence north and westward.


5. HYDROLEA, L.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla short-campanulate or almost wheel-shaped,
5-cleft. Filaments dilated at base. Styles 2, distinct. Capsule
globular, 2-celled, with very large and fleshy many-seeded placentae,
thin-walled, 2--4-valved or bursting irregularly. Seeds minute,
striate-ribbed.--Herbs or scarcely shrubby, growing in water or wet
places (whence the name, from [Greek: y(/dor], _water_), with entire
leaves, often having spines in their axils, and clustered blue flowers.

1. H. affinis, Gray. Glabrous throughout; stem ascending from a creeping
base, armed with small axillary spines; leaves lanceolate, tapering to a
very short petiole; flowers in small axillary leafy-bracted clusters;
divisions of the calyx lance-ovate, equalling the corolla and the
irregularly-bursting globose capsule.--Banks of streams, S. Ill. to Tex.


ORDER 72. BORRAGINACEAE. (BORAGE FAMILY.)

_Chiefly rough-hairy herbs, with alternate entire leaves, and
symmetrical flowers with a 5-parted calyx, a regular 5-lobed corolla_
(except in Echium), _5 stamens inserted on its tube, a single style and
a usually deeply 4-lobed ovary_ (_as in_ Labiatae), _forming in fruit 4
seed-like 1-seeded nutlets, or separating into two 2-seeded or four
1-seeded nutlets_.--Albumen none. Cotyledons plano-convex; radicle
pointing to the apex of the fruit. Stigmas 1 or 2. Calyx valvate, the
corolla imbricated (in Myosotis convolute) in the bud. Flowers mostly on
one side of the branches of a reduced cyme, imitating a spike or raceme,
which is rolled up from the end, and straightens as the blossoms expand
(circinate or scorpioid), often bractless. (A rather large family of
innocent, mucilaginous, and slightly bitter plants; the roots of some
species yielding a red dye.)

Tribe I. HELIOTROPIEAE. Ovary not lobed; fruit separating into 2--4
nutlets.

1. Heliotropium. Corolla salver-form. Stamens included. Nutlets
1--2-celled.

Tribe II. BORRAGINEAE. Ovary deeply 4-parted, forming as many separate
1-seeded nutlets in fruit; style rising from the centre between them.

[*] Corolla and stamens regular.

[+] Nutlets armed, attached laterally; corolla short, closed by 5
scales.

2. Cynoglossum. Nutlets horizontally radiate, much produced downward,
covered with barbed prickles.

3. Echinospermum. Nutlets erect or ascending, the margin or back armed
with barbed prickles.

[+][+] Nutlets not armed, attached more or less laterally.

4. Krynitzkia. Corolla short, white, with closed throat. Nutlets
attached along the inner angle.

5. Mertensia. Corolla trumpet-shaped with open throat, usually blue.
Nutlets fleshy, attached just above the base.

[+][+][+] Nutlets unarmed, attached by the very base, ovoid, mostly
smooth and shining.

[++] Scar flat, small. Racemes leafy-bracteate, except in n. 6.

6. Myosotis. Corolla short salver-form, its lobes rounded, and throat
crested.

7. Lithospermum. Corolla salver-form to funnel-form, its rounded lobes
spreading; the throat either naked or with low crests.

8. Onosmodium. Corolla tubular, unappendaged, its erect lobes acute.

[++][++] Scar large and excavated.

9. Symphytum. Corolla oblong-tubular, enlarged above and closed by 5
scales.

[*][*] Corolla irregular, limb and throat oblique and lobes unequal.

10. Lycopsis. Corolla-tube curved, closed with hispid scales. Stamens
included.

11. Echium. Dilated throat of corolla unappendaged. Stamens unequal,
exserted.

ASPERUGO PROCUMBENS, L., a European annual, well marked by its much
enlarged membranaceous and veiny fructiferous calyx, has sparingly
appeared in waste grounds about New York and Philadelphia, and at
Pipestone, Minn.


1. HELIOTROPIUM, Tourn. TOURNSOLE, HELIOTROPE.

Corolla salver-form or funnel-form, unappendaged, more or less plaited
in the bud. Anthers nearly sessile. Style short; stigma conical or
capitate. Fruit 2--4-lobed, separating into 2 indurated 2-celled and
2-seeded closed carpels, or more commonly into 4 one-seeded
nutlets.--Herbs or low shrubby plants; leaves entire; fl. in summer,
white (in our species). (The ancient name, from [Greek: e(/lios], _the
sun_, and [Greek: trope/], _a turn_, with reference to its flowering at
the summer solstice.)

Sec. 1. HELIOTROPIUM proper. _Fruit 4-lobed, separating into four 1-celled
1-seeded nutlets. Style short._

[*] _Flowers in bractless one-sided scorpioid spikes._

H. EUROPAEUM, L. Erect annual (6--18' high), hoary-pubescent; leaves
oval, long-petioled; lateral spikes single, the terminal in pairs; calyx
spreading in fruit, hairy.--Waste places, southward; scarce. (Adv. from
Eu.)

1. H. Curassavicum, L. Apparently annual, glabrous; stems ascending;
leaves lance-linear or spatulate, thickish, pale, almost veinless;
spikes in pairs.--Sandy seashore, Va.; saline soils, S. Ill., and south
and westward.

[*][*] _Inflorescence not at all scorpioid; flowers scattered._

2. H. tenellum, Torr. A span to a foot high, paniculately branched,
slender, strigose-canescent; leaves narrowly linear, with revolute
margins; flowers often bractless.--Open dry ground, Ky. to Mo. and Kan.,
south to Ala. and Tex.

Sec. 2. EUPLOCA. _Fruit didymous, the 2 carpels each splitting into two
1-seeded nutlets; style elongated; flowers scattered, large._

3. H. convolvulaceum, Gray. Low annual, strigose-hirsute and hoary, much
branched; leaves lanceolate, or ovate or even linear, short-petioled;
flowers opposite the leaves and terminal; corolla 6'' broad, the
strigose-hirsute tube about twice as long as the linear sepals.--Sandy
plains, Neb. to W. Tex. A showy plant, with sweet-scented flowers.

Sec. 3. TIARIDIUM. _Fruit 2-lobed, separating into two 2-celled 2-seeded
carpels, with sometimes a pair of empty false cells; style very short;
flowers in bractless scorpioid spikes._

H. INDICUM, L. Erect and hairy annual; leaves petioled, ovate or oval
and somewhat heart-shaped; spikes single; fruit 2-cleft, mitre-shaped,
with an empty false cell before each seed-bearing cell. (Heliophytum
Indicum, _DC._)--Waste places, along the great rivers, from S. Ind. to
Mo., and southward. (Adv. from India.)


2. CYNOGLOSSUM, Tourn. HOUND'S-TONGUE.

Corolla funnel-form, the tube about equalling the 5-parted calyx, and
throat closed with 5 obtuse scales; lobes rounded. Stamens included.
Nutlets depressed or convex, oblique, fixed near the apex to the base of
the style, roughened all over with short barbed or hooked
prickles.--Coarse herbs, with a strong scent and petioled lower leaves;
the mostly panicled (so-called) racemes naked above, usually bracted at
base. Fl. all summer. (Name from [Greek: ky/on], _a dog_, and [Greek:
glo ssa], _tongue_; from the shape and texture of the leaves.)

C. OFFICINALE, L. (COMMON HOUND'S-TONGUE.) Biennial; _clothed with short
soft hairs, leafy_, panicled above; upper leaves lanceolate, closely
sessile by a rounded or slightly heart-shaped base; racemes nearly
bractless; _corolla reddish-purple_ (rarely white); nutlets flat on the
broad upper face, somewhat margined.--Waste ground and pastures; a
familiar and troublesome weed; the large nutlets adhering to the fleece
of sheep, etc. (Nat. from Eu.)

1. C. Virginicum, L. (WILD COMFREY.) Perennial; _roughish with spreading
bristly hairs_; stem simple, _few-leaved_ (2--3 deg. high); stem-leaves
lanceolate-oblong, clasping by a deep heart-shaped base; _racemes few
and corymbed, raised on long naked peduncles_, bractless; _corolla pale
blue_; nutlets strongly convex.--Open woods, Ont. and Sask. to Fla. and
La.


3. ECHINOSPERMUM, Lehm. STICKSEED.

Corolla salver-form, short, imbricated in the bud, the throat closed
with 5 short scales. Stamens included. Nutlets erect, fixed laterally to
the base of the style or central column, triangular or compressed, the
back armed all over or with 1--3 marginal rows of prickles which are
barbed at the apex, otherwise naked.--Rough-hairy and grayish herbs,
with small blue to whitish flowers in racemes or spikes; ours annuals or
biennials, flowering all summer. (Name compounded of [Greek: e)chi~nos],
_a hedgehog_, and [Greek: spe/rma], _seed_.)

[*] _Racemes panicled, leafy-bracteate at base; slender pedicels
recurved or deflexed in fruit; calyx-lobes short, at length reflexed;
biennial, not hispid._

1. E. Virginicum, Lehm. (BEGGAR'S LICE.) Stem 2--4 deg. high; radical leaves
round-ovate or cordate, slender-petioled; cauline (3--8' long)
ovate-oblong to oblong-lanceolate, acuminate at both ends; loosely
paniculate racemes divaricate; pedicel and flower each a line long;
_nutlets of the globose fruit equally short-glochidiate over the whole
back_. (Cynoglossum Morisoni, _DC._)--Borders of woods and thickets,
N. Eng. to Minn., south to Va. and La.

2. E. deflexum, Lehm., var. Americanum, Gray. Diffusely branched, about
1 deg. high, leaves oblong to lanceolate, racemes lax, loosely paniculate;
flowers small; _nutlets of the globular-pyramidal fruit only marginally
glochidiate_.--Iowa, Minn., and northward.

3. E. floribundum, Lehm. Rather strict, 2 deg. high or more; leaves oblong-
to linear-lanceolate, the lowest tapering into margined petioles;
racemes numerous, commonly geminate and in fruit rather strict; corolla
larger (blue, sometimes white), 2--3'' in diameter; nutlets scabrous and
margined with a close row of flat subulate prickles.--Minn. and Sask.,
and westward.

[*][*] _Racemes leafy-bracteate, stout pedicels not deflexed; calyx
becoming foliaceous; leaves linear, lanceolate, or the lower spatulate;
hispid annuals._

E. LAPPULA, Lehm. Erect, 1--2 deg. high, nutlets rough-granulate or
tuberculate on the back, the margins with a double row of slender
distinct prickles, or these irregular over most of the back.--Waste and
cultivated grounds, from Canada to the Middle Atlantic States. (Nat.
from Eu.)

4. E. Redowskii, Lehm., var. occidentale, Watson. Erect, 1--2 deg. high, at
length diffuse; nutlets irregularly and minutely sharp-tuberculate, the
margins armed with a single row of stout flattened prickles sometimes
confluent at base.--Minn. to Tex., and westward.


4. KRYNITZKIA, Fisch. & Meyer.

Calyx 5-parted or deeply cleft, erect or little spreading in fruit.
Corolla short, usually with more or less fornicate throat. Nutlets erect
and straight, unarmed, attached to the axis either at inner edge of base
or ventrally from the base upward.--Ours are very hispid annuals or
biennials, with small white flowers in scorpioid spikes. A large western
genus. (Dedicated to _Prof. J. Krynitzki_, of Cracow.)

1. K. crassisepala, Gray. Annual, diffusely much branched, a span high,
very rough-hispid; _leaves oblanceolate and linear-spatulate_; flowers
very small, short-pedicelled, mostly bracteate; _lobes of the persistent
calyx closed over the fruit, the midrib below becoming much thickened_
and indurated; nutlets ovate, acute, _dissimilar_, 3 of them
muricate-granulate and 1 larger and smooth, _attached from the base to
the middle_.--Plains, Sask. to Kan., Tex. and N. Mex.


5. MERTENSIA, Roth. LUNGWORT.

Corolla trumpet-shaped or bell-funnel-shaped, longer than the deeply
5-cleft or 5-parted calyx, naked, or with 5 small glandular folds or
appendages in the open throat. Anthers oblong or arrow-shaped. Style
long and thread-form. Nutlets ovoid, fleshy when fresh, smooth or
wrinkled, obliquely attached next the base by a prominent internal
angle, the scar small.--Smooth or soft-hairy perennial herbs, with pale
and entire leaves, and handsome purplish-blue (rarely white) flowers, in
loose and short panicled or corymbed raceme-like clusters, only the
lower one leafy-bracted; pedicels slender. (Named for _Prof. Francis
Charles Mertens_, a German botanist.)

[*] _Corolla trumpet-shaped, with spreading nearly entire limb and naked
throat; filaments slender, exserted; hypogynous disk 2-lobed._

1. M. Virginica, DC. (VIRGINIAN COWSLIP. LUNGWORT. BLUE BELLS.) Very
smooth, pale, erect (1--2 deg. high); leaves obovate, veiny, those at the
root (4--6' long) petioled; corolla trumpet-shaped, 1' long, many times
exceeding the calyx, rich purple-blue, rarely white; nutlets dull and
roughish.--Alluvial banks, N. Y. to Minn., S. C., and Ark. May.
Cultivated for ornament.

[*][*] _Corolla with conspicuously 5-lobed limb, and crested throat._

[+] _Filaments broad and short; nutlets dull, wrinkled or roughish when
dry._

2. M. paniculata, Don. Roughish and more or less hairy, erect (1--2 deg.
high), loosely branched, _leaves ovate and ovate-lanceolate,
taper-pointed, ribbed, thin_; corolla (6'' long) somewhat funnel-form,
3--4 times the length of the lance-linear acute divisions of the calyx,
filaments broader and shorter than the anthers.--Shore of L. Superior
and north and westward. July and Aug.

3. M. lanceolata, DC. Glabrous or hirsute, pale, 1 deg. high or less, simple
or branched, _leaves spatulate-oblong to lanceolate-linear, smaller
(1--2' long), nearly veinless, obtuse or acute_; corolla-tube somewhat
longer than the lanceolate calyx-lobes; _filaments generally longer than
the anthers_.--Dak. to N. Mex. and westward.

[+][+] _Filaments longer and narrower than the anthers; nutlets shining,
utricular._

4. M. maritima, Don. (SEA LUNGWORT.) Spreading or decumbent, smooth,
glaucous; leaves fleshy, ovate or obovate or spatulate, the upper
surface becoming papillose; corolla white, bell-funnel-form (3'' long),
twice the length of the calyx.--Sea-coast, on rocks and sand, Cape Cod
to Maine and northward; scarce. June--Aug.


6. MYOSOTIS, Dill. SCORPION-GRASS. FORGET-ME-NOT.

Corolla salver-form, the tube about the length of the 5-toothed or
5-cleft calyx, the throat with 5 small and blunt arching appendages
opposite the rounded lobes; the latter convolute in the bud! Stamens
included, on very short filaments. Nutlets smooth, compressed, fixed at
the base; the scar minute.--Low and mostly soft-hairy herbs, with entire
leaves, those of the stem sessile, and with small flowers in naked
racemes, which are entirely bractless, or occasionally with one or two
small leaves next the base, prolonged and straightened in fruit.
Flowering through the season. (Name composed of [Greek: my/s], _mouse_,
and [Greek: ou~)s], [Greek: o)to/s], _ear_, in allusion to the aspect of
the short and soft leaves in some species; one popular name is
MOUSE-EAR.)

[*] _Calyx open in fruit, its hairs appressed, none of them hooked or
glandular._

M. PALUSTRIS, Withering. (TRUE FORGET-ME-NOT.) Perennial; stems
ascending from an oblique creeping base (9--20' high), loosely branched,
smoothish; leaves rough-pubescent, oblong-lanceolate or linear-oblong;
calyx-lobes much shorter than its tube; limb of corolla 3 or 4 lines
broad, sky-blue with a yellow eye.--In wet ground, probably only escaped
from cultivation. (Nat. from Eu.)

1. M. laxa, Lehm. Perennial from filiform subterranean shoots; stems
very slender, decumbent; pubescence all appressed; leaves
lanceolate-oblong or somewhat spatulate; calyx-lobes as long as its
tube; limb of corolla 2 or 3'' broad, paler blue. (M. palustris, var.
laxa, _Gray_.)--In water and wet ground, Newf. to N. Y. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Calyx closing or the lobes erect in fruit, clothed with
spreading hairs, some minutely hooked or gland-tipped; corolla small;
annual or biennial._

2. M. arvensis, Hoffm. Hirsute with spreading hairs, erect or ascending
(6--15' high); leaves oblong-lanceolate, acutish; _racemes naked at the
base and stalked_; corolla blue, rarely white; _pedicels spreading in
fruit and longer than the 5-cleft equal calyx_.--Fields, etc.; not very
common. (Eu.)

3. M. verna, Nutt. Bristly-hirsute, branched from the base, erect
(4--12' high); _leaves obtuse_, linear-oblong, or the lower
spatulate-oblong; _racemes leafy at the base_; corolla very small,
white, with a short limb; _pedicels in fruit erect and appressed_ at the
base, usually abruptly bent outward near the apex, _rather shorter than
the deeply 5-cleft unequal_ (somewhat 2-lipped) _very hispid
calyx_.--Dry ground, rather common. May--July.

M. VERSICOLOR, Pers. More slender than the last, simple at base; racemes
loose, mostly naked at base; _flowers almost sessile; corolla pale
yellow changing to blue or violet; calyx deeply and equally
5-cleft_.--Fields, Del. (Nat. from Eu.)


7. LITHOSPERMUM, Tourn. GROMWELL. PUCCOON.

Corolla funnel-form, or sometimes salver-shaped; the open throat naked,
or with a more or less evident transverse fold or scale-like appendage
opposite each lobe; the spreading limb 5-cleft, its lobes rounded.
Anthers oblong, almost sessile, included. Nutlets ovate, smooth or
roughened, mostly bony or stony, fixed by the base; scar nearly
flat.--Herbs, with thickish and commonly red roots and sessile leaves;
flowers solitary and as if axillary, or spiked and leafy-bracted,
sometimes dimorphous as to insertion of stamens and length of style.
(Name formed of [Greek: li/thos], _stone_, and [Greek: spe/rma], _seed_,
from the hard nutlets.)

Sec. 1. _Nutlets tubercled or rough-wrinkled and pitted, gray and dull;
throat of the (nearly white) corolla destitute of any evident folds or
appendages._

L. ARVENSE, L. (CORN GROMWELL.) Minutely rough-hoary, annual or
biennial; stems erect (6--12' high); leaves lanceolate or linear,
veinless; corolla scarcely longer than the calyx.--Sandy banks and
roadsides. May--Aug. (Nat. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. _Nutlets smooth and shining, white like ivory; corolla
greenish-white or pale-yellow, small, with 5 distinct pubescent scales
in the throat; perennial._

L. OFFICINALE, L. (COMMON GROMWELL.) Much branched above, erect (1--2 deg.
high); _leaves thinnish, broadly lanceolate, acute_, with a few distinct
veins, rough above, soft-pubescent beneath; _corolla exceeding the
calyx_.--Roadsides, N. Eng. to Minn. (Nat. from Eu.)

1. L. latifolium, Michx. Stem loosely branched, erect (2--3 deg. high),
rough; _leaves ovate and ovate-lanceolate, mostly taper-pointed_ (even
the floral ones 2--4' long), _ribbed-veined_, roughish above, finely
soft-pubescent beneath, the root leaves large and rounded; _corolla
shorter than the calyx_.--Open ground and borders of woods, W. New York
to Minn., south to Va. and Ark.

Sec. 3. BATSCHIA. _Nutlets white, smooth and shining; corolla large,
salver-form or nearly so, deep orange-yellow, somewhat pubescent, the
tube much exceeding the calyx, and the throat appendaged. (Roots
perennial, long and deep, yielding a red dye.)_

[*] _Corolla-tube one half to twice longer than the calyx, not much
longer than the ample limb, the lobes entire; appendages little if at
all projecting._

2. L. hirtum, Lehm. _Hispid_ with bristly hairs (1--2 deg. high);
stem-leaves lanceolate or linear, those of the flowering branches
ovate-oblong, bristly-ciliate; _corolla woolly-bearded at the base
inside_ (limb 8--12'' broad); _flowers distinctly peduncled_, crowded,
showy; _fruiting calyx_ (1/2' long) 3--4 times longer than the
nutlets.--Pine barrens, etc., N. Y. to Minn., south and westward.
April--June.

3. L. canescens, Lehm. (PUCCOON of the Indians.) _Softly hairy_ and more
or less _hoary_ (6--15' high); _leaves obtuse_, linear-oblong, or the
upper ovate-oblong, more or less _downy beneath_ and roughish with close
appressed hairs above; _flowers sessile; corolla naked at the base
within; fruiting calyx_ (3'' long) _barely twice the length of the
nutlets_.--Plains and open woods, in sandy soil, Ont. to Va., Ala., and
westward. May.

[*][*] _Corolla-tube in well-developed flowers 2--4 times the length of
the calyx and of its erose-toothed lobes, and the appendages conspicuous
and arching; later flowers small, cleistogenous._

4. L. angustifolium, Michx. Erect or diffusely branched from the base,
6--18' high, minutely rough-strigose and hoary; leaves linear; flowers
pedicelled, leafy-bracted, of two sorts; the earlier large and showy
(corolla-tube 8--18'' long), the later and those of more diffusely
branching plants, with inconspicuous or small and pale corollas, without
crests, and the pedicels commonly recurved in fruit; nutlets usually
punctate. (L. longiflorum, _Spreng._; the long-flowered form.)--Dry and
sterile or sandy soil, Ind. and Mich. to Dak. and Tex., and westward.


8. ONOSMODIUM, Michx. FALSE GROMWELL.

Calyx 5-parted; the divisions linear and erect. Corolla tubular, or
tubular-funnel-form, not crested (the sinuses minutely hooded-inflexed),
the 5 acute lobes converging or barely spreading. Anthers oblong-linear
or arrow-shaped, mucronate, inserted in the throat. Style thread-form,
much exserted. Nutlets bony, ovoid, smooth, erect, fixed by the base;
the scar minute, not hollowed out.--Chiefly perennial herbs, coarse and
hispid, with oblong and sessile ribbed-veined leaves, and white,
greenish, or yellowish flowers, in at length elongated and erect leafy
raceme-like clusters; in summer.--Our species belong to true ONOSMODIUM,
with smooth included anthers on very short filaments; the corolla rarely
twice the length of the calyx. (Named from the likeness to the genus
_Onosma_, which name means _ass-smell_.)

1. O. Virginianum, DC. _Clothed all over with harsh and rigid appressed
short bristles_; stems rather slender (1--2 deg. high); _leaves narrowly
oblong_, or oblong-lanceolate (1--21/2' long), the lower narrowed at base;
_lobes of the narrow corolla lance-awl-shaped_, sparingly bearded
outside with long bristles.--Banks and hillsides, N. Eng. to Fla., Mo.,
and La.

2. O. Carolinianum, DC. _Shaggy all over with long and spreading bristly
hairs_; stem stout, upright (2--4 deg. high); _leaves ovate-lanceolate or
oblong-lanceolate_, acute; lobes of the rather broad corolla
_ovate-triangular or triangular-lanceolate, thickly hirsute
outside_.--Alluvial grounds, W. New York to Minn., south to Ga. and Tex.

Var. molle, Gray. _Pubescence shorter and less spreading or appressed_,
1--2 deg. high; leaves mostly smaller (2' long), when young softly
strigose-canescent beneath. (O. molle, _Michx._)--Ill. to Minn., Tex.,
and westward.


9. SYMPHYTUM, Tourn. COMFREY.

Corolla oblong-tubular, inflated above, 5-toothed, the short teeth
spreading; the throat closed with 5 converging linear-awl-shaped scales.
Stamens included; anthers elongated. Style thread-form. Nutlets smooth,
ovate, erect, fixed by the large hollowed base, which is finely toothed
on its margin.--Coarse perennial herbs, with thickened bitterish
mucilaginous roots; the nodding raceme-like clusters either single or in
pairs. (Ancient Greek name from [Greek: symphei~n], _to grow together_,
probably for its reputed healing virtues.)

S. OFFICINALE, L. (COMMON COMFREY.) Hairy, branched, winged above by the
decurrent leaves; the lower leaves ovate-lanceolate, tapering into a
petiole, the upper narrower; corolla yellowish-white, rarely
purplish.--Moist places; escaped from gardens. June. (Adv. from Eu.)


10. LYCOPSIS, L. BUGLOSS.

Corolla funnel-shaped, with curved tube and slightly unequal limb; the
throat closed with 5 convex obtuse bristly scales opposite the lobes.
Stamens and style included. Nutlets rough-wrinkled, erect, fixed by a
hollowed-out base.--Annuals. (Name from [Greek: ly/kos], _a wolf_, and
[Greek: o)/psis], _face_.)

L. ARVENSIS, L. (SMALL BUGLOSS.) Very rough-bristly (1 deg. high); leaves
lanceolate; flowers in leafy raceme-like clusters; calyx as long as the
tube of the small blue corolla.--Dry or sandy fields, New Eng. to Va.;
scarce. (Adv. from Eu.)


11. ECHIUM, Tourn. VIPER'S BUGLOSS.

Corolla with a cylindraceous or funnel-form tube, and a more or less
unequal spreading 5-lobed border; lobes rounded, the expanded throat
naked. Stamens mostly exserted, unequal. Style thread-form. Nutlets
roughened or wrinkled, fixed by a flat base. (A name of Dioscorides,
from [Greek: e)/chis], _a viper_.)

E. VULGARE, L. (BLUE-WEED.) Rough-bristly biennial; stem erect (2 deg.
high), mostly simple; stem-leaves linear-lanceolate, sessile; flowers
showy, in short lateral clusters, disposed in a long and narrow thyrsus;
corolla reddish-purple changing to brilliant blue (rarely
pale).--Roadsides and meadows of the Middle Atlantic States. June. (Nat.
from Eu.)


ORDER 73. CONVOLVULACEAE. (CONVOLVULUS FAMILY.)

_Chiefly twining or trailing herbs, often with some milky juice, with
alternate leaves (or scales) and regular 5-androus flowers; a calyx of 5
imbricated sepals, a 5-plaited or 5-lobed corolla convolute or twisted
in the bud (imbricate in n. 6); a 2-celled (rarely 3-celled) ovary (or
in one tribe 2 separate pistils), with a pair of erect ovules in each
cell, the cells sometimes doubled by a false partition between the
seeds, so becoming 4-celled; the embryo large, curved or coiled in
mucilaginous albumen._--Fruit a globular 2--6-seeded capsule. Flowers
mostly showy, on axillary peduncles; pedicels articulated, often
2-bracted. (Many are cultivated for ornament, and one, the Sweet Potato,
for its edible farinaceous roots, those of several species are
cathartic; e.g. Jalap.)

Tribe I. DICHONDREAE. Carpels 2 or 4, distinct or nearly so; styles 2
basilar. Creeping herbs.

1. Dichondra. Corolla deeply 5-cleft. Pistils 2, one-seeded.

Tribe II. CONVOLVULEAE. Ovary entire. Leafy plants, mostly twiners.

2. Ipomoea. Style undivided, with stigma capitate or 2--3-globose.

3. Convolvulus. Style undivided or 2-cleft only at apex; stigmas 2,
linear-filiform to subulate or ovate.

4. Breweria. Style 2-cleft or 2-parted; the divisions simple; stigmas
capitate.

5. Evolvulus. Styles 2, each 2-cleft; stigmas linear-filiform. Not
twining.

Tribe III. CUSCUTEAE. Ovary entire. Leafless parasitic twining herbs,
never green. Embryo filiform, coiled, without cotyledons.

6. Cuscuta. The only genus of the group.


1. DICHONDRA, Forst.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla broadly bell-shaped, 5-cleft. Stamens included.
Styles, ovaries, and utricular 1--2-seeded capsules 2, distinct. Stigmas
thick.--Small and creeping perennial herbs, soft pubescent, with
kidney-shaped entire leaves, and axillary 1-flowered bractless
peduncles. Corolla small, yellowish or white. (Name from [Greek: di/s],
_double_, and [Greek: cho/ndros], _a grain_, from the fruit.)

1. D. repens, Forst. Leaves round kidney-shaped, pubescent, green both
sides; corolla not exceeding the calyx (1--11/2'' long).--Wet ground, Va.
to Tex., near the coast.


2. IPOMOEA, L. MORNING GLORY.

Calyx not bracteate at base, but the outer sepals commonly larger.
Corolla salver-form or funnel-form to nearly campanulate; the limb
entire or slightly lobed. Style undivided, terminated by a single
capitate or 2--3-globose stigma. Capsule globular, 4--6 (by abortion
fewer) -seeded, 2--4-valved. (Name, according to Linnaeus, from [Greek:
i)/ps], _a Bindweed_, and [Greek: o(/moios], _like_; but [Greek: i)/ps]
is _a worm_.)

Sec. 1 QUAMOCLIT. _Corolla salver-form, or with somewhat funnel-form but
narrow tube; stamens and style exserted; flowers red. Annual twiners._

I. QUAMOCLIT, L. (CYPRESS-VINE.) Leaves pinnately parted into
linear-thread-shaped delicate parallel lobes; peduncles 1-flowered;
corolla narrow, scarlet-red, or sometimes white. (Quamoclit vulgaris,
_Choisy_.)--Sparingly spontaneous southward. (Trop. Amer., etc.)

I. COCCINEA, L. Leaves heart-shaped, acuminate, entire or angled, sepals
awn-pointed; corolla light scarlet (1' long). (Quamoclit coccinea,
_Moench_.)--River banks, etc., Ohio to Ill., Va., and southward.
(Probably indigenous in N. Mex. and Arizona.)

Sec. 2. IPOMOEA proper. _Corolla funnel-form or nearly campanulate,
contorted in the bud; stamens and style not exserted._

[*] (MORNING GLORY.) _Lobes of stigma and cells 3; sepals long and
narrow, attenuate upward, mostly hirsute below, corolla purple, blue,
and white._

I. HEDERACEA, Jacq. Stems retrorsely hairy, _leaves heart-shaped,
3-lobed_, the lobes acute or acuminate; peduncles short, or rather long,
1--3-flowered; calyx densely hairy below; corolla white and purple or
pale blue (1--11/2' long). (I. Nil. of Manual, not _Roth_.)--Waste and
cultivated ground, Penn. to Fla., and La. (Trop. Amer.)

I. PURPUREA, Lam. (COMMON MORNING-GLORY.) Annual, stems retrorsely
hairy; _leaves heart shaped, acuminate, entire_; peduncles long,
umbellately 3--5-flowered; calyx bristly hairy below; corolla
funnel-form (2' long), purple, varying to white.--Escaped in cultivated
grounds. (Trop. Amer.)

[*][*] _Stigma 2-lobed or entire; cells 2, each 2-seeded; sepals
broader, imbricated._

[+] _Leaves cordate, acuminate._

1 I. pandurata, Meyer. (WILD POTATO-VINE. MAN-OF-THE-EARTH.) Perennial,
smooth or nearly so when old, trailing or sometimes twining; leaves
occasionally contracted at the sides so as to be fiddle-shaped;
_peduncles longer than the petioles_, 1--5-flowered; _sepals smooth,
ovate-oblong, very obtuse_; corolla open-funnel-form (3' long), white
with purple in the tube.--Dry ground, Conn. to Mich., south to Fla. and
Tex. June--Aug. Stems long and stout, from a huge root, which often
weighs 10--20 pounds.

2 I. lacunosa, L. Annual; rather smooth; stem twining and creeping,
slender; leaves entire or angled-lobed; _peduncles short_,
1--3-flowered; _sepals lance-oblong, pointed, bristly-ciliate_ or hairy,
half the length of the sharply 5-lobed (white, 1/2--{1/3}' long)
corolla.--River-banks and low grounds, Penn. to Ill., south to S. C. and
Tex.

[+][+] _Leaves linear; not twining._

3 I. leptophylla, Torr. Perennial, very glabrous; stems erect or
ascending (2--4 deg. high), with slender recurving branches, from an immense
root (weighing 10--100 pounds); leaves 2--4' long, 2--3'' wide,
short-petioled, acute; peduncles short, 1--2-flowered; sepals broadly
ovate, very obtuse, outer ones shorter; corolla pink-purple,
funnel-form, about 3' long.--Plains of Neb. to central Kan., Tex., and
westward.


3. CONVOLVULUS, Tourn. BINDWEED.

Corolla funnel-form to campanulate. Stamens included. Style undivided or
2-cleft only at the apex; stigmas 2, linear-filiform to subulate or
ovate. Capsule globose, 2-celled, or imperfectly 4-celled by spurious
partitions between the 2 seeds, or by abortion 1-celled, mostly
2--4-valved.--Herbs or somewhat shrubby plants, either twining, erect,
or prostrate. (Name from _convolvo_, to entwine.)

Sec. 1 CALYSTEGIA. _Stigmas oval to oblong; calyx enclosed in 2 broad leafy
brats._

1 C. spithamaeus, L. _Downy; stem low and mostly simple, upright or
ascending_ (6--12' long); leaves oblong, with or without a heart-shaped
or auricled base; corolla white (2' long); stigmas oval. (Calystegia
spithamaea, _Pursh_.)--Dry and sandy or rocky soil; not rare.

2. C. sepium, L. (HEDGE BINDWEED.) Glabrous, or more or less pubescent;
stem _twining or sometimes trailing extensively_; leaves
triangular-halberd-shaped or arrow-shaped, acute or pointed, the basal
lobes obliquely truncate and often somewhat toothed or sinuate-lobed;
peduncles 4-angled; bracts commonly acute; corolla white or tinged with
rose-color (11/2--2' long). (Calystegia sepium, _R. Br._)--Moist alluvial
soil, or along streams; N. Atlantic States and westward. (Eu., etc.)

Var. Americanus, Sims. Glabrous; corolla pink or rose-purple; bracts
obtuse. (C. sepium of Am. authors mainly.)--Common, across the
continent.

Var. repens, Gray. More or less pubescent; sterile and sometimes
flowering stems extensively prostrate; leaves more narrowly sagittate or
cordate, the basal lobes commonly obtuse or rounded and entire; corolla
from almost white to rose-color; bracts very obtuse or acute.
(Calystegia sepium, var. pubescens, _Gray_.)--Common.

Sec. 2. _Stigmas filiform; no bracts at or near the base of the calyx._

C. ARVENSIS, L. (BINDWEED.) Perennial; stem procumbent or twining, and
low; leaves ovate-oblong, arrow-shaped, with the lobes at the base
acute; peduncles mostly 1-flowered; bracts minute, remote; corolla (9''
long) white or tinged with reddish.--Old fields, N. Atlantic States.
(Eu.)


4. BREWERIA, R. Br.

Styles 2, or rarely 3, simple and distinct, or else united into one
below; stigmas depressed-capitate. Otherwise as Convolvulus and
Evolvulus.--Perennial prostrate or diffusely spreading herbs; flowers
small; in summer; corolla more or less hairy or silky outside. (Named
for _Samuel Brewer_, an English botanist or amateur of the 18th
century.)

1. B. humistrata, Gray. _Sparsely hairy_ or nearly smooth; leaves
varying from oblong with a somewhat heart-shaped base to linear,
mucronate or emarginate; peduncles 1--7-flowered; bracts shorter than
the pedicels; _sepals pointed, glabrous_ or nearly so; _corolla white;
filaments hairy; styles united at base_. (Bonamia humistrata,
_Gray_.)--Dry pine barrens, Va. to La.

2. B. aquatica, Gray. _Minutely soft downy_ and somewhat hoary;
peduncles 1--3-flowered; _sepals silky; corolla pink or purple;
filaments smooth; styles almost distinct_; otherwise nearly as n. 1.
(Bonamia aquatica, _Gray_.)--Wet pine barrens and margins of ponds,
N. C. to Tex., extending into Mo.

3. B. Pickeringii, Gray. Soft-pubescent or smoothish; _leaves very
narrowly linear_ or the lowest linear-spatulate, tapering to the base,
nearly sessile; peduncles 1--3-flowered; _bracts resembling the leaves_,
mostly exceeding the flowers; _sepals hairy; filaments_ (scarcely hairy)
_and styles (united far above the middle) exserted from the open white
corolla_. (Bonamia Pickeringii, _Gray_.)--Dry pine barrens and prairies,
N. J. and southward; also W. Ill.


5. EVOLVULUS, L.

Calyx of 5 sepals, naked at base. Corolla open funnel-form or almost
rotate. Styles 2, each 2-cleft; stigmas obtuse. Capsule 2-celled; the
cells 2-seeded.--Low and small herbs or suffrutescent plants, mostly
diffuse, never twining (hence the name, from _evolvo_, to unroll, in
contrast with Convolvulus).

1. E. argenteus, Pursh. Many-stemmed from a somewhat woody base, dwarf,
silky-villous all over; leaves crowded, broadly lanceolate, sessile, or
the lower oblong spatulate and short-petioled, about 1/2' long; flowers
almost sessile in the axils; corolla purple, 3'' broad.--Sterile plains
and prairies, Dak. and Neb. to Mo. and Tex.


6. CUSCUTA, Tourn. DODDER.

Calyx 5- (rarely 4-) cleft, or of 5 sepals. Corolla globular-urn-shaped,
bell-shaped, or short-tubular, the spreading border 5- (rarely 4-)
cleft, imbricate. Stamens with a scale-like often fringed appendage at
base. Ovary 2-celled, 4-ovuled; styles distinct, or rarely united.
Capsule mostly 4-seeded. Embryo thread-shaped, spirally coiled in the
rather fleshy albumen, destitute of cotyledons, sometimes with a few
alternate scales (belonging to the plumule); germination occurring in
the soil.--Leafless annual herbs, with thread-like yellowish or reddish
stems, bearing a few minute scales in place of leaves; on rising from
the ground becoming entirely parasitic on the bark of herbs and shrubs
on which they twine, and to which they adhere by means of suckers
developed on the surface in contact. Flowers small, cymose-clustered,
mostly white; usually produced late in summer and in autumn. (Name
supposed to be of Arabic derivation.)

Sec. 1. _Stigmas elongated; capsule circumscissile._

C. EPILINUM, Weihe. (FLAX DODDER.) Stems very slender, low; flowers
globular, sessile in dense scattered heads; corolla 5-parted,
short-cylindrical, scarcely exceeding the broadly ovate acute divisions
of the calyx, persistent around the capsule; stamens included; scales
short, broad, crenulate, shorter than the globose ovary.--Flax-fields;
in Europe very injurious; sparingly introduced with flax-seed into the
Northern States. June.

C. EPITHYMUM, Murr. Stems very slender; flowers capitate; corolla-lobes
spreading, the cylindrical tube longer than the suberect acute sepals;
scales large, contiguous, toothed; stamens exserted.--Occasionally found
in clover-fields. (Int. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. _Stigmas capitate; capsule indehiscent._

[*] _Calyx gamosepalous; ovary and capsule depressed-globose._

[+] _Flowers in dense or globular clusters; corolla with short and wide
tube, persistent at the base of the capsule; styles mostly shorter than
the ovary._

1. C. chlorocarpa, Engelm. _Stems coarse, orange-colored_; flowers white
(1--11/4' long); _lobes of calyx and corolla_ (mostly 4) _acute_, often
longer than the tube; _scales small, 2-cleft_, often reduced to a few
teeth; the thin capsule pale greenish-yellow.--Wet places, from Wisc.
and Minn. to Ark.; also in Penn. and Del., often on Polygonum.

2. C. arvensis, Beyrich. _Stems pale and slender_, low; _flowers smaller_
(hardly 1'' long); _calyx-lobes (5) obtuse_, mostly very broad; those of
the corolla acuminate, longer than the tube, with inflexed points,
_scales large, deeply fringed_.--Rather dry soil on various low plants,
N. Y. to Fla., west to the Pacific. Very variable.

[+][+] _Flowers in panicled often compound cymes; styles slender, mostly
longer than the ovary; corolla withering on the summit of the large
capsule._

3. C. tenuiflora, Engelm. Stems coarse and yellow, usually rather
high-climbing; flowers (1'' long or less) on short thick pedicels, often
4-merous; lobes of calyx and corolla oblong, obtuse, the latter mostly
shorter than the slender deeply campanulate tube; scales shorter than
the tube, fringed.--On tall herbs and shrubs in wet places, Penn. to
Minn., and south to Tex.

[*][*] _Calyx gamosepalous; ovary and capsule pointed, the latter
enveloped or capped by the marcescent corolla; flowers in loose panicled
cymes._

[+] _Acute tips of the corolla-lobes inflexed._

4. C. decora, Engelm. Stems coarse; flowers fleshy and more or less
papillose; calyx-lobes triangular, acute; those of the broadly
campanulate corolla ovate-lanceolate, minutely crenulate, _spreading;
scales large, deeply fringed; capsule enveloped by remains of corolla_.
(C. indecora, _Choisy_.)--Var. PULCHERRIMA, Engelm. The larger form,
with coarser stems, and conspicuous flowers 11/2--21/2'' long and wide;
anthers and stigmas yellow or deep purple.--Wet prairies, on herbs and
low shrubs (principally Leguminosae and Compositae), from Ill. to Fla. and
Tex., and westward.

5. C. inflexa, Engelm. Similar to the preceding; flowers of the same
structure, but _smaller_ (only 1'' long), generally 4-merous; corolla
deeper, _with erect lobes, finally capping the capsule; scales reduced
to a few teeth_.--Open woods and dry prairies, on shrubs (hazels, etc.)
or coarse herbs, southern N. Eng. to Neb. and Ark.

[+][+] _Corolla-lobes obtuse, spreading._

6. C. Gronovii, Willd. Stems coarse, often climbing high; corolla-lobes
mostly shorter than the deeply campanulate tube; scales copiously
fringed; _capsule globose, umbonate_.--Wet shady places, Canada to
Minn., south to Fla. and Tex. The commonest of our species. Flowers very
variable in size and compactness of clusters.--Var. LATIFLORA, Engelm.,
is a form with flowers of more delicate texture, and shorter tube and
longer lobes to the corolla. Common northward.

7. C. rostrata, Shuttleworth. Similar to the preceding; flowers larger
(2--3'' long), more delicate and whiter; lobes of corolla and calyx
shorter than its tube; slender styles longer; _ovary bottle-shaped;
capsule long-pointed_.--Shady valleys in the Alleghanies, from Md. and
Va., southward; on tall herbs, rarely shrubs.

[*][*][*] _Sepals 5, distinct, surrounded by 2 or more similar bracts;
styles capillary; scales large, deeply fringed; capsule capped by the
marcescent corolla._

8. C. cuspidata, Engelm. Stems slender; flowers (11/2--21/4'' long) thin,
_on bracteolate pedicels in loose panicles_; the ovate-orbicular bracts
and sepals and the oblong corolla-lobes cuspidate or mucronate, rarely
obtuse, shorter than the cylindrical tube; styles many times longer than
the ovary, at length exserted.--Wet or dry prairies, on Ambrosia, Iva,
some Leguminosae, etc., Neb. to Tex., occasionally down the Missouri as
far as St. Louis.

9. C. compacta, Juss. Stems coarse; _flowers closely sessile in densely
compact clusters; bracts (3--5) and sepals orbicular, concave, slightly
crenate, appressed_, nearly equalling or much shorter than the
cylindrical tube of the corolla; stamens shorter than the oblong obtuse
spreading lobes of the latter.--Along the west side of the Alleghanies
from Ont. to Ala., west to Mo. and Tex. In damp woods, almost always on
shrubs.

10. C. glomerata, Choisy. Flowers _very densely clustered_, forming
knotty masses closely encircling the stem of the foster plant, much
imbricated with scarious oblong _bracts, their tips recurved-spreading;
sepals nearly similar_, shorter than the oblong-cylindrical tube of the
corolla; stamens nearly as long as the oblong-lanceolate obtuse
spreading or reflexed corolla-lobes; style several times longer than the
ovary.--Wet prairies, Ohio to Minn., Kan., and Tex., mostly on tall
Compositae. The rope-like twists (1/2--3/4' thick), of white flowers with
golden yellow anthers imbedded in a mass of curly bracts, have a
singular appearance.


ORDER 74. SOLANACEAE. (NIGHTSHADE FAMILY.)

_Herbs (or rarely shrubs), with colorless juice and alternate leaves,
regular 5-merous and 5-androus flowers, on bractless pedicels; the
corolla imbricate or valvate in the bud, and mostly plaited; the fruit a
2-celled (rarely 3--5-celled) many-seeded capsule or berry._--Seeds
campylotropous or amphitropous. Embryo mostly slender and curved in
fleshy albumen. Calyx usually persistent. Stamens mostly equal,
inserted on the corolla. Style and stigma single. Placentae in the axis,
often projecting far into the cells. (Foliage rank-scented, and with the
fruits mostly narcotic, often very poisonous, while some are edible.)--A
large family in the tropics, but very few indigenous in our district. It
shades off into Scrophulariaceae, from which the plaited regular corolla
and 5 equal stamens generally distinguish it.

[*] Corolla wheel-shaped, 5-parted or 5-lobed; the lobes valvate and
their margins usually turned inward in the bud. Anthers connivent. Fruit
a berry.

1. Solanum. Anthers opening by pores or chinks at the tip.

[*][*] Corolla various, not wheel-shaped, nor valvate in the bud.
Anthers separate.

[+] Fruit a berry, closely invested by an herbaceous (not angled) calyx.

2. Chamaesaracha. Corolla plicate, 5-angulate. Pedicels solitary,
recurved in fruit.

[+][+] Fruit a berry, enclosed in the bladdery-inflated calyx. Corolla
widely expanding.

3. Physalis. Calyx 5-cleft. Corolla 5-lobed or nearly entire. Berry
juicy, 2-celled.

4. Nicandra. Calyx 5-parted. Corolla nearly entire. Berry dry,
3--5-celled.

[+][+][+] Fruit a berry with the unaltered calyx persistent at its base.

5. Lycium. Corolla funnel-form or tubular, not plaited. Berry small,
2-celled.

[+][+][+][+] Fruit a capsule.

6. Hyoscyamus. Calyx urn-shaped, enclosing the smooth 2-celled capsule,
which opens by the top falling off as a lid. Corolla and stamens
somewhat irregular.

7. Datura. Calyx prismatic, 5-toothed. Capsule prickly, naked, more or
less 4-celled, 4-valved. Corolla funnel-form.

8. Nicotiana. Calyx tubular-bell-shaped, 5-cleft. Capsule enclosed in
the calyx, 2-celled.


1. SOLANUM, Tourn. NIGHTSHADE.

Calyx and wheel-shaped corolla 5-parted or 5-cleft (rarely
4--10-parted), the latter plaited in the bud, and valvate or
induplicate. Stamens exserted; filaments very short; anthers converging
around the style, opening at the tip by two pores or chinks. Berry
usually 2-celled.--Herbs, or shrubs in warm climates, the larger leaves
often accompanied by a smaller lateral (rameal) one; the peduncles also
mostly lateral and extra-axillary.--A vast genus, chiefly in warmer
regions, including the POTATO (S. TUBEROSUM) and the EGG-PLANT (S.
MELONGENA); while the TOMATO (LYCOPERSICUM ESCULENTUM) is closely
related. (Name of unknown derivation.)

[*] _Not prickly; anthers blunt; flowers and globose naked berries
small._

[+] _Perennial, climbing or twining._

S. DULCAMARA, L. (BITTERSWEET.) More or less pubescent; leaves
ovate-heart-shaped, the upper halberd-shaped, or with two ear-like lobes
or leaflets at base; flowers (purple or blue) in small cymes; berries
oval, red.--Moist banks and around dwellings. June--Sept. (Nat. from
Eu.)


[+][+] _Simple-leaved annuals._

1. S. triflorum, Nutt. Low, spreading, slightly hairy or nearly
glabrous; _leaves oblong, pinnatifid_ (7--9-lobed) with rounded sinuses;
peduncles 1--3-flowered; corolla white; _berries green_, as large as a
small cherry.--Central Kan., and westward; chiefly a weed near
dwellings.

2. S. nigrum, L. (COMMON NIGHTSHADE.) Low, much branched and often
spreading, nearly glabrous, rough on the angles; _leaves ovate,
wavy-toothed_; _flowers_ white, _in small umbel-like lateral clusters_,
drooping; _calyx spreading_; filaments hairy; _berries_ globular,
_black_.--Shaded grounds and fields; common, appearing as if introduced,
but a cosmopolite. July--Sept.

Var. VILLOSUM, Mill. Low, somewhat viscid-pubescent or villous; leaves
small, conspicuously angular-dentate; filaments glabrous; berries
yellow.--Established near Philadelphia, from ballast. (Adv. from Eu.)

S. GRACILE, Link. Cinereous-pubescent or puberulent, rather tall (2--3 deg.
high), with virgate spreading branches; leaves _ovate and
ovate-lanceolate, nearly entire_; corolla white or bluish; _calyx
somewhat appressed to the black berry_.--Coast of N. C., and about
ballast near Philadelphia. (Adv. from S. Am.)

[*][*] _More or less prickly; anthers tapering upward; pubescence
stellate._

[+] _Perennial; fruit naked; anthers equal; corolla violet, rarely
white._

3. S. Carolinense, L. (HORSE-NETTLE.) _Hirsute or roughish-pubescent
with 4--8-rayed hairs; prickles stout, yellowish_, copious (rarely
scanty); _leaves oblong_ or ovate, obtusely sinuate-toothed or lobed or
sinuate-pinnatifid, racemes simple, soon lateral; _calyx-lobes
acuminate; berries about 6'' broad_.--Sandy soil and waste grounds,
Conn. to Iowa, south to Fla. and Tex.

4. S. elaeagnifolium, Cav. _Silvery-canescent with_ dense scurf-like
pubescence of _many-rayed hairs; prickles small, slender_, more or less
copious or wanting; _leaves lanceolate_ to oblong and linear,
sinuate-repand or entire; _calyx-lobes slender_; berry _seldom 6'' in
diameter_.--Prairies and plains. E. Kan. to Tex., and westward.

5. S. Torreyi, Gray. _Cinereous with a somewhat close pubescence of_
about _equally 9--12-rayed hairs; prickles small and stout_, scanty or
nearly wanting; _leaves ovate_ with truncate or slightly cordate base,
sinuately 5--7-lobed (4--6' long); _calyx-lobes short-ovate, abruptly
long-acuminate_; berry 1' _in diameter_.--Prairies, etc., E. Kan. and
Tex.

[+][+] _Annual; fruit closely covered; lowest anther much the longest,
corolla yellow._

6. S. rostratum, Dunal. Very prickly, somewhat hoary or yellowish with a
copious wholly stellate pubescence (1--2 deg. high); leaves 1--2-pinnatifid;
calyx densely prickly; stamens and style much declined.--Plains of Neb.
to Tex.; spreading eastward to Ill. and Tenn.


2. CHAMAESARACHA, Gray.

Calyx herbaceous, closely investing the globose berry (or most of it),
obscurely if at all veiny. Corolla rotate, 5-angulate, plicate in the
bud. Filaments filiform; anthers separate, oblong.--Perennials, with
mostly narrow entire or pinnatifid leaves tapering into margined
petioles, and filiform naked pedicels solitary in the axils, refracted
or recurved in fruit. (_Saracha_ is a tropical American genus dedicated
to _Isidore Saracha_, a Spanish Benedictine; the prefix [Greek:
chamai/], _on the ground_.)

1. C. sordida, Gray. Much branched from root or base, somewhat cinereous
with short viscid pubescence; leaves obovate-spatulate or cuneate-oblong
to oblanceolate, repand to incisely pinnatifid; calyx when young
villous-viscid; corolla pale yellow or violet-purple (6'' broad); berry
as large as a pea.--Dry or clayey soil, central and W. Kan. to Tex. and
Arizona.


3. PHYSALIS, L. GROUND CHERRY.

Calyx 5-cleft, reticulated and enlarging after flowering, at length much
inflated and enclosing the 2-celled globular (edible) berry. Corolla
between wheel-shaped and funnel-form, the very short tube marked with 5
concave spots at the base; the plaited border somewhat 5-lobed or barely
5--10-toothed. Stamens 5, erect; anthers separate, opening
lengthwise.--Herbs (in this country), with the leaves often unequally in
pairs, and the 1-flowered nodding peduncles extra-axillary; flowering
through the summer. (Name [Greek: physali/s], _a bladder_, from the
inflated calyx.)

[*] _Corolla large, white or tinged with blue, without dark centre, with
almost entire border; pubescence simple._

1. P. grandiflora, Hook. Clammy-pubescent, erect; leaves lance-ovate,
pointed, entire or nearly so; corolla 1--2' wide when expanded, and with
a woolly ring in the throat; fruiting calyx globular, apparently nearly
filled by the berry.--S. shore of L. Superior to Sask.; Providence
Island, L. Champlain (_Perkins_).

[*][*] _Corolla lurid greenish-white or yellow, mostly with dark centre,
3--10'' broad._

[+] _Annuals, glabrous or pubescence minute; anthers violet._

2. P. Philadelphica, Lam. Leaves ovate or oblong-ovate, oblique at base,
entire, repand, or very sparingly angulate-toothed; _corolla brownish-
or violet-spotted in the centre, 7--10'' broad_; calyx at maturity
globose and completely filled by the large reddish or purple berry and
open at the mouth.--In fertile soil, Penn. to Minn. and Tex.

3. P. angulata, L. Much branched; leaves ovate or ovate-oblong, sharply
and irregularly _laciniate-toothed_; peduncles filiform; _corolla
unspotted, very small_ (3--6'' broad when expanded); fruiting calyx
conical-ovate with a truncate or sunken base, 10-angled, loosely
inflated, at length well filled by the greenish-yellow berry.--Open rich
grounds, Penn. to Minn., and southward.

[+][+] _Strong-scented, villous or pubescent with viscid or glandular
simple hairs; fruiting calyx ovate-pyramidal, carinately 5-angled,
closed, loosely enveloping the green or yellow berry; leaves ovate or
cordate._

4. P. pubescens, L. _Annual_, diffusely much branched or at length
decumbent; leaves angulate- or repand-toothed or nearly entire;
_corolla_ spotted with brown purple in the centre, 5--6'' _broad_ when
expanded, obscurely 5--10-toothed; _anthers violet_.--Low grounds, N. Y.
to Minn., south to Fla. and Tex., and westward.--A very doubtful form,
found at Independence, Kan. (_B. F. Bush_), has the small corolla (2''
broad) yellow, without a brown centre, the anthers yellow, the fruiting
calyx smaller, and the berry viscid.

5. P. Virginiana, Mill. _Perennial_, diffusely much branched and widely
spreading, or at first erect; leaves sometimes oblong, repand or
obtusely toothed, rarely entire; _corolla 9--12'' broad_, 5-angled or
5--10-toothed; _anthers yellow_. (P. viscosa, _Gray_, Man., not
_L._)--Light or sandy soils, Ont. and Minn. to Fla. and Tex.--Var.
AMBIGUA, Gray, is a coarse and very villous form with violet anthers.
Wisc., and westward.

[+][+][+] _Perennials, mostly low, not viscid; pubescence stellate or
simple or nearly none; anthers almost always yellow._

6. P. viscosa, L. _Cinereous or when young almost canescent with short
stellate or 2--3-forked pubescence_; stems ascending or spreading from
_slender creeping subterranean shoots; leaves ovate or oval_, varying to
oblong and obovate, entire or undulate; corolla greenish-yellow, with a
more or less dark eye; _fruiting calyx globose-ovate; berry yellow or
orange_.--In sands on and near the coast, Va. to N. C. and Fla.

7. P. lanceolata, Michx. _More or less hirsute-pubescent with short
stiff mostly simple hairs_, varying to nearly glabrous; stems from
rather _stout subterranean shoots_, angled, somewhat rigid; _leaves
oblong-ovate to narrowly lanceolate_, sparingly angulate-toothed to
undulate or entire; corolla ochroleucous, with a more or less dark eye;
_calyx commonly hirsute, in fruit pyramidal-ovate_ (1--11/2' long); _berry
reddish_. (P. Pennsylvanica, _Gray_, Man., in part; not _L._)--Dry open
ground, Penn. to Ill., Minn., and south and westward.

Var. laevigata, Gray. Glabrous or almost so throughout, or with some very
short hairs on young parts.--Neb. to Tex., and westward.

Var. hirta, Gray. A remarkable ambiguous form, with much of the
hirsute-pubescence of the leaves 2--3-forked, as also are some of the
abundant villous-hispid hairs of the stem.--Wet woods, Tex. to Mo., and
E. Kan.


4. NICANDRA, Adans. APPLE OF PERU.

Calyx 5-parted, 5-angled, the divisions rather arrow-shaped, enlarged
and bladder-like in fruit, enclosing the 3--5-celled globular dry berry.
Corolla with border nearly entire. Otherwise much like Physalis.--An
annual smooth herb (2--3 deg. high), with ovate sinuate-toothed or angled
leaves, and solitary pale blue flowers on axillary and terminal
peduncles. (Named after the poet _Nicander_ of Colophon.)

N. PHYSALOIDES, Gaertn.--Waste grounds, near dwellings and old gardens.
(Adv. from Peru.)


5. LYCIUM, L. MATRIMONY-VINE.

Calyx 3--5-toothed or -cleft, not enlarging, persistent at the base of
the berry. Corolla funnel-form or salver-shaped, 5-lobed, the lobes
imbricated and not plaited in the bud. Stamens 5; anthers opening
lengthwise. Style slender; stigma capitate. Berry small, 2-celled.
Shrubby, often spiny plants, with alternate and entire small leaves, and
mostly axillary small flowers. (Named from the country, _Lycia_.)

L. VULGARE, Dunal. (COMMON M.) Shrub with long sarmentose
recurved-drooping branches, smooth, sparingly if at all spiny; leaves
oblong- or spatulate-lanceolate, often fascicled, narrowed into a short
petiole; flowers on slender peduncles fascicled in the axils; corolla
short funnel-form, greenish-purple; style and slender filaments
equalling its lobes; berry oval, orange-red.--About dwellings, and
escaped into waste grounds in Penn., etc. (Adv. from Eu.)


6. HYOSCYAMUS, Tourn. HENBANE.

Calyx bell-shaped or urn-shaped, 5-lobed. Corolla funnel-form, oblique,
with a 5-lobed more or less unequal plaited border. Stamens declined.
Capsule enclosed in the persistent calyx, 2-celled, opening transversely
all round near the apex, which falls off like a lid.--Clammy-pubescent,
fetid, narcotic herbs, with lurid flowers in the axils of angled or
toothed leaves. (Name composed of [Greek: y(/s], [Greek: y(o/s], _a
hog_, and [Greek: ky/amos], _a bean_; said to be poisonous to swine.)

H. NIGER, L. (BLACK HENBANE.) Biennial or annual; leaves clasping,
sinuate-toothed and angled; flowers sessile, in one-sided leafy spikes;
corolla dull yellowish, strongly reticulated with purple veins.--Escaped
from gardens to roadsides. (Adv. from Eu.)


7. DATURA, L. JAMESTOWN-WEED. THORN-APPLE.

Calyx prismatic, 5-toothed, separating transversely above the base in
fruit, the upper part falling away. Corolla funnel-form, with a large
and spreading 5--10-toothed plaited border. Stigma 2-lipped. Capsule
globular, prickly, 4-valved, 2-celled, with 2 thick placentae; projected
from the axis into the middle of the cells, and connected with the walls
by an imperfect false partition, so that the capsule is 4-celled except
near the top, the placentae as if on the middle of these false
partitions. Seeds rather large, flat.--Rank weeds, narcotic-poisonous,
with ovate leaves, and large showy flowers on short peduncles in the
forks of the branching stem; produced all summer and autumn. (Altered
from the Arabic name, _Tatorah_.)

D. STRAMONIUM, L. (COMMON STRAMONIUM or THORN APPLE.) Annual, glabrous;
leaves ovate, sinuate-toothed or angled; _stem green; corolla white_ (3'
long), the border with 5 teeth; lower prickles of the capsule mostly
shorter.--Waste grounds; a well-known ill-scented weed. (Adv. from
Asia?)

D. TATULA, L. (PURPLE T.) Mostly taller; _stem purple; corolla pale
violet-purple_; prickles of the capsule nearly equal.--Waste grounds, in
the Atlantic States. (Adv. from trop. Amer.)


8. NICOTIANA, Tourn. TOBACCO.

Calyx tubular-bell-shaped, 5-cleft. Corolla funnel-form or salver-form,
usually with a long tube; the plaited border 5-lobed. Stigma capitate.
Capsule 2-celled, 2--4-valved from the apex. Seeds minute.--Rank
acrid-narcotic herbs, mostly clammy-pubescent, with ample entire leaves,
and racemed or panicled flowers. (Named after _John Nicot_, who was
thought to have introduced Tobacco (N. TABACUM, L.) into Europe.)

N. RUSTICA, L. (WILD TOBACCO.) Annual; leaves ovate, petioled; tube of
the dull greenish-yellow corolla cylindrical, two thirds longer than the
calyx, the lobes rounded.--Old fields, from N. Y. westward and
southward; a relic of cultivation by the Indians. (Of unknown nativity.)


ORDER 75. SCROPHULARIACEAE. (FIGWORT FAMILY.)

_Chiefly herbs (rarely trees), with didynamous stamens (or perfect
stamens often only 2, rarely 5) inserted on the tube of the 2-lipped or
more or less irregular corolla, the lobes of which are imbricated in the
bud; fruit a 2-celled and usually many-seeded capsule, with the
placentae; in the axis; seeds anatropous, or amphitropous, with a small
embryo in copious albumen._--Style single; stigma entire or 2-lobed.
Leaves and inflorescence various; but the flowers not terminal in any
genuine representatives of the order.--A large order of bitterish
plants, some of them narcotic-poisonous.

I. ANTIRRHINIDEAE. Upper lip or lobes of the corolla covering the lower
in the bud (with occasional exceptions in Mimulas, etc.) Capsule usually
septicidal.

Tribe I. VERBASCEAE. Corolla rotate. Flowers racemose. Leaves alternate.

1. Verbascum. Stamens 5, all with anthers, and 3 or all with bearded
filaments.

Tribe II. ANTIRRHINEAE. Corolla tubular, with a spur or sac at the base
below, the throat usually with a palate. Capsule opening by chinks or
holes. Flowers in simple racemes or axillary. Lower leaves usually
opposite or whorled. Stamens 4.

2. Linaria. Corolla spurred at base; the palate seldom closing the
throat.

3. Antirrhinum. Corolla merely saccate at base; the palate closing the
throat.

Tribe III. CHELONEAE. Corolla tubular, or 2-lipped, not spurred nor
saccate below. Capsule 2--4-valved. Leaves opposite. Inflorescence
usually compound, of small axillary spiked or racemed or umbel-like
clusters or cymes, or when reduced to a single flower the peduncle
mostly 2-bracteate. Stamens 4, and usually a rudiment of the fifth.

4. Scrophularia. Corolla inflated, globular or oblong, with four erect
lobes and one spreading one. Rudiment of the sterile stamen a scale on
the upper lip.

5. Collinsia. Corolla 2-cleft, the short tube saccate on the upper side;
the middle lobe of the lower lip sac-like and enclosing the declined
stamens.

6. Chelone. Corolla tubular inflated above. Sterile stamen shorter than
the others. Anthers very woolly. Seeds winged.

7. Pentstemon. Corolla tubular. Sterile stamen about as long as the
rest. Seeds wingless.

Tribe IV. GRATIOLEAE. Corolla tubular, not saccate nor spurred. Capsule
2-valved. Flowers solitary in the axils of bracts or leaves, peduncles
naked (or 2-bracteolate in n. 12). Leaves all or the lower ones
opposite. No trace of a fifth stamen.

[*] Stamens 4, all anther-bearing and similar.

8. Mimulus. Calyx prismatic, 5-angled, 5-toothed. Corolla elongated.

9. Conobea. Calyx 5-parted, the divisions equal. Corolla short.

10. Herpestis. Calyx 5-parted, unequal, the upper division largest.
Corolla short.

11. Limosella. Calyx 5-toothed. Corolla open bell-shaped, 5-cleft,
nearly regular. Leaves alternate or fascicled, fleshy. Dwarf aquatic or
marsh plant.

[*][*] Anther-bearing stamens 2; usually also a pair of sterile
filaments.

12. Gratiola. Calyx 5-parted. Stamens included; the sterile pair short
or none.

13. Ilysanthes. Calyx 5-parted. Stamens included; the sterile filaments
protruded.

14. Micranthemum. Flowers minute. Calyx 4-toothed or cleft. Upper lip of
corolla short or none. Filaments with an appendage; sterile pair none.
Dwarf aquatic.

II. RHINANTHIDEAE. Under lip or the lateral lobes of the corolla covering
the upper in the bud. Capsule commonly loculicidal.

Tribe V. DIGITALEAE. Corolla wheel-shaped, salver-shaped, or bell-shaped.
Stamens 2 or 4, not approaching in pairs nor strongly didynamous;
anthers 2-celled.

15. Synthyris. Calyx 4-parted. Corolla bell-shaped, 2--4-lobed,
irregular. Stamens 2 or 4. Leaves alternate. Flowers racemed.

16. Veronica. Calyx 4-(rarely 3--5-) parted. Corolla wheel-shaped or
salver-shaped, almost regular. Stamens 2. Leaves chiefly opposite or
whorled. Flowers racemed.

Tribe VI. GERARDIEAE. Corolla with a spreading and slightly unequal
5-lobed limb. Stamens 4, approximate in pairs. Leaves opposite, or the
uppermost alternate.

[*] Corolla salver-shaped. Anthers 1-celled. Flowers in a spike.

17. Buchnera. Calyx tubular, 5-toothed. Limb of the elongated corolla
5-cleft.

[*][*] Corolla bell-shaped to funnel-form; anthers 2-celled.

18. Seymeria. Stamens nearly equal. Tube of the corolla broad, not
longer than the lobe.

19. Gerardia. Stamens strongly unequal, included.

Tribe VII. EUPHRASIEAE. Corolla tubular, obviously 2-lipped; the upper
lip narrow, erect or arched, enclosing the 4 usually strongly didynamous
stamens.

[*] Anther-cells unequal and separated. Capsule many-seeded.

20. Castilleia. Calyx tubular, cleft down the lower, and often also on
the upper, side. Upper lip of corolla elongated; the lower short, often
very small.

21. Orthocarpus. Calyx tubular-campanulate, 4-cleft. Upper lip of
corolla little longer and usually much narrower than the inflated lower
one.

[*][*] Anther-cells equal. Capsule many--several-seeded.

22. Schwalbea. Calyx 5-toothed, very oblique, the upper tooth much the
smallest.

23. Euphrasia. Calyx 4-cleft. Upper lip of the corolla 2-lobed, and
sides folded back. Capsule oblong.

24. Bartsia. Calyx 4-cleft. Upper lip of corolla entire and sides not
folded back.

25. Rhinanthus. Calyx inflated, ovate. Capsule orbicular; seeds winged.

26. Pedicularis. Calyx not inflated. Capsule ovate or sword-shaped;
seeds wingless.

[*][*][*] Anther-cells equal. Capsule 1--4-seeded.

27. Melampyrum. Calyx 4-cleft. Ovary 2-celled, 4-ovuled. Capsule flat,
oblique.


1. VERBASCUM, L. MULLEIN.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla 5-lobed, open or concave, wheel-shaped; the
lobes broad and rounded, a little unequal. Stamens 5, all the filaments,
or the 3 upper, woolly. Style flattened at the apex. Capsule globular,
many-seeded.--Tall and usually woolly biennial herbs, with alternate
leaves, those of the stem sessile or decurrent. Flowers in large
terminal spikes or racemes, ephemeral; in summer. (The ancient Latin
name, altered from _Barbascum_.)

V. THAPSUS, L. (COMMON MULLEIN.) _Densely woolly throughout; stem tall
and stout, simple_, winged by the decurrent bases of the oblong acute
leaves; _flowers_ (yellow, very rarely white) _in a prolonged and very
dense cylindrical spike_; lower stamens usually beardless.--Fields, a
common weed. (Nat. from Eu.)

V. BLATTARIA, L. (MOTH M.) _Green and smoothish, slender_; lower leaves
petioled, oblong, doubly serrate, sometimes lyre-shaped, the upper
partly clasping, _raceme loose_; filaments all bearded with violet
wool.--Roadsides, throughout our range. Corolla either yellow, or white
with a tinge of purple. (Nat. from Eu.)

V. LYCHNITIS, L. (WHITE M.) _Clothed with thin powdery woolliness_; stem
and branches angled above; leaves ovate, acute, not decurrent, greenish
above; _flowers_ (yellow, rarely white) _in a pyramidal panicle_;
filaments with whitish wool.--Fields, N. Atlantic States, rather rare.
(Adv. from Eu.)


2. LINARIA, Tourn. TOAD-FLAX.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla personate, with the prominent palate often
nearly closing the throat, spurred at base on the lower side. Stamens 4.
Capsule thin, opening below the summit by one or two pores or chinks.
Seeds many.--Herbs, with at least all the upper leaves alternate (in
ours), fl. in summer. (Name from _Linum_, the Flax, which the leaves of
some species resemble.)

[*] _Slender glabrous annual or biennial; leaves linear, entire and
alternate (or smaller, oblong, and opposite on procumbent shoots), small
blue flowers in a naked terminal raceme_.

1. L. Canadensis, Dumont. Flowering stems nearly simple (6--30' high);
leaves flat (1--2'' wide); pedicels erect, not longer than the filiform
curved spur of the corolla.--Sandy soil, common.

[*][*] _Perennial, erect (1--3 deg. high), glabrous, with narrow entire and
alternate pale leaves, and yellow flowers in a terminal raceme._

L. VULGARIS, Mill. (RAMSTED. BUTTER AND EGGS.) Leaves linear or nearly
so, extremely numerous; raceme dense; corolla 1' long or more, including
the slender subulate spur; seeds winged.--Fields and roadsides,
throughout our range. (Nat. from Eu.)

L. GENISTIFOLIA, Mill. Glaucous, paniculately branched; leaves
lanceolate, acute; flowers smaller and more scattered; seeds
wingless.--Sparingly naturalized near New York. (Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Annual, procumbent, much branched, with broad petioled veiny
alternate leaves, and small purplish and yellow flowers from their
axils._

L. ELATINE, Mill. Spreading over the ground, slender, hairy; leaves
hastate or the lower ovate, much surpassed by the filiform peduncles;
calyx-lobes lanceolate, acute; corolla 3--4'' long, including the
subulate spur.--Sandy banks and shores, Canada to N. C., rather rare.
(Nat. from Eu.)

L. SPURIA, Mill. Like the preceding, but with roundish or cordate leaves
and ovate or cordate calyx-lobes.--Occasionally occurs on ballast or
waste grounds near cities. (Nat. from Eu.)


3. ANTIRRHINUM, Tourn. SNAPDRAGON.

Corolla saccate at the base, the throat closed by the large bearded
palate. Seeds oblong-truncate. Otherwise nearly as Linaria.--Corolla
commonly showy, resembling the face of an animal or a mask; whence the
name (from [Greek: a)nti/], _like_, and [Greek: r(i/n], _a snout_.) Fl.
summer and autumn.

A. ORONTIUM, L. A small-flowered annual or biennial, low, erect; leaves
lance-linear; spike loose, leafy; sepals longer than the purplish or
white corolla.--About gardens and old fields in Atlantic States. (Adv.
from Eu.)

A. MAJUS, L. (LARGE SNAPDRAGON.) A large-flowered perennial, with oblong
smooth leaves and a glandular-downy raceme; sepals short; corolla 11/2--2'
long, purple or white.--Eastward, escaping from gardens. (Adv. from Eu.)


4. SCROPHULARIA, Tourn. FIGWORT.

Calyx deeply 5-cleft. Corolla with a somewhat globular tube; the 4 upper
lobes of the short border erect (the two upper longer), the lower
spreading. Stamens 4, declined, with the anther-cells transverse and
confluent into one; the fifth stamen a scale-like rudiment at the summit
of the tube of the corolla. Capsule many-seeded.--Rank herbs, with
mostly opposite leaves, and small greenish-purple or lurid flowers in
loose cymes, forming a terminal narrow panicle. (So called because a
reputed remedy for _scrofula_.)

1. S. nodosa, L., var. Marilandica, Gray. Smooth perennial (3--5 deg. high),
stem 4-sided; leaves ovate, oblong, or the upper lanceolate, acuminate,
cut-serrate, rounded or rarely heart-shaped at base.--Damp grounds,
N. Eng. to Fla., west to the Rocky Mts. (Eu., Asia, the type.)


5. COLLINSIA, Nutt.

Calyx deeply 5-cleft. Corolla declined, with the tube saccate or bulging
at the base on the upper side, deeply 2-lipped; the upper lip 2-cleft,
its lobes partly turned backward, the lower 3-cleft, its middle lobe
keeled and sac-like, enclosing the 4 declined stamens and style. Fifth
stamen a gland-like rudiment. Capsule 4--many-seeded.--Slender
branching annuals or biennials, with opposite leaves, and handsome
party-colored flowers in umbel-like clusters, appearing whorled in the
axils of the upper leaves. (Dedicated to the late _Zaccheus Collins_, of
Philadelphia, an accurate botanist.)

1. C. verna, Nutt. Slender (6--20' high), lower leaves ovate, the upper
ovate-lanceolate, clasping by the heart-shaped base, toothed; _whorls
about 6-flowered; flowers long-peduncled; corolla (blue and white) twice
the length of the calyx_.--Moist soil, western N. Y. to W. Va., Wisc.,
and Ky. May, June.

2. C. parviflora, Dougl. Small; lower leaves ovate or rounded, the upper
oblong-lanceolate, mostly entire; _whorls 2--6-flowered; flowers
short-peduncled_; the small (blue) _corolla scarcely exceeding the
calyx_.--Shore of L. Superior, N. Mich., and westward.


6. CHELONE, Tourn. TURTLE-HEAD. SNAKE-HEAD.

Calyx of 5 distinct imbricated sepals. Corolla inflated-tubular, with
the mouth a little open; upper lip broad and arched, keeled in the
middle, notched at the apex; the lower woolly-bearded in the throat,
3-lobed at the apex, the middle lobe smallest. Stamens 4, with woolly
filaments and very woolly heart-shaped anthers, and a fifth sterile
filament smaller than the others. Seeds many, wing-margined.--Smooth
perennials, with upright branching stems, opposite serrate leaves, and
large white or purple flowers, which are nearly sessile in spikes or
clusters, and closely imbricated with round-ovate concave bracts and
bractlets. (Name from [Greek: chelo/ne], _a tortoise_, the corolla
resembling in shape the head of a reptile.)

1. C. glabra, L. A foot or two (or even 6--7 deg.) high; _leaves narrowly to
rather broadly lanceolate_ (4--5' long, 4--12'' wide), gradually
acuminate, serrate with sharp appressed teeth, narrowed at base usually
into a very short petiole; _bracts not ciliate; corolla white, or barely
tinged with rose._--Wet places, Newf. to Minn., south to Fla. and Tex.

2. C. obliqua, L. Less strict or with spreading branches, 1--2 deg. high;
_leaves broadly lanceolate to oblong_ (2--5' long), sometimes
laciniately serrate, more veiny and duller, acute or obtuse at base,
mostly short-petioled; _bracts ciliolate; corolla deep and bright
rose-color_.--S. Ill. to Va. and Fla.


7. PENTSTEMON, Mitchell. BEARD-TONGUE.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla tubular and more or less inflated, or
bell-shaped, either decidedly or slightly 2-lipped; the upper lip
2-lobed, and the lower 3-cleft. Stamens 4, declined at the base,
ascending above, and a fifth sterile filament usually as long as the
others, either naked or bearded. Seeds numerous, wingless.--Perennials,
branched from the base, simple above, with opposite leaves, the upper
sessile and mostly clasping. Flowers mostly showy, thyrsoid or
racemose-panicled. (Name from [Greek: pe/nte], _five_, and [Greek:
ste/mon], _stamen_; the fifth stamen being present and conspicuous,
although sterile.)

[*] _Viscid or glandular above, more or less pubescent or glabrous
below; leaves often toothed or denticulate._

[+] _Thyrse somewhat open; leaves ovate-lanceolate to linear; corolla
9--12'' long, the lower lip usually bearded within._

1. P. pubescens, Solander. _Stem 1--2 deg. high, viscid-pubescent_ (at least
the inflorescence); _leaves oblong to lanceolate_ (2--4' long), the
lowest and radical ovate or oblong, usually denticulate; _thyrse narrow;
corolla dull violet or purple_ (or partly whitish), _very moderately
dilated, the throat nearly closed by a villous-bearded palate; sterile
filament densely bearded_.--Dry or rocky grounds, S. Maine (_Miss
Furbish_) to Minn., south to Fla. and Tex.

2. P. laevigatus, Solander. _Stem 2--4 deg. high, mostly glabrous_ except the
inflorescence; leaves _firmer_, somewhat glossy, the _cauline ovate- or
oblong-lanceolate_ with subcordate clasping base (2--5' long); _thyrse
broader; corolla white_ (commonly tinged with purple), _abruptly and
broadly inflated, the throat widely open; sterile filament thinly
bearded above_.--Moist or rich soil, Penn. to Fla. and westward, where
the common form is

Var. Digitalis, Gray. Stem sometimes 5 deg. high; corolla larger and more
abruptly inflated, white. (P. Digitalis, _Nutt._)--Penn. to Iowa, Mo.,
Ark., etc.

3. P. gracilis, Nutt. Glabrous or puberulent, viscid-pubescent above, 1 deg.
high or less; stem-leaves mostly linear-lanceolate, the radical
spatulate or oblong; corolla tubular-funnel-form or nearly cylindrical
with open throat, lilac-purple or whitish.--Minn. to Mo., and westward.

[+][+] _Thyrse raceme-like. All extreme western._

4. P. Cobaea, Nutt. _Soft-puberulent_, 1 deg. high; _leaves ovate or oblong_,
or the lower broadly lanceolate and the upper cordate-clasping, _mostly
sharply toothed_; thyrse short; _corolla 2' long, broadly ventricose_,
dull purple or whitish.--Prairies, Kan. to Tex.

5. P. tubiflorus, Nutt. _Wholly glabrous_ excepting the viscid ovate
sepals, 2--3 deg. high; _leaves oblong or ovate-lanceolate, entire or
sparsely toothed_, the floral shorter than the remote dense clusters of
the virgate thyrse; _corolla 9'' long, the narrow tube gradually dilated
upward_, white or whitish.--Low prairies, Kan. and Ark.

6. P. albidus, Nutt. _Viscid-pubescent_, 6--10' high; _leaves
oblong-lanceolate or narrow_, entire or sparsely toothed; _clusters_ of
the strict thryse few-flowered, _approximate; sepals lanceolate, densely
pubescent; corolla_ 9'' long, _with shorter tube and more dilated
throat_.--Plains, Neb. to Dak. and Tex.

[*][*] _Glabrous throughout and glaucous; leaves sessile, entire; thryse
raceme-like._

7. P. grandiflorus, Nutt. Stem 2--4 deg. high; _leaves_ thickish, the upper
and floral _rounded, all but the obovate radical ones clasping or
perfoliate_; pedicels short; _corolla 2' long, oblong-campanulate_,
nearly regular, lilac or lavender-blue; sterile filament hooked and
minutely bearded at the apex.--Prairies, from Ill. and Wisc. to Dak.,
Neb., and Kan.

8. P. glaber, Pursh. Stems 1--2 deg. high, _leaves_ mostly
_oblong-lanceolate or the upper ovate-lanceolate_; thryse elongated, the
peduncles and pedicels very short; _corolla 1--11/2' long_, bright blue to
violet-purple, _dilated above_; anthers and apex of sterile filament
glabrous or sparsely hirsute.--Plains of E. Neb. to Dak., and westward.

9. P. acuminatus, Dougl. Stems 6--20' high, stout; _leaves_ thick, the
lower _obovate or oblong, the upper lanceolate to broadly ovate or
cordate-clasping_, acute or acuminate; thyrse leafy below, very narrow;
_corolla 9'' long_, lilac or violet; sterile filament mostly bearded
above.--Kan. to Minn., and westward.


8. MIMULUS, L. MONKEY-FLOWER.

Calyx prismatic, 5-angled, 5-toothed, the upper tooth largest. Corolla
tubular; upper lip erect or reflexed-spreading, 2-lobed; the lower
spreading, 3-lobed. Stamens 4. Stigma 2-lobed, the lobes ovate. Seeds
numerous.--Herbs, with opposite leaves, and mostly handsome flowers on
solitary axillary and bractless peduncles. (Diminutive of _mimus_, a
buffoon, from the grinning corolla.)

[*] _Erect from a perennial root, glabrous; leaves feather-veined;
corolla violet-purple._

1. M. ringens, L. Stem square (1--2 deg. high); _leaves oblong or
lanceolate, pointed, clasping_ by a heart-shaped base, serrate;
peduncles longer than the flower; calyx-teeth taper-pointed, nearly
equal; corolla personate.--Wet places, N. Eng. to Minn., and southward;
common. July--Sept.--Flower 1--11/2' long, rarely white.

2. M. alatus, Ait. Stem somewhat winged at the angles; _leaves
oblong-ovate, tapering into a petiole_; peduncles shorter than the
calyx, which has very short abruptly pointed teeth; otherwise like the
last.--Wet places, western N. Eng. to Ill., south to N. C. and Tex.

[*][*] _Leaves several-nerved and veiny, dentate, the upper sessile and
clasping; calyx oblique, the upper tooth longest; corolla yellow, the
lower lip bearded._

3. M. Jamesii, Torr. Diffusely spreading, smooth or smoothish; stems
creeping at base; stem-leaves roundish or kidney-shaped, nearly sessile,
equalling the peduncles; calyx ovate, inflated in fruit; throat of
corolla broad and open.--In water or wet places, usually in springs,
N. Mich. and Minn. to Ill., Kan., and westward.

M. LUTEUS, L. Erect or with later branches spreading; leaves ovate to
roundish or subcordate; corolla deep yellow, with brown-purple dots or
blotches, often large.--Wet meadows, Norfolk, Ct. (Adv. from Calif.)


9. CONOBEA, Aublet.

Calyx 5-parted, equal. Upper lip of corolla 3-lobed, the lower 3-parted.
Stamens 4, fertile; anthers approximate. Stigma 2-lobed, the lobes
wedge-form. Seeds numerous.--Low branching herbs, with opposite leaves,
and small solitary flowers on axillary peduncles. (Name unexplained.)

1. C. multifida, Benth. Annual, diffusely spreading, much branched,
minutely pubescent; leaves petioled, pinnately parted, divisions
linear-wedge-shaped; peduncles naked; corolla (greenish-white) scarcely
longer than the calyx.--Along streams and shores, Ohio to Ill., Ark.,
and Tex.; also adv. below Philadelphia. July--Sept.


10. HERPESTIS, Gaertn. f.

Calyx 5-parted; the upper division broadest, the innermost often very
narrow. Upper lip of the corolla entire, notched or 2-cleft, and the
lower 3-lobed, or the limb nearly equally 5-lobed. Stamens 4, all
fertile. Style dilated or 2-lobed at the apex. Seeds numerous.--Low
herbs, with opposite leaves, and solitary axillary flowers; in summer;
ours rather succulent perennials. (Name from [Greek: e(rpeste/s], _a
creeping thing_, the species being chiefly procumbent.)

[*] _Corolla plainly bilabiate, the 2 upper lobes united to form the
upper lip; leaves many-nerved._

1. H. nigrescens, Benth. Erect or ascending, very leafy, glabrous;
leaves pinnately veined, oblong to cuneate-lanceolate (1--2' long),
serrate; pedicels equalling and the upper surpassing the leaves; corolla
whitish or purplish.--Wet places, Md. and N. C. to Tex., along and near
the coast.

2. H. rotundifolia, Pursh. Nearly smooth, creeping; _leaves
round-obovate, half-clasping_ (1/2--1' long), entire, basally nerved;
_peduncles twice or thrice the length of the calyx_; upper sepal ovate;
corolla white or pale blue.--Margins of ponds, Ill. to Minn., Mo., and
southward.

3. H. amplexicaulis, Pursh. Stems hairy, creeping at base; _leaves
ovate, clasping_, entire, basally nerved; _peduncles shorter than the
calyx_; upper sepal heart-shaped; corolla blue.--Margin of pine-barren
ponds, N. J. and Md. to La.--Aromatic when bruised.

[*][*] _Corolla obscurely bilabiate, the limb subequally 5-lobed;
stamens almost equal._

4. H. Monniera, HBK. Glabrous, prostrate and creeping; leaves spatulate
to obovate-cuneate, entire or somewhat toothed, nearly nerveless,
sessile; corolla pale blue.--River-banks and shores near the sea, Md. to
Tex.


11. LIMOSELLA, L. MUDWORT.

Calyx bell-shaped, 5-toothed. Corolla short, widely bell-shaped,
5-cleft, nearly regular. Stamens 4; anthers confluently 1-celled. Style
short, club-shaped. Capsule globular, many-seeded; the partition thin
and vanishing.--Small annuals, growing in mud, usually near the
sea-shore, creeping by slender runners, without ascending stems; the
entire fleshy leaves in dense clusters around the simple 1-flowered
naked peduncles. Flowers small, white or purplish. (Name from _limus_,
mud, and _sella_, seat.)

1. L. aquatica, L., var. tenuifolia, Hoffm. Leaves (with no blade
distinct from the petiole) awl-shaped or thread-form.--Brackish
river-banks and shores, Lab. to N. J., and far north and west. (Eu.,
Asia, etc.)


12. GRATIOLA, L. HEDGE-HYSSOP.

Calyx 5-parted, the narrow divisions nearly equal. Upper lip of corolla
entire or 2-cleft, the lower 3-cleft. Fertile stamens 2, included,
posterior; the anterior mere sterile filaments, or wanting. Style
dilated or 2-lipped at the apex. Capsule 4-valved, many-seeded.--Low
herbs, mostly perennials, some apparently annuals, with opposite sessile
leaves, and axillary 1-flowered peduncles, usually with 2 bractlets at
the base of the calyx. Flowering all summer; all inhabiting wet or damp
places. (Name from _gratia_, grace or favor, on account of supposed
excellent medicinal properties.)

Sec. 1. _Anthers with a broad connective, the cells transverse; stems
mostly diffusely branched, or creeping at base, soft viscid-pubescent or
smooth; corollas 4--6'' long; bractlets foliaceous, equalling the
calyx._

[*] _Sterile filaments minute or none; corolla whitish, with the tube
yellowish._

1. G. Virginiana, L. Stem clammy-puberulent above (4--6' high); leaves
lanceolate with narrow base, acute, entire or sparingly toothed,
_peduncles almost equalling the leaves_ (1/2--1' long); pod ovoid (2''
long).--Very common.

2. G. sphaerocarpa, Ell. Smooth, rather stout (5--10' high); leaves
lance-ovate or oblong to oval-obovate (1--2' long), toothed; _peduncles
scarcely longer than the calyx_ and the large (3'') globular pod.--N. J.
and Md. to Ill., south to Fla. and Tex.

[*][*] _Sterile filaments slender, tipped with a little head; leaves
short (1/2--1' long)._

3. G. viscosa, Schwein. _Clammy-pubescent or glandular; leaves
ovate-lanceolate or oblong_, acute, toothed, mostly shorter than the
peduncles; _corolla whitish, yellow within_.--Ky. to N. C. and Ga.

4. G. aurea, Muhl. _Nearly glabrous; leaves lanceolate or oblong-linear,
entire_, equalling the peduncles; _corolla golden-yellow_ (1/2'
long).--Sandy swamps, Vt. and N. H. to Ohio, and south to Fla.

Sec. 2. _Anthers with no broad connective, the cells vertical; sterile
filaments tipped with a head; hairy apparently annual plants, with erect
rigid and more simple stems._

5. G. pilosa, Michx. Leaves ovate or oblong, sparingly toothed, sessile
(1/2' long); flowers nearly sessile; corolla white, 3--4'' long, scarcely
exceeding the calyx.--Low ground, N. J. to Fla. and Tex.


13. ILYSANTHES, Raf.

Calyx 5-parted, nearly equal. Upper lip of corolla short, erect,
2-lobed; the lower larger and spreading, 3-cleft. Fertile stamens 2,
included, posterior; the anterior pair sterile, inserted in the throat,
2-lobed, without anthers; one of the lobes glandular, the other smooth,
usually short and tooth-like. Stigma 2-lobed. Capsule ovate or oblong,
many-seeded.--Small and smooth annuals, with opposite leaves, and small
axillary (purplish) flowers, on filiform naked pedicels, or the upper
racemed, produced all summer. (Name from [Greek: i)ly/s], _mud_, or
_mire_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_.)

1. I. riparia, Raf. (FALSE PIMPERNEL.) Much branched, diffusely
spreading (4--8' high), or at first simple and erect, leafy; leaves
ovate, rounded, or oblong, sparingly toothed or entire, the upper partly
clasping; corolla 3'' long. (I. gratioloides, _Benth._)--Wet places;
common.


14. MICRANTHEMUM, Michx.

Calyx 4-lobed or 4- (rarely 5-) parted. Corolla short, 2-lipped, with
the upper lip considerably shorter than the lower, or 1-lipped, the
upper lip obsolete; lower lip 3-cleft, the middle lobe longest. Stamens
2, anterior, the short filaments with a glandular (mostly basal)
appendage; anthers 2-celled, didymous; no sterile filaments. Style
short; the stigma 2-lobed. Capsule globular, thin, with a very delicate
or evanescent partition, several--many-seeded.--Small, smooth, depressed
and tufted or creeping annuals, in mud or shallow water, with opposite
and entire rounded or spatulate sessile leaves, and minute white or
purplish flowers solitary in the axils of some of the middle leaves
(usually one axil floriferous, that of the other leaf sterile). (Name
formed of [Greek: mikro/s], _small_, and [Greek: a)/nthemon], _flower_.)

1. M. Nuttallii, Gray. Branches ascending, 1--2' high; leaves
obovate-spatulate or oval; peduncles at length recurved, about the
length of the calyx, which is bell-shaped, 4-toothed and usually split
down on one side, in fruit becoming pear-shaped; middle lobe of the
corolla linear-oblong, nearly twice the length of the lateral ones;
appendage of the stamen nearly as long as the filament itself; stigmas
subulate.--Tidal mud of rivers, N. J. to Fla. Aug.--Oct.


15. SYNTHYRIS, Benth.

Calyx 4-parted. Corolla somewhat bell-shaped, variously 2--4-lobed or
cleft. Stamens 2, inserted just below the upper sinuses, occasionally
with another pair from the other sinuses, exserted; anther-cells not
confluent. Style slender; stigma simple. Capsule flattened, rounded,
obtuse or notched, 2-celled (rarely 3-lobed and 3-celled), many-seeded,
loculicidal; the valves cohering below with the axis.--Perennial herbs,
with the simple stems beset with partly clasping bract-like alternate
leaves, the root-leaves rounded and petioled, crenate. Flowers in a
raceme or spike, bracteate. (Name from [Greek: sy/n], _together_, and
[Greek: thyri/s], _a little door_; in allusion to the closed valves of
the pod.)

1. S. Houghtoniana, Benth. Hairy; root-leaves ovate, heart-shaped; spike
dense (5--12' long); corolla (greenish-white or yellowish) not longer
than the calyx, usually 2--3-parted.--Oak-barrens and prairies, Mich. to
Minn., south to Ind., Ill., and Iowa.


16. VERONICA, L. SPEEDWELL.

Calyx 4- (rarely 3--5-) parted. Corolla wheel-shaped or salver-shaped,
the border 4-parted (rarely 5-parted); the lateral lobes or the lower
one commonly narrower than the others. Stamens 2, one each side of the
upper lobe of the corolla, exserted; anther-cells confluent at the apex.
Style entire; stigma single. Capsule flattened, obtuse or notched at the
apex, 2-celled, few--many-seeded.--Chiefly herbs; leaves mostly opposite
or whorled; flowers blue, flesh-color, or white. (Derivation doubtful;
perhaps the flower of _St. Veronica_.)

Sec. 1. LEPTANDRA. _Tall perennials, with mostly whorled leaves; racemes
terminal, dense, spiked; bracts very small; tube of the corolla longer
than its limb and much longer than the calyx; both sometimes 5-cleft._

1. V. Virginica, L. (CULVER'S-ROOT. CULVER'S PHYSIC.) Smooth or rather
downy; stem simple, straight (2--6 deg. high); leaves whorled in fours to
sevens, short-petioled, lanceolate, pointed, finely serrate; spikes
panicled; corolla small, nearly white; stamens much exserted; capsule
oblong-ovate, not notched, opening by 4 teeth at the apex,
many-seeded.--Rich woods, Vt. to Minn., E. Kan., and southward. July,
Aug.

Sec. 2. VERONICA proper. _Corolla wheel-shaped; capsule more or less
notched, strongly flattened except in n. 2 and 3; low herbs._

[*] _Perennials, stoloniferous or rooting at base, with opposite usually
serrate leaves; racemes axillary, mostly opposite; corolla pale blue._

[+] _Capsule turgid, orbicular, many-seeded._

2. V. Anagallis, L. (WATER SPEEDWELL.) Smooth, creeping and rooting at
base, then erect; _leaves sessile, most of them clasping by a
heart-shaped base, ovate-lanceolate_, acute, serrate or entire (2--3'
long); pedicels spreading; corolla pale blue with purple stripes;
capsule slightly notched.--Brooks and ditches, N. Eng. to N. J., west to
the Rocky Mts. June--Aug. (Eu., Asia.)

3. V. Americana, Schweinitz. (AMERICAN BROOKLIME.) Smooth, decumbent at
base, then erect (8--15' high); _leaves mostly petioled, ovate or
oblong_, serrate, thickish, truncate or slightly heart-shaped at base;
the slender pedicels spreading.--Brooks and ditches, common. June--Aug.

[+][+] _Capsule strongly flattened, several-seeded._

4. V. scutellata, L. (MARSH SPEEDWELL.) _Smooth_, slender and weak
(6--12' high); _leaves sessile, linear, acute, remotely denticulate;
racemes 1 or 2, very slender_ and zigzag; _flowers few and scattered_,
on elongated spreading or reflexed pedicels; capsule very flat, much
broader than long, notched at both ends or didymous.--Bogs, common.
June--Aug. (Eu., Asia.)

5. V. officinalis, L. (COMMON SPEEDWELL.) _Pubescent_; stem _prostrate_,
rooting at base; _leaves short-petioled, obovate-elliptical or
wedge-oblong, obtuse, serrate; racemes densely many-flowered_; pedicels
shorter than the calyx; capsule obovate-triangular, broadly
notched.--Dry hills and open woods, N. Eng. to Mich., and southward.
July. (Eu., Asia.)

V. CHAMAEDRYS, L. Stem _pubescent_, at least in two lines, ascending from
a creeping base; _leaves subsessile, ovate or cordate, incisely crenate;
racemes loosely-flowered_; pedicels little longer than calyx; capsule
triangular-obcordate.--Sparingly introduced into Canada, N. Y., and
Penn. (Adv. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Leaves opposite; flowers in a terminal raceme; the lower bracts
leaf-like; capsules flat, several-seeded. Perennials (mostly turning
blackish in drying)._

6. V. alpina, L. Stem branched from the base, erect, simple (2--12'
high); _leaves elliptical_, or the lowest rounded, entire or toothed,
_nearly sessile; raceme hairy, few-flowered, crowded_; capsule obovate,
notched.--Alpine summits of the White Mts. (Eu., Asia.)

7. V. serpyllifolia, L. (THYME-LEAVED SPEEDWELL.) Much branched at the
creeping base, _nearly smooth_; branches ascending and simple (2--4'
high); leaves _ovate or oblong_, obscurely crenate, _the lowest
petioled_ and rounded, the upper passing into lanceolate bracts; _raceme
loose_; corolla whitish, or pale blue, with deeper stripes; capsule
rounded, broader than long, obtusely notched.--Roadsides and fields,
common; introduced and indigenous. May--July (Eu., Asia.)

[*][*][*] _Annuals; floral leaves like those of the stem (or somewhat
reduced), the flowers appearing to be axillary and solitary, mostly
alternate; corolla shorter than the calyx._

[+] _Flowers short-pedicelled; floral leaves reduced; corolla shorter
than the calyx._

8. V. peregrina, L. (NECKWEED. PURSLANE SPEEDWELL.) Glandular-puberulent
or _nearly smooth_, erect (4--9' high), branched; _lowest leaves
petioled, oval-oblong, toothed_, thickish, the others sessile, obtuse;
the upper oblong-linear and entire, longer than the almost sessile
(whitish) flowers; _capsule orbicular, slightly notched_,
many-seeded.--Waste and cultivated grounds, in damp soil; throughout
U. S., and almost cosmopolite. April--June.

V. ARVENSIS, L. (CORN SPEEDWELL.) Simple or diffusely branched (3--8'
high), _hairy; lower leaves petioled, ovate, crenate_; the uppermost
sessile, lanceolate, entire; _capsule inversely heart-shaped_, the lobes
rounded.--Cultivated grounds, Atlantic States to Tex., rather rare.
(Nat. from Eu.)

[+][+] _Flowers long-pedicelled in axils of ordinary leaves; seeds
cup-shaped._

V. AGRESTIS, L. (FIELD SPEEDWELL.) _Leaves_ round or ovate,
crenate-toothed, the floral somewhat similar; calyx-lobes oblong; flower
small; _ovary many-ovuled_, but the _nearly orbicular and sharply
notched capsule_ 1--2 seeded.--Sandy fields, N. Brunswick to La., near
the coast. (Adv. from Eu.)

V. BUXBAUMII, Tenore. _Leaves_ round or heart-ovate, crenately
cut-toothed ({2/3}--1' long); flower large (nearly 1/2' wide, blue);
calyx-lobes lanceolate, widely spreading in fruit; _capsule
obcordate-triangular, broadly notched_, 16--24-seeded.--Waste grounds,
rare in Atlantic States. (Adv. from Eu.)

V. HEDERAEFOLIA, L. (IVY-LEAVED SPEEDWELL.) _Leaves_ rounded
or heart-shaped, _3--7-toothed or lobed_; calyx-lobes
somewhat heart-shaped; flowers small; _capsule turgid, 2-lobed,
2--4-seeded_.--Shaded places, N. J., Penn., etc. April--June. (Adv. from
Eu.)


17. BUCHNERA, L. BLUE-HEARTS.

Calyx tubular, obscurely nerved, 5-toothed. Corolla salver-form, with a
straight or curved tube and an almost equally 5-cleft limb, the lobes
oblong or wedge-obovate, flat. Stamens 4, included, approximate in
pairs; anthers one-celled (the other cell wanting). Style club-shaped
and entire. Capsule 2-valved, many-seeded.--Perennial rough-hairy herbs
(doubtless root-parasitic), turning blackish in drying, with opposite
leaves, or the uppermost alternate; the flowers opposite in a terminal
spike, bracted and with 2 bractlets. (Named in honor of _I. G. Buchner_,
an early German botanist.)

1. B. Americana, L. Rough-hairy; stem wand-like (1--2 deg. high); lower
leaves obovate-oblong, the others ovate-oblong to linear-lanceolate,
sparingly and coarsely toothed, veiny; spike interrupted; calyx longer
than the bracts, one third the length of the deep-purple corolla (1'
long).--Moist sandy ground, western N. Y. to Minn., and southward.
June--Aug.


18. SEYMERIA, Pursh.

Calyx bell-shaped, deeply 5-cleft. Corolla with a short and broad tube,
not longer than the 5 ovate or oblong nearly equal and spreading lobes.
Stamens 4, somewhat equal; anthers approximate by pairs, oblong,
2-celled; the cells equal and pointless. Capsule many-seeded.--Erect
branching herbs, with the general aspect and character of Gerardia,
leaves mostly opposite and dissected or pinnatifid, the uppermost
alternate and bract-like. Flowers yellow, interruptedly racemed or
spiked. (Named for _Henry Seymer_, an English naturalist.)

1. S. macrophylla, Nutt. (MULLEIN-FOXGLOVE.) Rather pubescent (4--5 deg.
high); leaves large, the lower pinnately divided, with the broadly
lanceolate divisions pinnatifid and incised, the upper lanceolate; tube
of the corolla incurved, very woolly inside, as are the filaments except
at the apex; style short, dilated and notched at the point; capsule
ovate, pointed.--Shady river-banks, Ohio to Iowa, south to Tex. July.


19. GERARDIA, L.

Calyx bell-shaped, 5-toothed or 5-cleft. Corolla
campanulate-funnel-form, or somewhat tubular, swelling above, with 5
more or less unequal spreading lobes, the 2 upper usually rather smaller
and more united. Stamens 4, strongly didynamous, included, hairy;
anthers approaching by pairs, 2-celled, the cells parallel, often
pointed at base. Style elongated, mostly enlarged and flattened at the
apex. Capsule globular or ovate, pointed, many-seeded.--Erect branching
herbs (more or less root-parasitic); stem-leaves opposite, or the upper
alternate, the uppermost reduced to bracts and subtending 1 flowered
peduncles, which often form a raceme or spike. Flowers showy, purple or
yellow; in late summer and autumn. (Dedicated to the celebrated
herbalist, _John Gerarde_.)

Sec. 1. DASYSTOMA. _Corolla yellow, the tube woolly inside, as well as the
anthers and filaments; anthers alike, awn-pointed at base; leaves rather
large, more or less incised or pinnatifid._

[*] _Pubescence partly glandular and viscid; corolla pubescent outside._

1. G. pedicularia, L. Annual or biennial, smoothish or pubescent, much
branched (2--3 deg. high), very leafy; leaves ovate-lanceolate, pinnatifid,
and the lobes cut and toothed; pedicels longer than the hairy mostly
serrate calyx-lobes.--Dry copses; N. Eng. to Minn., south to Fla. and
Ark.

[*][*] _No glandular pubescence; corolla glabrous outside; perennial._

2. G. grandiflora, Benth. _Minutely downy_; stem much branched (2--4 deg.
high); _leaves ovate-lanceolate, coarsely toothed or cut, the lower
pinnatifid_; pedicels rather shorter than the calyx; corolla (2' long) 4
times the length of the broadly lanceolate entire or toothed
calyx-lobes.--Oak openings, Wisc. and Minn. to Tenn. and Tex.

3. G. flava, L. (DOWNY FALSE FOXGLOVE.) _Pubescent with a fine close
down_; stem (3--4 deg. high) mostly simple; _leaves ovate-lanceolate or
oblong, obtuse, entire, or the lower usually sinuate-toothed or
pinnatifid; pedicels very short_; calyx-lobes oblong, obtuse, rather
shorter than the tube, corolla 11/2' long.--Open woods, N. Eng. to Wisc.
and Iowa, south to Ga. and Ark.

4. G. quercifolia, Pursh. (SMOOTH FALSE FOXGLOVE.) _Smooth and glaucous_
(3--6 deg. high), usually branching; lower _leaves commonly
twice-pinnatifid; the upper oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid or entire;
pedicels nearly as long as the calyx_; calyx-lobes lance-linear, acute,
as long as the at length inflated tube; corolla 2' long.--Dry woods,
N. Eng. to Minn., south to Fla. and Ill.

5. G. laevigata, Raf. _Smooth, not glaucous_; stem (1--2 deg. high) mostly
simple; _leaves lanceolate, acute, entire_, or the lowest obscurely
toothed; _pedicels shorter than the calyx-tube_; corolla 1' long. (G.
integrifolia, _Gray_.)--Oak-barrens, etc., Penn. to Mich, and Ill.,
south in the mountains to Ga.

Sec. 2. OTOPHYLLA. _Corolla purple (rarely white), naked within, as well as
the very unequal filaments; anthers dissimilar, pointless, glabrous or
sparingly hairy._

6. G. auriculata, Michx. Rough-hairy; stem erect, nearly simple (9--20'
high); _leaves lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate_, sessile, _the lower
entire_, the others with an oblong-lanceolate lobe on each side at the
base; _flowers nearly sessile in the axils_ (1' long).--Low grounds and
prairies, W. Penn. to Minn., south to N. C. and Mo.

7. G. densiflora, Benth. More hispid and rough, very leafy; _leaves
rigid, pinnately parted into 3--7 narrowly linear acute divisions_,
those subtending the _densely spicate flowers_ similar and crowded;
corolla over 1' long.--Prairies, E. Kan. to Tex.

Sec. 3. GERARDIA proper. _Corolla purple or rose-color (rarely white);
calyx-teeth short; anthers alike, nearly pointless, pubescent; cauline
leaves linear or narrower, entire._

[*] _Perennnial; leaves erect, very narrow; pedicels erect, as long as
floral leaves._

8. G. linifolia, Nutt. Glabrous, 2--3 deg. high, sparingly or paniculately
branched; leaves flat, thickish, 1'' wide; calyx-teeth minute; corolla
1' long, minutely pubescent outside, villous within and lobes ciliate;
anthers and filaments very villous.--Low pine barrens, Del. to Fla.

[*][*] _Annuals; herbage blackish in drying_ (except n. 13).

[+] _Pedicels little if at all longer than the calyx and capsule._

9. G. aspera, Dougl. Sparingly branched (1--2 deg. high); leaves long and
linear, rough; _pedicels (most of them alternate) equalling or
moderately exceeding the calyx_, which has _triangular-lanceolate acute
lobes about half as long as the tube_; corolla over 1' long.--Plains and
prairies, Mich, and W. Ind. to Dak. and W. Ark.

10. G. purpurea, L. (PURPLE GERARDIA.) Stem (1--2 deg. high) with long and
rigid widely spreading branches; _leaves linear, acute, rough-margined_;
flowers large (1' long), bright purple, often downy; _pedicels shorter
than the calyx, mainly opposite; calyx-teeth sharp-pointed_, from very
short to about half as long as the tube.--Low grounds, mainly near the
coast and in the region of the Great Lakes. Very variable.--Var.
PAUPERCULA, Gray. Smoother, more simple; corolla usually only 1/2' long,
lighter rose-purple.--N. Eng. to Penn., N. Ill., Minn., and northward.

11. G. maritima, Raf. (SEA-SIDE G.) Low (4--12' high), with shorter
branches; _leaves and short broad calyx-teeth rather fleshy and obtuse_;
pedicels about as long as the calyx; corolla 1/2' long.--Salt marshes
along the coast.

[+][+] _Pedicels usually exceeding the corolla; woolly anthers cuspidate
at base._

12. G. tenuifolia, Vahl. (SLENDER G.) _Leaves narrowly linear_, acute,
the floral ones mostly like the others; _calyx-teeth very short, acute;
capsule globular, not exceeding the calyx_; corolla about 1/2' long.--Low
or dry ground, common.--Var. MACROPHYLLA, Benth. Stouter; larger leaves
11/2--2' long and almost 2'' wide, scabrous; pedicels ascending;
calyx-teeth larger; corolla little over 1/2' long. W. Iowa to W. La. and
Col.--Var. ASPERULA, Gray. Leaves all nearly filiform and upper face
hispidulous scabrous; inflorescence more paniculate; corolla small, the
expanded limb only 6'' in diameter. Dry bare hills, Mich, and N. Ind. to
Minn. and Mo.

13. G. Skinneriana, Wood. _Leaves bristle-shaped_, as are the
branchlets, or the lower linear; _capsule ovate, mostly longer than the
calyx_, which has short setaceous teeth; corolla 4--6'' long. (G.
setacea, _Gray_, Man., not of _Walt._)--Sandy low ground, Mass. to
Minn., south to Fla. and La.


20. CASTILLEIA, Mutis. PAINTED-CUP.

Calyx tubular, flattened, cleft at the summit on the anterior, and
usually on the posterior side also; the divisions entire or 2-lobed.
Tube of the corolla included in the calyx; its upper lip (_galea_) long
and narrow, arched and keeled, flattened laterally, enclosing the 4
unequal stamens; lower lip short, 3-lobed. Anther cells oblong-linear,
unequal, the outer fixed by the middle, the inner pendulous. Capsule
many-seeded.--Herbs (root-parasitic), with alternate entire or cut-lobed
leaves; the floral ones usually dilated, colored, and more showy than
the yellow or purplish spiked flowers. (Dedicated to _Castillejo_, a
Spanish botanist.)

1. C. coccinea, Spreng. (SCARLET PAINTED-CUP.) Hairy biennial or annual;
stem simple; root-leaves clustered, mostly entire, obovate or oblong;
those of the stem incised; the floral 3--5-cleft, bright scarlet toward
the summit (rarely yellow); calyx about the length of the pale yellow
corolla, _equally cleft both sides, the lobes quadrate-oblong, entire or
retuse_.--Low sandy ground, Maine to Minn., south to N. J., Tenn., and
Tex.

2. C. pallida, Kunth, var. septentrionalis, Gray. Perennial, smooth or
sparingly hairy, at the summit woolly; _leaves mainly entire_, the lower
linear, upper broader; the floral oblong or obovate, greenish-white,
varying to yellowish, purple, or red; _calyx equally cleft, the lobes
oblong or lanceolate, 2-cleft_; corolla 1/2--1' long, the _galea decidedly
shorter than the tube_, not over 2 or 3 times as long as the
lip.--Alpine summits of N. Eng., N. shore of L. Superior, west and
northward.

3. C. sessiliflora, Pursh. Perennial, 6--8' high, very leafy,
cinereous-pubescent; leaves mostly 3--5-cleft, with narrow diverging
sometimes cleft lobes; the floral similar or broader, _not at all
colored; calyx deeper cleft in front_, the narrow lobes deeply 2-cleft;
corolla 2' long, _the short galea but twice as long as the slender-lobed
lip_.--Prairies, Wisc. and Ill. to Dak. and Tex.


21. ORTHOCARPUS, Nutt.

Corolla with the upper lip (_galea_) little longer and usually much
narrower than the inflated 1--3-saccate lower one. Otherwise nearly as
Castilleia. (Name from [Greek: o)rtho/s], _upright_, and [Greek:
karpo/s], _fruit_.)

1. O. luteus, Nutt. Annual, pubescent and hirsute, sometimes viscid,
erect, 1 deg. high; leaves linear to lanceolate, occasionally 3-cleft; spike
dense; bracts broader, mostly 3-cleft, about equalling the flowers, not
colored; corolla golden-yellow, not 6'' long, 2--3 times as long as the
calyx.--Plains, N. Minn. to Col., and westward.


22. SCHWALBEA, Gronov. CHAFF-SEED.

Calyx oblique, tubular, 10--12-ribbed, 5-toothed; the posterior tooth
much the smaller, the 2 anterior united higher than the others. Upper
lip of the corolla arched, oblong, entire; the lower little shorter,
erect, 2-plaited, with 3 very short and broad obtuse lobes. Stamens 4,
included in the upper lip; anther-cells equal and parallel. Capsule
ovate, many-seeded. Seeds linear, with a loose chaff-like coat.--A
perennial minutely pubescent upright herb (1--2 deg. high), with leafy
simple stems, terminated by a loose spike of rather large dull
purplish-yellow flowers; leaves alternate, sessile, 3-nerved, entire,
ovate or oblong, the upper gradually reduced to narrow bracts; pedicels
very short, with 2 bractlets under the calyx. (Dedicated to _C. G.
Schwalbe_, an obscure German botanist.)

1. S. Americana, L.--Wet sandy soil, Mass. to La., near the coast.
May--July.


23. EUPHRASIA, Tourn. EYEBRIGHT.

Calyx tubular or bell-shaped, 4-cleft. Upper lip of the corolla erect,
scarcely arched, 2-lobed, and the sides folded back; lower lip
spreading, 3-cleft, the lobes obtuse or notched. Stamens 4, under the
upper lip; anther-cells equal, pointed at the base. Capsule oblong,
flattened. Seeds numerous.--Herbs, with branching stems, and opposite
toothed or cut leaves. Flowers, small, spiked. (Name [Greek:
eu)thrasi/a], _cheerfulness_, in allusion to its reputed medicinal
properties.)

1. E. officinalis, L. Low annual; leaves ovate or lanceolate, the lowest
crenate, the floral bristly-toothed; lobes of the lower lip of the
(whitish, yellowish, or bluish) corolla notched.--Coast of Maine and
Lower Canada; perhaps introduced from Eu.--Var. TATARICA, Benth., a low
form with small flowers (2--3'' long), and mostly rounded
leaves.--Alpine region of N. H., shore of L. Superior, and far
northward.


24. BARTSIA, L.

Calyx equally 4-cleft. Corolla with upper lip entire and sides not
folded back. Otherwise much as Euphrasia.--Herbs, with opposite sessile
leaves, and subsessile flowers, in the upper axils and in a terminal
leafy spike.

B. ODONTITES, Huds. A span or two high from an annual root, branching,
scabrous-pubescent; leaves oblong-lanceolate, coarsely and remotely
serrate; spikes elongated, loosely-flowered; corolla small,
rose-red.--Coast of Maine and N. Scotia. (Nat. from Eu.)


25. RHINANTHUS, L. YELLOW-RATTLE.

Calyx membranaceous, flattened, much inflated in fruit, 4-toothed. Upper
lip of corolla arched, ovate, obtuse, flattened, entire at the summit,
but with a minute tooth on each side below the apex; lower lip 3-lobed.
Stamens 4, under the upper lip; anthers approximate, hairy, transverse;
the cells equal, pointless. Capsule orbicular, flattened. Seeds many,
orbicular, winged.--Annual upright herbs, with opposite leaves; the
yellow flowers crowded in a one-sided leafy-bracted spike. (Name
composed of [Greek: r(i/n], _a snout_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _a
flower_, from the beaked upper lip in some species formerly of this
genus.)

1. R. Crista-galli, L. Leaves narrowly oblong to lanceolate, coarsely
serrate, the floral bracts more incised with bristle-tipped teeth;
corolla 6'' long; seeds broadly winged (when ripe they rattle in the
inflated calyx, whence the popular name.)--Coast of N. Eng. and alpine
region of N. H., to L. Superior, and northward. (Eu., Asia.)


26. PEDICULARIS, Tourn. LOUSEWORT.

Calyx various. Corolla strongly 2-lipped; the upper lip arched,
flattened, often beaked at the apex; the lower erect at base, 2-crested
above, 3-lobed; lobes commonly spreading, the lateral ones rounded and
larger. Stamens 4, under the upper lip; anthers transverse; the cells
equal, pointless. Capsule ovate or lanceolate, mostly oblique, several
seeded.--Perennial herbs, with chiefly pinnatifid leaves, the floral
bract-like, and rather large flowers in a spike. (Name from _pediculus_,
a louse; of no obvious application.)

1. P. Canadensis, L. (COMMON LOUSEWORT. WOOD BETONY.)

Hairy; stems simple, clustered (5--12' high); _leaves scattered, the
lowest pinnately parted, the others half-pinnatifid_; spike short and
dense; _calyx split in front, otherwise almost entire_, oblique; _upper
lip of the_ (dull greenish-yellow and purplish) _corolla hooded,
incurved_, 2-toothed under the apex; capsule _flat, somewhat
sword-shaped_.--Copses and banks, common. May--July.

2. P. lanceolata, Michx. Stem upright (1--3 deg. high), nearly simple,
mostly smooth; _leaves partly opposite, oblong-lanceolate, doubly
cut-toothed_; spike crowded; _calyx 2-lobed_, leafy-crested; _upper lip
of the_ (pale yellow) _corolla incurved_ and bearing a short truncate
beak at the apex, the lower erect, so as nearly to close the throat;
_capsule ovate, scarcely longer than the calyx_.--Swamps, Conn. to Va.,
Ohio, and Minn.

3. P. Furbishiae, Watson. Tall (2--3 deg. high) pubescent or glabrate; leaves
lanceolate, _pinnately parted and the short oblong divisions
pinnatifid-incised_, or the upper simply pinnatifid and the lobes
serrate; bracts ovate, laciniate-dentate; _calyx-lobes_ 5, rather
unequal, linear-lanceolate, entire or toothed; _upper lip of corolla
straight_ and beakless, the truncate apex bicuspidate, the lower erect,
truncately 3-lobed; _capsule broadly ovate_.--Banks of the St. John's,
Aroostook Co., Maine (_Miss Kate Furbish_), and adjacent N. Brunswick.


27. MELAMPYRUM, Tourn. COW-WHEAT.

Calyx bell-shaped, 4-cleft; the taper lobes sharp-pointed. Tube of
corolla cylindrical, enlarging above; upper lip arched, compressed,
straight in front; the lower erect-spreading, biconvex, 3-lobed at the
apex. Stamens 4, under the upper lip; anthers approximate, oblong,
nearly vertical, hairy; the equal cells minutely pointed at base. Ovary
with 2 ovules in each cell. Capsule flattened, oblique,
1--4-seeded.--Erect branching annuals, with opposite leaves, the lower
entire, the upper mostly toothed at base. Flowers solitary in the upper
axils. (Name from [Greek: me/las], _black_, and [Greek: pyro/s],
_wheat_; from the color of the seeds of some species as they appear
mixed with grain.)

1. M. Americanum, Michx. Leaves lanceolate, short-petioled, the floral
ones like the lower, or truncate at base and beset with a few bristly
teeth; calyx-teeth linear-awl-shaped, not half the length of the slender
tube of the pale greenish-yellow corolla (5'' long).--Open woods;
common, from the Atlantic to Minn. and Iowa, especially eastward.
June--Sept.


ORDER 76. OROBANCHACEAE. (BROOM-RAPE FAMILY.)

_Herbs destitute of green foliage (root-parasites), monopetalous,
didynamous, the ovary one-celled with 2 or 4 parietal placentae; pod very
many-seeded; seeds minute, with albumen and a very minute
embryo._--Calyx persistent, 4--5-toothed or parted. Corolla tubular,
more or less 2-lipped, ringent, persistent and withering; upper lip
entire or 2-lobed, the lower 3-lobed. Stamens 4, didynamous, inserted on
the tube of the corolla; anthers 2-celled, persistent. Ovary free,
ovoid, pointed with a long style; stigma large. Capsule 1-celled,
2-valved; each valve bearing on its face one placenta or a pair. Seeds
very numerous, minute.--Low, thick or fleshy herbs, bearing scales in
place of leaves, lurid yellowish or brownish throughout. Flowers
solitary or spiked.

[*] Flowers of two sorts, scattered along slender panicled branches.

1. Epiphegus. Upper flowers sterile, with a tubular corolla; the lower
fertile, with the corolla minute and not expanding. Bracts
inconspicuous.

[*][*] Flowers all alike and perfect; sterns mostly simple.

2. Conopholis. Flowers, densely spicate. Calyx deeply cleft in front.
Corolla 2-lipped Stamens exserted.

3. Aphyllon. Flowers pedicellate, sometimes subsessile and
thyrsoid-spicate. Calyx regularly 5-cleft. Corolla somewhat 2-lipped.
Stamens included.

4. Orobanche. Flowers sessile, spicate. Calyx cleft before and behind
almost to the base. Corolla 2-lipped. Stamens included.


1. EPIPHEGUS, Nutt. BEECH-DROPS. CANCER-ROOT.

Flowers racemose or spiked, scattered on the branches; the upper
sterile, with a long tubular corolla and long filaments and style; the
lower fertile, with a very short corolla which seldom opens, but is
forced off from the base by the growth of the pod; stamens and style
very short. Calyx 5-toothed. Stigma capitate, a little 2-lobed. Capsule
2-valved at the apex, with 2 approximate placentae on each valve.--Herbs
slender, purplish or yellowish-brown, much branched, with small
scattered scales, 6--12' high. (Name from [Greek: e)pi/], _upon_, and
[Greek: phego/s], _the Beech_, because it grows on the roots of that
tree.)

1. E. Virginiana, Bart. Corolla of the upper (sterile) flowers whitish
and purple, 6--8'' long, curved, 4-toothed.--Common under Beech-trees,
parasitic on their roots; N. Brunswick to Wisc., south to Fla. and Ark.
Aug.--Oct.


2. CONOPHOLIS, Wallroth. SQUAW-ROOT. CANCER-ROOT.

Flowers in a thick scaly spike, perfect, with 2 bractlets at the base of
the irregularly 4--5-toothed calyx; its tube split down on the lower
side. Corolla tubular, swollen at base, strongly 2 lipped; upper lip
arched, notched at the summit, the lower shorter, 3-parted, spreading.
Stamens protruded. Stigma depressed. Capsule with 4 placentae, a pair on
the middle of each valve.--Upper scales forming bracts to the flowers,
regularly imbricate, not unlike those of a fir-cone (whence the name,
from [Greek: ko~nos], _a cone_, and [Greek: pholi/s], _a scale_).

1. C. Americana, Wallroth.--Oak woods, growing in clusters among fallen
leaves; N. Eng. to Mich., south to Fla. and Tenn. May, June.--A singular
plant, chestnut-colored or yellowish throughout, as thick as a man's
thumb, 3--6' high, covered with fleshy scales, which become dry and
hard.


3. APHYLLON, Mitchell. NAKED BROOM-RAPE.

Flowers perfect, pedicellate, sometimes subsessile and thyrsoid-spicate.
Calyx 5-cleft, regular. Corolla somewhat 2-lipped; the upper lip more or
less spreading and 2-lobed, the lower spreading, 3-lobed. Stamens
included. Stigma broadly 2-lipped or crateriform. Capsule with 4
placentae, equidistant or contiguous in pairs. Plants brownish or
whitish. Flowers (purplish or yellowish) and naked scapes minutely
glandular-pubescent. (Name from [Greek: a-] privative and [Greek:
phy/llon], _foliage_, alluding to the naked stalks.)

[*] _Flowers solitary on long naked scapes or peduncles, without
bractlets; corolla with a long curved tube and spreading 5-lobed limb._

1. A. uniflorum, Gray. (ONE-FLOWERED CANCER-ROOT.) _Stem subterranean or
nearly so, very short_, scaly, often branched, each branch sending up
1--3 slender one-flowered scapes (3--5' high); _divisions of the calyx
lance-awl-shaped_, half the length of the corolla, which is 1' long,
with 2 yellow bearded folds in the throat, and obovate lobes.--Damp
woodlands, Newf. to Va. and Tex., and west to the Pacific. April, May.

2. A. fasciculatum, Gray. _Scaly stem erect and rising 3--4' out of the
ground_, mostly longer than the crowded peduncles; _divisions of the
calyx triangular, very much shorter than the corolla_, which has rounded
short lobes.--Sandy ground, L. Michigan to Minn., southward west of the
Mississippi, and westward. On Artemisia, Eriogonum, etc. May.

[*][*] _Caulescent, flowers densely spicate, with 1--2 bractlets at base
of calyx; corolla 2-lipped, the upper lip less or not at all 2-cleft._

3. A. Ludovicianum, Gray. Glandular-pubescent, branched (3--12' high);
corolla somewhat curved, twice the length of the narrow lanceolate
calyx-lobes; the lips equal in length. (Phelipaea Ludoviciana,
_Walp._)--Minn. to Ill. and Tex., and westward.


4. OROBANCHE, Tourn. BROOM-RAPE.

Flowers spicate, sessile. Calyx cleft before and behind almost or quite
to the base, the divisions usually 2-cleft. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip
erect, 2-lobed or emarginate, the lower spreading, broadly 3-lobed.
Stamens included.--Old World parasites, on roots of various plants.

O. MINOR, L. A span to a foot high, pubescent, pale yellowish-brown, or
with purplish-tinged flowers in a rather loose spike; corolla 6''
long.--Parasitic on clover, N. J. to Va. Sparingly and probably recently
introduced.

(Addendum) O. RAMOSA, L. Often branched, 6' high or less, of a pale
straw-color; flowers 3-bracteate, the lateral bracts small; calyx
4-toothed, split at the back; corolla pale blue, 6--8'' long.--On the
roots of hemp and tobacco; Ky. (Int. from Eu.)


ORDER 77. LENTIBULARIACEAE. (BLADDERWORT FAMILY.)

_Small herbs (growing in water or wet places), with a 2-lipped calyx,
and a 2-lipped personate corolla, 2 stamens with (confluently)
one-celled anthers, and a one-celled ovary with a free central placenta,
bearing several anatropous seeds, with a thick straight embryo, and no
albumen._--Corolla deeply 2-lipped, the lower lip larger, 3-lobed and
with a prominent palate, spurred at the base in front; the palate
usually bearded. Ovary free; style very short or none; stigma
1--2-lipped. Capsule often bursting irregularly. Scapes
1--few-flowered.--The following are the two principal genera.

1. Utricularia. Calyx-lobes mostly entire. Upper lip of corolla erect.
Filaments strongly incurved. Foliage dissected; bladder-bearing.

2. Pinguicula. Calyx with upper lip deeply 3- and lower 2-cleft.
Corolla-lobes spreading. Filaments straighter. Terrestrial, with entire
rosulate leaves next the ground.


1. UTRICULARIA, L. BLADDERWORT.

Lips of the 2-parted calyx entire, or nearly so. Corolla personate, the
palate on the lower lip projecting, often closing the throat; upper lip
erect. Anthers convergent.--Aquatic and immersed, with capillary
dissected leaves bearing little bladders, which float the plant at the
time of flowering; or rooting in the mud, and sometimes with few or no
leaves or bladders. Scapes 1--few-flowered; usually flowering all
summer. Bladders furnished with a valvular lid and usually with a few
bristles at the orifice. (Name from _utriculus_, a little bladder.)

[*] _Upper leaves in a whorl on the otherwise naked scape, floating by
means of large bladders formed of the inflated petioles; the lower
leaves dissected and capillary, bearing small bladders; rootlets few or
none._

1. U. inflata, Walt. Swimming free; bladder-like petioles oblong,
pointed at the ends and branched near the apex, bearing fine thread-like
divisions; flowers 3--10 (large, yellow); the appressed spur half the
length of the corolla; style distinct.--In still water, Maine to Tex.,
near the coast.

[*][*] _Scapes naked (except some small scaly bracts), from immersed
branching stems, which commonly swim free, bearing capillary dissected
leaves with small bladders on their lobes; roots few and not affixed, or
none. (Mostly perennial, propagated from year to year by tuber-like
buds.)_

[+] _Cleistogamous flowers along the submersed copiously bladder-bearing
stems._

2. U. clandestina, Nutt. Leaves numerous on the slender immersed stems,
several times forked, capillary; scapes slender (3--5' high); lips of
the yellow corolla nearly equal in length, the lower broader and
3-lobed, somewhat longer than the approximate thick and blunt
spur.--Ponds, from N. Brunswick and N. Eng. to N. J., near the coast.

[+][+] _No cleistogamous flowers._

[++] _Pedicels recurved in fruit; corolla yellow._

3. U. vulgaris, L. (GREATER BLADDERWORT.) Immersed stems (1--3 deg. long)
_crowded with 2--3-pinnately many-parted capillary leaves, bearing many
bladders_; scapes 5--12-flowered (6--12' long); _corolla closed_ (6--9''
broad), the sides reflexed; spur conical, rather shorter than the lower
lip, thick and blunt in the European and the high northern plant; in the
common American plant less thick and rather acute.--Common in ponds and
slow streams, Newf. to Minn., south to Va. and Tex., and westward. (Eu.,
Asia.)

4. U. minor, L. (SMALLER B.) _Leaves scattered_ on the thread-like
immersed stems, 2--4 times _forked_, short; scapes weak, 2--8-flowered
(3--7' high); _upper lip of the gaping corolla not longer than the
depressed palate; spur very short and blunt, or almost none_.--Shallow
water, E. Mass, to Minn., south to N. J. and Ark., and westward. (Eu.)

[++][++] _Pedicels erect in fruit, few and slender; corolla yellow._

5. U. gibba, L. _Scape_ (1--3' high) _1--2-flowered_, at base furnished
with very slender short branches, bearing sparingly dissected capillary
root-like leaves and scattered bladders; corolla 3--4'' broad, the lips
broad and rounded, nearly equal; the _lower_ with the sides reflexed,
_exceeding and approximate to the very thick and blunt conical gibbous
spur_.--Shallow water, Mass. to Mich., south to Va. and Ill.; Mt. Desert
(_F. M. Day_).

6. U. biflora, Lam. _Scape_ (2--5' high) _1--3-flowered_, at the base
bearing somewhat elongated submersed branches with capillary root-like
leaves and numerous bladders; _corolla 4--6'' broad, the spur oblong,
equalling the lower lip_; seeds scale-shaped.--Ponds and shallow waters,
S. Ill. and Iowa to Tex.; also S. Va. (?), and Barnstable, Mass. (_W.
Deane_).

7. U. fibrosa, Walt. _Leaves_ crowded or whorled on the small immersed
stems, several times forked, _capillary_; the bladders borne mainly
along the stems; flowers 2--6 (6'' broad); lips nearly equal, broad and
expanded, the upper undulate, concave, plaited-striate in the middle;
_spur nearly linear, obtuse_, approaching and almost equalling the lower
lip. (U. striata, _LeConte_.)--Shallow pools in pine barrens, L. Island
and N. J. to Fla. and Ala.

8. U. intermedia, Hayne. _Leaves_ crowded on the immersed stems,
_2-ranked_, 4--5 times forked, _rigid_, the divisions linear-awl-shaped,
minutely bristle-toothed along the margins; _the bladders borne on
separate leafless branches_; upper lip of corolla much longer than the
palate; _spur conical-subulate, acute, appressed to the very broad
(6--8'') lower lip and nearly as long as it_.--Shallow pools, Newf. to
N. J., west to Iowa, Minn., and northward. (Eu., Asia.)

[++][++][++] _Pedicels erect in fruit, rather long; corolla
violet-purple._

9. U. purpurea, Walt. Leaves whorled along the long immersed free
floating stems, petioled, decompound, capillary, bearing many bladders;
flowers 2--4 (6'' wide); spur appressed to the 3-lobed 2-saccate lower
lip of the corolla and about half its length.--Ponds, Maine and N. Penn.
to Fla., mainly near the coast; also Lake Co., Ind.

[*][*][*] _Scape solitary, slender and naked, or with a few small
scales, the base rooting in the mud or soil; leaves small, awl-shaped or
grass-like, often raised out of the water, commonly few or fugacious;
air-bladders few on the leaves or rootlets, or commonly none._

[+] _Flower purple, solitary; leaves bearing a few delicate lobes._

10. U. resupinata, B. D. Greene. Scape (2--8' high) 2-bracted above;
leaves thread-like, on delicate creeping branches; corolla (4--5'' long)
deeply 2-parted; spur oblong-conical, very obtuse, shorter than the
dilated lower lip and remote from it, _both ascending_, the flower
resting transversely on the summit of the scape.--Sandy margins of
ponds, E. Maine to R. I., near the coast; also N. New York and Presque
Isle, L. Erie.

[+][+] _Flowers 2--10, (chiefly) yellow; leaves entire, rarely seen._

11. U. subulata, L. Stem capillary (3--5' high); _pedicels capillary;
lower lip of the corolla flat_ or with its margins recurved, _equally
3-lobed_, much larger than the ovate upper one; _spur oblong_, acute,
straight, _appressed_ to the lower lip, which it nearly equals in
length.--Sandy swamps, and pine-barrens, Nantucket, Mass., to N. J.,
Fla., and Tex., near the coast.

Var. cleistogama, Gray. Only 1--2' high, bearing 1 or 2 evidently
cleistogamous purplish flowers, not larger than a pin's head; capsule
becoming 1'' long. (The unnamed Utricularia in the Man., p. 320).--With
the ordinary form; Barnstable and Nantucket, Mass., pine-barrens of
N. J., and southward.

12. U. cornuta, Michx. Stem strict (3'--1 deg. high), 1--5-flowered;
_pedicels not longer than the calyx_; corolla 1' long, the _lower lip
large and helmet-shaped_, its centre very convex and projecting, while
the sides are strongly reflexed; upper lip obovate and much smaller;
_spur awl-shaped, turned downward_ and outward, about as long as the
lower lip.--Peat-bogs, or sandy swamps, Newf. to Minn., south to Fla.
and Tex.; common.


2. PINGUICULA, Tourn. BUTTERWORT.

Upper lip of the calyx 3-cleft, the lower 2-cleft. Corolla with an open
hairy or spotted palate, the lobes spreading.--Small and stemless
perennials, growing on damp rocks, with 1-flowered scapes, and broad and
entire leaves, all clustered at the root, soft-fleshy, mostly greasy to
the touch (whence the name, from _pinguis_, fat).

1. P. Vulgaris, L. Leaves ovate or elliptical; scape and calyx a little
pubescent; lips of the violet corolla very unequal, the tube
funnel-form; spur straightish.--Wet rocks, northern N. Eng. and N. Y. to
Minn., and far northward. (Eu., Asia.)


ORDER 78. BIGNONIACEAE. (BIGNONIA FAMILY.)

_Woody plants, monopetalous, didynamous or diandrous, with the ovary
commonly 2-celled by the meeting of the two parietal placentae or of a
projection from them, many-ovuled; fruit a dry capsule, the large flat
winged seeds with a flat embryo and no albumen, the broad and leaf-like
cotyledons notched at both ends._--Calyx 2-lipped, 5-cleft, or entire.
Corolla tubular or bell-shaped, 5-lobed, somewhat irregular or 2-lipped,
deciduous; the lower lobe largest. Stamens inserted on the corolla; the
fifth or posterior one, and sometimes the shorter pair also, sterile or
rudimentary; anthers of 2 diverging cells. Ovary free, bearing a long
style, with a 2-lipped stigma.--Leaves compound or simple, opposite,
rarely alternate. Flowers large and showy.--Chiefly a tropical family.

1. Bignonia. Pod flattened parallel with the partition. Leaves compound,
tendril-bearing.

2. Tecoma. Pod flattish contrary to the partition. Leaves compound,
without tendrils.

3. Catalpa. Pod terete. Fertile stamens only 2. Trees; leaves simple.


1. BIGNONIA, Tourn.

Calyx truncate, or slightly 5-toothed. Corolla somewhat bell-shaped,
5-lobed and rather 2-lipped. Stamens 4, often showing a rudiment of the
fifth. Capsule linear, 2-celled, flattened parallel with the valves and
partition. Seeds transversely winged.--Woody climbers, with chiefly
compound leaves, terminating in a tendril. (Named for the _Abbe
Bignon_.)

1. B. capreolata, L. (CROSS-VINE.) Smooth; leaves of 2 ovate or oblong
leaflets and a branched tendril, often with a pair of accessory leaves
in the axil resembling stipules; peduncles few and clustered,
1-flowered; corolla orange, 2' long; pod 6' long; seeds with the wing
11/2' long.--Rich soil, Va. to S. Ill and south to Fla. and La. April.
Climbing tall trees; a transverse section of the wood showing a cross.


2. TECOMA, Juss. TRUMPET-FLOWER.

Calyx bell-shaped, 5-toothed. Corolla funnel-form, 5-lobed, a little
irregular. Stamens 4. Capsule 2-celled, with the partition at right
angles to the convex valves. Seeds transversely winged.--Woody, with
compound leaves, climbing by aerial rootlets. (Abridged from the Mexican
name.)

1. T. radicans, Juss. (TRUMPET CREEPER.) Leaves pinnate; leaflets 9--11,
ovate, pointed, toothed; flowers corymbed; stamens not protruded beyond
the tubular-funnel-form orange and scarlet corolla (21/2--3' long); pod
oblanceolate, 4--5' long.--Moist soil, Penn. to Ill., south to Fla. and
Tex. Common in cultivation farther north.


3. CATALPA, Scop., Walt. CATALPA. INDIAN BEAN.

Calyx deeply 2-lipped. Corolla bell-shaped, swelling; the undulate
5-lobed spreading border irregular and 2-lipped. Fertile stamens 2, or
sometimes 4; the 1 or 3 others sterile and rudimentary. Capsule very
long and slender, nearly cylindrical, 2-celled, the partition at right
angles to the valves. Seeds winged on each side, the wings cut into a
fringe.--Trees, with ovate or cordate and mainly opposite leaves. (The
aboriginal name.)

1. C. speciosa, Warder. A large and tall tree, with thick bark; leaves
ample, heart-shaped, long-acuminate; corolla 2' long, nearly white,
inconspicuously spotted, with obconical tube and slightly oblique limb,
the lower lobe emarginate; capsule thick.--Low rich woodlands, S. Ind.
to Tenn., Mo., and Ark. May.


C. BIGNONIOIDES, Walt., of Ga., Ala. and Miss., very widely cultivated,
and formerly including the above species, is a low much branched tree,
with thin bark, smaller (11/2' long) thickly spotted corolla (with oblique
limb and lower lobe entire), and a much thinner capsule.


ORDER 79. PEDALIACEAE.

_Herbs, with chiefly opposite simple leaves, and flowers as of the
preceding Order, except in structure of ovary and fruit, the former
being 1-celled, the latter fleshy-drupaceous, with wingless seeds and
thick entire cotyledons._--Ovary (in ours) 1-celled, with 2 parietal
intruded placentae expanded into 2 broad lamellae or united into a central
columella.


1. MARTYNIA, L. UNICORN-PLANT.

Calyx 5-cleft, mostly unequal. Corolla gibbous, bell-shaped, 5-lobed and
somewhat 2-lipped. Fertile stamens 4, or only 2. Fruit fleshy, the flesh
at length falling away in 2 valves; the inner part woody, terminated by
a beak, which at length splits into 2 hooked horns, and opens at the
apex between the horns, imperfectly 5-celled, owing to the divergence of
the two plates of each placenta, leaving a space in the centre, while by
reaching and cohering with the walls of the fruit they form 4 other
cells. Seeds several, wingless, with a thick roughened coat.--Low
branching annuals, clammy-pubescent, exhaling a heavy odor, stems
thickish; leaves simple, rounded; flowers racemed, large. (Dedicated to
_Prof. John Martyn_, of Cambridge, England.)

1 M. proboscidea, Glox. Leaves heart-shaped, oblique, entire or
undulate, the upper alternate; corolla dull white or purplish, or
spotted with yellow and purple; endocarp of the fruit crested on one
side, long-beaked.--Banks of the Mississippi and its lower tributaries,
from S. Ind., Ill., and Iowa, to northern Mexico. Also cultivated and
naturalized farther north.


ORDER 80. ACANTHACEAE. (ACANTHUS FAMILY.)

_Chiefly herbs, with opposite simple leaves, didynamous or diandrous
stamens, inserted on the tube of the more or less 2-lipped corolla, the
lobes of which are convolute or imbricated in the bud; fruit a 2-celled
and few- (4--12-) seeded capsule; seeds anatropous, without albumen,
usually flat and supported by hooked projections of the placentae
(retinacula)._--Flowers commonly much bracted. Calyx 5-cleft. Style
thread-form; stigma simple or 2-cleft. Pod loculicidal, usually
flattened contrary to the valves and partition. Cotyledons broad and
flat.--Mucilaginous and slightly bitter, not noxious. A large family in
the warmer parts of the world; represented in gardens by THUNBERGIA,
which differs from the rest by the globular pod and seeds, the latter
not on hooks.

[*] Corolla not obviously bilabiate, the 5 lobes broad and roundish,
spreading; stamens 4.

1. Calophanes. Calyx-lobes long-filiform. Capsule 2--4-seeded.

2. Ruellia. Calyx-lobes mostly linear or lanceolate. Capsule
6--20-seeded.

[*][*] Corolla bilabiate, upper lip erect and concave, lower spreading;
stamens 2.

3. Dianthera. Capsule obovate, flattened, 4-seeded.


1. CALOPHANES, Don.

Calyx deeply 5-cleft or parted; its lobes elongated setaceous-acuminate
or aristiform. Corolla funnel-form, with ample limb, convolute in the
bud. Stamens 4, the anthers mucronate or sometimes aristate at base.
Ovules a single pair in each cell. Capsule oblong-linear,
2--4-seeded.--Low branching perennials, pubescent or hirsute, with
proportionally large axillary nearly sessile flowers (solitary or few),
and blue corolla. (Name from [Greek: kalo/s], _beautiful_, and [Greek:
phai/no], _to appear_.)

1. C. oblongifolia, Don. Stems visually erect and simple, 1/2--1 deg. high;
leaves from narrowly oblong to oval, very obtuse, sessile (1' long or
less); corolla blue, sometimes purple-dotted or mottled, seldom 1' long;
calyx-lobes nearly distinct, filiform-setaceous, hirsute.--Pine-barrens,
S. Va. to Fla.


2. RUELLIA, Plumier.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla funnel-form, with spreading ample border,
convolute in the bud. Stamens 4, the cells of the somewhat arrow-shaped
anthers parallel and nearly equal. Capsule narrow, in our species
somewhat flattened, contracted and seedless at the base, above
8--12-seeded. Seeds with a mucilaginous coat, when wet exhibiting under
the microscope innumerable tapering short bristles, their walls marked
with rings or spirals.--Perennials, with rather large and showy blue or
purple flowers, mostly in axillary clusters, sometimes also with small
flowers precociously close-fertilized in the bud. Calyx often
2-bracteolate. (Named for the early herbalist, _John Ruelle_.)

1. R. ciliosa, Pursh. _Hirsute_ with soft whitish hairs (1--3 deg. high);
_leaves nearly sessile, oval_ or ovate-oblong (1--2' long); flowers 1--3
and almost sessile in the axils; _tube of the corolla_ (1--11/2' long)
fully _twice the length of the setaceous calyx-lobes_; the throat
short.--Dry ground, Mich. to Minn., south to Fla. and La.
June--Sept.--Var. AMBIGUA, Gray. Sparingly hirsute-pubescent or
glabrate; leaves ovate-oblong, usually short-petioled, larger; tube of
corolla little exceeding the hardly hirsute calyx.--Va. and Ky. to Ala.
Appearing like a hybrid with the next.

2. R. strepens, L. _Glabrous or sparingly pubescent_ (1--4 deg. high);
_leaves narrowed at base into a petiole_, ovate, obovate, or mostly
oblong (21/2--5' long); _tube of the corolla_ (about 1' long) little
longer than the dilated portion, _slightly exceeding the lanceolate or
linear calyx-lobes_.--Rich soil, Penn. to Wisc., south to Fla. and Tex.
July--Sept.--Var. CLEISTANTHA, Gray. Leaves commonly narrower and
oblong; flowers for most of the season cleistogamous.--Common with the
ordinary form.


3. DIANTHERA, Gronov. WATER-WILLOW.

Calyx 5-parted. Corolla deeply 2-lipped; the upper lip erect, notched;
the lower spreading, 3-parted, external in the bud. Stamens 2; anthers
2-celled, the cells separated and somewhat unequal. Capsule obovate,
flattened, contracted at base into a short stalk, 4-seeded.--Perennial
herbs, growing in water or wet places, with entire leaves, and purplish
flowers in axillary peduncled spikes or heads. (Name formed of [Greek:
di/s], _double_, and [Greek: a)nthera/], _anther_; the separated cells
giving the appearance of two anthers on each filament.)

1. D. Americana, L. Stem 1--3 deg. high; leaves linear-lanceolate,
elongated; spikes oblong, dense, long-peduncled; corolla 4--5''
long.--In water, N. W. Vt. to Wisc., south to S. C. and Tex. July--Sept.


ORDER 81. VERBENACEAE. (VERVAIN FAMILY.)

_Herbs or shrubs, with opposite leaves, more or less 2-lipped or
irregular corolla, and didynamous stamens, the 2--4-celled_ (in Phryma
1-celled) _fruit dry or drupaceous, usually splitting when ripe into as
many 1-seeded indehiscent nutlets_; differing from the following order
in the ovary not being 4-lobed, the style therefore terminal, and the
plants seldom aromatic or furnishing a volatile oil.--Seeds with a
straight embryo and little or no albumen.--A large order in the warmer
parts of the world, sparingly represented in cool regions.


Tribe I. VERBENEAE. Ovary 2--4-celled, with an erect anatropous ovule in
each cell.

1. Verbena. Flowers in spikes or heads. Calyx tubular. Fruit splitting
into 4 nutlets.

2. Lippia. Flowers in spikes or heads. Calyx short, 2-cleft. Fruit
splitting into 2 nutlets.

3. Callicarpa. Flowers in axillary cymes. Calyx short. Fruit berry-like,
with 4 nutlets.


Tribe II. PHRYMEAE. Ovary 1-celled; ovule erect, orthotropous.

4. Phryma. Flowers in slender spikes. Calyx cylindrical, 2-lipped. Fruit
an achene.


1. VERBENA, Tourn. VERVAIN.

Calyx tubular, 5-toothed, one of the teeth often shorter than the
others. Corolla tubular, often curved, salver-form; the border somewhat
unequally 5-cleft. Stamens included; the upper pair occasionally
without anthers. Style slender; stigma mostly 2-lobed. Fruit splitting
into 4 seed-like nutlets.--Flowers sessile, in single or often panicled
spikes, bracted; produced all summer. (The Latin name for any sacred
herb; derivation obscure.)--The species present numerous spontaneous
hybrids.

Sec. 1. _Anthers not appendaged; flowers small, in narrow spikes._

[*] _Spikes filiform, with flowers or at least fruits scattered, naked,
the inconspicuous bracts shorter than the calyx._

V. OFFICINALIS, L. (EUROPEAN V.) Annual, glabrous or nearly so,
loosely branched (1--3 deg. high); _leaves pinnatifid or 3-cleft,
oblong-lanceolate_, sessile, smooth above, the lobes cut and toothed;
spikes panicled; _flowers purplish_, very small.--Roadsides and old
fields, N. J. to Minn., south to Tex., and westward. (Nat. from Eu.)

1. V. urticaefolia, L. (WHITE V.) Perennial, from minutely pubescent to
almost glabrous, rather tall (3--5 deg. high); _leaves oval or oblong-ovate,
acute, coarsely serrate, petioled_; spikes at length much elongated,
loosely panicled; flowers very small, _white_.--Waste or open grounds.
(Trop. Am.)

[*][*] _Spikes thicker or densely flowered; the fruits crowded, mostly
overlapping each other; bracts inconspicuous, not exceeding the flowers;
perennial._

2. V. angustifolia, Michx. Low (6--18' high), often simple; _leaves
narrowly lanceolate, tapering to the base, sessile, roughish_, slightly
toothed; spikes few or single; the purple flowers crowded, larger than
in the next.--Dry or sandy ground, Mass. to Minn., south to Fla. and
Ark.

3. V. hastata, L. (BLUE VERVAIN.) Tall (4--6 deg. high); _leaves lanceolate
or oblong-lanceolate_, taper-pointed, cut-serrate, _petioled, the lower
often lobed and sometimes halberd-shaped_ at base; _spikes linear,
erect_, corymbed or panicled; flowers blue.--Waste grounds and
roadsides; common.

4. V. stricta, Vent. (HOARY V.) _Downy with soft whitish hairs_, erect,
simple or branched (1--2 deg. high); _leaves sessile, obovate or oblong,
serrate_; _spikes thick_, somewhat clustered, hairy; flowers rather
large, purple.--Barrens and prairies, Ohio to Dak., south to Tex. and
N. Mex.

[*][*][*] _Spikes thick, sessile and leafy-bracted; annual._

5. V. bracteosa, Michx. Widely spreading or procumbent, hairy; leaves
wedge-lanceolate, cut-pinnatifid or 3-cleft, short-petioled; spikes
single, remotely flowered; bracts large, the lower pinnatifid, longer
than the small purple flowers.--Prairies and waste grounds, Ohio to
Minn., south and westward.

Sec. 2. _Anthers of the longer stamens glandular-tipped; flowers showy,
from depressed-capitate becoming spicate._

6. V. bipinnatifida, Nutt. _Hispid-hirsute_, 1/2--1 deg. high; _leaves_
(11/2--4' long) _bipinnately parted_, or 3-parted into more or less
bipinnatifid divisions, the lobes commonly linear or broader; _bracts
mostly surpassing the calyx_; limb of bluish-purple or lilac corolla
4--5'' _broad_.--Plains and prairies, Kan. to Ark. and Tex., and
westward.

7. V. Aubletia, L. Slender, 1 deg. high or less, _soft-pubescent or
glabrate_; _leaves_ (1--2' long) _ovate or ovate-oblong in outline, with
a wedge-shaped base, incisely lobed and toothed_, often more deeply
3-cleft; _bracts shorter than or equalling the calyx_; limb of
reddish-purple or lilac (rarely white) corolla 6--8'' _broad_.--Open
woods and prairies, Ind. and Ill. to Fla., Ark., and N. Mex.


2. LIPPIA, Houst.

Calyx short, often flattened, 2--4-toothed, or 2-lipped. Corolla
2-lipped; upper lip notched, the lower much larger, 3-lobed. Stamens
included. Style slender; stigma obliquely capitate. Fruit 2-celled,
2-seeded. (Dedicated to _Augustus Lippi_, an Italian naturalist and
traveller.)

1. L. lanceolata, Michx. (FOG-FRUIT.) _Creeping extensively, roughish,
green; leaves oblanceolate or wedge-spatulate_, serrate above;
_peduncles axillary, slender, exceeding the leaves_, bearing solitary
closely bracted heads of bluish-white flowers; _bracts mucronate or
pointless_.--River-banks, E. Penn. to Minn., south to Fla. and Tex.
July--Sept.

2. L. cuneifolia, Steud. Diffusely branched from a woody base,
procumbent _(not creeping), minutely canescent throughout; leaves rigid,
cuneate-linear_, incisely 2--6-toothed above the middle; peduncles
axillary, _mostly shorter than the leaves_; bracts rigid, broadly
cuneate, _abruptly acuminate_; corolla white (?).--Plains, W. Neb. to
central Kan. and Arizona.


3. CALLICARPA, L.

Calyx 4--5-toothed, short. Corolla tubular-bell-shaped, 4--5-lobed,
nearly regular. Stamens 4, nearly equal, exserted; anthers opening at
the apex. Style slender, thickened upward. Fruit a small berry-like
drupe, with 4 nutlets.--Shrubs, with scurfy pubescence, and small
flowers in axillary cymes. (Name formed of [Greek: ka/llos], _beauty_,
and [Greek: karpo/s], _fruit_.)

1. C. Americana, L. (FRENCH MULBERRY.) Leaves ovate-oblong with a
tapering base, acuminate, toothed, whitish beneath; cymes many-flowered;
calyx obscurely 4-toothed; corolla bluish; fruit violet-color.--Rich
soil, Va. to Tex., thence north to Mo. May--July.


4. PHRYMA, L. LOPSEED.

Calyx cylindrical, 2-lipped; the upper lip of 3 bristle-awl-shaped
teeth; the lower shorter, 2-toothed. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip
notched; the lower much larger, 3-lobed. Stamens included. Style
slender; stigma 2-lobed. Fruit dry, in the bottom of the calyx, oblong,
1-celled and 1-seeded. Seed orthotropous. Cotyledons convolute round
their axis.--A perennial herb, with slender branching stems, and
coarsely toothed ovate leaves, the lower long-petioled; the small
opposite flowers in elongated and slender terminal spikes, strictly
reflexed in fruit. Corolla purplish or rose-color. (Derivation of the
name unknown.)

1. P. Leptostachya, L. Plant 2--3 deg. high; leaves 3--5' long, thin; calyx
strongly ribbed and closed in fruit, the long slender teeth hooked at
the tip.--Moist and open woods, common. (E. Asia.)


ORDER 82. LABIATAE. (MINT FAMILY.)

_Chiefly herbs, with square stems, opposite aromatic leaves, more or
less 2-lipped corolla, didynamous or diandrous stamens, and a deeply
4-lobed ovary, which forms in fruit 4 little seed-like nutlets or
achenes, surrounding the base of the single style in the bottom of the
persistent calyx, each filled with a single erect seed._--Nutlets smooth
or barely roughish and fixed by their base, except in the first tribe.
Albumen mostly none. Embryo straight (except in Scutellaria); radicle at
the base of the fruit. Upper lip of the corolla 2-lobed or sometimes
entire; the lower 3-lobed. Stamens inserted on the tube of the corolla.
Style 2-lobed at the apex. Flowers axillary, chiefly in cymose clusters,
these often aggregated in terminal spikes or racemes. Foliage mostly
dotted with small glands containing a volatile oil, upon which depends
the warmth and aroma of the plants of this large and well-known family.

I. Nutlets rugose-reticulated, attached obliquely or ventrally; ovary
merely 4-lobed.

Tribe I. AJUGOIDEAE. Stamens 4, ascending and parallel, mostly exserted
from the upper side of the corolla. Calyx 5--10-nerved.

[*] Limb of corolla merely oblique, of 5 nearly equal and similar lobes.

1. Trichostema. Corolla lobes all declined. Calyx oblique. Stamens
exserted.

2. Isanthus. Calyx bell shaped. Corolla small, the lobes spreading.
Stamens included.

[*][*] Limb of corolla irregular, seemingly unilabiate, the upper lip
being either split down or very short; stamens exserted from the cleft.

3. Teucrium. Corolla deeply cleft between the 2 small lobes of the upper
lip.

4. Ajuga. Corolla with a very short and as if truncate upper lip.

II. Nutlets smooth or granulate; scar basal, small; ovary deeply
4-parted.

Tribe II. SATUREINEAE. Upper pair of stamens shorter or wanting; anthers
2-celled. Upper lip of corolla not galeate or concave.

[*] Flowers in loose terminal panicled racemes; calyx 2-lipped, enlarged
and declined in fruit.

5. Collinsonia. Lower lobe of corolla fimbriate, much the largest.
Stamens 2.

6. Perilla. Corolla short, the lower lobe little larger. Stamens 4,
included.

[*][*] Flowers in more or less crowded clusters or whorls, axillary or
spicate.

[+] Corolla not evidently 2-lipped, but almost equally 4-lobed, small.
Stamens erect, distant.

7. Mentha. Fertile stamens 4, nearly equal.

8. Lycopus. Fertile stamens 2, and often 2 sterile filaments without
anthers.

[+][+] Corolla more or less 2-lipped.

[++] Stamens distant and straight, often divergent, never convergent nor
curved.

[=] Stamens 2, with or without rudiments of the upper pair.

9. Cunila. Calyx very hairy in the throat, equally 5-toothed. Corolla
small.

[=][=] Stamens 4, calyx 10--13-nerved, and hairy in the throat (except
n. 10).

10. Hyssopus. Calyx tubular, 15-nerved, equally 5-toothed. Stamens
exserted.

11. Pycnanthemum. Calyx ovate or short-tubular, equally 5-toothed or
somewhat 2-lipped. Flowers in dense heads or clusters.

12. Origanum. Calyx ovate-bell-shaped, 5-toothed. Spikes with large
colored bracts.

13. Thymus. Calyx ovate, nodding in fruit, 2-lipped. Bracts minute;
leaves very small.

[++][++] Stamens (often 2 only in n. 16) ascending or arcuate, often
more or less converging (or ascending parallel under the erect upper lip
in n. 14 and 15).

14. Satureia. Calyx bell-shaped, 10-nerved, naked in the throat, equally
5-toothed.

15. Calamintha. Calyx tubular, often hairy in the throat, 13-nerved,
2-lipped. Tube of corolla straight.

16. Melissa. Calyx tubular-bell-shaped, flattish on the upper side.
Corolla curved upward.

17. Hedeoma. Calyx gibbous on the lower side, hairy in the throat.
Flowers loose.

Tribe III. MONARDEAE. Stamens 2, ascending and parallel; anthers
apparently or really 1-celled. Corolla strongly 2-lipped.

18. Salvia. Calyx 2-lipped. Anthers with a long connective astride the
filament, bearing a linear cell at the upper end, and none or an
imperfect cell on the lower.

19. Monarda. Calyx tubular and elongated, equally 5-toothed. Anthers of
2 cells confluent into one, the connective inconspicuous.

20. Blephilia. Calyx ovate-tubular, 2-lipped. Anthers as in the last.

Tribe IV. NEPETEAE. Stamens 4, the upper (inner) pair longer than the
lower,ascending or diverging. Corolla 2-lipped; the upper lip concave
or arched, the lower spreading. Calyx mostly 15-nerved.

[*] Anthers not approximate in pairs; their cells parallel or nearly so.

21. Lophanthus. Stamens divergent, exserted; upper pair declined, lower
ascending.

22. Cedronella. Stamens all ascending, not exceeding the lip of the
corolla.

[*][*] Anthers more or less approximate in pairs; their cells divaricate
or divergent; filaments ascending, not exserted.

23. Nepeta. Calyx more or less curved, equally 5-toothed.

24. Dracocephalum. Calyx straight, the upper tooth much the larger.

Tribe V. SCUTELLARINEAE. Stamens 4, ascending and parallel. Calyx
bilabiate, closed in fruit; the rounded lips entire. Corolla bilabiate,
the upper lip arched.

25. Scutellaria. Calyx with a helmet-like projection on the upper side.

Tribe VI. STACHYDEAE. Stamens 4, parallel and ascending under the galeate
or concave upper lip, the lower (outer) pair longer (except in n. 31,
32). Calyx 5--10-nerved, not 2-lipped (except in n. 26).

[*] Calyx reticulate-veiny, deeply bilabiate, closed in fruit.

26. Brunella. Calyx nerved and veiny; upper lip flat, 3-toothed, the
lower 2-cleft.

[*][*] Calyx thin, inflated in fruit, obscurely nerved, 3--5-lobed,
open.

27. Physostegia. Calyx 5-toothed or 5-lobed. Anther cells parallel.

28. Synandra. Calyx almost equally 4-lobed! Anther cells widely
divergent.

[*][*][*] Calyx of firmer texture, distinctly 5--10-nerved or striate,
5--10-toothed.

[+] Stamens included in the short corolla-tube, its upper lip merely
concave.

29. Marrubium. Calyx tubular, 5--10-nerved, and with 5 or 10 awl-shaped
teeth.

[+][+] Stamens ascending under the galeate upper lip of the corolla.

[++] Stamens not deflexed after anthesis; naturalized from the Old
World.

30. Ballota. Calyx somewhat funnel-form, expanding above into a
spreading 5-toothed border. Nutlets roundish at top. Upper lip of the
corolla erect.

31. Phlomis. Calyx tubular, the 5 teeth abruptly awned. Upper lip of the
corolla arched.

32. Leonurus. Calyx top-shaped, the rigid spiny-pointed teeth soon
spreading. Nutlets truncate and acutely 3-angled at top. Leaves cleft or
incised.

33. Lamium. Calyx-teeth not spiny-pointed. Nutlets sharply 3-angled,
truncate.

34. Galeopsis. Calyx tubular-bell-shaped; the 5 teeth spiny-pointed.
Anthers transversely 2-valved, the smaller valve ciliate.

[++][++] Stamens often deflexed or contorted after anthesis.

35. Stachys. Calyx tubular-bell-shaped, equally 5-toothed or the 2 upper
teeth united into one. Nutlets rounded at top.


1. TRICHOSTEMA, L. BLUE CURLS.

Calyx bell-shaped, oblique, deeply 5-cleft; the 3 upper teeth elongated
and partly united, the 2 lower very short. Corolla 5-lobed; the lobes
narrowly oblong, declined, nearly equal in length; the 3 lower more or
less united. Stamens 4, with very long capillary filaments, exserted
much beyond the corolla, curved; anther-cells divergent and at length
confluent.--Low annuals, somewhat clammy glandular and balsamic,
branched, with entire leaves, and mostly solitary 1-flowered pedicels
terminating the branches, becoming lateral by the production of axillary
branchlets, and the flower appearing to be reversed, namely, the short
teeth of the calyx upward, etc. Corolla blue, varying to pink, rarely
white, small; in summer and autumn. (Name composed of [Greek: thri/x],
_hair_ and [Greek: ste~ma], _stamen_, from the capillary filaments.)

1. T. dichotomum, L. (BASTARD PENNYROYAL.) Viscid with rather minute
pubescence; _leaves lance-oblong or rhombic-lanceolate_, rarely
lance-linear, short-petioled.--Sandy fields, E. Mass. to Ky., south to
Fla. and Tex.

2. T. lineare, Nutt. Puberulent, more slender and less forked; _leaves
linear_, nearly smooth.--Conn. to La., near the coast; in sandy ground.


2. ISANTHUS, Michx. FALSE PENNYROYAL.

Calyx bell-shaped, 5-lobed, equal, enlarged in fruit. Corolla little
longer than the calyx; the border bell-shaped, with 5 nearly equal and
obovate spreading lobes. Stamens 4, slightly didynamous,
incurved-ascending, scarcely exceeding the corolla.--A low, much
branched annual, clammy-pubescent, with nearly entire lance-oblong
3-nerved leaves, and small pale blue flowers on axillary 1--3-flowered
peduncles. (Name from [Greek: i)/sos], _equal_, and [Greek: a)/nthos],
_flower_, referring to the almost regular corolla.)

1. I. caeruleus, Michx. Corolla 2--3'' long, little exceeding the
calyx.--Dry or sterile ground, Maine to Ill., Minn., and southward.
July, August.


3. TEUCRIUM, Tourn. GERMANDER.

Calyx 5-toothed. Corolla with the 4 upper lobes nearly equal, oblong,
turned forward, so that there seems to be no upper lip; the lower lobe
much larger. Stamens 4, exserted from the deep cleft between the 2
upper lobes of the corolla; anther-cells confluent. (Named for _Teucer_,
king of Troy.)

1. T. Canadense, L. (AMERICAN GERMANDER. WOOD SAGE.) Perennial, _downy_,
erect (1--3 deg. high); leaves ovate-lanceolate, serrate, rounded at base,
short-petioled, hoary underneath, the floral scarcely longer than the
oblique unequally-toothed calyx; whorls about 6-flowered, crowded in a
long and simple wand-like spike; _calyx canescent, the 3 upper lobes
very obtuse_ or the middle one acutish; corolla purple, rose, or
sometimes cream-color (6'' long).--Low grounds; not rare. July--Sept.

2. T. occidentale, Gray. _Loosely pubescent; calyx villous with viscid
hairs, the upper lobes acute or middle one acuminate_; corolla 4--5''
long; other wise like the last.--A western form, from Neb.
southwestward, and extending eastward (Ont., and near Philadelphia).


4. AJUGA, L.

Calyx 5-toothed. Corolla with very short and as if truncate upper lip;
the large and spreading lower lip with the middle lobe emarginate or
2-cleft. Stamens as in Teucrium, but anther-cells less confluent. (From
[Greek: a-] privative, and [Greek: zygo/n] (Latin _jugum_), _yoke_, from
the seeming absence of a yoke-fellow to the lower lip of the corolla.)

A. REPTANS, L. Perennial, about 1 deg. high, with copious creeping stolons;
leaves obovate or spatulate, sometimes sinuate, the cauline
sessile, the floral approximate, subtending several sessile blue
flowers.--Naturalized near Saco, Maine, Montreal, etc. (Eu., N. Asia.)


5. COLLINSONIA, L. HORSE-BALM.

Calyx ovate, enlarged and declined in fruit, 2-lipped; upper lip
truncate and flattened, 3-toothed, the lower 2-cleft. Corolla elongated,
expanded at the throat, somewhat 2-lipped, the tube with a bearded ring
within; the 4 upper lobes nearly equal, but the lower much larger and
longer, pendent, toothed or lacerate-fringed. Stamens 2 (sometimes 4,
the upper pair shorter), much exserted, diverging; anther-cells
divergent.--Strong-scented perennials, with large ovate leaves, and
yellowish flowers on slender pedicels, in loose and panicled terminal
racemes. (Named in honor of _Peter Collinson_, a well-known patron of
science and correspondent of Linnaeus, who introduced it into England.)

1. C. Canadensis, L. (RICH-WEED. STONE-ROOT.) Nearly smooth (1--3 deg.
high); leaves serrate, pointed, petioled (3--6' long); panicle loose;
corolla 8--9'' long, lemon-scented; stamens 2.--Rich moist woods, N.
Brunswick to Wisc., south to Fla. and Mo. July--Sept.


6. PERILLA, L.

Calyx as in Collinsonia. Corolla-tube included, the limb 5-cleft; lower
lobe a little larger. Stamens 4, included, erect, distant.--Coarse
aromatic annual, with small flowers in panicled and axillary racemes. (A
Greek and Latin proper name.)

P. OCYMOIDES, L. Erect, branching, 2--3 deg. high; leaves ovate, coarsely
toothed; flowers white.--About dwellings and roadsides, S. Ill.
(_Schneck._) (Adv. from E. Asia.)


7. MENTHA, Tourn. MINT.

Calyx bell-shaped or tubular, 5-toothed, equal or nearly so. Corolla
with a short included tube; the bell-shaped border somewhat equally
4-cleft; the upper lobe broadest, entire or notched. Stamens 4, equal,
erect, distant.--Odorous perennial herbs; the small flowers mostly in
close clusters, forming axillary capitate whorls, sometimes approximated
in interrupted spikes, produced in summer, of two sorts as to the
fertility of the stamens in most species. Corolla pale purple or
whitish. Species mostly adventive or naturalized from Europe, with many
hybrids. ([Greek: Mi/nthe] of Theophrastus, from a Nymph of that name,
fabled to have been changed into Mint by Proserpine.)

[*] _Spikes narrow and leafless, densely crowded; leaves sessile or
nearly so._

M. SYLVESTRIS, L. (HORSE MINT of Eu.) _Finely pubescent or canescent;
leaves ovate-oblong to oblong-lanceolate_, acute, sharply serrate,
often glabrous above; spikes rather slender, _canescently
pubescent_.--Roadsides, etc., Penn.--Var. ALOPECUROIDES, Baker. Leaves
larger, more nearly sessile, broadly oval and obtuse, often subcordate,
coarsely serrate, more veiny, but not rugose; approaching the
next.--Penn. and N. J.

M. ROTUNDIFOLIA, L. _Soft-hairy_ or downy; _leaves_ broadly elliptical
to _round-ovate_ and somewhat heart-shaped, _rugose_, crenate-toothed;
spikes slender, _not canescent_.--Atlantic States, at a few stations,
Maine to Tex.

M. VIRIDIS, L. (SPEARMINT.) _Nearly smooth; leaves oblong- or
ovate-lanceolate_, unequally serrate; bracts linear-lanceolate and
subulate, conspicuous.--Wet places; in all cultivated districts.

[*][*] _Flowers pedicellate, less crowded, in interrupted leafless
spikes, or some in the upper axils; leaves petioled._

M. PIPERITA, L. (PEPPERMINT.) _Glabrous_ (somewhat hairy in var.
SUBHIRSUTA), very pungent-tasted; leaves ovate-oblong to
oblong-lanceolate, acute, sharply serrate; _spikes narrow,
loose_.--Along brooks, escaped everywhere.

M. AQUATICA, L. (WATER MINT.) _Pubescent_ or smoothish; leaves ovate or
round-ovate; flowers in a terminal _globular or interrupted and oblong
head_, often with one or more clusters in the axils of the upper leaves;
calyx and usually the pedicels hairy. The common form has the stems
_hairy downward_.--Wet places, N. Eng. to Del.; rare.--Var. CRISPA,
Benth., is a glabrous or glabrate form, with lacerate-dentate and
crisped leaves.--Ditches, N. J., etc.

[*][*][*] _Flowers in globular whorls or clusters, all in the axils of
the leaves, the uppermost axils not flower-bearing; leaves more, or less
petioled, toothed._

M. SATIVA, L. (WHORLED MINT.) _Stem hairy downward_; leaves ovate,
sharply serrate; calyx oblong-cylindrical with _very slender
teeth_.--Waste damp places, Mass. to Penn.; not common. Passes into the
next.

M. ARVENSIS, L. (CORN MINT.) Lower and smaller-leaved than the last;
leaves obtusely serrate; _calyx bell-shaped, the teeth short_ and
broader.--Moist fields, N. Eng., etc.; rare.

1. M. Canadensis, L. (WILD MINT.) _Leaves_ varying from ovate-oblong to
lanceolate, _tapering to both ends_; calyx oblong-bell-shaped, the teeth
rather short; hairs on the stem not conspicuously reflexed. The commoner
form is more or less hairy, and has nearly the odor of Pennyroyal.--Wet
places, through the northern U. States across the continent, and
northward.

Var. glabrata, Benth. Leaves and stems almost glabrous, the former
sometimes very short-petioled; scent sweeter, as of Monarda.--Similar
range.


8. LYCOPUS, Tourn. WATER HOREHOUND.

Calyx bell-shaped, 4--5-toothed, naked in the throat. Corolla
bell-shaped, scarcely longer than the calyx, nearly equally 4-lobed.
Stamens 2, distant; the upper pair either sterile rudiments or wanting.
Nutlets with thickened margins.--Perennial low herbs, glabrous or
puberulent, resembling Mints, with sharply toothed or pinnatifid leaves,
the floral ones similar and much longer than the dense axillary whorls
of small mostly white flowers; in summer. (Name compounded of [Greek:
ly/kos], _a wolf_, and [Greek: pou~s], _foot_, from some fancied
likeness in the leaves.)

[*] _Stoloniferous, the long filiform runners often tuberiferous; leaves
only serrate._

[+] _Calyx-teeth usually 4, barely acutish, shorter than the mature
nutlets._

1. L. Virginicus, L. (BUGLE-WEED.) Stem obtusely 4-angled (6'--2 deg. high);
leaves oblong or ovate-lanceolate, toothed, entire toward the base,
acuminate at both ends, short-petioled; calyx-teeth ovate.--Shady moist
places, Lab. to Fla., Mo., and northwestward across the continent.

[+][+] _Calyx-teeth usually 5, very acute, longer than the nutlets._

[++] _Bracts minute; corolla twice as long as the calyx._

2. L. sessilifolius, Gray. Stem rather acutely 4-angled; _leaves closely
sessile_, ovate or lanceolate-oblong (1--2' long), sparsely sharply
serrate; _calyx-teeth subulate, rigid_. (L. Europaeus, var.
sessilifolius, _Gray_, Man.)--Pine barrens of N. J. to Cape Cod, Mass.
(_Deane_).

3. L. rubellus, Moench. Stem rather obtusely 4-angled; leaves
_petioled_, ovate-oblong or oblong-lanceolate, sharply serrate in the
middle, _attenuate-acuminate at both ends (3' long)_; calyx-teeth
triangular-subulate, _not rigid-pointed_. (L. Europaeus, var.
integrifolius, _Gray_.)--Penn. to Minn., and southward.

[++][++] _Outer bracts conspicuous; corolla hardly exceeding the calyx._

4. L. lucidus, Turcz., var. Americanus, Gray. Stem strict, stout, 2--3 deg.
high; leaves lanceolate and oblong-lanceolate (2--4' long), acute or
acuminate, very sharply and coarsely serrate, sessile or nearly so;
calyx-teeth attenuate-subulate.--Sask. and Minn. to Kan., thence west to
Calif.

[*][*] _Not stoloniferous; leaves incised or pinnatifid._

5. L. sinuatus, Ell. Stem erect, 1--3 deg. high, acutely 4-angled; leaves
oblong or lanceolate (11/2--2' long), acuminate, irregularly incised or
laciniate-pinnatifid, or some of the upper merely sinuate, tapering to a
slender petiole; calyx-teeth short-cuspidate; sterile filaments slender,
conspicuous, with globular or spatulate tips. (L. Europaeus, var.
sinuatus, _Gray_.)--Common.


9. CUNILA, L. DITTANY.

Calyx ovate-tubular, equally 5-toothed, very hairy in the throat.
Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip erect, flattish, mostly notched; the lower
spreading, 3-cleft. Stamens 2, erect, exserted, distant; sterile
filaments short, minute.--Perennials, with small white or purplish
flowers, in corymbed cymes or clusters. (An ancient Latin name, of
unknown origin.)

1. C. Mariana, L. (COMMON DITTANY.) Stems tufted, corymbosely much
branched (1 deg. high); leaves smooth, ovate, serrate, rounded or
heart-shaped at base, nearly sessile, dotted (1' long); cymes peduncled;
calyx striate.--Dry hills, southern N. Y. to S. Ind., south to Ga. and
Ark.


10. HYSSOPUS, Tourn. HYSSOP.

Calyx tubular, 15-nerved, equally 5-toothed, naked in the throat.
Corolla short, 2-lipped; upper lip erect, flat, obscurely notched, the
lower 3-cleft, with the middle lobe larger and 2-cleft. Stamens 4,
exserted, diverging.--Perennial herb, with wand-like simple branches,
lanceolate or linear entire leaves, and blue-purple flowers in small
clusters, crowded in a spike. (The ancient name.)

H. OFFICINALIS, L.--Roadsides, etc., sparingly escaped from gardens.
(Adv. from Eu.)


11. PYCNANTHEMUM, Michx. MOUNTAIN MINT. BASIL.

Calyx ovate-oblong or tubular, about 13-nerved, equally 5-toothed, or
the three upper teeth more or less united, naked in the throat. Corolla
short, more or less 2-lipped; the upper lip straight, nearly flat,
entire or slightly notched; the lower 3-cleft, its lobes all ovate and
obtuse. Stamens 4, distant, the lower pair rather longer; anther-cells
parallel.--Perennial upright herbs, with a pungent mint-like flavor,
corymbosely branched above, the floral leaves often whitened; the
many-flowered whorls dense, crowded with bracts, and usually forming
terminal heads or close cymes. Corolla whitish or purplish, the lips
mostly dotted with purple. Fl. summer and early autumn.--Varies, like
the Mints, with the stamens exserted or included in different flowers.
(Name composed of [Greek: pykno/s], _dense_, and [Greek: a)/nthemon], _a
blossom_, from the dense inflorescence.)

[*] _Bracts and equal calyx-teeth awn-tipped, rigid, naked, as long as
the corolla; flowers in rather dense mostly terminal heads; leaves
rigid, slightly petioled._

1. P. aristatum, Michx. Minutely hoary-puberulent (1--2 deg. high); leaves
ovate-oblong and oblong-lanceolate, acute, sparingly denticulate-serrate
(1--2' long), roundish at the base.--Pine barrens, N. J. to Fla. and La.

Var. hyssopifolium, Gray. Leaves narrowly oblong or broadly linear,
nearly entire and obtuse.--Va. to Fla.

[*][*] _Bracts and equal and similar calyx-teeth not awned._

[+] _Leaves linear or lanceolate, nearly sessile, entire, very numerous;
capitate glomerules small and numerous, densely cymose, imbricated with
many short appressed rigid bracts._

2. P. lanceolatum, Pursh. _Smoothish or minutely pubescent_ (2 deg. high);
_leaves lanceolate or lance-linear_, obtuse at base; _heads downy_;
bracts ovate or lanceolate; _calyx-teeth short and triangular_.--Dry
thickets, Mass. to Dak., south to Ga. and Ark.

3. P. linifolium, Pursh. _Smoother and leaves narrower_ and heads less
downy than in the last; the narrower _bracts and lance-awl-shaped
calyx-teeth pungently pointed_.--Dry ground, Mass. to Minn., south to
Fla. and Tex.

[+][+] _Leaves lanceolate to ovate, sessile or nearly so, denticulate or
entire; heads larger and fewer, with fewer and looser bracts._

4. P. muticum, Pers. _Minutely hoary_ throughout, or becoming almost
smooth, corymbosely much branched (1--21/2 deg. high); _leaves ovate or
broadly ovate-lanceolate_, varying to lanceolate, _rather rigid, acute,
rounded or slightly heart-shaped at base_, mostly sessile and minutely
sharp-toothed, prominently veined, green when old; _the floral ones_,
short bracts, and triangular or ovate calyx-teeth, _hoary with a fine
close down_; flower-clusters very dense.--Maine to S. Ill., south to
Fla. and Ark.

Var. pilosum, Gray. Hoary with loose pubescence; leaves thinner,
oblong-lanceolate, mostly acute or acutish at base; bracts and
especially the narrower (often somewhat unequal) calyx-teeth often
villous-pubescent. (P. pilosum, _Nutt._)--Ohio to Iowa, Kan., and Ark.

5. P. leptodon, Gray. _Soft-pubescent_, or glabrate below, loosely
branched; _leaves membranaceous, green_ (11/2--2' long), _lanceolate or
oblong-lanceolate_, subsessile; clusters larger and looser,
canescent-hirsute; _long-acuminate bracts and calyx-teeth
slender-subulate, villous-hirsute_.--S. Mo. to northwestern N. C.

[+][+][+] _Leaves linear- or oblong-lanceolate, short-petioled, not at
all hoary; flowers in mostly terminal dense capitate clusters; calyx
hoary-pubescent._

6. P. Torreyi, Benth. _Puberulent_; stem strict and nearly simple (2--3 deg.
high); _leaves thin, linear-lanceolate_, tapering to both ends (mostly
2' long and 2--3'' wide), _nearly entire_; heads small; awl-shaped
calyx-teeth and mostly appressed bracts canescent.--Dry soil, southern
N. Y. to Penn. and Del.

7. P. clinopodioides, Gray. _Pubescent; leaves broadly or
oblong-lanceolate, sharply denticulate_ (sometimes entire); heads fewer
and larger; bracts loose.--Dry soil, southern N. Y. to E. Penn.

[*][*][*] _Calyx bilabiate (3 upper teeth united), the teeth and the
tips of the loose bracts not rigid; flowers in dense flattened glomerate
cymes; leaves thin, mostly serrate, petioled, the uppermost more or less
canescent._

8. P. Tullia, Benth. Leaves greener and _loosely soft-downy_, only the
floral ones whitened, otherwise resembling those of the next; cymes
dense; _bracts much surpassing the flowers_, their long awn-like points
and the awn-pointed calyx-teeth bearded with long loose hairs.--S. Va.
and N. C. to Tenn. and Ga.

9. P. incanum, Michx. _Leaves_ ovate-oblong, acute, remotely toothed,
_downy above and mostly hoary with whitish wool underneath, the
uppermost whitened both sides; cymes open_; bracts linear-awl-shaped
and, with the calyx-teeth, more or less awn-pointed.--N. Eng. to Ont.
and Ind., south to Fla. and Tex.

[*][*][*][*] _Calyx equally 5-toothed; heads few, large and globose
(terminal and in the upper axils of the thin petioled leaves); bracts
loose, ciliate-bearded._

10. P. montanum, Michx. Stem (1--3 deg. high) and ovate- or
oblong-lanceolate serrate leaves glabrous; bracts very acute or
awl-pointed, the outermost ovate and leaf-like, the inner linear; teeth
of the tubular calyx short and acute.--Alleghanies, from S. Va. and
Tenn. to Ga. and Ala.


12. ORIGANUM, Tourn. WILD MARJORAM.

Calyx ovate-bell-shaped, hairy in the throat, striate, 5-toothed. Tube
of the corolla about the length of the calyx, 2-lipped; the upper lip
rather erect and slightly notched, the lower longer, of 3 nearly equal
spreading lobes. Stamens 4, exserted, diverging.--Perennials, with
nearly entire leaves, and purplish flowers crowded in cylindrical or
oblong spikes, imbricated with colored bracts. (An ancient Greek name,
composed of [Greek: o)/ros], _a mountain_, and [Greek: ga/nos],
_delight_.)

O. VULGARE, L. Upright, hairy, corymbose at the summit; leaves petioled,
round-ovate; bracts ovate, obtuse, purplish.--Roadsides, Atlantic
States. June--Oct. (Nat. from Eu.)


13. THYMUS, Tourn. THYME.

Calyx ovate, 2-lipped, 13-nerved, hairy in the throat; the upper lip
3-toothed, spreading; the lower 2-cleft, with the awl-shaped divisions
ciliate. Corolla short, slightly 2-lipped; the upper lip straight and
flattish, notched at the apex, the lower 3-cleft. Stamens 4, straight
and distant, usually exserted.--Low perennials, with small and entire
strongly-veined leaves, and purplish or whitish flowers. (The ancient
Greek name of the Thyme, probably from [Greek: thy/o], _to burn
perfume_, because it was used for incense.)

T. SERPYLLUM, L. (CREEPING THYME.) Prostrate; leaves green, flat, ovate,
entire, short-petioled; flowers crowded at the ends of the
branches.--Old fields, E. Mass. to Penn. (Adv. from Eu.)


14. SATUREIA, Tourn. SAVORY.

Calyx bell shaped, 10-nerved, equally 5-toothed, naked in the throat.
Corolla 2-lipped; the upper lip erect, flat, nearly entire, the lower
3-cleft. Stamens 4, somewhat ascending.--Aromatic plants, with narrow
entire leaves, often clustered, and somewhat spiked purplish flowers.
(The ancient Latin name.)

S. HORTENSIS, L. (SUMMER SAVORY.) Pubescent annual; clusters
few-flowered; bracts small or none.--Escaping from gardens and sparingly
wild in Ohio to Ill., etc. (Adv. from Eu.)


15. CALAMINTHA, Tourn. CALAMINT.

Calyx tubular, 13-nerved, mostly hairy in the throat, 2-lipped; the
upper lip 3-cleft, the lower 2-cleft. Corolla with a straight tube and
an inflated throat, distinctly 2-lipped; the upper lip erect, flattish,
entire or notched; the lower spreading, 3-parted, the middle lobe
usually largest. Stamens 4, mostly ascending; the anthers usually
approximate in pairs.--Perennials, with mostly purplish or whitish
flowers, produced all summer; inflorescence various. (Name composed of
[Greek: kalo/s], _beautiful_, and [Greek: mi/ntha], _Mint_.)

Sec. 1. _Flowers loose, without long-subulate bracts; calyx villous in the
throat._

[*] _Pubescent; peduncles short but mostly distinct; bracts minute._

C. NEPETA, Link. (BASIL-THYME.) Soft-hairy; stem ascending (1--3 deg. high);
leaves petioled, broadly ovate, obtuse, crenate; corolla (3'' long)
twice the length of the calyx.--Dry waste grounds, Md. to Ark. (Nat.
from Eu.)

[*][*] _Glabrous or nearly so; common peduncles hardly any; pedicels
1--5, slender, the conspicuous bracts subulate-acuminate; on wet
limestone river-banks._

1. C. glabella, Benth. Smooth; _stems diffuse or spreading (1--2 deg.
long)_; leaves slightly petioled, _oblong or oblong-linear_, narrowed at
base (8''--2' long), _sparingly toothed_ or nearly entire; clusters
3--5-flowered; corolla (purplish, 5--6'' long) fully twice the length of
the calyx.--S. Ind., Ky., and Tenn.

2. C. Nuttallii, Gray. Smaller; the flowering stems more upright (5--9'
high), _with narrower mostly entire leaves and fewer-flowered clusters,
while sterile runners from the base bear ovate thickish leaves only
2--5'' long_. (C. glabella, var. Nuttallii, _Gray_.)--Niagara Falls to
Minn., south to Mo. and Tex.

Sec. 2. _Flowers in sessile dense many-flowered clusters, and involucrate
with conspicuous setaceous-subulate rigid bracts; calyx nearly naked in
the throat._

3. C. Clinopodium, Benth. (BASIL.) Hairy, erect (1--2 deg. high); leaves
ovate, petioled, nearly entire; flowers (pale purple) in globular
clusters; hairy bracts as long as the calyx.--Borders of thickets and
fields, naturalized extensively, but indigenous from the Great Lakes to
the Rocky Mts. (Eu., Asia)


16. MELISSA, L. BALM.

Calyx with the upper lip flattened and 3-toothed, the lower 2-cleft.
Corolla with a recurved-ascending tube. Stamens 4, curved and conniving
under the upper lip. Otherwise nearly as Calamintha.--Clusters
few-flowered, loose, one-sided, with few and mostly ovate bracts
resembling the leaves. (Name from [Greek: me/lissa], _a bee_; the
flowers yielding abundance of honey.)

M. OFFICINALIS, L. (COMMON BALM.) Upright, branching, perennial,
pubescent; leaves broadly ovate, crenate-toothed, lemon-scented; corolla
nearly white.--Sparingly escaped from gardens. (Nat. from Eu.)


17. HEDEOMA, Pers. MOCK PENNYROYAL.

Calyx ovoid or tubular, gibbous on the lower side near the base,
13-nerved, bearded in the throat, 2-lipped; upper lip 3-toothed, the
lower 2-cleft. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip erect, flat, notched at the
apex, the lower spreading, 3-cleft. Fertile stamens 2; the upper pair
reduced to sterile filaments or wanting.--Low, odorous annuals, with
small leaves, and loose axillary clusters of flowers (in summer), often
forming terminal leafy racemes. (Altered from [Greek: e(dyo/smon], an
ancient name of Mint, from its sweet scent.)

[*] _Sterile filaments manifest; leaves oblong-ovate, petioled, somewhat
serrate._

1. H. pulegioides, Pers. (AMERICAN PENNYROYAL.) Erect, branching, hairy;
whorls few-flowered; upper calyx-teeth triangular, the lower
setaceous-subulate; corolla (bluish, pubescent) scarcely exserted
(2--3'' long); taste and odor nearly of the true _Pennyroyal_ (Mentha
Pulegium) of Europe.--Common from N. Eng. to Dak., and southward.

[*][*] _Sterile filaments minute or obsolete; leaves narrow, entire,
sessile or nearly so._

2. H. hispida, Pursh. Mostly low; _leaves linear, crowded, almost
glabrous_, somewhat hispid-ciliate; _bracts spreading or reflexed_;
upper flowers rather crowded; _calyx-teeth all subulate_, equalling the
bluish corolla.--Plains, Minn. and Dak. to W. Ill. and La.

3. H. Drummondi, Benth. _Pubescent or puberulent_, a span or two high;
_leaves oblong to linear; bracts mostly erect_; calyx hirsute or hispid,
its teeth at length connivent, _the lower nearly twice as long as the
upper_.--Central Neb. and Kan. to Tex., and westward.


18. SALVIA, L. SAGE.

Calyx 2-lipped; upper lip 3-toothed or entire, the lower 2-cleft.
Corolla deeply 2-lipped, ringent; upper lip straight or scythe-shaped,
entire or barely notched, the lower spreading or pendent, 3-lobed, its
middle lobe larger. Stamens 2, on short filaments, jointed with the
elongated transverse connective, one end of which, ascending under the
upper lip, bears a linear 1-celled (half-) anther, the other, usually
descending, bears an imperfect or deformed (half-) anther or none at
all.--Flowers mostly large and showy, in spiked, racemed, or panicled
whorls, produced in summer. (Name from _salvo_, to save, in allusion to
the reputed healing qualities of Sage.)

[*] _Both anther-cells polliniferous; leaves mostly lyrately lobed or
pinnatifid._

1. S. lyrata, L. (LYRE-LEAVED SAGE.) Low perennial (10--20' high),
somewhat hairy; stem nearly simple and naked; root-leaves lyre-shaped or
sinuate-pinnatifid, sometimes almost entire; those of the stem mostly a
single pair, smaller and narrower; the floral oblong-linear, not longer
than the calyx; whorls loose and distant, forming an interrupted raceme;
upper lip of the blue-purple pubescent corolla (nearly 1' long) short,
straight, not vaulted.--Woodlands and meadows, N. J. to Ill., south to
Fla. and Tex.

[*][*] _Lower anther-cell wanting; the sterile ends of the connectives
mostly united._

[+] _Calyx obscurely bilabiate; corolla 8--12'' long, with prominently
exserted tube._

2. S. azurea, Lam., var. grandiflora, Benth. Cinereous-puberulent, 1--5 deg.
high; lower leaves lanceolate or oblong, obtuse, denticulate or serrate,
tapering to a short petiole; upper narrower, often linear, entire;
inflorescence spike-like, tomentulose-sericeous; calyx-teeth short, the
broad upper lip entire; corolla deep blue (varying to white).--E. Neb.
to Miss., Tex., and Col.

[+][+] _Calyx deeply bilabiate; corolla 4--6'' long, the tube hardly at
all exserted._

3. S. lanceolata, Willd. _Puberulent_ or nearly glabrous, 5--12' high;
_leaves lanceolate or linear-oblong_, irregularly serrate or nearly
entire, _tapering to a slender petiole_; inflorescence virgate
spiciform, interrupted; _upper lip of calyx entire_, lower 2-cleft;
corolla blue, 4'' long, _little exserted; style glabrous or nearly
so_.--Plains, Iowa and Neb. to Tex. and Ariz.

4. S. urticifolia, L. _Villous-pubescent and somewhat viscid_, or
glabrate, 1--2 deg. high; _leaves_ coarsely serrate, _ovate, with truncate
or cuneate base decurrent into a winged petiole_; inflorescence
racemose-spicate, of numerous distant clusters; calyx-lips divergent,
_the upper 3-toothed_, lower 2-cleft; corolla blue and white,
5--6'' long, _twice the length of the calyx; style strongly
bearded_.--Woodlands, Md. to Ky., south to Ga. and La.

S. SCLAREA, L. (CLARY.) Villous-pubescent, viscid, stout, 2--3 deg. high;
leaves ample, long-petioled, ovate and cordate, crenate, rugose; the
floral forming bracts of the spike, tinged with white and rose-color;
corolla white and bluish, rather large, the long upper lip falcate and
compressed.--Escaped from gardens, Penn. (Nat. from Eu.)

S. VERBENACEA, L. Pubescent or villous, 1--2 deg. high; leaves ovate or
oblong, often cordate at base, mostly sinuate-incised or moderately
pinnatifid, the lobes crenate-toothed, rugose; the few cauline mostly
sessile, the floral inconspicuous; raceme interrupted; calyx reflexed
after flowering; corolla bluish, small, the upper lip nearly
straight.--Sparingly seen in the Middle States. (Nat. from Eu.)


19. MONARDA, L. HORSE-MINT.

Calyx tubular, elongated, 15-nerved, nearly equally 5-toothed, usually
hairy in the throat. Corolla elongated, with a slightly expanded throat,
and a strongly 2-lipped limb; lips linear or oblong, somewhat equal, the
upper erect, entire or slightly notched, the lower spreading, 3-lobed at
the apex, its lateral lobes ovate and obtuse, the middle one narrower
and slightly notched. Stamens 2, elongated, ascending, inserted in the
throat of the corolla; anthers linear (the divaricate cells confluent at
the junction).--Odorous erect herbs, with entire or toothed leaves, and
pretty large flowers in a few whorled heads, closely surrounded with
bracts. (Dedicated to _Nicolas Monardes_, author of many tracts upon
medicinal and other useful plants, especially those of the New World, in
the latter half of the 16th century.)

[*] _Stamens and style exserted beyond the linear straight acute upper
lip of the corolla; heads solitary and terminal or sometimes 2 or 3;
leaves acutely more or less serrate; perennials._

[+] _Leaves petioled; calyx-teeth scarcely longer than the width of the
tube._

1. M. didyma, L. (OSWEGO TEA. BEE-BALM.) Somewhat hairy (2 deg. high),
acutely 4-angled; leaves ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, _the floral ones
and the large outer bracts tinged with red; calyx smooth, incurved,
nearly naked in the throat; corolla smooth (2' long), bright red_,
showy.--Moist woods by streams, N. Eng. to Mich., south to Ga. in the
mountains. July--Aug.

2. M. clinopodia, L. Nearly glabrous to villous-pubescent; leaves
ovate-lanceolate and ovate; _bracts whitish; calyx moderately hirsute in
the throat; corolla slightly pubescent (1' long), dull white or
flesh-colored_.--Shady places, ravines, etc., Ont. to Ill., and along
the mountains to Ga.

3. M. fistulosa, L. (WILD BERGAMOT.) Smoothish or downy, 2--5 deg. high;
_leaves_ ovate-lanceolate, the uppermost and outer bracts somewhat
colored (whitish or purplish); _calyx_ slightly curved, _very hairy in
the throat; corolla_ (1' long or more) _purple or purplish dotted_,
smooth or hairy.--Dry soil, Vt. and E. Mass, to Fla., and far westward.
Very variable; the following are the more marked forms.--Var. RUBRA,
Gray. Corolla bright crimson or rose-red; habit of n. 1, but upper lip
of corolla villous-bearded on the back at tip; throat of calyx with the
outer bristly hairs widely spreading. In moist ground, Alleghany
Mts.--Var. MEDIA, Gray. Corolla deep purple. Alleghany Mts.--Var.
MOLLIS, Benth. Corolla flesh-color to lilac, glandular, its upper lip
hairy outside or more bearded at the tip; leaves paler, soft-pubescent
beneath; throat of calyx mostly filled with dense beard, with sometimes
an outer row of bristles. Extends to Minn. and westward.

[+][+] _Leaves nearly sessile; calyx-teeth elongated, lax; head
solitary._

4. M. Bradburiana, Beck. Leaves clothed with long soft hairs, especially
underneath; the floral and the outer bracts somewhat heart-shaped,
purplish; calyx smoothish, contracted above, very hairy in the throat,
with awl-shaped awned teeth; corolla smoothish, bearded at the tip of
the upper lip, scarcely twice the length of the calyx, pale-purplish,
the lower lip dotted with purple.--Thickets, Ind. to Tenn. and Kan.

[*][*] _Stamens not exceeding the falcate upper lip of the short
corolla; heads axillary or interrupted spicate; leaves lanceolate or
oblong, sparsely serrate, tapering into the petiole._

5. M. punctata, L. (HORSE-MINT.) _Perennial_, minutely downy (2--3 deg.
high); leaves petioled, lanceolate, narrowed at base; _bracts_
lanceolate, blunt, obtuse at base, sessile, yellowish and purple; teeth
of the downy calyx _short and awnless_, rigid, soon spreading; corolla
nearly smooth, _yellowish_, the upper lip _spotted with purple_, notched
at the apex, the tube scarcely exceeding the calyx.--Sandy ground, N. Y.
to Minn., south to Fla. and Tex.

6. M. citriodora, Cerv. _Annual_, 1--3 deg. high; bracts narrowly oblong,
_their slender awned tips spreading or recurving; calyx-teeth slender_,
at length usually spreading; corolla _white or pinkish, not
spotted_.--Neb. to Tex.


20. BLEPHILIA, Raf.

Calyx ovoid-tubular, 13-nerved, 2-lipped, naked in the throat; upper lip
with 3 awned teeth, the lower with 2 nearly awnless teeth. Corolla
inflated in the throat, strongly and nearly equally 2-lipped; upper lip
erect, entire, the lower spreading, 3-cleft, its lateral lobes ovate and
rounded, larger than the oblong and notched middle one. Stamens 2,
ascending, exserted (the upper pair minute or none); anthers, etc., as
in Monarda.--Perennial herbs, with nearly the foliage, etc., of Monarda;
the small pale bluish purple flowers crowded in axillary and terminal
globose whorls; in summer. (Name from [Greek: blephari/s], _the
eyelash_, in reference to the hairy-fringed bracts and calyx-teeth.)

1. B. ciliata, Raf. Somewhat downy (1--2 deg. high); _leaves almost sessile,
oblong-ovate, narrowed at base_, whitish-downy underneath; outer _bracts
ovate_, acute, colored, ciliate, as long as the calyx; corolla
hairy.--Dry open places, Mass. to Minn., south to Ga. and Kan.

2. B. hirsuta, Benth. Taller, hairy throughout; _leaves long-petioled,
ovate, pointed, rounded or heart-shaped at base_; the lower floral ones
similar, the uppermost and the _bracts linear-awl-shaped_, shorter than
the long-haired calyx; corolla smoothish, pale, with darker purple
spots.--Moist shady places, Vt. to Minn., south to Ga. and E. Tex.


21. LOPHANTHUS, Benth. GIANT HYSSOP.

Calyx tubular-bell-shaped, 15-nerved, oblique, 5-toothed, the upper
teeth rather longer than the others. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip nearly
erect, 2-lobed, the lower somewhat spreading, 3-cleft, with the middle
lobe crenate. Stamens 4, exserted; the upper pair declined, the lower
and shorter pair ascending, so that the pairs cross; anther-cells nearly
parallel.--Perennial tall herbs, with petioled serrate leaves, and small
flowers crowded in interrupted terminal spikes; in summer. (Name from
[Greek: lo/phos], _a crest_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _a flower_.)

1. L. nepetoides, Benth. Stem stout, 21/2--6 deg. high, sharply 4-angled,
_smooth_, or nearly so; leaves ovate, somewhat pointed, coarsely
crenate-toothed (2--4' long); spikes 2--6' long, crowded with the ovate
pointed bracts; _calyx-teeth ovate, rather obtuse, little shorter than
the pale greenish-yellow corolla_.--Borders of woods, Vt. to Minn.,
south to N. C. and Tex.

2. L. scrophulariaefolius, Benth. Stem (obtusely 4-angled) and lower
surface of the ovate or somewhat heart-shaped acute leaves more or less
_pubescent; calyx-teeth lanceolate, acute, shorter than the purplish
corolla_ (spikes 4--15' long); otherwise like the last.--Same range.

3. L. anisatus, Benth. Smooth, but the ovate acute _leaves
glaucous-white underneath_ with minute down; _calyx-teeth lanceolate,
acute_.--Plains, Wisc. to Minn., Neb., and westward.--Foliage with the
scent of anise.


22. CEDRONELLA, Moench.

Calyx rather obliquely 5-toothed, many-nerved. Corolla ample, expanded
at the throat, 2-lipped; the upper lip flattish or concave, 2-lobed, the
lower 3-cleft, spreading, the middle lobe largest. Stamens 4, ascending,
the lower pair shorter; anther-cells parallel.--Sweet-scented
perennials, with pale purplish flowers. (Name a diminutive of _cedrus_,
the cedar-tree, from the aromatic leaves of C. triphylla, the
_Balm-of-Gilead_ of English gardens.)

1. C. cordata, Benth. Low, with slender runners, hairy; leaves broadly
heart-shaped, crenate, petioled, the floral shorter than the calyx;
whorls few-flowered, at the summit of short ascending stems; corolla
hairy inside (11/2' long); stamens shorter than the upper lip.--Moist
shady banks, W. Penn. to Ky., south to the mountains of N. C. and Tenn.


23. NEPETA, L. CAT-MINT.

Calyx tubular, often incurved, obliquely 5-toothed. Corolla dilated in
the throat, 2-lipped; the upper lip erect, rather concave, notched or
2-cleft; the lower spreading, 3-cleft, the middle lobe largest,
either 2-lobed or entire. Stamens 4, ascending under the upper lip,
the lower pair shorter; anthers approximate in pairs, the cells
divergent.--Perennial herbs. (The Latin name, thought to be derived from
_Nepete_, an Etrurian city.)

Sec. 1. _Cymose clusters rather dense and many-flowered, forming
interrupted spikes or racemes; upper floral leaves small and
bract-like._

N. CATARIA, L. (CATNIP.) Downy, erect, branched; leaves heart-shaped,
oblong, deeply crenate, whitish-downy underneath; corolla whitish,
dotted with purple.--Near dwellings; a very common weed. July--Sept.
(Nat. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. GLECHOMA. _Leaves all alike; the axillary clusters loosely
few-flowered._

N. GLECHOMA, Benth. (GROUND IVY. GILL-OVER-THE-GROUND.) Creeping and
trailing; leaves petioled, round kidney-shaped, crenate, green both
sides; corolla thrice the length of the calyx, light blue.--Damp or
shady places, common. (Nat. from Eu.)


24. DRACOCEPHALUM, Tourn. DRAGON-HEAD.

Calyx tubular, 13--15-nerved, straight, 5-toothed; the upper tooth
usually much the largest. Corolla 2-lipped; the upper lip slightly
arched and notched; the lower spreading, 3-cleft, with its middle lobe
largest and 2-cleft or notched at the end. Stamens 4, ascending under
the upper lip, the lower pair shorter; anthers approximate by pairs, the
cells divergent.--Whorls many-flowered, mostly spiked or capitate, and
with awn-toothed or fringed leafy bracts. (Name from [Greek: dra/kon],
_a dragon_, and [Greek: kephale/], _head_, alluding to the form of the
corolla in the original species.)

1. D. parviflorum, Nutt. Annual or biennial; stem erect, leafy (8--20'
high); leaves ovate-lanceolate, sharply cut-toothed, petioled; whorls
crowded in a terminal head or spike; upper tooth of the calyx ovate,
nearly equalling the bluish small slender corolla.--Rocky or gravelly
soil, northern N. Y. to Iowa and Minn., and westward.


25. SCUTELLARIA, L. SKULLCAP.

Calyx bell-shaped in flower, 2-lipped; the lips entire, closed in fruit,
the upper with a helmet-like at length concave and enlarged appendage on
the back (the upper sepal); calyx splitting to the base at maturity, the
upper lip usually falling away. Corolla with an elongated curved
ascending tube, dilated at the throat, 2-lipped; the upper lip arched,
entire or barely notched, the lateral lobes mostly connected with the
upper rather than the lower lip; the lower lobe or lip spreading and
convex, notched at the apex. Stamens 4, ascending under the upper
lip; anthers approximate in pairs, ciliate or bearded, those of
the lower stamens 1-celled (halved), of the upper 2-celled and
heart-shaped.--Bitter perennial herbs, not aromatic, the short peduncles
or pedicels chiefly opposite, 1-flowered, often 1-sided, axillary or
spiked or racemed; in summer. (Name from _scutella_, a dish, in
allusion to the appendage to the fruiting calyx.)

Sec. 1. _Nutlets wingless, mostly marginless, on a low gynobase._

[*] _Flowers small (3'' long), in axillary and sometimes terminal
1-sided racemes._

1. S. lateriflora, L. (MAD-DOG SKULLCAP.) Smooth; stem upright, much
branched (1--2 deg. high); leaves lanceolate-ovate or ovate-oblong, pointed,
coarsely serrate, rounded at base, petioled (2--3'' long), the lower
floral ones similar; flowers blue, rarely white.--Wet shaded places,
common.

[*][*] _Flowers larger (6--12'' long) in terminal single or panicled
racemes, the floral leaves gradually reduced to bracts._

[+] _Stem-leaves all cordate, crenate-toothed, slender-petioled; lateral
lobes of the corolla almost equalling the short upper lip._

2. S. versicolor, Nutt. _Soft hairy_, the hairs of the inflorescence,
etc., partly viscid-glandular; stem mostly erect (1--3 deg. high); _leaves
ovate or round-ovate_, very veiny, _rugose_, the floral reduced to
broadly ovate entire bracts about equalling the glandular-hairy calyx;
racemes mostly simple; corolla bright blue with lower side and lip
whitish.--Banks of streams, Penn. to Wisc., Minn., and southward.--Var.
MINOR, Chapm. Low, slender, and thin-leaved; floral leaves
small.--Mountains of Va., etc.

3. S. saxatilis, Riddell. _Glabrous or slightly hairy_; stem weak,
ascending (6--18' long), often producing runners, branched; _leaves
ovate or ovate-oblong_ (1--2' long), _thin, obtuse_; upper bracts oblong
or ovate, small, entire; raceme simple, loose.--Moist shaded banks, Del.
to Ohio, south in the mountains to Va. and Tenn.

[+][+] _Stem-leaves crenate-dentate or serrate (or nearly entire in
n. 7), only the lowest if any cordate at base, more or less petioled;
lateral lobes of the blue corolla shorter than the galeate upper lip._

4. S. serrata, Andrews. _Green and nearly glabrous_; stem rather simple
(1--3 deg. high), with single loosely flowered racemes; _leaves serrate,
acuminate at both ends_, ovate or ovate-oblong; calyx, etc., somewhat
hairy; _corolla 1' long, narrow, its lips equal_ in length.--Woods,
Penn. to Ill. and N. C.

5. S. canescens, Nutt. Stem branched above (2--4 deg. high), with the
_panicled many-flowered racemes, flowers, and the lower surface of the
ovate or lance-ovate acute_ (at the base acute, obtuse, or cordate)
_crenate leaves whitish with fine soft down_, often becoming
rather glabrous; bracts oblong or lanceolate; _corolla 8--9''
long_.--River-banks, Ont. and Penn. to the mountains of N. C. and N.
Ala., west to Kan. and Ark.

6. S. pilosa, Michx. _Pubescent with spreading hairs_; stem nearly
simple (1--3 deg. high); _leaves rather distant, crenate, oblong-ovate,
obtuse_, varying to roundish-ovate, the lower abrupt or heart-shaped at
base and long-petioled, the upper on short margined petioles, veiny;
bracts oblong-spatulate; racemes short, often branched; _corolla 6''
long, rather narrow_, the lower lip a little shorter.--Dry or sterile
ground, southern N. Y. to Mich., south to Fla. and Tex.

Var. hirsuta, Gray, is a large form (sometimes 3 deg. high), more hirsute,
with larger very coarsely crenate leaves (2--3' long).--Richer soil, Ky.

Var. ovalifolia, Benth., is a form with shorter and finer pubescence,
and narrower less veiny leaves.--N. J. to Va.

7. S. integrifolia, L. _Downy all over with a minute hoariness_; stem
commonly simple (1--2 deg. high); _leaves oblong-lanceolate or linear,
mostly entire_, obtuse, very short-petioled; _corolla_ 1' long, _much
enlarged above, the ample lips equal_ in length.--Dry ground, N. Eng. to
Fla. and Tex.

[*][*][*] _Flowers solitary in the axils of the upper mostly sessile
leaves, which resemble the lower ones but are occasionally reduced._

8. S. Wrightii, Gray. _Firm and woody at base, not stoloniferous
nor tuberiferous_, low, many-stemmed in a tuft, minutely
cinereous-puberulent, very leafy; leaves ovate or spatulate-oblong,
entire, subsessile (1/2' long), the upper floral shorter than the flowers;
corolla pubescent (1/2' long), usually violet.--Kan. to Tex.

9. S. parvula, Michx. Herbaceous; _subterranean stolons
moniliform-tuberiferous_; minutely downy, dwarf (3--6' high), branched
and spreading; all but the lower leaves sessile and entire, the lowest
round-ovate, the others ovate or lance-ovate, slightly heart-shaped
(6--8'' long); corolla 2--4'' long.--Sandy banks, W. New Eng. to Minn.,
south to Fla. and Tex.--Var. MOLLIS, Gray, is more spreading, softly
pubescent throughout, with larger less firm leaves.--Sandy banks, S.
Ill. to Kan.

10. S. galericulata, L. _Herbaceous; subterranean stolons not
tuberiferous_; smooth or a little downy, erect (1--2 deg. high), simple;
leaves ovate-lanceolate, acute, serrate, roundish and slightly
heart-shaped at base (1--2' long); corolla violet-blue, 8--9'' long,
with slender tube, the large lower lip nearly erect.--Wet shady places;
common especially northward. (Eu.)

Sec. 2. _Nutlets conspicuously winged, each raised on a slender base._

11. S. nervosa, Pursh. Smooth, simple or branched, slender, 10--20'
high; lower leaves roundish, the middle ovate, toothed, somewhat
heart-shaped (1' long), the floral ovate-lanceolate, entire; nerve-like
veins prominent beneath; corolla bluish, 4'' long, the lower lip
exceeding the concave upper one.--Moist thickets, N. Y. to Ind., south
to Va. and Mo.


26. BRUNELLA, Tourn. SELF-HEAL.

Calyx tubular-bell-shaped, somewhat 10-nerved and reticulated-veiny,
flattened on the upper side, naked in the throat, closed in fruit,
2-lipped; upper lip broad and flat, truncate, with 3 short teeth, the
lower 2-cleft. Corolla ascending, slightly contracted at the throat and
dilated at the lower side just beneath it, 2-lipped; upper lip erect,
arched, entire; the lower reflexed-spreading, 3-cleft, its lateral lobes
oblong, the middle one rounded, concave, denticulate. Stamens 4,
ascending under the upper lip; filaments 2-toothed at the apex, the
lower tooth bearing the anther; anthers approximate in pairs, their
cells diverging.--Low perennials, with nearly simple stems, and
3-flowered clusters of flowers sessile in the axils of round and
bract-like membranaceous floral leaves, imbricated in a close spike or
head. (Name said to be from the German _braune_, a disease of the
throat, for which this plant was a reputed remedy.)

1. B. vulgaris, L. (COMMON SELF-HEAL or HEAL-ALL.) Leaves ovate-oblong,
entire or toothed, petioled, hairy or smoothish; corolla (violet or
flesh-color, rarely white) not twice the length of the purplish
calyx.--Woods and fields, Newf. to Fla., westward across the continent.
June--Sept. (Eu.)


27. PHYSOSTEGIA, Benth. FALSE DRAGON-HEAD.

Calyx nearly equally 5-toothed, obscurely 10-nerved, short-tubular or
bell-shaped, more or less enlarged and slightly inflated in fruit.
Corolla funnel-form, with a much inflated throat, 2-lipped; upper lip
erect, nearly entire; the lower 3-parted, spreading, small, its middle
lobe larger, broad and rounded, notched. Stamens 4, ascending under the
upper lip; anthers approximate; the cells parallel.--Smooth perennials,
with upright wand-like stems, and sessile lanceolate or oblong mostly
serrate leaves. Flowers large and showy, rose or flesh-color variegated
with purple, opposite, crowded in simple or panicled terminal leafless
spikes. (Name from [Greek: phy~sa], _a bladder_, and [Greek: ste/ge], _a
covering_.)

1. P. Virginiana, Benth. Stem 1--4 deg. high, terminated by a simple virgate
or several panicled spikes; leaves thickish; _calyx tubular-campanulate,
its teeth half the length of the tube; corolla 1' long_.--Wet grounds,
from N. Vt. west and southward. Varies greatly.--Var. DENTICULATA,
Gray. Slender and commonly low, with crenulate-denticulate or obscurely
serrate leaves, and slender or loosely-flowered spikes.--Middle Atlantic
States.

2. P. intermedia, Gray. Slender, 1--3 deg. high, remotely leaved; leaves
linear-lanceolate, repand-denticulate; _spikes filiform_, rather
remotely flowered; _calyx short and broadly campanulate, its teeth
about as long as the tube; corolla 5--6'' long, much dilated
upward_.--Barrens, W. Ky. and Ark. to La. and Tex.


28. SYNANDRA, Nutt.

Calyx bell-shaped, inflated, membranaceous, irregularly veiny, almost
equally 4-toothed! Corolla with a long tube, much expanded above and at
the throat; the upper lip slightly arched, entire, the lower spreading
and 3-cleft, with ovate lobes, the middle one broadest and notched at
the end. Stamens 4, ascending; filaments hairy; anthers approximate in
pairs under the upper lip; the two upper each with one fertile and one
smaller sterile cell, the latter cells cohering together (whence the
name; from [Greek: sy/n], _together_, and [Greek: a)ne/r], for
_anther_).

1. S. grandiflora, Nutt. Hairy biennial, 1 deg. high; lower leaves
long-petioled, broadly ovate, heart-shaped, crenate, thin, the floral
sessile, gradually reduced to bracts, each with a single sessile flower;
corolla 11/2' long, yellowish-white.--Shady banks of streams, S. Ohio to
Ill. and Tenn. In spring.


29. MARRUBIUM, Tourn. HOREHOUND.

Calyx tubular, 5--10-nerved, nearly equally 5--10-toothed, the teeth
more or less spiny-pointed and spreading at maturity. Upper lip
of the corolla erect, notched, the lower spreading, 3-cleft, its
middle lobe broadest. Stamens 4, _included in the tube of the
corolla_.--Whitish-woolly bitter-aromatic perennials, branched at the
base, with rugose and crenate or cut leaves, and many-flowered axillary
whorls. (A name of Pliny, from the Hebrew _marrob_, a bitter juice.)

M. VULGARE, L. (COMMON HOREHOUND.) Stems ascending; leaves round-ovate,
petioled, crenate-toothed; whorls capitate; calyx with 10 recurved
teeth, the alternate ones shorter; corolla small, white.--Escaped from
gardens into waste places. (Nat. from Eu.)


30. BALLOTA, L. FETID HOREHOUND.

Calyx nearly funnel-form; the 10-ribbed tube expanded above into a
spreading regular border, with 5--10 teeth. Anthers exserted beyond the
tube of the corolla, approximate in pairs. Otherwise much as in
Marrubium. (The Greek name, of uncertain origin.)

B. NIGRA, L. (BLACK HOREHOUND.) More or less hairy, but green, erect;
the root perennial; leaves ovate, toothed; whorls many-flowered, dense;
calyx-teeth 5, longer than the tube of the purplish corolla.--Waste
places N. Eng., Penn., etc. (Nat. from Eu.)


31. PHLOMIS, Tourn. JERUSALEM SAGE.

Calyx tubular, 5--10-nerved, truncate or equally 5-toothed. Upper lip of
the corolla arched; the lower spreading, 3-cleft. Stamens 4, ascending
and approximate in pairs under the upper lip; the filaments of the upper
pair _longer than the others_ in P. tuberosa, with an awl-shaped
appendage at base; anther-cells divergent and confluent.--Leaves rugose.
Whorls dense and many-flowered, axillary, remote, bracted. (An old Greek
name of a woolly plant.)

P. TUBEROSA, L. Tall perennial (3--5 deg. high), nearly smooth; leaves
ovate-heart-shaped, crenate, petioled, the floral oblong-lanceolate;
bracts awl-shaped, hairy; upper lip of the purple corolla densely
bearded with white hairs on the inside.--S. shore of Lake Ontario, N. Y.
June, July. (Nat. from Eu.)


32. LEONURUS, L. MOTHERWORT.

Calyx top-shaped, 5-nerved, with 5 nearly equal teeth which are
awl-shaped, and when old rather spiny-pointed and spreading. Upper lip
of the corolla oblong and entire, somewhat arched; the lower spreading,
3-lobed, its middle lobe larger, narrowly oblong-obovate, entire, the
lateral ones oblong. Stamens 4, ascending under the upper lip; anthers
approximate in pairs, the valves naked. Nutlets truncate and sharply
3-angled.--Upright herbs, with cut-lobed leaves, and close whorls of
flowers in their axils; in summer. (Name from [Greek: le/on], _a lion_,
and [Greek: ou)ra/], _tail_, i.e. _Lion's-tail_.)

L. CARDIACA, L. (COMMON MOTHERWORT.) Tall perennial; leaves
long-petioled, the lower rounded, palmately lobed, the floral
wedge-shaped at base, 3-cleft, the lobes lanceolate; upper lip of the
pale purple corolla bearded.--Waste places, around dwellings. (Nat. from
Eu.)

L. MARRUBIASTRUM, L. Tall biennial, with elongated branches; stem-leaves
oblong-ovate, coarsely toothed; corolla (whitish) shorter than the
calyx-teeth, the tube naked within; lower lip rather erect.--Roadsides,
N. J. to Del., and southward. (Adv. from Eu.)

L. SIBIRICUS, L. Tall biennial; leaves 3-parted, the divisions
2--5-cleft, or deeply 3--7-cleft and incised; corolla (purplish) twice
as long as the calyx, the upper lip fornicate, the lower little
spreading.--Waste grounds, Penn.; also far west. (Adv. from Eu. and
Asia.)


33. LAMIUM, L. DEAD-NETTLE.

Calyx tubular-bell-shaped, about 5-nerved, with 5 nearly equal
awl-pointed teeth. Corolla dilated at the throat; upper lip ovate or
oblong, arched, narrowed at the base; the middle lobe of the spreading
lower lip broad, notched at the apex, contracted as if stalked at the
base, the lateral ones small, at the margin of the throat. Stamens 4,
ascending under the upper lip; anthers approximate in pairs, 2-celled,
the cells divergent. Nutlets truncate.--Decumbent herbs, the lowest
leaves small and long-petioled, the middle heart-shaped and doubly
toothed, the floral subtending the whorled flower-cluster; spring to
autumn. (Name from [Greek: laimo/s], _throat_, in allusion to the
ringent corolla.)

[*] _Annuals or biennials, low; flowers small, purple, in few whorls or
heads._

L. AMPLEXICAULE, L. Leaves rounded, deeply crenate-toothed or cut, the
_upper ones clasping_; corolla elongated, upper lip bearded, the lower
spotted; lateral lobes truncate.--Rather common. (Nat. from Eu.)

L. PURPUREUM, L. _Leaves_ roundish or oblong, heart-shaped,
crenate-toothed, _all petioled_.--N. Eng. and Penn. (Nat. from Eu.)

(Addendum) L. INTERMEDIUM, Fries. Resembling L. purpureum, but the
calyx-teeth longer than the tube, the rather narrower corolla without a
hairy ring within near the base, and the nutlet longer (3 times as long
as broad).--Cultivated fields near Hingham, Mass. (_C. J. Sprague_).
(Adv. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Perennial, taller; flowers larger, in several axillary whorls._

L. ALBUM, L. Hairy; leaves ovate, heart-shaped, petioled; calyx-teeth
very slender, spreading; corolla white, the tube curved upward,
obliquely contracted near the base, where there is a ring of hairs
inside; lateral lobes of lower lip bearing a long slender tooth.--E. New
Eng. (Nat. from Eu.)

L. MACULATUM, L. Like the last, but leaves more frequently marked with a
white spot on the upper face, and flowers purplish, with the ring of
hairs transverse instead of oblique.--Sparingly escaped. (Adv. from Eu.)


34. GALEOPSIS, L. HEMP-NETTLE.

Calyx tubular-bell-shaped, about 5-nerved, with 5 somewhat equal and
spiny-tipped teeth. Corolla dilated at the throat; upper lip ovate,
arched, entire; the lower 3-cleft, spreading, the lateral lobes ovate,
the middle one inversely heart-shaped; palate with 2 teeth at the
sinuses. Stamens 4, ascending under the upper lip; _anther-cells
transversely 2-valved_; the inner valve of each cell bristly-fringed,
the outer one larger and naked.--Annuals, with spreading branches, and
several--many-flowered whorls in the axils of floral leaves which are
nearly like the lower ones. (Name composed of [Greek: gale/e], _a
weasel_, and [Greek: o)/psis], _resemblance_, from some fancied likeness
of the corolla to the head of a weasel.)

G. TETRAHIT, L. (COMMON HEMP-NETTLE.) _Stem swollen below the joints,
bristly-hairy; leaves ovate_, coarsely serrate; corolla purplish or
variegated, about twice the length of the calyx; or, in var.
GRANDIFLORA, 3--4 times the length of the calyx, often yellowish with a
purple spot on the lower lip.--Waste places, common. Aug., Sept. (Nat.
from Eu.)

G. LADANUM, L. (RED H.) _Stem smooth or pubescent; leaves
oblong-lanceolate_, more or less downy; corolla red or rose-color (often
spotted with yellow), much exceeding the calyx.--E. New Eng., rare. Aug.
(Adv. from Eu.)


35. STACHYS, Tourn. HEDGE-NETTLE.

Calyx tubular-bell-shaped, 5--10-nerved, equally 5-toothed, or the upper
teeth united to form an upper lip. Corolla not dilated at the throat;
upper lip erect or rather spreading, often arched, entire or nearly so;
the lower usually longer and spreading, 3-lobed, with the middle lobe
largest and nearly entire. Stamens 4, ascending under the upper lip
(often reflexed on the throat after flowering); anthers approximate in
pairs. Nutlets obtuse, not truncate.--Whorls 2--many-flowered,
approximate in a terminal raceme or spike (whence the name, from [Greek:
sta/chus], _a spike_). Flowers purple or rose-red, in summer.

[*] _Root annual; stems decumbent, low._

S. ARVENSIS, L. (WOUNDWORT.) Hairy; leaves petioled, cordate-ovate,
obtuse, crenate; whorls 4--6-flowered, distant; corolla (purplish)
scarcely longer than the unarmed calyx.--Waste places, E. Mass. (Adv.
from Eu.)

[*][*] _Root perennial; stem erect._

[+] _Leaves obscurely or not at all cordate, sessile or short-petioled._

1. S. hyssopifolia, Michx. _Smooth and glabrous_, or the nodes hirsute;
stems slender (1 deg. high); _leaves linear-oblong or narrowly linear,
sessile_, obscurely toothed toward the apex; whorls 4--6-flowered,
rather distant; _corolla glabrous_, twice or thrice the length of the
triangular-awl-shaped spreading calyx-teeth.--Wet sandy places, Mass. to
Mich., south to Fla. and Mo.--Var. AMBIGUA, Gray, is stouter (1--2 deg.
high), sometimes with scattered retrorse bristles on the angles of the
stem, and with broader (3--6'') serrulate leaves.--Ill. and Ky. to Ga.

2. S. palustris, L. Stem 4-angled (2--3 deg. high), leafy, _hirsute with
spreading or reflexed hairs_, especially on the angles; _leaves_
sessile, or the lower short-petioled, _oblong- or ovate-lanceolate,
crenately serrate_, rounded at base, _downy or hairy-pubescent_,
obtusish (2--4' long), the upper floral ones shorter than the nearly
sessile calyx; whorls 6--10-flowered, the upper crowded into an
interrupted spike; calyx hispid; the lance-subulate teeth somewhat
spiny, half the length of the corolla, diverging in fruit; _upper lip of
corolla pubescent_.--Wet ground, Newf. to Penn., westward across the
continent.

3. S. aspera, Michx. Taller; _stem more commonly smooth on the sides,
the angles beset with stiff reflexed bristles_; leaves hairy or
smoothish, as in the last, but _nearly all distinctly petioled_, the
lower floral as long as the flowers; spike often slender and more
interrupted; _calyx mostly glabrous_, the tube rather narrower and the
teeth more awl-shaped and spiny; _corolla glabrous throughout_. (S.
palustris, var. aspera, _Gray_.)--Wet ground, common.

Var. glabra, Gray. More slender, _smooth and glabrous throughout_, or
with few bristly hairs; leaves taper-pointed, more sharply toothed,
mostly rounded or truncate at the base, _all more conspicuously
petioled_. (S. palustris, var. glabra, _Gray_.)--Western N. Y. to Ill.,
and southward.

[+][+] _Nearly all the leaves long-petioled and cordate._

4. S. cordata, Riddell. Rather weak, hirsute, 2--3 deg. high; leaves all
ovate- or oblong-cordate, acuminate, crenate (2--5' long), the floral
mostly minute; spikes slender, of numerous few-flowered clusters; calyx
only 2'' long; corolla glabrous throughout (or nearly so), barely 5''
long. (S. palustris, var. cordata, _Gray_.)--Thickets, S. Ohio to Iowa,
south to Va., Tenn., and Mo.


ORDER 83. PLANTAGINACEAE. (PLANTAIN FAMILY.)

_Chiefly stemless herbs, with regular 4-merous spiked flowers, the
stamens inserted on the tube of the dry and membranaceous veinless
monopetalous corolla, alternate with its lobes_;--chiefly represented by
the two following genera.


1. PLANTAGO, Tourn. PLANTAIN. RIBWORT.

Calyx of 4 imbricated persistent sepals, mostly with dry membranaceous
margins. Corolla salver-form or rotate, withering on the pod, the border
4-parted. Stamens 4, or rarely 2, in all or some flowers with long and
weak exserted filaments, and fugacious 2-celled anthers. Ovary 2- (or in
n. 5 falsely 3--4-) celled, with 1--several ovules in each cell. Style
and long hairy stigma single, filiform. Capsule 2-celled,
2--several-seeded, opening transversely, so that the top falls off like
a lid and the loose partition (which bears the peltate seeds) falls
away. Embryo straight, in fleshy albumen.--Leaves ribbed. Flowers
whitish, small, in a bracted spike or head, raised on a naked scape.
(The Latin name.)

Sec. 1. _Stamens 4; flowers all perfect; corolla not closed over the
fruit_.

[*] _Flowers proterogynous, the style first projecting from the unopened
corolla, the anthers long-exserted after the corolla has opened; seeds
not hollowed on the face (except in_ P. lanceolata).

[+] _Corolla glabrous; leaves strongly ribbed; perennial._

[++] _Ribs of the broad leaves rising from the midrib._

1. P. cordata, Lam. Tall, glabrous; leaves heart-shaped or round-ovate
(3--8' long), long-petioled; spike at length loosely flowered; bracts
round-ovate, fleshy; capsule 2--4-seeded.--Along streams, N. Y. to
Minn., and southward.

[++][++] _Ribs of the leaf free to the contracted base_.

2. P. major, L. (COMMON PLANTAIN.) Smooth or rather hairy, rarely
roughish; _leaves ovate, oblong, oval_, or slightly heart-shaped, often
toothed, abruptly narrowed into a channelled petiole; _spike dense,
obtuse_; sepals round-ovate or obovate; _capsule ovoid, circumscissile
near the middle, 8--18-seeded; seeds angled, reticulated_.--Waysides and
near dwellings everywhere. Doubtless introduced from Eu., but native
from L. Superior and N. Minn., northward.

3. P. Rugelii, Decaisne. Leaves as in the last, but paler and thinner;
_spikes long and thin, attenuate at the apex_; sepals oblong, acutely
carinate; _capsules cylindraceous-oblong, circumscissile much below the
middle, 4--9-seeded; seeds oval-oblong, not reticulated_. (P.
Kamtschatica, _Gray_, Man., not _Cham._)--Vt. to Minn., south to Ga.
and Tex.

4. P. eriopoda, Torr. _Usually a mass of yellowish wool at the base;
leaves thickish, oblanceolate to obovate_, with short stout petioles;
spike dense or loose; _sepals and bract more or less scarious but not
carinate; capsule ovoid, never over 4-seeded_.--Moist and saline soil;
Red River valley, Minn., and westward; also on the Lower St. Lawrence.

P. LANCEOLATA, L. (RIBGRASS. RIPPLEGRASS. ENGLISH PLANTAIN.) Mostly
hairy; scape grooved-angled, at length much longer than the _lanceolate
or lance-oblong leaves_, slender (9'--2 deg. high); spike dense, at first
capitate, in age cylindrical; bract and sepals scarious, brownish;
_seeds 2, hollowed on the face_.--Very common. (Nat. from Eu.)

[+][+] _Corolla-tube externally pubescent; leaves linear or filiform,
fleshy, indistinctly ribbed; seeds 2--4; maritime, often woolly at
base_.

5. P. decipiens, Barneoud. _Annual_, or sometimes biennial with a stout
rootstock, smooth, or the scape pubescent; leaves flat or flattish and
channelled, erect, nearly as long as the scape (5--12'), acuminate;
spike slender, rather loose. (P. maritima, var. juncoides, _Gray_,
Man.)--Salt marshes, Atlantic coast, from Labrador to N. J. The
characters distinguishing biennial specimens of this from the next are
obscure.

6. P. maritima, L. _Perennial_; spikes dense.--Coast of Mass.; Gulf of
St. Lawrence to Lab. and Greenland. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Flowers of 2 sorts (as respects length of anthers and filaments)
on different plants, mostly cleistogamous; corolla-lobes broad, rounded,
persistently spreading; seeds 2, boat-shaped; inflorescence and narrow
leaves silky-pubescent or woolly; annual._

7. P. Patagonica, Jacq., var. gnaphalioides, Gray. White with silky
wool; leaves 1--3-nerved, varying from oblong-linear to filiform; spike
very dense (1/4--4' long), woolly; bracts not exceeding the calyx; sepals
very obtuse, scarious, with a thick centre.--Prairies and dry plains,
Minn. to Ind., Ky., and Tex., westward to the Pacific. Very
variable.--Var. NUDA, Gray; with sparse and loose pubescence, green and
soon glabrate rigid leaves, and short bracts.--Var. SPINULOSA, Gray; a
canescent form with aristately prolonged and rigid bracts.--Var.
ARISTATA, Gray; loosely hairy and green, or becoming glabrous, with
narrowly linear bracts 2--3 times the length of the flowers. (Nat. on
Martha's Vineyard, and about Boston.)

Sec. 2. _Flowers subdioecious or polygamo-cleistogamous; the corolla in the
fertile (or mainly fertile) plant closed over the maturing capsule and
forming a kind of beak, and anthers not exserted; sterile flowers with
spreading corolla and long-exserted filaments; seeds mostly flat; small
annuals or biennial._

[*] _Leaves comparatively broad, short-petioled or subsessile; stamens
4._

8. P. Virginica, L. Hairy or hoary-pubescent (2--9' high); leaves
oblong, varying to obovate and spatulate-lanceolate, 3--5 nerved,
slightly or coarsely and sparingly toothed; spikes mostly dense (1--2'
long); seeds usually 2.--Sandy grounds, S. New Eng. to S. Ill., south to
Fla. and Ariz.

[*][*] _Leaves linear or filiform; flowers very small; stamens 2; spike
slender._

9. P. pusilla, Nutt. Minutely pubescent (1--4' high); leaves entire;
_capsule short-ovoid, 4-seeded_, little exceeding the calyx and
bract.--Sandy soil, southern N. Y. to Va., west to the Rocky Mts.
Apr.--Aug.

10. P. heterophylla, Nutt. Leaves rather fleshy, acute, entire, or some
of them below 2--4-lobed or toothed; _capsule oblong-conoidal,
10--28-seeded_, nearly twice the length of the calyx and bract.--Low
sandy ground, Penn. to Fla. and Tex. Apr.--June.


2. LITTORELLA, L.

Flowers monoecious; the male solitary on a mostly simple naked scape;
calyx 4-parted, longer than the cylindraceous 4-cleft corolla; stamens
exserted on very long capillary filaments. Female flowers usually 2,
sessile at the base of the scape; calyx of 3 or 4 unequal sepals;
corolla urn-shaped, with a 3--4-toothed orifice. Ovary with a single
cell and ovule, tipped with a long laterally stigmatic style, maturing
as an achene. (Name from _litus_ or _littus_, shore, from the place of
growth.)

1. L. lacustris, L. Stoloniferous but otherwise stemless; leaves terete,
linear-subulate, 1--2' long.--In water or on gravelly shores, Nova
Scotia and N. Brunswick, to L. Champlain (_Pringle_) and Ont.




DIVISION III. APETALOUS DICOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS.

Corolla none; the floral envelopes in a single series (calyx), or
sometimes wanting altogether.


ORDER 84. NYCTAGINACEAE. (FOUR-O'CLOCK FAMILY.)

_Herbs (or in the tropics often shrubs or trees), with mostly opposite
and entire leaves, stems tumid at the joints, a delicate tubular or
funnel-form calyx which is colored like a corolla, its persistent base
constricted above the 1-celled 1-seeded ovary, and indurated into a sort
of nut-like pericarp; the stamens few, slender, and hypogynous; the
embryo coiled around the outside of mealy albumen, with broad foliaceous
cotyledons_ (in Abronia monocotyledonous by abortion).--Represented in
our gardens by the FOUR-O'CLOCK, or MARVEL OF PERU (MIRABILIS JALAPA),
in which the calyx is commonly mistaken for a corolla, the cup-like
involucre of each flower exactly imitating a calyx.

1. Oxybaphus. Involucre of united bracts. Fruit wingless. Calyx bell
shaped.

2. Abronia. Involucre of distinct bracts. Fruit 5-winged. Calyx
salver-form.


1. OXYBAPHUS, Vahl.

Flowers 3--5 in the same 5-lobed membranaceous broad and open involucre,
which enlarges and is thin and reticulated in fruit. Calyx with a very
short tube and a bell-shaped (rose or purple) deciduous limb, plaited in
the bud. Stamens mostly 3 (3--5), hypogynous. Style filiform; stigma
capitate. Fruit achene-like, several-ribbed or angled (pubescent in
ours).--Herbs, abounding on the western plains, with very large and
thick perennial roots, opposite leaves, and mostly clustered small
flowers. (Name [Greek: o)xyba/phon], _a vinegar-saucer_, or small
shallow vessel; from the shape of the involucre.)

1. O. nyctagineus, Sweet. _Nearly smooth_; stem becoming repeatedly
forked, 1--3 deg. high; _leaves all petioled_ (except the uppermost reduced
ones), _from broadly ovate to lanceolate, rounded or cordate or cuneate
at base_; inflorescence loose and but slightly pubescent, the peduncles
slender (at first solitary in the axils); fruit oblong-obovate, 2''
long, rather acutely angled.--Minn. and Wisc. to Tex. and La.; rare
escape from gardens in E. Mass. and R. I.

2. O. hirsutus, Sweet. More or less _glandular-hirsute_, especially
about the nodes and the usually contracted inflorescence, 1--3 deg. high;
_leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, sessile_ and cuneate at base or
narrowed to a short petiole; stamens often 5; fruit with thickened
obtuse angles.--Plains of the Sask. to Wisc., Iowa., Neb., and Tex.

3. O. angustifolius, Sweet. Often tall, _glabrous_ except the more or
less hirsute peduncles and involucres; _leaves linear_, thick and
glaucous, often elongated (2--6' long); fruit as in the last.--Minn. to
Tex., and westward.


2. ABRONIA, Juss.

Involucre of 5--15 distinct bracts, enclosing numerous sessile flowers.
Calyx salver-form, with obcordate lobes. Stamens 5, included, adnate to
the calyx-tube. Style included; stigma linear-clavate. Perfect fruit
3--5-winged. Embryo monocotyledonous.--Low herbs, with thick opposite
petioled unequal leaves, axillary or terminal peduncles, and showy
flowers in solitary heads. (Name from [Greek: a(bro/s], _graceful_.)

1. A. fragrans, Nutt. More or less viscid-pubescent, from a perennial
root; leaves oblong or ovate, truncate or cuneate at base; involucre
conspicuous, of broad ovate white and scarious bracts; flowers white,
fragrant, 4--10'' long; fruit coriaceous, obpyramidal, with narrow
undulate coarsely reticulated wings.--From W. Iowa to Utah and N. Mex.


ORDER 85. ILLECEBRACEAE. (KNOTWORT FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with mostly opposite and entire leaves, scarious stipules_
(except in Scleranthus), _a 4--5-toothed or -parted herbaceous or
coriaceous persistent calyx_, no petals, _stamens borne on the calyx, as
many as the lobes and opposite them or fewer, styles 2 and often united,
and fruit a 1-seeded utricle._ Seed upon a basal funicle, the embryo (in
ours) surrounding the mealy albumen.--Small diffuse or tufted herbs,
with small greenish or whitish flowers in clusters or dichotomous cymes.

1. Anychia. Stamens on the base of the 5-parted awnless calyx. Styles
hardly any.

2. Paronychia. Stamens on the base of the 5-parted calyx; the sepals
hooded at the summit and bristle-pointed. Style 1, 2-cleft at the top.

3. Scleranthus. Stamens borne on the throat of the indurated 5-cleft and
pointless calyx. Styles 2. Stipules none.


1. ANYCHIA, Michx. FORKED CHICKWEED.

Sepals 5, scarcely concave, indistinctly mucronate on the back,
greenish. Stamens 2--3, rarely 5. Stigmas 2, sessile. Utricle larger
than the calyx. Radicle turned downward.--Small, many times forked
annuals, with small stipules, and minute flowers in the forks, produced
all summer. (Same derivation as the next genus.)

1. A. dichotoma, Michx. _More or less pubescent, short-jointed, low and
spreading_; leaves somewhat petioled, mostly very narrowly lanceolate or
oblanceolate; _flowers nearly sessile_ and somewhat clustered.--Mostly
in open places, N. Eng. to Fla., west to Minn. and Ark.

2. A. capillacea, DC. _Smooth, longer-jointed, slender and erect; leaves
thinner, broader and longer_ (5--15'' long); _flowers more stalked and
diffuse._ (A. dichotoma, var. capillacea, _Torr._)--Dry woodlands, same
range as the last, but more abundant northward.


2. PARONYCHIA, Tourn. WHITLOW-WORT.

Sepals 5, linear or oblong, concave, awned at the apex. Petals (or
staminodia) bristle-form, or minute teeth, or none. Stamens 5. Style
2-cleft at the apex. Utricle enclosed in the calyx. Radicle
ascending.--Tufted herbs (ours perennial), with dry and silvery
stipules, and clustered flowers. (Greek name for a _whitlow_, and for a
plant thought to cure it.)

1. P. argyrocoma, Nutt. Forming broad tufts, branched, _spreading;
leaves linear_ (1/2' long); _flowers densely clustered_, surrounded by
conspicuous _large silvery bracts_; calyx hairy, short-awned; petals
mere teeth between the stamens.--Bare mountain slopes of the White Mts.,
and in the Alleghanies from Va. to Ga.; also coast of Maine and near
Newburyport, Mass. July.

2. P. dichotoma, Nutt. Smooth, tufted; stems (6--12' high) _ascending_
from a rather woody base; _leaves_ (1/2--11/2' long) _and bracts_ narrowly
_awl-shaped_; _cymes open, many-times forked_; sepals short-pointed;
minute bristles in place of petals.--Rocks, Md. to N. C. and Tex.
July--Sept.

3. P. Jamesii, Torr. & Gray. Subcespitose, much branched from the
somewhat woody base, minutely puberulent; leaves filiform-subulate,
obtuse or mucronate; forked cymes rather close; calyx narrow-campanulate
with turbinate base.--Central Kan. to W. Neb., Col., and Tex.


3. SCLERANTHUS, L. KNAWEL.

Sepals 5, united below in an indurated cup, enclosing the utricle.
Stamens 10 or 5. Styles 2, distinct.--Homely little weeds, with
awl-shaped leaves, obscure greenish clustered flowers, and no stipules.
(Name from [Greek: sklero/s], _hard_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_,
from the hardened calyx-tube.)

S. ANNUUS, L. Much branched, spreading (3--5' high); flowers sessile in
the forks; calyx-lobes scarcely margined.--Waste places. (Nat. from Eu.)


ORDER 86. AMARANTACEAE. (AMARANTH FAMILY)

_Weedy herbs, with nearly the characters of the next family, but the
flowers mostly imbricated with dry and scarious persistent bracts; these
often colored, commonly 3 in number_; the 1-celled ovary in our genera
1-ovuled. (The greater part of the order tropical.)

[*] Anthers 2-celled; flowers unisexual; leaves alternate.

1. Amarantus. Flowers monoecious or polygamous, all with a calyx of 3 or
5 distinct erect sepals, not falling off with the fruit.

2. Acnida. Flowers dioecious. Calyx none in the fertile flowers.

[*][*] Anthers 1-celled; flowers perfect; leaves opposite.

3. Iresine. Calyx of 5 sepals. Filaments united below into a cup.
Flowers paniculate.

4. Froelichia. Calyx 5-cleft. Filaments united into a tube. Flowers
spicate.

(Addendum) 5. Cladothrix. Flowers perfect, minute, axillary. Densely
white-tomentose.


1. AMARANTUS, Tourn. AMARANTH.

Flowers monoecious or polygamous, 3-bracted. Calyx of 5, or sometimes 3,
equal erect sepals, glabrous. Stamens 5, rarely 2 or 3, separate;
anthers 2-celled. Stigmas 2 or 3. Fruit an ovoid 1-seeded utricle,
2--3-beaked at the apex, mostly longer than the calyx, opening
transversely or sometimes bursting irregularly. Embryo coiled into a
ring around the albumen.--Annual weeds, of coarse aspect, with alternate
and entire petioled setosely tipped leaves, and small green or purplish
flowers in axillary or terminal spiked clusters; in late summer and
autumn. ([Greek: A)ma/rantos], _unfading_, because the dry calyx and
bracts do not wither. The Romans, like the Greeks, wrote Amarantus,
which the early botanists incorrectly altered to _Amaranthus_.)

Sec. 1. _Utricle thin, circumscissile, the top falling away as a lid;
flowers polygamous._

[*] _Flowers in terminal and axillary simple or mostly panicled spikes;
stem erect (1--6 deg. high); leaves long-petioled; stamens and sepals 5._

[+] RED AMARANTHS. _Flowers and often leaves tinged with crimson or
purple._

A. HYPOCHONDRIACUS, L. Glabrous; leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute or
pointed at both ends; _spikes very obtuse_, thick, crowded, the terminal
one elongated and interrupted; _bracts long-awned; fruit 2--3-cleft at
the apex_, longer than the calyx.--Rarely spontaneous about gardens.
(Adv. from Trop. Amer.)

A. PANICULATUS, L. Stem mostly pubescent; leaves oblong-ovate or
ovate-lanceolate; _spikes numerous and slender, panicled_, erect or
spreading; _bracts awn-pointed_; flowers small, green tinged with red,
or sometimes crimson; _fruit 2--3-toothed_ at the apex, longer than the
calyx.--Roadsides, etc. (Adv. from Trop. Amer.)

[+][+] GREEN AMARANTHS, PIGWEED. _Flowers green, rarely a little
reddish._

A. RETROFLEXUS, L. Roughish and more or less pubescent; leaves dull
green, long-petioled, ovate or rhombic-ovate, undulate; the thick spikes
crowded in a stiff or glomerate panicle; bracts awn-pointed, rigid,
exceeding the acute or obtuse sepals.--Cultivated grounds, common;
indigenous southwestward. (Adv. from Trop. Amer.)

A. CHLOROSTACHYS, Willd. Very similar, but smoother and deeper green,
with more slender, linear-cylindric, more or less flexuous spikes, the
lateral ones spreading or divaricate, and the sepals more frequently
acute or acuminate. (A. retroflexus, var. chlorostachys,
_Gray_.)--Cultivated grounds; apparently also indigenous
southwestward.--Var. HYBRIDUS, Watson, is similar, but smooth and still
more loosely panicled. (A. retroflexus, var. hybridus, _Gray_.) (Adv.
from Trop. Amer.)

[*][*] _Flowers crowded in close and small axillary clusters; stems low,
spreading or ascending; stamens and sepals 3, or the former only 2._

1. A. albus, L. (TUMBLE WEED.) Smooth, pale green; _stems whitish, erect
or ascending_, diffusely branched; leaves small, obovate and
spatulate-oblong, very obtuse or retuse; flowers greenish; sepals
acuminate, half the length of the _rugose fruit_, much shorter than the
_subulate rigid pungently pointed bracts; seed small, {2/3}''
broad_.--Waste grounds, common.

2. A. blitoides, Watson. Like the last, but _prostrate or decumbent_;
spikelets usually contracted; _bracts ovate-oblong, shortly acuminate_;
sepals obtuse or acute; _fruit not rugose; seed about 1'' broad_.--From
Minn. to Mo. and Tex., and westward, and introduced eastward as far as
western N. Y.

A. BLITUM, L., resembles the last, but is usually erect, with shorter
and more scarious bracts, and a smaller seed more notched at the
hilum.--Near N. Y. City and Boston. (Adv. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. _Utricle thinnish, bursting or imperfectly circumscissile; flowers
monoecious._

A. SPINOSUS, L. (THORNY AMARANTH.) Smooth, bushy-branched; stem reddish;
leaves rhombic-ovate or ovate-lanceolate, dull green, a pair of _spines
in their axils_; upper clusters sterile, forming long and slender
spikes; the fertile globular and mostly in the axils; flowers
yellowish-green, small.--Waste grounds, N. Y. to E. Kan., and southward.
(Nat. from Trop. Amer.)

Sec. 3. EUXOLUS. _Utricle rather fleshy, remaining closed or bursting
irregularly; no spines; bracts inconspicuous._

3. A. pumilus, Raf. Low or prostrate; leaves fleshy and obovate,
emarginate, strongly nerved; flower-clusters small and axillary;
_stamens and sepals_ 5, the latter half the length of the obscurely
5-ribbed fruit.--Sandy beaches, R. I. to Va.

A. CRISPUS, Braun. Very slender, procumbent, pubescent; leaves small,
light green, rhombic-ovate to -lanceolate, acute, the margin crisped and
undulate; flowers in small axillary clusters; bracts and sepals
scarious, oblanceolate, acute or obtuse; utricle about as long,
roughened, not nerved nor angled. (A. viridis, _Man._)--Streets of
Albany, New York City and Brooklyn; doubtless introduced, but the native
habitat unknown.


2. ACNIDA, Mitch. WATER-HEMP.

Characters of Amarantus, except that the flowers are completely
dioecious and the pistillate ones without calyx. Bracts 1--3, unequal.
Staminate calyx of 5 thin oblong mucronate-tipped sepals, longer than
the bracts; stamens 5, the anther-cells united only at the middle.
Stigmas 2--5, often long and plumose-hispid. Fruit somewhat coriaceous
and indehiscent, or a thin membranous utricle dehiscing irregularly
(rarely circumscissile), usually 3--5-angled. (Name from [Greek: a-]
privative, and [Greek: kni/de], _a nettle_.)

Sec. 1. ACNIDA proper. _Fruit indehiscent, with firm and close pericarp._

1. A. cannabina, L. Usually stout, 2--6 deg. high or more, glabrous; leaves
lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acuminate, long-petioled; sepals of
sterile flowers ovate-oblong, obtuse or acutish; bracts usually thin and
lax, much shorter than the fruit, sometimes more rigid and longer; fruit
about 1'' long, obovate, the pericarp rather thin, more or less rugosely
angled; seed somewhat turgid, not angled, usually less than 1'' long,
shining.--Salt or brackish marshes, coast of N. Eng. to Fla.

2. A. rusocarpa, Michx. Very similar; fruit larger, 11/2--2'' long, the
pericarp thicker, and the larger seed flattened with thick margins,
usually thickest on the cotyledonar side.--N. Y. (?) and Penn. to
S. Car.; apparently much less common than the last, though it is often
difficult to positively distinguish the species from the immature fruit.

Sec. 2. MONTELIA. _Fruit dehiscing irregularly, the pericarp thin, loose
and usually roughened; not salt-marsh plants._

3. A. tuberculata, Moq. Tall and erect, or sometimes low and decumbent;
leaves lanceolate, acute or acutish or sometimes obtuse; sepals of
sterile flowers lanceolate, acute or acuminate; pistillate flowers
closely clustered in more or less dense naked or leafy axillary and
terminal spikes (or the axillary capitate); bracts rather rigid,
acuminate, equalling or exceeding the fruit; utricle about 1/2'' long;
seed shining, 1/2--{1/3}'' in diameter. (Montelia tamariscina, _Gray_, in
part.)--Ohio to Dak., Mo., Ala., and La.

Var. subnuda, Watson. Erect or often prostrate, the lower clusters at
least of pistillate flowers more or less cymose and often in globose
heads; bracts thinner, narrow and lax, shorter than the fruit. (M.
tamariscina, var. concatenata, _Gray_, in part.)--W. Vt. (_Oakes_); Ont.
to Minn., and southward. Often appearing quite distinct from the type,
but intermediate forms are not rare.


3. IRESINE, P. Browne.

Flowers mostly polygamous or dioecious, 3-bracted. Calyx of 5 sepals.
Stamens mostly 5; filaments slender, united into a short cup at base;
anthers 1-celled, ovate. Fruit a globular utricle, not opening.--Herbs,
with opposite petioled leaves, and minute scarious-white flowers,
crowded into clusters or spiked and branching panicles; the calyx, etc.,
often bearing long wool (whence the name, from [Greek: ei)resio/ne], a
wreath or staff entwined with fillets of wool).

1. I. celosioides, L. Nearly glabrous, annual, erect, slender (2--4 deg.
high); leaves ovate-lanceolate; panicles very slender, often broad and
diffuse, naked; bracts and calyx silvery-white, the fertile calyx twice
longer than the broad bracts and densely silky-villous at base.--Dry
banks, Ohio to Kan., and far southward. Sept.


4. FROELICHIA, Moench.

Flowers perfect, 3-bracted. Calyx tubular, 5-cleft at the summit, below
2--5-crested lengthwise, or tubercled and indurated in fruit, enclosing
the indehiscent thin utricle. Filaments united into a tube, bearing 5
oblong 1-celled anthers, and as many sterile strap-shaped
appendages.--Hairy or woolly herbs, with opposite sessile leaves, and
spiked scarious-bracted flowers. (Named for _J. A. Froelich_, a German
botanist of the last century.)

1. F. Floridana, Moquin. Root annual; stem leafless above (1--3 deg. high);
leaves lanceolate, silky-downy beneath; spikelets crowded into an
interrupted spike; calyx very woolly, becoming broadly winged, the wings
irregularly toothed.--Dry sandy places, S. Minn, to Ill., Col., Tex.,
and Fla.

2. F. gracilis, Moq. More slender, with narrow leaves, the spikelets
smaller, and the crests of the matured calyx of nearly distinct rigid
processes--Col. to Tex., and is reported from Kansas.


(Addendum) 5. CLADOTHRIX, Nutt.

Flowers perfect, 3-bracted. Sepals 5, erect, rigid-scarious, somewhat
pilose. Stamens 5, the filaments united at base; anthers large,
1-celled. Stigma large, capitate, 2-lobed. Utricle globose,
indehiscent.--Densely stellate-tomentose low herbs or woody at base,
with opposite petiolate leaves and very small flowers solitary or few in
the axils. (Name from [Greek: kla/dos], _a branch_, and [Greek: thri/x],
_hair_, for the branching tomentum.)

1. C. lanuginosa, Nutt. Prostrate or ascending, much branched; leaves
round-obovate to rhomboidal, 3--10'' long.--Central Kan. (_Meehan_) and
southwestward.


ORDER 87. CHENOPODIACEAE. (GOOSEFOOT FAMILY.)

_Chiefly herbs, of homely aspect, more or less succulent, with mostly
alternate leaves and no stipules nor scarious bracts, minute greenish
flowers, with the free calyx imbricated in the bud; the stamens as many
as its lobes, or occasionally fewer, and inserted opposite them or on
their base; the 1-celled ovary becoming a 1-seeded thin utricle or
rarely an achene. Embryo coiled into a ring around the mealy albumen,
when there is any, or else conduplicate, or spiral._--Calyx persistent,
mostly enclosing the fruit. Styles or stigmas 2, rarely 3--5. (Mostly
inert or innocent, weedy plants; several are pot-herbs, such as Spinach
and Beet.)

[*] Embryo coiled into a ring about usually copious central albumen.
Leaves flat, not spiny. Stem not jointed.

[+] Flowers perfect (or stamens only occasionally wanting), clustered or
panicled; calyx obvious, persistent. Seed-coat crustaceous.

1. Cycloloma. Calyx 5-cleft, in fruit surrounded by a horizontal
continuous membranaceous wing. Seed horizontal, crustaceous. Leaves
sinuate-toothed.

2. Kochia. Like n. 1, but wing 5-lobed and seed-coat membranaceous.
Leaves entire.

3. Chenopodium. Calyx 3--5-parted, unchanged or becoming fleshy in
fruit.

4. Roubieva. Calyx 3--5-toothed, becoming saccate. Leaves pinnatifid.

[+][+] Flowers monoecious or dioecious; the staminate in clusters,
mostly spiked; the pistillate without calyx, enclosed between a pair of
appressed axillary bracts.

5. Atriplex. Fruiting bracts with margins often dilated and sides often
muricate.

[+][+][+] Flowers perfect, naked or 1-sepaled, solitary in the axils of
the reduced upper leaves.

6. Corispermum. Pericarp oval, flattened, adherent to the vertical seed.
Leaves linear.

[*][*] Embryo narrowly horseshoe-shaped or conduplicate no albumen. Stem
fleshy, jointed; leaves reduced to opposite fleshy scales or teeth.
Flowers densely spiked, perfect.

7. Salicornia. Flowers sunk in hollows of the axis of the fleshy spike.
Calyx utricle-like.

[*][*][*] Embryo coiled into a spiral; albumen mostly none. Leaves
fleshy, alternate.

8. Suaeda. Embryo flat-spiral. Calyx wingless. Leaves succulent.

9. Salsola. Embryo conical-spiral. Calyx in fruit horizontally winged.
Leaves spinescent.


1. CYCLOLOMA, Moquin. WINGED PIGWEED.

Flowers perfect or pistillate, bractless. Calyx 5-cleft, with the
concave lobes strongly keeled, enclosing the depressed fruit, at length
appendaged with a broad and continuous horizontal scarious wing. Stamens
5. Styles 3 (rarely 2). Seed horizontal, flat; coats crustaceous. Embryo
encircling the mealy albumen.--An annual and much-branched coarse herb,
with alternate sinuate-toothed petioled leaves, and very small scattered
sessile flowers in open panicles. (Name composed of [Greek: ky/klos], _a
circle_, and [Greek: lo/ma], _a border_, from the encircling wing of the
calyx.)

1. C. platyphyllum, Moquin.--Diffuse (6--15' high), more or less
arachnoid-pubescent or glabrate, light green or often deep
purple.--Sandy soil, Minn, to W. Ill., S. Ind., Ark., and westward
across the plains.


2. KOCHIA, Roth.

Characters nearly as in Cycloloma, but the seed-coat membranaceous and
the albumen wanting.--Annuals or suffruticose perennials, with flat or
more usually linear and terete leaves. (Named for _W. D. J. Koch_, a
German botanist.)

K. SCOPARIA, Schrad. Annual, erect, puberulent or glabrate, branching;
leaves narrowly lanceolate to linear; flowers in small axillary
clusters, sessile, each sepal developing a thick wing.--Sparingly
introduced; Vt., Ont., and Ill. (Nat. from Eu.)


3. CHENOPODIUM, Tourn. GOOSEFOOT. PIGWEED.

Flowers perfect, all bractless. Calyx 5- (rarely 4-) parted or lobed,
unchanged in fruit or becoming succulent and berry-like, more or less
enveloping the depressed fruit. Stamens mostly 5; filaments filiform.
Styles 2, rarely 3. Seed horizontal or vertical, lenticular; the coat
crustaceous; embryo coiled partly or fully round the mealy
albumen.--Weeds, usually with a white mealiness, or glandular. Flowers
sessile in small clusters collected in spiked panicles. (Named from
[Greek: che/n], _a goose_, and [Greek: pou~s], _foot_, in allusion to
the shape of the leaves.)--Our species are mostly annuals, flowering
through late summer and autumn, growing around dwellings, in manured
soil, cultivated grounds, and waste places.

Sec. 1. _Annual, more or less mealy, not glandular nor aromatic; fruiting
calyx dry; seed horizontal; embryo a complete ring._

[*] _Pericarp very easily separated from the seed; leaves entire or
rarely sinuate-dentate._

1. C. Boscianum, Moq. Erect, slender (2 deg. high), loosely branched, often
_nearly glabrous; leaves oblong- to linear-lanceolate_ (1--2' long),
attenuate into a _slender petiole_, acute, the lower sinuate-dentate or
often all entire; flowers small, solitary or in small clusters upon the
slender branchlets; _calyx not strongly carinate_. (C. album, var.
Boscianum, _Gray_, Manual.)--N. Y. to Minn., south to N. C. and Tex.

2. C. leptophyllum, Nutt. _Densely mealy_ or rarely nearly glabrous
(1/2--11/2 deg. high), simple or branched, often strict; _leaves linear_
(1/2--1' long), entire, _rather shortly petioled_; flowers closely
clustered, in dense or interrupted spikelets; _calyx-lobes strongly
carinate_.--Sea-coast, Conn. to N. J., north shore of L. Erie, and from
Dak. to Col., N. Mex., and westward.

[*][*] _Pericarp persistent upon the smooth seed; leaves more or less
sinuate-dentate (except in_ C. polyspermum).

C. POLYSPERMUM, L. Low, often spreading, green and _wholly destitute of
mealiness; leaves all entire_, oblong or ovate and on slender petioles;
flowers very small, in slender panicles in all the axils, the thin lobes
of the calyx very incompletely enclosing the fruit; seed
obtuse-edged.--Sparingly naturalized in the Eastern States. (Adv. from
Eu.)

C. ALBUM, L. (LAMB'S-QUARTERS. PIGWEED.) Erect (1--4 deg. high), _more or
less mealy; leaves varying from rhombic-ovate to lanceolate_ or the
uppermost even linear, acute, _all or only the lower more or less
angulate-toothed_; clusters spiked-panicled, mostly dense; calyx (3/4''
wide in fruit) with strongly carinate lobes, nearly or quite covering
the seed.--Introduced everywhere. (Nat. from Eu.)--Var. VIRIDE, Moq.,
more common eastward, is less mealy and with less dense inflorescence.

C. URBICUM, L. Rather pale or dull green, nearly destitute of mealiness,
with erect branches (1--3 deg. high); _leaves_ triangular, acute, _coarsely
and sharply many-toothed; spikes erect, crowded in a long and narrow
racemose panicle_; calyx-lobes not keeled; _seed with rounded
margins_.--Apparently throughout our range. (Nat. from Eu.)

C. MURALE, L. Resembles the preceding, but less erect, loosely branched
(1--2 deg. high); _leaves rhomboid-ovate_, acute, _coarsely and sharply
unequally toothed_, thin, bright green; _spikes or racemes
diverging, somewhat corymbed_; calyx-lobes scarcely keeled; _seed
sharp-edged_.--From N. Eng. to Mich, and Mo. (Adv. from Eu.)

3. C. hybridum, L. (MAPLE-LEAVED GOOSEFOOT.) Bright green throughout;
stem widely much branched (2--4 deg. high); _leaves thin_ (2--6' long),
somewhat triangular and heart shaped, taper-pointed, _sinuate-angled_,
the angles extending into a _few large and pointed teeth_; racemes
diffusely and loosely panicled, leafless; calyx not fully covering the
fruit, its lobes keeled.--Indigenous from western N. Y. and Ky.,
westward across the continent; introduced eastward.

Sec. 2. _Annual or perennial herbs, somewhat mealy, not
glandular-pubescent; fruiting calyx dry; seed large, subglobose,
vertical, exserted; embryo a complete ring._

C. GLAUCUM, L. (OAK-LEAVED GOOSEFOOT.) _Low_ (5--12' high), _spreading,
glaucous-mealy; leaves sinuately pinnatifid-toothed_, oblong, obtuse,
pale green above; _clusters in axillary spikes_, small; _seed
sharp-edged_.--Throughout our range and westward. (Nat. from Eu.)

C. BONUS-HENRICUS, L. (GOOD-KING-HENRY.) _Stout, erect_ (1--2 deg. high),
mostly simple; _leaves broadly triangular-hastate_ (2--3' long), obtuse
or acute, _subsinuate or entire; flowers somewhat densely paniculately
spiked; seed with obtuse edges_. (Blitum Bonus-Henricus,
_Reichenb._)--Sparingly introduced. (Adv. from Eu.)

Sec. 3. _Annual, glabrous; calyx more or less fleshy in fruit and often
colored, enclosing the utricle; seed mostly vertical; embryo a complete
ring; flowers in crowded clusters, axillary or in spikes._

4. C. rubrum, L. (COAST BLITE.) Stem angled, much branched; leaves
thickish, triangular-lanceolate, tapering below into a wedge-shaped base
and above into a slender point, sparingly and coarsely toothed, the
upper linear-lanceolate; _clusters scattered in axillary leafy spikes;
calyx-lobes 2--4, rather fleshy_; stamens 1--2; seed shining, the margin
acute. (Blitum maritimum, _Nutt._)--Sea-coast of Northern States, and in
saline places to Minn. (Eu.)

5. C. capitatum, Watson. (STRAWBERRY BLITE.) Stem ascending, branching;
leaves triangular and somewhat halberd-shaped, sinuate-toothed;
_clusters simple (large), interruptedly spiked, the upper leafless;
stamens 1--5; calyx berry-like_ in fruit; seed ovoid, flattish, smooth,
with a very narrow margin. (Blitum capitatum, _L._)--Dry rich ground,
along the Great Lakes, northward and westward. The calyx becomes pulpy
and bright red in fruit, when the large clusters look like strawberries.
(Eu.)

Sec. 4. _Annual, not mealy, but more or less glandular-pubescent, aromatic;
calyx 2--3-parted, dry in fruit; seed often vertical; embryo not a
complete ring._

C. BOTRYS, L. (JERUSALEM OAK. FEATHER GERANIUM.) Glandular-pubescent and
viscid; _leaves slender-petioled_, oblong, obtuse, sinuate-pinnatifid;
_racemes cymose-diverging, loose, leafless_; fruit not perfectly
enclosed.--Widely introduced. (Nat. from Eu.)

C. AMBROSIOIDES, L. (MEXICAN TEA.) Smoothish; _leaves slightly
petioled_, oblong or lanceolate, repand-toothed or nearly entire, the
upper tapering to both ends; _spikes densely flowered, leafy_, or
intermixed with leaves; fruit perfectly enclosed in the calyx.--Waste
places, common throughout our range, especially southward. (Nat. from
Trop. Amer.)

Var. ANTHELMINTICUM, Gray. (WORMSELD.) Leaves more strongly toothed, the
lower sometimes almost laciniate-pinnatifid; _spikes more elongated,
mostly leafless_.--From Long Island and southward, west to Wisc. and
Tex. (Nat. from Trop. Amer.)


4. ROUBIEVA, Moquin.

Flowers minute, perfect or pistillate, solitary or 2--3 together in the
axils. Calyx urceolate, 3--5-toothed, becoming enlarged and saccate,
contracted at the apex and enclosing the fruit. Stamens 5, included;
styles 3, exserted. Fruit membranaceous, compressed, glandular-dotted.
Seed vertical. Embryo annular.--Perennial glandular herb, with alternate
pinnatifid leaves.

R. MULTIFIDA, Moq. Prostrate or ascending, branching and leafy; leaves
lanceolate to linear (1/2--11/2' long), deeply pinnatifid with narrow lobes;
fruiting calyx obovate. (Chenopodium multifidum, _L._)--Sparingly
introduced in the Atlantic States. (Adv. from S. Amer.)


5. ATRIPLEX, Tourn. ORACHE.

Flowers monoecious or dioecious; the staminate like the flowers of
Chenopodium, but sterile by the abortion of the pistil; the fertile
consisting simply of a naked pistil enclosed between a pair of appressed
foliaceous bracts, which are enlarged in fruit, and sometimes united.
Seed vertical. Embryo coiled into a ring around the albumen. In one
section, including the Garden Orache, there are some fertile flowers
with a calyx, like the staminate, but without stamens, and with
horizontal seeds.--Herbs (ours annuals) usually mealy or scurfy with
bran-like scales, with spiked-clustered flowers; in summer and autumn.
(The ancient Latin name, a corruption of the Greek, [Greek:
a)tra/phaxis].)

A. ROSEUM, L. Hoary-mealy; leaves short-petioled or the upper sessile,
rhombic-ovate or oblong with a wedge-shaped base, coarsely
sinuate-toothed; fertile flowers mostly clustered in the axils; fruiting
bracts broad, often cut-toothed and warty.--Sparingly introduced at the
east. (Adv. from Eu.)

1. A. patulum, L. Erect or prostrate (1--4 deg. high), dark green and
glabrous or somewhat scurfy; leaves narrowly lanceolate hastate (1--4'
long), the lower sometimes opposite, entire or sparingly
sinuate-dentate, petioled, the upper lanceolate to linear; flowers
clustered in rather slender spikes, the two kinds together or separate;
fruiting bracts ovate-triangular or rhombic-hastate, entire or toothed,
often muricate on the back, united to near the middle.--Very variable.
The typical form scarcely occurs except as naturalized from
Europe.--Var. HASTATUM, Gray. Erect or spreading, stout, at least the
lower leaves broadly triangular-hastate, often coarsely and irregularly
toothed. Salt and brackish places, on the coast from Can. to Va., along
the Great Lakes, and far westward.--Var. LITTORALE, Gray. Slender;
leaves linear-lanceolate to linear, rarely subhastate or toothed. Canada
to N. J., and westward along the Great Lakes.--Var. SUBSPICATUM, Watson.
A low erect and often simple form (3--12' high), usually quite scurfy;
leaves lanceolate-hastate (1/2--1' long). Minn. to central Kan., and
westward.

2. A. arenarium, Nutt. _Silvery-mealy_, diffusely spreading; leaves
oblong, narrowed at base, nearly sessile; fruiting bracts broadly
wedge-shaped, united, 3-nerved, 2--5 toothed at the summit, and usually
strongly muricate and reticulate on the sides.--Sandy beaches, along the
coast, Mass. to Fla.

3. A. argenteum, Nutt. Usually low, much branched, gray-scurfy, leafy;
leaves deltoid or subrhombic, often subhastate; staminate flowers in
terminal spikes; fruiting bracts round-rhombic, indurated, united, the
free margins more or less dilated and deeply toothed, the sides
variously appendaged.--Red River Valley, Minn., south and westward.


6. CORISPERMUM, A. Juss. BUG-SEED.

Flowers perfect, single and sessile in the axils of the upper leaves
reduced to bracts, usually forming a spike. Calyx of a single delicate
sepal on the inner side. Stamens 1 or 2, rarely 5. Styles 2. Fruit oval,
flat, with the outer face rather convex and the inner concave,
sharp-margined, a _caryopsis_, i.e. the thin pericarp adherent to the
vertical seed. Embryo slender, coiled around a central albumen.--Low
branching annuals, with narrow linear alternate 1-nerved leaves. (Name
formed of [Greek: ko/ris], _a bug_, and [Greek: spe/rma], _seed_.)

1. C. hyssopifolium, L. Somewhat hairy when young, pale; floral leaves
or bracts awl-shaped from a dilated base or the upper ovate and pointed,
scarious-margined; fruit wing-margined.--Sandy beaches along the Great
Lakes, central Neb., Tex., and westward.--Leaves usually pungent.


7. SALICORNIA, Tourn. GLASSWORT. SAMPHIRE.

Flowers perfect, 3 together immersed in each hollow of the thickened
upper joints, forming a spike; the two lateral sometimes sterile. Calyx
small and bladder-like, with a toothed or torn margin, at length spongy
and narrowly wing-bordered, enclosing the flattened thin utricle.
Stamens 1 or 2. Styles 2, united at base. Seed vertical, without
albumen. Embryo thick, the cotyledons incumbent upon the radicle.--Low
saline plants, with succulent leafless jointed stems, and opposite
branches; the flower-bearing branchlets forming the spikes. (Name
composed of _sal_, salt, and _cornu_, a horn; saline plants with
horn-like branches.)

1. S. mucronata, Bigel. Annual, erect, stout, naked below (2--12' high),
_turning red_ in age; _spikes thick, closely jointed; scales
mucronate-pointed and conspicuous_, especially when dry; _middle flower
half higher than the lateral ones_ or less, occupying nearly the whole
length of the joint; fruit pubescent; seed 1/2--3/4'' long. (S. Virginica,
_Gray_, Manual; not _L._)--Sea-coast from N. Scotia to Va.

2. S. herbacea, L. Annual, erect or at length spreading (6--18' high),
_green; scales obscure and very blunt_, making a truncate barely
emarginate termination of _the longer joints_ of the stem or _elongated
narrower spikes_; middle flower much higher than the lateral ones,
slightly shorter than the joint; fruit pubescent; seed {2/3}--1''
long.--Salt marshes of the coast and interior salt springs, and alkaline
localities.

3. S. ambigua, Michx. Numerous tufted stems (3--12' long) decumbent or
ascending from a hard and rather _woody creeping base or rootstock_,
greenish, turning lead-colored; _spikes slender, short-jointed, the
scales short, acutish or acute; flowers nearly equal in height_ and
equalling the joint; seed pubescent, {1/3}'' long. (S. fruticosa, var.
ambigua, _Gray_, Manual.)--Sea-coast, Mass. to Fla. and Tex.


8. SUAEDA, Forskal. SEA BLITE.

Flowers perfect, sessile in the axils of leafy bracts. Calyx 5-parted,
fleshy, enclosing the fruit (utricle) and often carinate or crested.
Stamens 5. Stigmas 2 or 3. Seed vertical or horizontal, with a
flat-spiral embryo, dividing the scanty albumen (when there is any) into
two portions.--Fleshy saline plants, with alternate nearly terete linear
leaves. (An Arabic name.)

1. S. linearis, Moq. Annual, prostrate or usually erect, 1--2 deg. high,
branched; _leaves narrow at base_, 1/2--2' long, acute; floral bracts
acuminate, on slender branchlets; sepals very thick; anthers exserted;
seed horizontal, round-oval, black, 1/2'' broad. (S. maritima, _Gray_; not
_Dumort_.)--Sea-coast, N. Scotia to Fla.--A doubtful form of E. Mass.
has the bracts and shorter leaves obtuse, larger flowers on less slender
branchlets, and reddish seeds nearly 1'' broad.

2. S. depressa, Watson. _Annual, decumbent_ or erect, branching from the
base; _leaves broadest at base_, the cauline 3--12'' long, the floral
lanceolate to ovate; one or more of the calyx-lobes _very strongly
carinate or crested_.--Saline soil, Red River Valley, Minn., to Col.,
and westward.


9. SALSOLA, L. SALTWORT.

Flowers perfect, with 2 bractlets. Calyx 5-parted, persistent and
enclosing the depressed fruit in its base; its divisions at length
horizontally winged on the back, the wings forming a broad and circular
scarious border. Stamens mostly 5. Styles 2. Seed horizontal, without
albumen, filled by the embryo, which is coiled in a conical spiral
(cochleate).--Herbs or slightly shrubby branching plants of the
sea-shore, with fleshy and rather terete or awl-shaped leaves, and
sessile axillary flowers. (Diminutive of _salsus_, salty.)

1. S. Kali, L. (COMMON SALTWORT.) Annual, diffusely branching, bushy,
rough or smoothish; leaves all alternate, awl-shaped, prickly-pointed;
flowers single; calyx with the converging lobes forming a sort of beak
over the fruit, the large rose or flesh-colored wings nearly orbicular
and spreading.--Sandy sea-shore, N. Eng. to Ga. Aug. (Eu.)
(Addendum)--Salsola Kali. This species has been found in Emmet Co., Iowa
(_Cratty_), at Yankton, Dak. (_Bruhin_), and in river-bottoms in N. W.
Neb. and central Dak.


ORDER 88. PHYTOLACCACEAE. (POKEWEED FAMILY.)

_Plants with alternate entire leaves and perfect flowers, having the
general characters of_ Chenopodiaceae, _but usually a several-celled
ovary composed of as many carpels united in a ring, and forming a berry
in fruit._


1. PHYTOLACCA, Tourn. POKEWEED.

Calyx of 5 rounded and petal like sepals. Stamens 5--30. Ovary of 5--12
carpels, united in a ring, with as many short separate styles, in fruit
forming a depressed globose 5--12-celled berry, with a single vertical
seed in each cell. Embryo curved in a ring around the albumen.--Tall
and stout perennial herbs, with large petioled leaves, and terminal
racemes which become lateral and opposite the leaves. (Name compounded
of [Greek: phyto/n], _plant_, and the French _lac_, lake, in allusion to
the crimson coloring matter which the berries yield.)

1. P. decandra, L. (COMMON POKE or SCOKE. GARGET. PIGEON-BERRY.) Stamens
and styles 10.--Low grounds. July--Sept.--A smooth plant, with a rather
unpleasant odor, and a very large poisonous root, often 4--6' in
diameter, sending up stout stalks at length 6--9 deg. high; calyx white;
ovary green; berries in long racemes, dark-purple and filled with
crimson juice, ripe in autumn.


ORDER 89. POLYGONACEAE. (BUCKWHEAT FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with alternate entire leaves, and stipules in the form of
sheaths_ (ocreae, these sometimes obsolete) _above the swollen joints of
the stem; the flowers mostly perfect, with a more or less persistent
calyx, a 1-celled ovary bearing 2 or 3 styles or stigmas, and a single
erect orthotropous seed._ Fruit usually an achene, compressed or
3--4-angled or -winged. Embryo curved or straightish, on the outside of
the albumen, or rarely in its centre. Stamens 4--12, inserted on the
base of the 3--6-cleft calyx. (Juice often acrid, sometimes agreeably
acid, as in Sorrel; the roots, as in Rhubarb, sometimes cathartic.)

[*] Flowers involucrate; stamens 9; stipules none.

1. Eriogonum. Involucre several-flowered, with flowers exserted. Calyx
6-cleft.

[*][*] Flowers without involucre; stamens 4 to 8.

[+] Stipular sheaths manifest; ovule erect from the base of the cell.

[++] Sepals 4 or 6, the outer row reflexed, the inner erect and
enlarging in fruit.

2. Oxyria. Sepals 4. Stigmas 2. Achene orbicular-winged. Leaves
reniform.

3. Rumex. Sepals 6. Stigmas 3. Achene 3-angled.

[++][++] Sepals 5 (sometimes 4), equal and erect in fruit. Achene
triangular or lenticular.

4. Polygonum. Embryo slender, curved around one side of the albumen.
Pedicels mostly fascicled.

5. Fagopyrum. Embryo in the albumen, its very broad cotyledons
twisted-plaited.

6. Polygonella. Embryo slender, nearly straight. Pedicels solitary.
Leaves jointed at base.

[+][+] Stipules obsolete; ovule hanging from the apex of a slender
stalk.

7. Brunnichia. Calyx 5-parted, in fruit with a wing decurrent on the
pedicel. Tendril-climber.


1. ERIOGONUM, Michx.

Flowers perfect, involucrate; involucre 4--8-toothed or lobed, usually
many-flowered; the more or less exserted pedicels intermixed with narrow
scarious bracts. Calyx 6-parted or -cleft, colored, persistent about the
achene. Stamens 9, upon the base of the calyx. Styles 3; stigmas
capitate. Achene triangular. Embryo straight and axile, with foliaceous
cotyledons.--Annuals or perennials, with radical or alternate or whorled
entire leaves, without stipules. (Name from [Greek: e)/rion], _wool_,
and [Greek: go/ny], _knee_.)

1. E. annuum, Nutt. Annual, erect, leafy, naked above, 2 deg. high,
white-floccose-tomentose throughout; leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute at
both ends, short-petiolate, flat; bracts small, triangular; involucres
numerous in terminal cymes, turbinate, shortly pedicelled, 1--11/2'' long,
very tomentose; flowers white, the outer sepals oblong obovate, 1'' long
or less.--Central Kan. to Col., and southward.

(Addendum) 2. E. Alleni, Watson. Perennial, white-tomentose throughout,
the tall scape-like stem repeatedly dichotomous above; radical leaves
lanceolate, long-petiolate, the upper in whorls of 4 or 5, ovate to
oblong-ovate, very shortly petiolate, much reduced above; involucres
mostly sessile; flowers glabrous, yellow, the segments elliptical.--Near
White Sulphur Springs, W. Va. (_T. F. Allen_).


2. OXYRIA, Hill. MOUNTAIN SORREL.

Calyx herbaceous, of 4 sepals; the outer smaller and spreading, the
inner broader and erect (but unchanged) in fruit. Stamens 6. Stigmas 2,
sessile, tufted. Achene lenticular, thin, flat, much larger than the
calyx, surrounded by a broad veiny wing. Seed flattened contrary to the
wing. Embryo straight, in the centre of the albumen, slender.--Low
alpine perennial, with round-kidney-form and long-petioled leaves
chiefly from the root, obliquely truncate sheaths, and small greenish
flowers clustered in panicled racemes on a slender scape. (Name from
[Greek: o)xy/s], _sour_, in allusion to the acid leaves.)

1. O. digyna, Hill. Leaves all round-kidney-form, usually notched at the
end; fruit orbicular.--Alpine region of the White Mts., and far north
and westward. (Eu.)


3. RUMEX, L. DOCK. SORREL.

Calyx of 6 sepals; the 3 outer herbaceous, sometimes united at base,
spreading in fruit; the 3 inner larger, somewhat colored, enlarged after
flowering (in fruit called _valves_) and convergent over the 3-angled
achene, veiny, often bearing a grain-like tubercle on the back. Stamens
6. Styles 3; stigmas tufted. Embryo slightly curved lying along one side
of the albumen, slender.--Coarse herbs, with small and homely (mostly
green) flowers, which are crowded and commonly whorled in panicled
racemes; the petioles somewhat sheathing at base. (The ancient Latin
name; of unknown etymology.)

Sec. 1. LAPATHUM. (DOCK.) _Flowers perfect or monoeciously polygamous;
herbage not sour or scarcely so; none of the leaves halberd-shaped.
(Flowering through the summer.)_

[*] _Perennials, 1--7 deg. high, mostly with fusiform roots; valves not
bearing bristles._

[+] _Valves (large, 3'' broad or more, thin) all naked or one with a
small grain._

R. PATIENTIA, L. (PATIENCE DOCK.) A very tall species, with ovate-oblong
and lanceolate leaves (broadest above the base), those from the root
2--3 deg. long, and one of the heart-shaped nearly or quite entire valves
(3'' broad) bearing a small grain, or its midrib thickened at
base.--N. Eng and N. Y. (Adv. from Eu.)

1. R. venosus, Pursh. Stems from running rootstocks, erect (1 deg. high or
less), with conspicuous dilated stipules; leaves on short but rather
slender petioles, ovate or oblong to lanceolate (3--6'; long), acute or
acuminate, only the lowest obtuse at base; panicle nearly sessile,
short, dense in fruit; valves entire, glandless, broadly cordate with a
deep sinus, 9--12'' in diameter, bright rose-color.--Sask. to central
Mo. and Kan., and westward.

[+][+] _Valves smaller, one or more of them conspicuously
grain-bearing._

[++] _Indigenous; leaves not wavy, none heart-shaped, except the lowest
of n. 5._

2. R. Britannica, L. (GREAT WATER-DOCK.) Tall and stout (5--6 deg. high);
leaves oblong-lanceolate, rather acute at both ends, transversely
veined, and with obscurely erose-crenulate margins (the lowest,
including the petiole, 1--2 deg. long, the middle rarely truncate or
obscurely cordate at base); racemes upright in a large compound panicle,
nearly leafless; whorls crowded; _pedicels capillary, nodding, about
twice the length of the fruiting calyx; the valves orbicular or
round-ovate_, very obtuse, obscurely heart-shaped at base, _finely
reticulated_, entire or repand-denticulate (2--3'' broad), all
grain-bearing. (R. orbiculatus, _Gray_.)--Wet places, N. Eng. to N. J.,
west to Minn, and Kan.

3. R. altissimus, Wood. (PALE DOCK.) Rather tall (2--6 deg. high); _leaves
ovate- or oblong-lanceolate_, acute, pale, thickish, obscurely veiny
(the cauline 3--6' long, contracted at base into a short petiole);
racemes spike-like and panicled, nearly leafless; whorls crowded;
_pedicels nodding, shorter than the fruiting calyx; valves broadly
ovate_ or obscurely heart-shaped, obtuse or acutish, entire, loosely
reticulated (about 2'' broad), one with a conspicuous grain, the others
with a thickened midrib or naked. (R. Britannica, _Gray_; not
_L._)--Moist grounds, N. Y. and N. J. to Minn., and Kan.

4. R. salicifolius, Weinmann. (WHITE DOCK.) Rather low (1--3 deg. high);
root white, _leaves narrowly or linear-lanceolate_, or the lowest
oblong; whorls much crowded; _pedicels much shorter than the fruiting
calyx; valves deltoid-ovate_, obtusish or acutish (about 11/2'' long),
one, two or sometimes all with a conspicuous often very large grain;
otherwise nearly as n. 3.--Salt marshes, from Newf. to N. Eng., about
the Great Lakes, and far westward.

5. R. verticillatus, L. (SWAMP DOCK.) Rather tall (3--5 deg. high); leaves
lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, rather obtuse, thickish, pale-green,
the lowest often heart-shaped at base; racemes nearly leafless,
elongated, loose, the whorls crowded or the lower ones distant;
fruit-bearing _pedicels slender, club-shaped, abruptly reflexed, 3--4
times longer than the fruiting calyx; valves dilated-rhomboid, obtusely
somewhat pointed, strongly rugose-reticulated_, each bearing a very
large grain.--Wet swamps, common.

[++][++] _Naturalized European weeds; lower leaves mostly heart-shaped
at base._

R. CRISPUS, L. (CURLED DOCK.) Smooth (3--4 deg. high); _leaves with strongly
wavy-curled margins, lanceolate_, acute, the lower truncate or scarcely
heart-shaped at base; _whorls crowded in prolonged wand-like racemes,
leafless above; valves round-heart-shaped, obscurely denticulate_ or
entire, mostly all grain-bearing.--In cultivated and waste ground, very
common. A hybrid of this with the next is reported from Mass., N. Y.,
and Md.

R. OBTUSIFOLIUS, L. (BITTER DOCK.) Stem roughish; _lowest leaves
ovate-heart-shaped, obtuse_, rather downy on the veins beneath, somewhat
wavy-margined, the _upper oblong-lanceolate, acute; whorls loose and
distant; valves ovate-halberd-shaped, with some sharp awl-shaped teeth
at base_, strongly reticulated, one of them principally
grain-bearing.--Fields, etc., common.

R. SANGUINEUS, L. _Leaves oblong-lanceolate_, often fiddle shaped,
wavy-margined; _whorls distant, in long slender leafless spikes_;
pedicels very short, jointed at base; _valves narrowly oblong, obtuse,
entire_, one at least grain-bearing; veins of the leaf red, or
green.--Waste and cultivated ground.

R. CONGLOMERATUS, Murray. (SMALLER GREEN DOCK.) Like the last, but
leaves not fiddle-shaped, and panicle leafy; pedicels short, jointed
below the middle; valves acutish, all grain-bearing.--Moist places.

[*][*] _Annuals, low; valves bearing long awns or bristles._

6. R. maritimus, L. (GOLDEN DOCK.) Minutely pubescent, diffusely
branched, 6--12' high; leaves lance-linear, wavy-margined, the lower
auricled or heart-shaped at base; whorls excessively crowded in leafy
and compact or interrupted spikes; valves rhombic-oblong, lance-pointed,
each bearing 2--3 long awn-like bristles on each side, and a large grain
on the back.--Sea-shore, Mass. to N. C.; also from Ill. to Minn., and
westward.

Sec. 2. ACETOSA. (SORREL.) _Flowers dioecious, small, in a terminal naked
panicle; herbage sour; some leaves halberd-shaped; smooth perennials,
spreading by running rootstocks, flowering in spring._

7. R. hastatulus, Baldw. Stem simple, 1--2 deg. high; leaves nearly as in
the next; _pedicels jointed at or below the middle; valves of the
fruiting calyx round-heart-shaped_, thin, finely reticulated, naked,
_many times larger than the achene_. (R. Engelmanni, _Ledeb._)--S. W.
Ill. to E. Kan., Tex., and Fla.; Riverhead, Long Island (_Young_).

R. ACETOSELLA, L. (FIELD or SHEEP SORREL.) Low (6--12' high); leaves
narrow-lanceolate or linear, halberd-form, at least those of the root,
the narrow lobes entire; _pedicels jointed with the flower; valves
scarcely enlarging in fruit, ovate_, naked.--Abundant everywhere. (Nat.
from Eu.)

R. ACETOSA, L. (SORREL DOCK.) Like the last, but taller (1--3 deg. high);
leaves oblong or broadly lanceolate; _valves enlarging in fruit and
orbicular, the outer reflexed_.--Charlotte, Vt., and Penn Yan, N. Y.
(Nat. from Eu.)


4. POLYGONUM, Tourn. KNOTWEED.

Calyx mostly 5-parted; the divisions often petal-like, all erect in
fruit, withering or persistent. Stamens 4--9. Styles or stigmas 2 or 3;
achene accordingly lenticular or 3-angular. Embryo placed in a groove on
the outside of the albumen and curved half-way around it; the radicle
and usually the cotyledons slender.--Pedicels jointed. Ours all
herbaceous, with fibrous roots (except n. 19), flowering through late
summer and early autumn. (Name composed of [Greek: poly/s], _many_, and
[Greek: go/ny], _knee_, from the numerous joints.)

Sec. 1. POLYGONUM proper. _Flowers in axillary fascicles or spicate with
foliaceous bracts; leaves and bracts jointed upon a very short petiole
adnate to the short sheath of the 2-lobed or lacerate scarious stipules;
stems striate; calyx 5--6-parted, usually more or less herbaceous;
stamens 3--8, the 3 inner filaments broad at base; styles 3; cotyledons
incumbent; albumen horny; glabrous annuals, except n. 1._ (Sec. Avicularia,
_Meisn._)

[*] _Leafy throughout._

1. P. maritimum, L. _Perennial_, at length woody at base (or sometimes
annual), prostrate, _glaucous_, the stout stems very shortly jointed;
_leaves thick_, oval to linear-oblong (3--10'' long), exceeding the
nodes; stipules very conspicuous; sepals petaloid; stamens 8; _achene
smooth and shining, exserted_.--Sea-coast from Mass. to Ga. (Eu.)

2. P. aviculare, L. Slender, _mostly prostrate or ascending,
bluish-green_; leaves oblong to lanceolate (3--10'' long), usually acute
or acutish; _sepals hardly 1'' long_, green with pinkish margins;
stamens 8 (rarely 5); achene dull and minutely granular, mostly
included.--Common everywhere in yards, waste places, etc. (Eu., Asia.)

3. P. erectum, L. _Stouter, erect_ or ascending (1--2 deg. high),
_yellowish_; leaves oblong or oval (1/2--21/2' long), usually obtuse;
_flowers mostly 11/2'' long_, often yellowish, on more or less exserted
pedicels, stamens 5--6; achene dull, included (P. aviculare, var.
erectum, _Roth_.)--Common, by waysides, etc.

[*][*] _Leaves much reduced above and bract-like._

4. P. ramosissimum, Michx. Erect or ascending (2--4 deg. high), _yellowish
green_; leaves lanceolate to linear (1--21/2' long), acute; _flowers_ and
achene _as in_ n. 3, but sepals more frequently 6, the _stamens_ 3--6,
and the achene mostly smooth and shining--Sandy shores and banks of
streams, E. Mass to N. Y., west to Minn., Ark., Tex., and far westward.

5. P. tenue, Michx. _Stem angled_, erect (1/2--11/2 deg. high), glabrous, or
slightly scabrous at the nodes; _leaves_ narrowly linear to lanceolate
(1--2' long), _3-nerved_, acute at each end and often cuspidate, the
margins somewhat scabrous and at length revolute; _flowers_ often
solitary, _nearly sessile; stamens_ 8; achene included, dull black--Dry
soil, N. Eng. to S. C., west to Minn., Mo., and Tex.

6. P. camporum, Meisn. _Stem terete_, erect or ascending (2--3 deg. high),
glabrous; _leaves deciduous_, linear to oblong, usually short; _pedicels
slender, exserted from the scarious sheaths_; stamens 8.--E. Kan. to
Tex.

Sec. 2. PERSICARIA _Flowers in dense spikes, with small scarious bracts;
leaves not jointed on the petiole; sheaths cylindrical, truncate,
entire, naked or ciliate-fringed or margined; calyx colored, 5-parted,
appressed to the fruit; stamens 4--8, filaments filiform; cotyledons
accumbent._

[*] _Sheaths and bracts not ciliate or fringed; sepals not punctate;
style 2-cleft._

7. P. lapathifolium, L. Annual, branching, 1--4 deg. high, glabrous or the
peduncles often minutely glandular; leaves lanceolate, attenuate upward
from near the cuneate base and acuminate somewhat scabious with short
appressed hairs on the midrib and margin or rarely floccose-tomentose
beneath; sheaths and bracts rarely somewhat ciliolate; spikes oblong to
linear (1/2--2' long), dense, erect or nearly so; flowers white or pale
rose-color; stamens 6; achene ovate, rarely 1'' broad. (P. nodosum,
_Pers._, P. incarnatum, _Man._, in part.)--Wet places; N. Eng. and Can.
to Ill., Wisc., and far westward. Very variable. (Eu.)

Var. incarnatum, Watson. Leaves often large (6--12' long, 1--3' wide);
spikes more slender and elongated (2--4' long), nodding. (P. incarnatum,
_Ell._)--Penn. to Ill., Mo., and southward.

Var. incanum, Koch. Low (6--12' high); leaves small, obtusish, more or
less hoary beneath with floccose tomentum; spikes short.--Cayuga Lake,
N. Y., Ont., shores of L. Superior, and northwestward. (Eu.)

8. P. Pennsylvanicum, L. A similar species, but the _branches above and
especially the peduncles beset with stipitate glands_; flowers larger
and often bright rose-color, in short erect spikes, often on exserted
pedicels; stamens usually 8; achene nearly orbicular, over 1''
broad.--Moist soil, in open waste places, common.

9. P. amphibium, L. Perennial, _aquatic_ or rooting in the mud, _stout
and glabrous_ or nearly so, not branching above the rooting base;
_leaves usually floating, thick_, smooth and shining above, mostly long
petioled, _elliptical to oblong_ or sometimes lanceolate, _acutish_,
cuneate or cordate at base (2--5' long); spike terminal, _dense, ovate
or oblong_ (1/2--1' long); flowers bright rose-color (11/2--3'' long); the 5
stamens and 2-cleft style exserted.--Widely distributed and rather
common. (Eu., Asia)

10. P. Muhlenberghii, Watson. Perennial, in muddy or dry places,
decumbent or suberect, _scabrous with short appressed or glandular
hairs; leaves thinner, rather broadly lanceolate, narrowly acuminate_
(4--7' long); _spikes more elongated_ (1--3' long), often in pairs;
flowers and fruit nearly as in the last. (P. amphibium, var. terrestre,
_Gray_, Manual; not _Lurs_)--N. Eng. to Fla., westward across the
continent.

[*][*] _Sheaths and bracts bristly ciliate or the sheaths foliaceously
margined._

[+] _Sepals not punctate; style 2-cleft; achene somewhat flattened._

11. P. Hartwrightii, Gray. _Perennial_, very closely allied to n. 9,
growing usually in mud, the ascending stems rooting at base and very
leafy, _more or less rough-hairy_, at least on the sheaths and bracts,
the former ciliate and _often with abruptly spreading foliaceous
borders_; leaves rather narrow (2--7' long), on very short petioles;
_flowers and fruit as in n. 9._--N. Eng. and N. Y., to Minn., Iowa, and
far westward. When growing in water the floating leaves are thicker and
glabrous.

12. P. Careyi, Olney. Annual, erect, the stem (3--5 deg. high) and peduncles
_glandular-bristly; leaves narrowly lanceolate_, attenuate to both ends,
roughish; sheaths ciliate or sometimes margined; spikes slender, loose
and nodding; flowers purplish; _stamens mostly_ 5.--Shady swamps, S.
Maine and N. H. to Penn. and Ont.

P. ORIENTALE, L. (PRINCE'S FEATHER.) Tall branching annual, _soft-hairy;
leaves ovate_ or oblong, pointed, distinctly petioled; _sheaths_ ciliate
or _often with an abrupt spreading border_; flowers large, bright
rose-color, _in dense cylindrical nodding spikes; stamens 7_.--Sparingly
escaped from gardens into waste grounds. (Adv. from India)

P. PERSICARIA, L. (LADY'S THUMB.) Nearly _smooth and glabrous_ (12--18'
high); sheaths more or less bristly-ciliate; leaves lanceolate, pointed,
roughish, often marked with a dark triangular or lunar spot near the
middle; _spikes ovoid or oblong, dense, erect, on smooth_ (or at least
not glandular) _peduncles_; stamens mostly 6; _styles half 2--3-cleft_;
achene gibbous-flattened or sometimes triangular, smooth and
shining.--Waste and damp places, very common. (Nat. from Eu.)

[+][+] _Sepals conspicuously dotted and leaves punctate (except n. 13),
with acrid juice; style mostly 3-parted, and achene triangular; sheaths
bristle-fringed._

13. P. hydropiperoides, Michx. (MILD WATER-PEPPER.) _Perennial, not
acrid_; stem smooth (1--3 deg. high), branching; the narrow _sheaths hairy_;
leaves narrowly lanceolate, sometimes oblong; _spikes erect, slender_,
sometimes filiform, often interrupted at base (1--21/2' long); flowers
small, flesh-color or nearly white; _sepals not dotted; stamens 8;
achene sharply triangular, smooth and shining_.--Wet places and in
shallow water; common, especially southward.

14. P. Hydropiper, L. (COMMON SMARTWEED or WATER-PEPPER.) _Annual_,
1--2 deg. high, smooth; leaves narrowly to linear-lanceolate; _spikes
nodding_, usually short or interrupted; flowers mostly greenish;
_stamens_ 6; style 2--3-parted; _achene dull_, minutely striate.--Moist
or wet grounds; apparently introduced eastward, but indigenous north and
westward. (Eu.)

15. P. acre, HBK. (WATER SMARTWEED.) _Perennial_, nearly smooth; stems
rooting at the decumbent base, 2--5 deg. high; leaves larger and longer than
in the last, taper-pointed; _spikes erect; flowers whitish_, sometimes
flesh-color; _stamens 8_; style _mostly 3-parted; achene smooth and
shining_.--Wet places; common, especially southward.

Sec. 3. BISTORTA. _Glabrous alpine perennials, with thick creeping
rootstocks and simple stems; flowers in a spike-like raceme; calyx
colored, deeply 5-cleft; stamens 8; styles 3, long._

16. P. viviparum, L. Smooth, dwarf (4--8' high), bearing a linear erect
spike of flesh-colored flowers (or often little red bulblets in their
place); leaves lanceolate.--Alpine summits of N. Eng., shores of L.
Superior, and northward. (Eu.)

Sec. 4. TOVARA. _Perennials; flowers in loose naked long and slender
spikes; calyx rather herbaceous (greenish), unequally 4-parted; stamens
5; styles 2, distinct, rigid and persistent on the smooth lenticular
achene._

17. P. Virginianum, L. Almost smooth; stem terete, upright (2--4 deg. high);
sheaths cylindrical, hairy and fringed; leaves ovate, or the upper
ovate-lanceolate, taper-pointed, rounded at the base, short-petioled,
rough-ciliate (3--6' long); flowers 1--3 from each bract, somewhat
curved, the styles deflexed in fruit, minutely hooked.--Thickets in rich
soil, common. (Asia.)

Sec. 5. TINIARIA. _Annuals or perennials, mostly twining or climbing, and
with petioled cordate or sagittate leaves; flowers in loose panicles or
racemes or in terminal or axillary clusters; calyx green with colored
margins, 5- (rarely 4-) parted; stamens mostly 8; styles or stigmas 3_
(2 in n. 18).

[*] _Annuals, erect, or somewhat climbing by reflexed prickles on the
angles of the stem and petioles; sepals (pale rose-color or white) not
keeled; bracts chaff-like._

18. P. arifolium, L. (HALBERD-LEAVED TEAR-THUMB.) _Stem grooved-angled;
leaves halberd-shaped_, taper-pointed, _long-petioled_; flowers somewhat
racemed (few); peduncles glandular-bristly; calyx often 4-parted;
_stamens 6; styles 2_, very short; _achene lenticular_ (large).--Low
grounds. (Asia.)

19. P. sagittatum, L. (ARROW-LEAVED TEAR-THUMB.) _Stem 4-angled; leaves
arrow-shaped, short-petioled_; flowers capitate; peduncles smooth;
_stamens mostly 8; styles 3_, slender; _achene sharply 3-angled_.--Low
grounds, common.--Slender, smooth except the angles of the stem and
midrib beneath, which are armed with fine and very sharp saw-toothed
prickles. (Asia.)

[*][*] _Stems not prickly; calyx with the 3 outer divisions keeled, at
least in fruit; flowers in loose panicled racemes; bracts
short-sheathing._

P. CONVOLVULUS, L. (BLACK BINDWEED.) _Annual_, twining or procumbent,
low, _roughish, the joints naked_; leaves halberd-heart shaped, pointed;
flowers in small interrupted corymbose racemes; _outer calyx-lobes
keeled_; achene smoothish.--Cult. and waste grounds, common. (Nat. from
Eu.)

20. P. cilinode, Michx. _Perennial, minutely downy; the sheaths fringed_
at the base with reflexed bristles; leaves heart-shaped and slightly
halberd-shaped, taper-pointed; racemes panicled; _calyx-lobes obscurely
keeled_; achene very smooth and shining.--Copses and rocky hills, N.
Eng. to mountains of N. C., west to Mich, and Minn. Climbing 3--9 deg. high.

21. P. dumetorum, L., var scandens, Gray. (CLIMBING FALSE BUCKWHEAT.)
_Perennial, smooth; sheaths naked_; leaves heart-shaped or slightly
halberd-shaped, pointed; racemes interrupted, leafy; the 3 outer
_calyx-lobes strongly keeled and in fruit winged_; achene smooth and
shining.--Moist thickets, common. Twining 8--12 deg. high over bushes.

P. CUSPIDATUM, Sieb. & Zucc. Perennial, erect, stout and tall, glabrous
except the loose axillary panicled racemes; leaves round-ovate, shortly
acuminate, truncate or cordate at base; outer sepals broadly winged in
fruit.--Occasionally escaped from gardens. (Japan.)


5. FAGOPYRUM, Tourn. BUCKWHEAT.

Calyx petal-like, equally 5-parted, withering and nearly unchanged in
fruit. Stamens 8. Styles 3; stigmas capitate. Achene 3-sided, longer
than the calyx. Embryo large, in the centre of the albumen, which it
divides into 2 parts, with very broad and foliaceous plaited and twisted
cotyledons.--Glabrous annuals, with triangular-heart-shaped or
halberd-shaped leaves, semicylindrical sheaths, and corymbose racemes or
panicles of white flowers, often tinged with green or rose-color. (Name
from _fagus_, the beech, and [Greek: pyro/s], _wheat_, from the
resemblance of the grain to the beech-nut; so the English name
Buckwheat, from the German _buche_, beech.)

F. ESCULENTUM, Moench. (BUCKWHEAT.) Smoothish; flower with 8
honey-bearing yellow-glands interposed between the stamens; achene acute
and entire, smooth and shining.--Old fields, remaining as a weed after
cultivation, and escaping into copses. June--Sept. (Adv. from Eu.)

F. TATARICUM, Gaertn. (INDIA-WHEAT.) Flowers very small, on shorter
pedicels; achene very dull and roughish, the sides sulcate.--An
occasional escape from cultivation. (Adv. from Asia.)


6. POLYGONELLA, Michx.

Flowers perfect or polygamous-dioecious. Calyx 5-parted, petaloid,
loosely persistent about the achene, the 3 inner divisions often
enlarging in fruit, in which case the outer are usually spreading.
Stamens 8. Styles 3, and achene 3-angular. Embryo slender, straight or
nearly so, toward one side of the albumen.--Slender glabrous annuals or
perennials, with alternate mostly linear leaves jointed at the base, and
rather rigid truncate or oblique naked sheaths and bracts. Flowers on
solitary jointed pedicels (nodding in fruit) in slender panicled
racemes. (Diminutive of Polygonum.)

1. P. articulata, Meisn. Annual, erect, branching, glaucous, 4--12'
high; leaves linear-filiform, deciduous; flowers rose-color, nodding, in
very slender racemes, the calyx a little enlarged in fruit; 3 inner
filaments dilated at base; achene exserted, smooth. (Polygonum
articulatum, _Gray_.)--Dry, sandy soil; on the coast from Maine to
N. J., and along the Great Lakes.


7. BRUNNICHIA, Banks.

Calyx 5-parted; the divisions somewhat petal-like, oblong, connivent and
coriaceous in fruit, the base and almost the whole length of the pedicel
winged on one side. Stamens 8; filaments capillary. Styles 3, slender;
stigmas depressed-capitate. Ovule pendulous on a slender erect
funiculus; seed erect, 6-grooved. Achene obtusely triangular, partly
3-celled, enclosed in the indurated calyx. Embryo in one of the angles
of the mealy albumen, somewhat curved.--Somewhat shrubby with grooved
stems, climbing by tendrils from the ends of the branches. (Named for
_F. Brunnich_, a Danish naturalist.)

1. B. cirrhosa, Banks. Glabrous; leaves ovate or heart-shaped pointed,
entire; petioles dilated at base and partly clasping, but with no
distinct sheath or stipules; flowers greenish, 2--5 in a fascicle from
the axil of an awl-shaped bract, these crowded in axillary and terminal
racemes; pedicel jointed near the base; fruiting calyx with the wing 1'
long.--S. Ill. to S. C. and Fla.


ORDER 90. PODOSTEMACEAE. (RIVER-WEED FAMILY.)

_Aquatics, growing on stones in running water, some with the aspect of_
Sea-weeds, _or others of_ Mosses _or_ Liverworts; _the minute naked
flowers bursting from a spathe-like involucre as in_ Liverworts,
_producing a 2--3-celled many-seeded ribbed capsule_;--represented in
North America by


1. PODOSTEMON, Michx. RIVER-WEED.

Flowers solitary, nearly sessile in a tubular sac-like involucre,
destitute of floral envelopes. Stamens 2, borne on one side of the stalk
of the ovary, with their long filaments united into one for more than
half their length, and 2 short sterile filaments, one on each side;
anthers 2-celled. Stigmas 2, awl shaped. Capsule pedicellate, oval,
8-ribbed, 2-celled, 2-valved. Seeds minute, very numerous on a thick
persistent central placenta, destitute of albumen.--Leaves 2-ranked.
(Name from [Greek: pou~s], _foot_, and [Greek: ste/mon], _stamen_; the
two stamens being apparently raised on a stalk by the side of the
ovary.)

1. P. ceratophyllus, Michx. Leaves rigid or horny, dilated into a
sheathing base, above mostly forked into thread-like or linear
lobes.--Not rare in shallow streams, E. Mass, to Minn., and southward.
July--Sept.--A small olive-green plant, of firm texture, resembling a
Seaweed, tenaciously attached to loose stones by fleshy disks or
processes in place of roots.


ORDER 91. ARISTOLOCHIACEAE. (BIRTHWORT FAMILY.)

_Twining shrubs, or low herbs, with perfect flowers, the conspicuous
lurid calyx valvate in bud and coherent (at least at base) with the
6-celled ovary, which forms a many-seeded 6-celled capsule or berry in
fruit. Stamens 6--12, more or less united with the style; anthers
adnate, extrorse._--Leaves petioled, mostly heart-shaped and entire.
Seeds anatropous, with a large fleshy rhaphe, and a minute embryo in
fleshy albumen. A small family of bitter-tonic or stimulant, sometimes
aromatic plants.

1. Asarum. Stemless herbs. Stamens 12, with more or less distinct
filaments.

2. Aristolochia. Caulescent herbs or twining shrubs. Stamens 6, the
sessile anthers adnate to the stigma.


1. ASARUM, Tourn. ASARABACCA. WILD GINGER.

Calyx regular; the limb 3-cleft or parted. Stamens 12, with more or less
distinct filaments, their tips usually continued beyond the anther into
a point. Capsule rather fleshy, globular, bursting irregularly or
loculicidal. Seeds large, thick.--Stemless perennial herbs, with
aromatic-pungent creeping root-stocks bearing 2 or 3 scales, then one or
two kidney-shaped or heart-shaped leaves on long petioles, and a
short-peduncled flower close to the ground in the lower axil; in spring.
(An ancient name, of obscure derivation.)

Sec. 1. _Calyx-tube wholly adnate to the ovary, the tips inflexed in bud;
filaments slender, much longer than the short anthers; style barely
6-lobed at the summit, with 6 radiating thick stigmas; leaves a single
pair, unspotted._

1. A. Canadense, L. Soft-pubescent; leaves membranaceous, kidney-shaped,
more or less pointed (4--5' wide when full grown); calyx bell-shaped,
the upper part of the short-pointed lobes widely and abruptly spreading,
brown-purple inside.--Hillsides in rich woods; common, especially
northward. (Addendum)--Asarum Canadense. In this species there are
rudimentary subulate petals, alternate with the calyx-lobes.

Sec. 2. _Calyx-tube inflated bell-shaped, somewhat contracted at the
throat, its base adnate to the lower half of the ovary; limb 3-cleft,
short; anthers sessile or nearly so, oblong-linear; styles 6, fleshy,
diverging, 2-cleft, bearing a thick extrorse stigma below the cleft;
leaves thickish, persistent, usually only one each year, often
whitish-mottled; peduncle very short; rootstocks clustered, ascending._

2. A. Virginicum, L. Nearly glabrous; _leaves round-heart-shaped_ (about
2' wide); calyx short, reticulated within; anthers pointless.--Va. to
Ga., in and near the mountains.

3. A. arifolium, Michx. _Leaves halberd-heart-shaped_ (2--4' long);
calyx oblong-tubular, with very short and blunt lobes; _anthers obtusely
short-pointed_.--Va. to Fla.


2. ARISTOLOCHIA, Tourn. BIRTHWORT.

Calyx tubular; the tube variously inflated above the ovary, mostly
contracted at the throat. Stamens 6, the sessile anthers wholly adnate
to the short and fleshy 3--6-lobed or angled style. Capsule naked,
septicidally 6-valved. Seeds very flat.--Twining, climbing, or sometimes
upright perennial herbs or shrubs, with alternate leaves and lateral or
axillary greenish or lurid-purple flowers. (Named from reputed
medicinal properties.)

Sec. 1. _Calyx-tube bent like the letter S, enlarged at the two ends, the
small limb obtusely 3-lobed; anthers contiguous in pairs (making 4 cells
in a row under each of the three truncate lobes of the stigma); low
herbs._

1. A. Serpentaria, L. (VIRGINIA SNAKEROOT.) Stems (8--15' high) branched
at base, pubescent; leaves ovate or oblong (or narrower) from a
heart-shaped base or halberd-form, mostly acute or pointed; flowers all
next the root, short-peduncled.--Rich woods, Conn. to Fla., west to
Mich., Mo., and La. July.--The fibrous, aromatic-stimulant root is well
known in medicine.

Sec. 2. _Calyx-tube strongly curved like a Dutch pipe, contracted at the
mouth, the short limb obscurely 3-lobed; anthers contiguous in pairs
under each of the 3 short and thick lobes of the stigma; very tall
twining shrubs; flowers from one or two of the superposed accessory
axillary buds._

2. A. Sipho, L'Her. (PIPE-VINE. DUTCHMAN'S PIPE.) _Nearly glabrous;
leaves round-kidney-shaped_ (sometimes 8--12' broad); peduncles with a
clasping bract; calyx (11/2' long) with a brown-purple _abrupt flat
border_.--Rich woods, Penn. to Ga., west to Minn. and Kan. May.

3. A. tomentosa, Sims. _Downy or soft-hairy; leaves round-heart-shaped_,
very veiny (3--5' long); _calyx yellowish_, with an _oblique_ dark
purple closed _orifice_ and a _rugose reflexed limb_.--Rich woods,
mountains of N. C. to Fla., west to S. Ill. and Mo. June.

Sec. 3. _Calyx-tube straight, open, with ample 6-lobed limb, the lobes
appendaged; anthers equidistant; erect herbs; flowers in axillary cymose
fascicles._

A. CLEMATITIS, L., with long-petioled cordate leaves, from Europe, is
said to have permanently escaped near Ithaca, N. Y. (_Dudley_).


ORDER 92. PIPERACEAE. (PEPPER FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with jointed stems, alternate entire leaves, and perfect flowers
in spikes, entirely destitute of floral envelopes, and with 3--5 more or
less separate or united ovaries._--Ovules few, orthotropous. Embryo
heart-shaped, minute, contained in a little sac at the apex of the
albumen.--The characters are those of the Tribe _Saurureae_, the
_Piperaceae_ proper (wholly tropical) differing in having a 1-celled and
1-ovuled ovary.


1. SAURURUS, L. LIZARD'S-TAIL.

Stamens mostly 6 or 7, hypogynous, with distinct filaments. Fruit
somewhat fleshy, wrinkled, of 3--4 indehiscent carpels united at base.
Stigmas recurved. Seeds usually solitary, ascending.--Perennial marsh
herbs, with heart-shaped converging-ribbed petioled leaves, without
distinct stipules; flowers (each with a small bract adnate to or borne
on the pedicel) crowded in a slender wand-like and naked peduncled
terminal spike or raceme (its appearance giving rise to the name, from
[Greek: sau~ros], _a lizard_, and [Greek: ou)ra/], _tail_).

1. S. cernuus, L. Flowers white, fragrant; spike nodding at the end;
bract lanceolate; filaments long and capillary.--Swamps, Conn. to Ont.,
Minn., Mo., and southward. June--Aug.


ORDER 93. LAURACEAE. (LAUREL FAMILY.)

_Aromatic trees or shrubs, with alternate simple leaves mostly marked
with minute pellucid dots, and flowers with a regular calyx of 4 or 6
colored sepals, imbricated in 2 rows in the bud, free from the 1-celled
and 1-ovuled ovary, and mostly fewer than the stamens; anthers opening
by 2 or 4 uplifted valves._--Flowers clustered. Style single. Fruit a
1-seeded berry or drupe. Seed anatropous, suspended, with no albumen,
filled by the large almond-like embryo.

[*] Flowers perfect, panicled; stamens 12, three of them sterile, three
with extrorse anthers.

1. Persea. Calyx persistent. Anthers 4-celled. Evergreen.

[*][*] Flowers dioecious, or nearly so; stamens in the sterile flowers
9. Leaves deciduous.

2. Sassafras. Flowers in corymb- or umbel-like racemes. Anthers
4-celled, 4-valved.

3. Litsea. Flowers few in involucrate umbels. Anthers 4-celled,
4-valved.

4. Lindera. Flowers in umbel-like clusters. Anthers 2-celled, 2-valved.


1. PERSEA, Gaertn. ALLIGATOR PEAR.

Flowers perfect, with a 6-parted calyx, persistent at the base of the
berry-like fruit. Stamens 12, in four rows, the 3 of the innermost row
sterile and gland-like, the rest bearing 4-celled anthers (i.e. with
each proper cell divided transversely into two), opening by as many
uplifted valves; the anthers of 3 stamens turned outward, the others
introrse.--Trees, with persistent entire leaves, and small panicled
flowers. (An ancient name of some Oriental tree.)

1. P. Carolinensis, Nees. (RED BAY.) Hoary with a fine down, at least
when young; leaves oblong, pale, soon smooth above; peduncle bearing few
flowers in a close cluster; sepals downy, the outer shorter; berries
dark blue, on a red stalk.--Swamps, S. Del. to Fla. and Tex. May. A
small tree.


2. SASSAFRAS, Nees.

Flowers dioecious, with a 6-parted spreading calyx; the sterile kind
with 9 stamens inserted on the base of the calyx in 3 rows, the 3 inner
with a pair of stalked glands at the base of each; anthers 4-celled,
4-valved; fertile flowers with 6 short rudiments of stamens and an ovoid
ovary. Drupe ovoid (blue), supported on a club-shaped and rather fleshy
reddish pedicel.--Trees, with spicy-aromatic bark, and very mucilaginous
twigs and foliage; leaves deciduous, often lobed. Flowers
greenish-yellow, naked, in clustered and peduncled corymbed racemes,
appearing with the leaves, involucrate with scaly bracts. Leaf-buds
scaly. (The popular name, applied by the early French settlers in
Florida.)

1. S. officinale, Nees. Trees 15--125 deg. high, with yellowish-green twigs;
leaves ovate, entire, or some of them 3-lobed, soon glabrous.--Rich
woods, E. Mass. to S. Ont., Mich., E. Iowa and Kan., and south to the
Gulf. April.


3. LITSEA, Lam.

Flowers dioecious, with a 6-parted deciduous calyx; the sterile with 9
stamens in 3 rows; their anthers all introrse, 4-celled, 4-valved;
fertile flowers with 12 or more rudiments of stamens and a globular
ovary. Drupe globular.--Shrubs or trees, with entire leaves, and small
flowers in axillary clustered umbels. (Name of Chinese origin.)

1. L. geniculata, Benth. & Hook. (POND SPICE.) Flowers (yellow)
appearing before the deciduous oblong leaves, which are hairy on the
midrib beneath; branches forked and divaricate, the branchlets zigzag;
involucres 2--4-leaved, 2--4-flowered; fruit red. (Tetranthera
geniculata, _Nees._)--Swamps, Va. to Fla. April.


4. LINDERA, Thunb. WILD ALLSPICE. FEVER-BUSH.

Flowers polygamous-dioecious, with a 6-parted open calyx; the sterile
with 9 stamens in 3 rows, the inner filaments 1--2-lobed and
gland-bearing at base; anthers 2-celled and 2-valved; fertile flowers
with 15--18 rudiments of stamens in 2 forms, and a globular ovary. Drupe
obovoid, red, the stalk not thickened.--Shrubs, with deciduous leaves,
and honey-yellow flowers in almost sessile lateral umbel-like clusters,
appearing before the leaves (in our species); the clusters composed of
smaller clusters or umbels, each of 4--6 flowers and surrounded by an
involucre of 4 deciduous scales. Leaf-buds scaly. (Named for _John
Linder_, a Swedish botanist of the early part of the 18th century.)

1. L. Benzoin, Blume. (SPICE-BUSH. BENJAMIN-BUSH.) _Nearly smooth_
(6--15 deg. high); _leaves oblong-obovate_, pale underneath.--Damp woods, N.
Eng. to Ont., Mich., E. Kan., and southward. March, April.

2. _L. melissaefolia_, Blume. Young branches and buds _pubescent; leaves
oblong, obtuse or heart-shaped_ at base, downy beneath; umbels few.--Low
grounds, N. C. to Fla., west to S. Ill. and Mo. April.


ORDER 94. THYMELAEACEAE. (MEZEREUM FAMILY.)

_Shrubs, with acrid and very tough (not aromatic) bark, entire leaves,
and perfect flowers with a regular and simple colored calyx, bearing
usually twice as many stamens as its lobes, free from the 1-celled and
1-ovuled ovary_, which forms a berry-like drupe in fruit, with a single
suspended anatropous seed. Embryo large; albumen little or none.

1. Dirca. Calyx tubular, without spreading lobes. Stamens and style
exserted.

2. Daphne. Calyx-lobes (4) spreading. Stamens included. Style very short
or none.


1. DIRCA, L. LEATHERWOOD. MOOSEWOOD.

Calyx petal-like, tubular-funnel-shaped, truncate, the border wavy or
obscurely about 4-toothed. Stamens 8, long and slender, inserted on the
calyx above the middle, protruded, the alternate ones longer. Style
thread-form; stigma capitate. Drupe oval (reddish).--A much-branched
bush, with jointed branchlets, oval-obovate alternate leaves, at length
smooth, deciduous, on very short petioles, the bases of which conceal
the buds of the next season. Flowers light yellow, preceding the leaves,
3 or 4 in a cluster from a bud of as many dark-hairy scales, forming an
involucre, from which soon after proceeds a leafy branch. (Name of
uncertain derivation.)

1. D. palustris, L. Shrub 2--5 deg. high; the wood white, soft, and very
brittle; but the fibrous bark remarkably tough (used by the Indians for
thongs, whence the popular names).--Damp rich woods, N. Brunswick to
Minn. and Mo., south to the Gulf. April.

2. DAPHNE, Linn. MEZEREUM.

Calyx salver-shaped or somewhat funnel-shaped, the border spreading and
4-lobed. Stamens 8, included; the anthers nearly sessile on the
calyx-tube. Style very short or none; stigma capitate. Drupe
red.--Hardy low shrub. (Mythological name of the nymph transformed by
Apollo into a Laurel.)

D. MEZEREUM, L. Shrub 1--3 deg. high, with purple-rose-colored (rarely
white) flowers, in lateral clusters on shoots of the preceding year,
before the lanceolate very smooth green leaves; berries red.--Escaped
from cultivation in Canada, Mass., and N. Y. Early spring. (Nat. from
Eu.)


ORDER 95. ELAEAGNACEAE. (OLEASTER FAMILY.)

_Shrubs or small trees, with silvery-scurfy leaves and perfect or
dioecious flowers_; further distinguished from the Mezereum Family by
the erect or ascending albuminous seed, and the calyx-tube becoming
pulpy and berry-like in fruit, strictly enclosing the achene.

1. Elaeagnus. Flowers perfect. Stamens 4. Leaves alternate.

2. Shepherdia. Flowers dioecious. Stamens 8. Leaves opposite.

1. ELAEAGNUS, Tourn.

Flowers perfect. Calyx cylindric-campanulate above the persistent oblong
or globose base, the limb valvately 4-cleft, deciduous. Stamens 4, in
the throat. Style linear, stigmatic on one side. Fruit drupe-like, with
an oblong, 8-striate stone.--Leaves alternate, entire and petioled, and
flowers axillary and pedicellate. (From [Greek: e)lai/a], _the olive_,
and [Greek: a)/gnos], _sacred_, the Greek name of the Chaste-tree,
_Vitex Agnus-castus_.)

1. E. argentea, Pursh. (SILVER-BERRY.) A stoloniferous unarmed shrub
(6--12 deg. high), the younger branches covered with ferruginous scales;
leaves elliptic to lanceolate, undulate, silvery-scurfy and more or less
ferruginous; flowers numerous, deflexed, silvery without, pale yellow
within, fragrant; fruit scurfy, round-ovoid, dry and mealy, edible,
4--5'' long.--N. W. Minn. to Utah and Montana.


2. SHEPHERDIA, Nutt.

Flowers dioecious; the sterile with a 4-parted calyx (valvate in the
bud) and 8 stamens, alternating with as many processes of the thick
disk; the fertile with an urn-shaped 4-cleft calyx, enclosing the ovary
(the orifice closed by the teeth of the disk), and becoming berry-like
in fruit. Style slender; stigma 1-sided.--Leaves opposite, entire,
deciduous; the small flowers nearly sessile in their axils on the
branches, clustered, or the fertile solitary. (Named for _John
Shepherd_, formerly curator of the Liverpool Botanic Garden.)

1. S. Canadensis, Nutt. Leaves elliptical or ovate, nearly naked and
green above, silvery-downy and scurfy with rusty scales beneath; fruit
yellowish-red, insipid.--Rocky or gravelly banks, Vt. and N. Y. to
Mich., Minn., and north and westward. May.--Shrub 3--6 deg. high, the
branchlets, young leaves, yellowish flowers, etc., covered with rusty
scales.

2. S. argentea, Nutt. (BUFFALO-BERRY.) Somewhat thorny, 5--18 deg. high;
leaves cuneate-oblong, silvery on both sides; fruit ovoid, scarlet, acid
and edible.--N. Minn. to Col., and westward.


ORDER 96. LORANTHACEAE. (MISTLETOE FAMILY.)

_Shrubby plants with coriaceous greenish foliage, parasitic on trees_,
represented in the northern temperate zone chiefly by the Mistletoe and
its near allies; distinguished from the next family more by the
parasitic growth and habit, and by the more reduced flowers, than by
essential characters.

1. Phoradendron. Anthers 2-celled. Berry globose, pulpy. Leaves
foliaceous.

2. Arceuthobium. Anthers a single orbicular cell. Berry compressed,
fleshy. Leaves scale-like, connate.


1. PHORADENDRON, Nutt. FALSE MISTLETOE.

Flowers dioecious, in short catkin-like jointed spikes, usually several
to each short fleshy bract or scale, and sunk in the joint. Calyx
globular, 3- (rarely 2--4-) lobed; in the staminate flowers a sessile
anther is borne on the base of each lobe, transversely 2-celled, each
cell opening by a pore or slit; in the fertile flowers the calyx-tube
adheres to the ovary; stigma sessile, obtuse. Berry 1-seeded, pulpy.
Embryo small, half imbedded in the summit of mucilaginous
albumen.--Yellowish-green woody parasites on the branches of trees, with
jointed much-branched stems, thick and firm persistent leaves (or only
scales in their place), and axillary small spikes of flowers. (Name
composed of [Greek: pho/r], _a thief_, and [Greek: de/ndron], _tree_;
from the parasitic habit.)

1. P. flavescens, Nutt. (AMERICAN MISTLETOE.) Leaves obovate or oval,
somewhat petioled, longer than the spikes, yellowish; berries white.--On
various deciduous trees, N. J. to S. Ind., Mo., and southward.


2. ARCEUTHOBIUM, Bieb.

Flowers axillary or terminal, solitary or several from the same axil.
Calyx mostly compressed; the staminate usually 3-parted, the pistillate
2-toothed. Anthers a single orbicular cell, opening by a circular slit.
Berry compressed, fleshy, on a short recurved pedicel.--Parasitic on
Conifers, glabrous, with rectangular branches and connate scale-like
leaves; flowers often crowded in apparent spikes or panicles, opening in
summer or autumn and maturing fruit the next autumn. (From [Greek:
a)/rkeuthos], _the juniper_, and [Greek: bi/os], _life_.)

1. A. pusillum, Peck. Very dwarf, the slender scattered or clustered
stems 3--10'' high, usually simple, olive-green to chestnut; scales
obtuse; flowers solitary in most of the axils; fruit narrowly oblong,
1'' long.--On _Abies nigra_; N. New York; Hanover, N. H. (_Jesup_).


ORDER 97. SANTALACEAE. (SANDALWOOD FAMILY.)

_Herbs, shrubs, or trees, with entire leaves; the 4--5-cleft calyx
valvate in the bud, its tube coherent with the 1-celled ovary, which
contains 2--4 ovules suspended from the apex of a stalk-like free
central placenta which rises from the base of the cell, but the
(indehiscent) fruit always 1-seeded._--Seed destitute of any proper
seed-coat. Embryo small, at the apex of copious albumen; radicle
directed upward; cotyledons cylindrical. Stamens equal in number to the
lobes of the calyx, and inserted opposite them into the edge of the
fleshy disk at their base. Style 1. A small order, the greater part
belonging to warm regions.

1. Comandra. Flowers perfect, in umbel-like clusters. Low herbaceous
perennials.

2. Pyrularia. Flowers dioecious or polygamous, in short spikes or
racemes. Shrub.


1. COMANDRA, Nutt. BASTARD TOAD-FLAX.

Flowers perfect. Calyx bell-shaped or soon urn-shaped, lined above the
ovary with an adherent disk which has a 5-lobed free border. Stamens
inserted on the edge of the disk between its lobes, opposite the lobes
of the calyx, to the middle of which the anthers are connected by a tuft
of thread-like hairs. Fruit drupe-like or nut-like, crowned by the
persistent calyx-lobes, the cavity filled by the globular seed.--Low and
smooth (sometimes parasitic) perennials, with herbaceous stems from a
rather woody base or root, alternate and almost sessile leaves, and
greenish-white flowers in terminal or axillary small umbel-like
clusters. (Name from [Greek: ko/me], _hair_, and [Greek: a)/ndres], for
_stamens_, in allusion to the hairs on the calyx-lobes which are
attached to the anthers.)

1. C. umbellata, Nutt. Stem 8--10' high, branched, very leafy; leaves
oblong, pale (1' long); _peduncles_ several and _corymbose-clustered at
the summit, several-flowered_; calyx-tube conspicuously continued as a
neck to the dry _globular-urn-shaped fruit; the lobes oblong; style
slender_.--Dry ground, common. May, June. Root forming parasitic
attachments to the roots of trees.

2. C. pallida, A. DC. _Leaves narrower, more glaucous and acuter, linear
to narrowly lanceolate_ (or those upon the main stem oblong), all acute
or somewhat cuspidate; _fruit ovoid, larger_ (3--4'' long), sessile or
on short stout pedicels.--W. Minn. to S. W. Kan., and westward.

3. C. livida, Richardson. _Peduncles_ slender, _axillary,
3--5-flowered_, shorter than the oval leaves; calyx-tube not continued
beyond the ovary, _the lobes ovate; style short_; fruit pulpy when ripe,
red.--Newf., N. Vt., sandy shores of L. Superior, and northward.


2. PYRULARIA, Michx. OIL-NUT. BUFFALO-NUT.

Flowers dioecious or polygamous. Calyx 4--5-cleft, the lobes recurved,
hairy-tufted at base in the male flowers. Stamens 4 or 5, on very short
filaments, alternate with as many rounded glands. Fertile flowers with a
pear-shaped ovary invested by the adherent tube of the calyx, naked at
the flat summit; disk with 5 glands; style short and thick; stigma
capitate-flattened. Fruit fleshy and drupe-like, pear shaped; the
globose endocarp thin. Embryo small; albumen very oily.--Shrubs or
trees, with alternate short-petioled and deciduous leaves; the small
greenish flowers in short and simple spikes or racemes. (Name a
diminutive of _Pyrus_, from the shape of the fruit.)

1. P. pubera, Michx. Shrub straggling (3--12 deg. high), minutely downy when
young, at length nearly glabrous; leaves obovate-oblong, acute or
pointed at both ends, soft, very veiny, minutely pellucid-punctate;
spike small and few-flowered, terminal; calyx 5-cleft; fruit 1' long.
(P. oleifera, _Gray_.)--Rich woods, mountains of Penn. to Ga. Whole
plant, especially the fruit, imbued with an acrid oil.


ORDER 98. EUPHORBIACEAE. (SPURGE FAMILY.)

_Plants usually with a milky acrid juice, and monoecious or dioecious
flowers, mostly apetalous, sometimes achlamydeous (occasionally
polypetalous or monopetalous); the ovary free and usually 3-celled, with
a single or sometimes a pair of ovules hanging from the summit of each
cell; stigmas or branches of the style as many or twice as many as the
cells; fruit commonly a 3-lobed capsule, the lobes or carpels separating
elastically from a persistent axis and elastically 2-valved; seed
anatropous; embryo straight, almost as long as and the flat cotyledons
mostly as wide as the fleshy or oily albumen._ Stipules often
present.--A vast family in the warmer parts of the world; most
numerously represented in northern countries by the genus Euphorbia,
which has very reduced flowers within a calyx-like involucre.

[*] Flowers all without calyx, included in a cup-shaped calyx-like
involucre,--the whole liable to be mistaken for a single flower.

1. Euphorbia. Involucre surrounding many staminate flowers (each of a
single naked stamen) and one pistillate flower (a 3-lobed pistil).

[*][*] Flowers with a calyx, without involucre.

[+] Seeds and ovules 2 in each cell; flowers monoecious.

2. Pachysandra. Flowers in basal spikes. Calyx 4-parted. Stamens 4,
distinct.

3. Phyllanthus. Flowers axillary. Stamens 3, united.

[+][+] Seeds and ovules 1 in each cell.

[a.] Flowers apetalous, in cymose panicles (2--3-chotomous); stamens 10,
erect in the bud.

4. Jatropha. Calyx corolla-like, the staminate salver-form; armed with
stinging hairs.

[b.] Flowers in terminal racemes or spikes. Stamens inflexed in the bud.
Stellate-downy or scurfy, or hairy and glandular; leaves mostly entire.

5. Croton. Flowers spiked or glomerate. Ovary and fruit 3- (rarely
2--4-) celled.

6. Crotonopsis. Flowers scattered on the branchlets. Ovary and fruit
1-celled.

[c.] Flowers in axillary spikes or racemes (except n. 9), apetalous
(except n. 7). Stamens 8 or more; anthers erect in the bud.

7. Argythamnia. Petals and sepals 5. Stamens 10--15, united. Styles
bifid, linear.

8. Acalypha. Calyx 4- (3--5-) parted. Stamens mostly 8. Fertile flowers
in the axils of leafy bracts. Stigmas finely dissected.

9. Ricinus. Racemes terminal, subpanicled. Calyx 3--5-parted. Stamens
very numerous; the filaments repeatedly branched. Styles 2-parted.

[d.] Flowers apetalous, in racemes or spikes pistillate at base. Stamens
2 or 3. Styles simple.

10. Tragia. Flowers racemose. Calyx-lobes valvate in bud. Hirsute or
pubescent.

11. Stillingia. Flowers spicate. Calyx-lobes imbricate in bud. Fertile
bracts glanduliferous. Glabrous.


1. EUPHORBIA, L. SPURGE.

Flowers monoecious, included in a cup-shaped 4--5-lobed involucre
(_flower_ of older authors) resembling a calyx or corolla, and usually
bearing large thick glands (with or without petal-like margins) at its
sinuses. Sterile flowers numerous and lining the base of the involucre,
each from the axil of a little bract, and consisting merely of a single
stamen jointed on a pedicel like the filament; anther-cells globular,
separate. Fertile flower solitary in the middle of the involucre, soon
protruded on a long pedicel, consisting of a 3-lobed and 3-celled ovary
with no calyx, or a mere vestige. Styles 3, each 2-cleft; the stigmas
therefore 6. Pod separating into 3 1-seeded carpels, which split
elastically into 2 valves. Seed often caruncled (ours only in Secs. 5 and
6).--Plants (herbs in the United States), with a milky acrid juice.
Peduncles terminal, often umbellate-clustered; in the first section
mostly appearing lateral, but not really axillary. (Named after
_Euphorbus_, physician to King Juba.)

[A.] _Glands of the involucre with petal-like, usually white or
rose-colored, margins or appendages; these almost obsolete in n. 1._

Sec. 1. ANISOPHYLLUM. _Leaves all opposite, short-petioled, small, oblique
at base; stipules awl-shaped or scaly and often fringed, persistent;
stems much branched, spreading or usually procumbent; involucres
solitary in the forks or in terminal or pseudo-lateral clusters, small,
with 4 glands; seeds ash-colored (except in n. 10); annuals._

[*] _Seeds smooth and even; leaves entire; whole plant glabrous._

1. E. polygonifolia, L. Prostrate-spreading; _leaves oblong-linear_,
obtuse, mucronate, slightly cordate or obtuse at base (4--8'' long);
stipules setaceously divided; peduncles in the forks, as long as the
petioles; lobes of the involucre longer than the _minute not appendaged
glands_; pods obtusely angled; seeds ovate (over 1'' long, the largest
of this section).--Sandy shores of the Atlantic and of the Great Lakes.

2. E. Geyeri, Engelm. Procumbent; _leaves oblong-ovate_, obtuse,
slightly mucronate, mostly acutish at base, lowermost cordate (3--6''
long); stipules setaceously divided; peduncles as long as the petioles,
at length in loose foliaceous lateral clusters; glands with _narrow
white or red appendages_; pods acutely angled; seeds ovate, acute at one
end (1/2'' long).--Sandy soil, Ill. to Wisc., Minn., and Kan.

3. E. petaloidea, Engelm. Resembling the last, but half-erect and
spreading; _leaves longer, narrower, retuse or emarginate_; peduncles
longer than the petioles; involucres larger, _the broadly campanulate
appendages much larger and conspicuous_; pod obtusely angled; seeds
nearly 1'' long.--From Iowa and Mo., westward.

4. E. serpens, HBK. Stems filiform, prostrate, and often rooting;
_leaves round-ovate_, obtuse or cordate at base (only 1/2--11/2'' long);
_stipules membranaceous, triangular_; peduncles much longer than the
petioles, at length in loose foliaceous lateral clusters; glands of the
very small involucre with _minute crenulate appendages_; pods acutely
angled; seeds obtusely angled (1/2'' long or less).--Rich soil, Ill. and
Iowa to Kan., and southward. Rarely adv. eastward.

[*][*] _Seeds minutely roughened or transversely wrinkled or pitted;
leaves more or less serrulate, smooth or often hairy._

5. E. serpyllifolia, Pers. Glabrous, prostrate-spreading; _leaves
obovate-oblong_, narrowed at the very oblique base, sharply serrulate
toward the obtuse apex (3--6'' long, often with a red spot); stipules
lanceolate, fimbriate; peduncles as long as or longer than the petioles,
at length in loose foliaceous lateral clusters; glands of the small
involucre with narrow somewhat toothed appendages; pods sharply angled;
_seeds acutely quadrangular, slightly cross-wrinkled_, often pitted
(nearly 3/4'' long).--Wisc. to Mo., and westward.

6. E. glyptosperma, Engelm. Glabrous (or very rarely puberulent),
erect-spreading; _leaves linear-oblong_, mostly falcate, very unequal at
base, slightly serrulate toward the obtuse apex (2--5'' long); stipules
lanceolate, setaceously divided; peduncles as long as the petioles, in
dense foliaceous lateral clusters; glands of the very small involucre
with narrow crenulate appendages; pods sharply angled; _seeds sharply
4-angled and with 5 or 6 sharp transverse wrinkles_ (1/2'' long).--Ont. to
Wisc., Ill., Mo., and westward.

7. E. maculata, L. Prostrate; stems puberulent or hairy; _leaves
oblong-linear_, very oblique at base, serrulate upward, more or less
pubescent or sometimes smoothish (4--6'' long), usually with a brown-red
spot in the centre; stipules lanceolate, fimbriate; peduncles as long as
the petioles, in dense foliaceous lateral clusters; glands of the small
involucre minute, with narrow slightly crenate (usually red) appendages;
pods acutely angled, puberulent; _seeds ovate_ ({2/5}'' long), _sharply
4-angled and with about 4 shallow grooves across the concave
sides_.--Open places, roadsides, etc., common.

8. E. humistrata, Engelm. Procumbent, puberulent or hairy; _leaves
elliptical or obovate_, very oblique at base, serrulate toward the apex,
sparsely hairy underneath (4--9'' long, sometimes with a brown spot
above); stipules lanceolate, fimbriate; peduncles rather shorter than
the petioles, in dense scarcely foliaceous lateral clusters; _involucre
cleft on the back_, its (red or white) appendages truncate or crenate;
pods sharply angled, puberulent; _seeds ovate, obtusely angled, minutely
roughened_ (1/2'' long).--Rich soil, Ind. and W. Tenn. to Minn. and Kan.

9. E. Preslii, Guss. Smooth or with scattered hairs, ascending or erect
(1--2 deg. high); leaves oblique at the obtuse or slightly cordate base,
ovate-oblong or oblong-linear, sometimes falcate, serrate (1/2--11/2' long),
often with a red spot or red margins; stipules triangular; peduncles
longer than the petioles, collected in loose leafy terminal cymes;
_appendages entire_, larger and white, or smaller and sometimes red;
_pod glabrous, obtusely angled; seeds ovate, obtusely angled, wrinkled
and tubercled_ (1/2'' long), blackish. (E. hypericifolia of _Man._, not
_L._)--Common throughout the U. S. east of the plains.

Sec. 2. ZYGOPHYLLIDIUM. _Leaves opposite, on short petioles, not oblique,
with stipular glands; stems dichotomously branched, erect; cymes
terminal; involucres with 5 glands; seeds tuberculate._

10. E. hexagona, Nutt. Somewhat hairy (1 deg. high or more); branches
striate-angled; leaves linear-lanceolate, entire; involucre hairy
without and within; glands with green ovate-triangular appendages twice
their length; capsule smooth; seeds ovate.--Iowa to Tex., west to Col.
and Montana.

Sec. 3. PETALOMA. _Uppermost leaves with conspicuous white petal-like
margins, whorled or opposite, the others scattered; erect annuals, with
leaves equal at base and entire, and with lanceolate deciduous stipules;
involucres 5-lobed, in an umbel-like inflorescence._

11. E. marginata, Pursh. Stem stout (2--3 deg. high), erect, hairy; leaves
sessile, ovate or oblong, acute; umbel with 3 dichotomous rays; glands
of the involucre with broad white appendages.--Minn. to Mo., west to
Col., also spreading eastward to Ohio, and frequently escaped from
gardens, where it is often cultivated for its showy broadly
white-margined floral leaves.

Sec. 4. TITHYMALOPSIS. _Only the uppermost leaves whorled or opposite;
erect perennials, with entire leaves equal at base; stipules none;
involucres mostly 5-lobed, in the forks of the branches and terminal;
inflorescence umbelliform._

12. E. corollata, L. Glabrous or sometimes sparingly hairy (2--3 deg. high);
leaves ovate, lanceolate, or linear, entire, obtuse; umbel 5- (3--7-)
forked, and the forks again 2--3- (or rarely 5-) forked; involucres
long-peduncled, with showy white appendages (appearing like petals), the
lobes minute and incurved; pod slender-pedicelled, smooth; seeds thick
(1'' long or more), ash-colored, slightly uneven.--Rich or sandy soil,
N. Y. and N. J. to Fla., west to Minn. and La., also adventive in Mass.
July--Oct.

[B.] _Glands of the involucre without petaloid appendages._

Sec. 5. POINSETTIA. _Involucres in terminal clusters, 4--5-lobed, with few
(or often solitary) cup-shaped glands; erect annuals, with variable,
entire, dentate, or sinuate leaves, all or only the upper ones opposite;
the uppermost often colored, especially at base; stipules small and
glandular._

13. E. dentata, Michx. Erect or ascending, hairy (1 deg. high); leaves
ovate, lanceolate, or linear, petioled, coarsely toothed (1--2' long),
_only the lowest alternate_, the upper often paler at base; involucres
almost sessile, with 5 oblong dentate lobes, and one or sometimes more
_short-stalked glands_; seeds ovate-globular, slightly tubercled.--Rich
soil, Penn. to Tenn., Iowa, E. Kan., and southward. July--Sept.

14. E. heterophylla, L. Erect (1--3 deg. high), glabrous; _leaves
alternate_, petioled, ovate-fiddle-shaped and sinuate-toothed, or
lanceolate or linear and entire, often only those of the branches
linear; the upper usually with a red base; involucres about the length
of the peduncle, with 5 ovate incised lobes and a single or few and
_almost sessile glands_; seeds nearly globular, tubercled.--Slopes and
rocky soil, Minn. to W. Ill., Iowa and Mo.

Sec. 6. TITHYMALUS. _Involucres in a terminal dichotomous or commonly
umbelliform inflorescence, 5- or usually 4-lobed, with as many flat or
convex entire or crescent-shaped glands; seeds carunculate (except
n. 15); ours ascending or erect, and mostly glabrous, without stipules._

[*] _Perennials with entire leaves, all or only the upper opposite;
involucres long-peduncled in a dichotomous inflorescence, mostly with 5
transversely oblong glands; seeds without caruncle._

15. E. Ipecacuanhae, L. Stems many from a very long perpendicular root,
erect or diffusely spreading (5--10' long), forking from near the base;
leaves varying from obovate or oblong to narrowly linear, almost
sessile, glabrous; peduncles elongated (1/2--1' long); pod
long-pedicelled, obtusely angled, nearly smooth; seed ovate, white,
sparsely marked with impressed dots.--Sandy soil, near the coast; Conn.
to Fla.; also barrens of S. Ind.

[*][*] _Leaves scattered, only the floral in the umbelliform
inflorescence whorled or opposite and of a different shape; glands
mostly 4._

[+] _Leaves serrulate or rarely entire; glands transversely oval,
obtuse._

[++] _Seeds smooth and even; pod warty or rough._

16. E. Darlingtonii, Gray. Tall _perennial_ (2--4 deg. high); _leaves
entire, minutely downy beneath_; those of the stem lanceolate-oblong
from a narrow base; the floral oval, very obtuse; the upper
roundish-dilated with a truncate base; umbel 5--8-rayed, then simply
forked; _pod minutely warty_; large globular seed with a small
caruncle.--Copses, N. Y. and Penn., to the mountains of N. C.
July--Sept.

17. E. obtusata, Pursh. Erect _annual_ (1--2 deg. high); _leaves
oblong-spatulate_, minutely serrulate, _smooth, all obtuse_; upper ones
cordate at base; floral ones ovate, dilated, barely mucronate; umbel
once or twice divided into 3 rays, then into 2; _involucre with naked
lobes_ and small stipitate glands; _styles distinct_, longer than the
ovary, erect, _2-cleft to the middle_; pod beset with long warts.--Damp
woods, Va. to S. C., west to Iowa and Kan. May--July.

E. PLATYPHYLLA, L. Erect _annual_ (8--18' high); upper _stem-leaves
lanceolate-oblong, acute_, cordate at base, minutely serrulate, mostly
_with scattered hairs beneath_; floral ones triangular-ovate,
subcordate; umbel 5-rayed; _involucre with ciliate lobes_ and large
sessile glands; _styles_ longer than the ovary, _united at base,
slightly 2-cleft_; pod covered with depressed warts.--Along the St.
Lawrence and Great Lakes to Mich. June--Aug. (Adv. from Eu.)

[++][++] _Seeds rugose or reticulated; leaves serrulate; annuals._

18. E. dictyosperma, Fischer & Meyer. Stem erect (8--18' high); _leaves_
oblong- or obovate-spatulate, smooth, all obtuse and _obtusely serrate_;
upper ones cordate at base; floral ones roundish-ovate or obscurely
heart-shaped, slightly mucronate; umbels once or twice 3-forked, then
2-forked; involucre with nearly naked lobes and _small almost sessile
glands_; styles shorter than the ovary, spreading or recurved; _pod
warty; seeds delicately reticulated_.--Prairies and roadsides, Md. to
Minn., Ala., and westward. May--July.

E. HELIOSCOPIA, L. Stems ascending (6--12' high), stout; _leaves all
obovate_ and very rounded or retuse at the end, _finely serrate_, smooth
or a little hairy, those of the stem wedge-shaped; umbel divided into 5
rays, then into 3, or at length simply forked; _glands orbicular,
stalked; pods smooth and even; seeds with coarse honeycomb-like
reticulations_.--Waste places, eastward and along the Great Lakes to
Mich. July--Sept. (Nat. from Eu.)

[+][+] _Leaves entire; glands crescent-shaped or 2-horned._

[++] _Seeds smooth and dark-colored; perennials, with running
rootstocks._

E. ESULA, L. Stems clustered (1 deg. high); _leaves lanceolate or linear,
the floral_ (yellowish) _broadly heart-shaped_, mucronate; umbel divided
into many rays, then forking; _glands short-horned_ (brown); pods
smoothish and granular.--Mass., western N. Y., and Mich.; rare. (Adv.
from Eu.)

E. CYPARISSIAS, L. Stems densely clustered (6--10' high); _stem-leaves
linear, crowded, the floral heart-shaped_; umbel many-rayed; _glands
crescent-shaped_; pods granular.--Escaped from gardens, common. (Nat.
from Eu.)

E. NICAEENSIS, All. _Stout and tall_ glabrous perennial; _leaves oblong
or oblong-lanceolate_, the floral broadly heart-shaped, mucronate;
terminal umbel many-rayed, the rays forking; glands short-horned; _pods
finely wrinkled_.--A rare escape; Binghampton, N. Y. (Adv. from Eu.)

[++][++] _Seeds sculptured, ash-colored; pod smooth; annuals or
biennials._

E. PEPLUS, L. Erect or ascending (5--10' high); _leaves petioled_, thin
round-obovate, the upper floral ones ovate; umbel 3-rayed, then forking;
glands long-horned; lobes of the _pod 2-wing-crested_ on the back;
_seeds 2-grooved on the inner face, pitted on the back_ (scarcely over
1/2'' long).--Waste places, N. Eng. to N. J. and western N. Y. (Adv. from
En.)

19. E. commutata, Engelm. Stems branched from a commonly decumbent base
(6--12' high); _leaves_ obovate, obtuse; the upper all _sessile_, the
upper floral ones roundish-dilated, broader than long; umbel 3-forked;
glands with slender horns; _capsule obtusely angled; seeds ovate, pitted
all over_ (1'' long).--Along streams and shady slopes, Md. to Fla.,
Minn., and Mo.

[*][*][*] _Glabrous annual or biennial with entire opposite and
decussate leaves, an umbelliform inflorescence, and short-horned
glands._

E. LATHYRIS, L. Stem stout (2--3 deg. high); leaves thick, linear or oblong,
the floral oblong-ovate and heart-shaped; umbel 4-rayed, then
forking.--Sparingly escaped from gardens, N. Eng. to N. C. (Adv. from
Eu.)


2. PACHYSANDRA, Michx.

Flowers monoecious, in naked spikes. Calyx 4--5-parted. Petals none.
_Ster. Fl._ Stamens 4, separate; filaments long-exserted, thick and
flat; anthers oblong-linear. _Fert. Fl._ Ovary 3-celled; styles 3,
thick, awl-shaped, recurved, stigmatic down their whole length inside.
Ovules a pair in each cell, suspended, with the rhaphe dorsal (turned
away from the placenta). Capsule deeply 3-horned, 3-celled, splitting
into 3 at length 2-valved 2-seeded carpels.--Nearly glabrous, low and
procumbent perennial herbs, with matted creeping rootstocks, and
alternate, ovate or obovate, coarsely toothed leaves, narrowed at base
into a petiole. Flowers each 1--3-bracted, the upper staminate, a few
fertile ones at base, unpleasantly scented; sepals greenish or purplish;
filaments white (their size and thickness giving the name, from [Greek:
pachu/s], _thick_, and [Greek: a)ne/r], used for _stamen_).

1. P. procumbens, Michx. Stems (6--9' long) bearing several approximate
leaves at the summit on slender petioles, and a few many-flowered spikes
along the base; the intervening portion naked, or with a few small
scales.--Woods, mountains of Ky., W. Va., and southward. March--May.


3. PHYLLANTHUS, L.

Flowers monoecious, axillary. Calyx usually 5--6-parted, imbricated in
the bud. Petals none. Stamens mostly 3, erect in the bud, often united.
Ovules 2 in each cell of the ovary. Capsule depressed; each carpel
2-valved, 2-seeded. Seeds not carunculate.--Leaves alternate, 2-ranked,
with small stipules. (Name composed of [Greek: phy/llon], _leaf_, and
[Greek: a)/nthos], _blossom_, because the flowers in a few species are
borne upon leaf-like dilated branches.)

1. P. Carolinensis, Walt. Annual, low and slender, branched; leaves
obovate or oval, short-petioled; flowers commonly 2 in each axil, almost
sessile, one staminate, the other fertile; calyx 6-parted; stamens 3;
styles 3, each 2-cleft; glands of the disk in the fertile flowers united
in a cup.--Gravelly banks, E. Penn. to Fla., west to S. Ind. and Ill.
July--Sept.


4. JATROPHA, L.

Flowers monoecious, rarely dioecious, in a terminal open forking cyme;
the fertile ones usually in the lower forks. Calyx corolla-like, in the
staminate flowers often salver shaped, 5-lobed; in the pistillate,
5-parted, imbricated or convolute in the bud. Corolla of 5 distinct or
apparently united petals, or none. Glands of the disk opposite the
calyx-lobes. Stamens 10--30, in 2 or more whorls; filaments monadelphous
at base. Ovary mostly 3-celled; styles 3, united below, their summits
once or twice forked. Capsule 3-celled, 3-seeded, separating into 3
two-valved carpels. Seed carunculate.--Perennial herbaceous or shrubby
plants, chiefly tropical, with alternate mostly long-petioled
palmately-veined leaves, and stipules.--Our species is of the section
CNIDOSCOLUS, with apetalous flowers, the staminate corolla salver-form,
and the plants mostly armed with stinging bristles. (Name said by
Linnaeus to be formed of [Greek: i)atro\n], _a remedy_, and [Greek:
pha/go], _to eat_.)

1. J. stimulosa, Michx. (TREAD-SOFTLY. SPURGE-NETTLE.) Herbaceous,
from a long perennial root, branching (6'--2 deg. high); leaves
roundish-heart-shaped, 3--5-lobed nearly to the base, on long petioles;
the divisions entire or acutely toothed, cut, or even pinnatifid, often
discolored; flowers white, fragrant, 9'' long or more; filaments 10,
monadelphous only at the woolly base, or the outer set almost distinct.
(J. urens, var. stimulosa, _J. Muell._)--Dry sandy soil, Va. to Fla. and
La. June--Sept.


5. CROTON, L.

Flowers monoecious, rarely dioecious, mostly in terminal spike-like
racemes or spikes. _Ster. Fl._ Calyx 5- (rarely 4--6-) parted; the
divisions lightly imbricated or nearly valvate in the bud. Petals
usually present, as many, but mostly small or rudimentary, hypogynous.
Glands or lobes of the disk as many as and alternate with the petals.
Receptacle usually hairy. Stamens 5 or more; filaments with the anthers
inflexed in the bud. _Fert. Fl._ Calyx 5--10-cleft or parted, nearly as
in the staminate flowers; but petals none or minute rudiments. Ovary
3- (rarely 2--4-) celled, with a single ovule in each cell; styles as
many, from once to thrice 2-cleft. Capsule separating into as many
2-valved 1-seeded carpels. Seeds carunculate.--Stellate-downy, or
scurfy, or hairy and glandular plants, mostly strong-scented; the
fertile flowers usually at the base of the sterile spike or cluster.
Leaves alternate, or sometimes imperfectly opposite, with or without
obvious stipules. ([Greek: Kroto/n], the Greek name of the Castor-oil
Plant, of this family.)

[*] _Sterile flowers with 4-parted calyx, as many petals, a 4-rayed disk
and 8 stamens; fertile flowers with 5-parted calyx, very minute
rudimentary petals, and the 3 styles 2-cleft._

1. C. glandulosus, L. Annual, rough-hairy and glandular (1--2 deg. high),
somewhat umbellately branched; leaves oblong or linear-oblong, obtusely
toothed, the base with a saucer-shaped gland on each side; fertile
flowers capitate-clustered at the base of the sterile spike, sessile in
the forks and terminal.--Open waste places, Va. to Iowa, E. Kan. and
southward.

[*][*] _Sterile flowers with 5-parted calyx, as many glands alternating
with the petals, and 10--14 stamens; fertile flowers with 7--12-parted
calyx, no petals, and the 3 styles twice or thrice 2-parted._

2. C. capitatus, Michx. Annual, densely soft-woolly and somewhat
glandular (1--2 deg. high), branched; leaves long-petioled, lance-oblong or
elongated-oblong, rounded at base, entire; petals obovate-lanceolate,
densely fimbriate; fertile flowers several, capitate-crowded at the base
of the short terminal sterile spike.--Barrens, N. J. to Ga., west to S.
Ind., Iowa, and E. Kan. July--Sept.

[*][*][*] _Sterile flowers with unequally 3--5-parted calyx, as many
petals and scale-like glands, and 3--8 stamens; fertile flowers with
equally 5-parted calyx, no petals, 5 glands, and 2 sessile 2-parted
stigmas._

3. C. monanthogynus, Michx. Annual, whitish-stellate-pubescent and
rusty-glandular; stems (1--2 deg. high) slender, erect, below often
umbellately 3--4-forked, then repeatedly 2--3-forked or alternately
branched; leaves oblong-ovate or narrowly oblong, entire, often acutish
(6--12'' long, about twice the length of the petioles); flowers in the
forks, the sterile few on the summit of a short and erect peduncle, the
fertile few and clustered or mostly solitary on short recurved
peduncles; ovary 2-celled; fruit often by abortion 1-celled and
1-seeded; the seed broadly oval.--Barrens and dry prairies, S. Ind. to
N. C. and Fla., west to E. Kan. June--Sept.

[*][*][*][*] _Dioecious; calyx equally 5-parted; petals none; stamens 10
or more; styles twice or thrice dichotomously 2-parted._

4. C. Texensis, Muell. Annual, covered with a close canescent stellate
pubescence, dichotomously branched or spreading (1--2 deg. high); leaves
narrowly oblong-lanceolate to linear; staminate spikes or racemes very
short, often sessile; capsule stellate-tomentose and somewhat
muricate.--Mo. and Kan. to Ala., Tex., and westward.


6. CROTONOPSIS, Michx.

Flowers monoecious, in very small terminal or lateral spikes or
clusters, the lower fertile. _Ster. Fl._ Calyx equally 5-parted. Petals
5, spatulate. Stamens 5, opposite the petals; filaments distinct,
inflexed in the bud, enlarged at the apex. _Fert. Fl._ Calyx unequally
3--5-parted. Petals none. Glands (petal-like scales) 5, opposite the
sepals. Ovary 1-celled, simple, 1-ovuled, bearing a twice or thrice
forked style. Fruit dry and indehiscent, small, 1-seeded. Seed without
caruncle.--A slender low annual, with alternate or opposite
short-petioled linear or elliptical lanceolate leaves, which are green
and smoothish above, but silvery hoary with starry hairs and scurfy with
brownish scales underneath, as well as the branches, etc. (_Croton_ and
[Greek: o)/psis], _appearance_, for a plant with the aspect and general
character of Croton.)

1. C. linearis, Michx.--Dry sandy soil, N. J. to Fla., west to Ill. and
Kan. July--Sept.--Fruit about 1'' long.


7. ARGYTHAMNIA, P. Browne.

Flowers monoecious. Calyx 5-parted, valvate in the staminate flowers,
imbricate in the pistillate. Petals alternate with the calyx-lobes and
with the prominent lobes of the glandular disk. Stamens 5--15, united
into a central column in 1--3 whorls. Styles 1--3-cleft. Capsule
depressed, 3-lobed. Seeds subglobose, roughened or reticulated, not
carunculate.--Erect herbs or undershrubs, with purplish juice, and
alternate usually stipulate leaves. (Name from [Greek: a)/rgyros],
_silver_, and [Greek: tha/mnos], _bush_, from the hoariness of the
original species.)

1. A. mercurialina, Muell. Stem erect, nearly simple (1--2 deg. high),
sericeous; leaves sessile, oblong-ovate to lanceolate, entire, pubescent
with appressed hairs or glabrate, somewhat rigid; raceme
many-flowered, exceeding the leaves; ovary sericeous; capsule
appressed-pubescent.--Kan. to Ark. and Tex.


8. ACALYPHA, L. THREE-SEEDED MERCURY.

Flowers monoecious; the sterile very small, clustered in spikes, with
the few or solitary fertile flowers at their base, or sometimes in
separate spikes. Calyx of the sterile flowers 4-parted and valvate in
bud; of the fertile, 3--5-parted. Corolla none. Stamens 8--16; filaments
short, monadelphous at base; anther-cells separate, long, often
worm-shaped, hanging from the apex of the filament. Styles 3, the upper
face or stigmas cut-fringed (usually red). Capsule separating into 3
globular 2-valved carpels, rarely of only one carpel.--Herbs (ours
annuals), or in the tropics often shrubs, resembling Nettles or
Amaranths; the leaves alternate, petioled, with stipules. Clusters of
sterile flowers with a minute bract; the fertile surrounded by a large
and leaf-like cut-lobed persistent bract. ([Greek: A)kale/phe], an
ancient name of the Nettle.)

[*] _Fruit smooth or merely pubescent; seeds nearly smooth._

1. A. Virginica, L. Smoothish or hairy (1--2 deg. high), often turning
purple; leaves ovate or oblong-ovate, obtusely and sparsely serrate,
long-petioled; sterile spike rather few-flowered, mostly shorter than
the large leaf like palmately 5--9-cleft fruiting bracts; fertile
flowers 1--3 in each axil.--Fields and open places, N. Eng. to Ont. and
Minn., south to the Gulf. July--Sept.

Var. gracilens, Muell. Leaves lanceolate or even linear, less toothed
and shorter-petioled; the slender sterile spike often 1' long, and much
surpassing the less cleft or few-toothed fruiting bracts.--Sandy dry
soil, R. I. and Conn. to Fla., west to Ill., E. Kan. and Tex.

[*][*] _Fruit echinate with soft bristly green projections; seeds
rough-wrinkled._

2. A. Caroliniana, Ell. Leaves thin, ovate-cordate, sharply and closely
serrate-toothed, abruptly acuminate, long-petioled; sterile spikes
short, axillary; the fertile ones mostly terminal and elongated, their
bracts deeply cut into many linear lobes.--N. J. to Fla., west to Ohio,
Kan., and Tex.


9. RICINUS, Linn. CASTOR-OIL PLANT.

Flowers in racemose or panicled clusters, the fertile above, the
staminate below. Calyx 5-parted. Stamens very numerous, with repeatedly
branching filaments. Styles 3, united at base, each bifid, red. Capsule
large, 3-lobed, with 3 large seeds.--A tall stately annual, with very
large alternate peltate and palmately 7--11-cleft leaves (often 1--2 deg.
broad). (The ancient Roman name of the plant.)

R. COMMUNIS, L.--Cultivated extensively for ornament, and sparingly
escaped in Md., Mo., and southward. Very variable.


10. TRAGIA, Plumier.

Flowers monoecious, in racemes, apetalous. _Ster. Fl._ Calyx 3--5-
(chiefly 3-) parted, valvate in the bud. Stamens 2 or 3; filaments
short; anther-cells united. _Fert. Fl._ Calyx 3--8-parted, persistent.
Style 3-cleft or 3-parted; the branches 3, simple. Capsule 3-celled,
3-lobed, bristly, separating into three 2-valved 1-seeded carpels. Seeds
not carunculate.--Erect or climbing plants (perennial herbs in U. S.),
pubescent or hispid, sometimes stinging, with mostly alternate stipulate
leaves; the small flowered racemes terminal or opposite the leaves; the
sterile flowers above, the few fertile at the base all with small
bracts. (Named for the early herbalist _Bock_, latinized _Tragus_.)

1. T. innocua, Walt. _Erect_, paniculate-branched, _softly
hairy-pubescent_ (6--12' high); _leaves_ varying from obovate-oblong to
narrowly linear, _acute at base_, obtusely or sinuately few-toothed or
lobed, sometimes entire, _short-petioled or sessile_, paler beneath;
sterile calyx usually 4-parted; stamens 2. (T. urens, _L._)--Dry sandy
soil, E. Va. to Fla. and La. May--Aug.--Not stinging.

2. T. nepetaefolia, Cav. _Erect or reclining_ or slightly twining,
hirsute with stinging hairs; _leaves ovate-lanceolate or
triangular-lanceolate_, or the lower ovate, _all somewhat cordate or
truncate at base_, coarsely cut-toothed, _short-petioled_; sterile calyx
usually 3-parted and stamens 3. (T. urticaefolia, _Michx._)--Virginia
(_Pursh_), and common southward to Fla. and Tex., Mo., Kan., and
westward.--T. STYLARIS, Muell., of the southwest, which is reported from
Kan., may be distinguished by its 4--5-parted sterile calyx, 4--5
stamens, and elongated styles.

3. T. macrocarpa, Willd. _Twining_, somewhat hirsute; _leaves deeply
cordate_, ovate, mostly narrowly acuminate, sharply serrate (3--5'
long), all but the uppermost _long-petioled_; pod 1/2' broad. (T.
cordata, _Michx._)--Ky. to Ga., Fla., and La.


11. STILLINGIA, Garden.

Flowers monoecious, aggregated in a terminal spike. Petals and glands of
the disk none. Calyx 2--3-cleft or parted; the divisions imbricated in
the bud. Stamens 2 or 3; anthers adnate, turned outward. Style thick;
stigmas 3, diverging, simple. Capsule 3-celled, 3-lobed, 3-seeded. Seed
carunculate.--Smooth upright plants with the alternate leaves mostly
2-glandular at base; the fertile flowers few at the base of the dense
sterile spike (rarely separate); the bract for each cluster with a large
gland on each side. (Named for _Dr. B. Stillingfleet_.)

1. S. sylvatica, L. Herbaceous (1--3 deg. high); leaves almost sessile,
oblong-lanceolate, serrulate; glands of the spike saucer-shaped.--Sandy
and dry soil, Va. to Fla., west to Kan. and Tex. June--Sept.


ORDER 99. URTICACEAE. (NETTLE FAMILY.)

_Plants with stipules, and monoecious or dioecious or rarely (in the_
Elm Family) _perfect flowers, furnished with a regular calyx, free from
the 1-celled (rarely 2-celled) ovary which forms a 1-seeded fruit; the
embryo in the albumen when there is any, its radicle pointing upward;
stamens as many as the lobes of the calyx and opposite them, or
sometimes fewer._ Cotyledons usually broad. Stipules often deciduous.--A
large order (far the greater part tropical).

Tribe I. ULMEAE. Flowers mostly polygamous, upon the last year's
branches. Anthers erect in the bud, extrorse. Styles or stigmas 2. Fruit
a winged samara or nut-like. Seed suspended. Embryo straight.--Trees,
with alternate serrate pinnately veined leaves and fugacious stipules.

1. Ulmus. Flowers preceding the leaves. Ovary 1--2-ovuled. Fruit winged
all around.

2. Planera. Flowers appearing with the leaves. Ovule one. Fruit
wingless, nut-like.

Tribe II. CELTIDEAE. As in Tribe I., but the dioecious-polygamous flowers
upon branches of the same year; anthers introrse; fruit a drupe; embryo
curved.

3. Celtis. Ovary 1-ovuled. Flowers appearing with the leaves. Leaves
3-nerved at base.

Tribe III. CANNABINEAE. Flowers dioecious; the sterile racemed or
panicled; the fertile in clusters or catkins, the calyx of one sepal
embracing the ovary. Filaments short, erect in the bud. Stigmas 2,
elongated. Ovary 1-celled, with a pendulous ovule, forming a small
glandular achene in fruit. Embryo curved or coiled.--Erect or climbing
herbs, with watery juice, mostly opposite lobed or divided leaves,
persistent stipules, and a fibrous inner bark.

4. Cannabis. Fertile flowers spiked-clustered. Leaves 5--7-divided.
Erect.

5. Humulus. Fertile flowers in a short spike forming a membranaceous
catkin in fruit. Leaves 3--5-lobed. Climbing.

Tribe IV. MOREAE. Flowers unisexual, racemose, spicate or capitate; calyx
becoming fleshy or juicy in fruit. Anthers inflexed in the bud. Style
undivided or 2-parted, filiform; ovule pendulous; fruit an achene,
embryo curved.--Trees or shrubs, with milky juice, alternate leaves, and
fugacious stipules.

6. Maclura. Sterile flowers in loose racemes; fertile in globose heads.
Leaves entire.

7. Morus. Fertile and sterile flowers in separate spikes. Leaves
dentate, 3-nerved.

Tribe V. URTICEAE. Flowers unisexual. Filaments indexed in the bud. Style
or stigma simple. Ovary 1-celled, with an erect ovule, forming an achene
in fruit. Embryo straight.--Herbs with watery juice, tough fibrous bark,
and opposite or alternate leaves; often armed with stinging hairs.

[*] Calyx in the fertile flowers of 2--5 separate or nearly separate
sepals.

[+] Plant beset with stinging bristles.

8. Urtica. Sepals 4 in both fertile and sterile flowers. Achene straight
and erect, enclosed by the 2 inner and larger sepals. Stigma capitate
tufted. Leaves opposite.

9. Laportea. Sepals 5 in the sterile flowers, 4 in the fertile, or
apparently only 2. Stigma long-subulate. Achene very oblique, deflexed,
nearly naked. Leaves alternate.

[+][+] Plant wholly destitute of stinging bristles. Leaves alternate.

10. Pilea. Sepals 3 or 4, those of the fertile flowers unequal, all or
all but one small. Achene partly naked, straight and erect. Stigma
pencil-tufted. Smooth and shining.

[*][*] Fertile calyx tubular or cup-shaped, enclosing the achene.
Unarmed.

11. Boehmeria. Flower-clusters spiked, not involucrate. Style long and
thread-shaped, stigmatic down one side. Leaves opposite, serrate.

12. Parietaria. Flowers in involucrate-bracted clusters. Stigma tufted.
Leaves alternate, entire.


1. ULMUS, L. ELM.

Calyx bell-shaped, 4--9-cleft. Stamens 4--9, with long and slender
filaments. Ovary 1--2-celled, with a single anatropous ovule suspended
from the summit of each cell; styles 2, short, diverging, stigmatic
along the inner edge. Fruit a 1-celled and 1-seeded membranaceous
samara, winged all around. Albumen none; embryo straight; the
cotyledons large.--Flowers polygamous, purplish or yellowish, in lateral
clusters, in our species preceding the leaves, which are strongly
straight-veined, short-petioled, and oblique or unequally somewhat
heart-shaped at base. Stipules small, caducous. (The classical Latin
name.)

[*] _Flowers nearly sessile; fruit orbicular, not ciliate; leaves very
rough above._

1. U. fulva, Michx. (SLIPPERY or RED ELM.) Buds before expansion
soft-downy with rusty hairs (large); leaves ovate-oblong, taper-pointed,
doubly serrate (4--8' long, sweet-scented in drying), soft-downy beneath
or slightly rough downward; branchlets downy; calyx-lobes and stamens
5--9; fruit (8--9'' wide) with the cell pubescent.--Rich soil, N. Eng.
to Dak., and southward. March, April.--A small or middle-sized tree
(45--60 deg. high), with tough reddish wood, and a very mucilaginous inner
bark.

[*][*] _Flowers on slender drooping pedicels, which are jointed above
the middle; fruit ovate or oval, fringed-ciliate; leaves smooth above,
or nearly so._

2. U. Americana, L. (AMERICAN or WHITE ELM.) _Buds and branchlets_
glabrous; _branches not corky_; leaves obovate-oblong or oval, abruptly
pointed, sharply and often doubly serrate (2--4' long), soft-pubescent
beneath, or soon glabrous; _flowers in close fascicles_; calyx with 7--9
roundish lobes; _fruit glabrous_ except the margins (1/2' long), its sharp
points incurved and closing the notch.--Moist woods, especially along
rivers, in rich soil. April.--A large and well-known ornamental tree,
variable in habit, usually with spreading branches and drooping
branchlets.

3. U. racemosa, Thomas. (CORK or ROCK ELM.) _Bud-scales downy-ciliate_
and somewhat pubescent, as are the young branchlets; _branches often
with corky ridges_; leaves nearly as in the last, but with veins more
simple and straight; _flowers racemed_; fruit much as in the last, but
rather larger.--River-banks, S. W. Vt. to Ont. and central Minn., south
to Mo. and Ky. A large and very valuable tree.

4. U. alata, Michx. (WAHOO or WINGED ELM.) _Bud-scales and branchlets
nearly glabrous; branches corky-winged_, at least some of them; leaves
downy beneath, ovate-oblong and oblong-lanceolate, acute, thickish,
small (1--21/2' long); calyx-lobes obovate; fruit downy on the face at
least when young.--Va. to S. Ind., S. Mo., and southward. March. A small
tree.


2. PLANERA, Gmelin. PLANER-TREE.

Flowers monoeciously polygamous. Calyx 4--5-cleft. Stamens 4--5. Ovary
ovoid, 1-celled, 1-ovuled, crowned with 2 spreading styles which are
stigmatose down the inner side, in fruit becoming coriaceous and
nut-like, not winged. Albumen none; embryo straight.--Trees with small
leaves, like those of Elms, the flowers appearing with them, in small
axillary clusters. (Named for _J. J. Planer_, a German botanist.)

1. P. aquatica, Gmel. Nearly glabrous; leaves ovate-oblong, small; fruit
stalked in the calyx, beset with irregular rough projections.--Wet
banks, N. C. to Ky., S. Ill., and southward. April. A rather small tree.


3. CELTIS, Tourn. NETTLE-TREE. HACKBERRY.

Flowers monoeciously polygamous. Calyx 5--6-parted, persistent. Stamens
5--6. Ovary 1-celled, with a single suspended ovule; stigmas 2, long and
pointed, recurved. Fruit a globular drupe. Embryo curved, nearly
enclosing a little gelatinous albumen; cotyledons folded and
crumpled.--Leaves pointed, petioled, inequilateral. Stipules caducous.
Flowers greenish, axillary, the fertile solitary or in pairs, peduncled,
appearing with the leaves, the lower usually staminate only, fascicled
or racemose along the base of the branches of the season. (A name of
Pliny's for an African species of Lotus.)

1. C. occidentalis, L. (SUGARBERRY. HACKBERRY.) _Leaves reticulated_,
ovate, cordate-ovate and ovate-lanceolate, taper-pointed, usually
conspicuously and sharply so, more or less oblique at base, _sharply
serrate_, sometimes sparingly so or only toward the apex, scabrous but
mostly glabrous above, usually soft-pubescent beneath, at least when
young; fruit reddish or yellowish, turning dark purple at maturity, its
peduncle once or twice the length of the petiole.--Woods and
river-banks, N. Eng. to Minn., and southward. April, May.--A small or
sometimes large tree, with the aspect of an Elm, bearing sweet and
edible fruits as large as bird-cherries, at first obovate, ripe in
autumn; the flesh thin. Very variable in the form, texture, etc., of the
leaves.--Var. PUMILA, Gray. Low and straggling (4--10 deg. high); leaves
thin when mature, and smooth, _slightly acuminate_. River-banks, on
rocks, from Maryland southward.

2. C. Mississippiensis, Bosc. _Leaves entire_ (rarely few-toothed),
_very long taper-pointed_, rounded at base, mostly oblique, thin, and
smooth; fruit small.--Ill. to Tenn., and southward. A small tree with
warty bark. (Addendum)--Celtis Mississippiensis. Common in low
river-bottoms of W. Mo. (_F. Bush_); described as having a very smooth
trunk, like a sycamore, and soft yellowish brittle wood, not
coarse-grained as in C. occidentalis.


4. CANNABIS, Tourn. HEMP.

Flowers dioecious; the sterile in axillary compound racemes or panicles,
with 5 sepals and 5 drooping stamens. Fertile flowers spiked-clustered,
1-bracted; the calyx of a single sepal enlarging at the base and folded
round the ovary. Achene crustaceous. Embryo simply curved.--A tall
roughish annual, with digitate leaves of 5--7 linear-lanceolate coarsely
toothed leaflets, the upper alternate; the inner bark of very tough
fibres. (The ancient Greek name, of obscure etymology.)

C. SATIVA, L. (HEMP.) Stem 4--8 deg. high; leaves 4--8' broad; flowers
green.--Waste and cultivated ground. (Adv. from Eu.)


5. HUMULUS, L. HOP.

Flowers dioecious; the sterile in loose axillary panicles, with 5 sepals
and 5 erect stamens. Fertile flowers in short axillary and solitary
spikes or catkins; bracts foliaceous, imbricated, each 2-flowered, in
fruit forming a sort of membranaceous strobile. Calyx of a single sepal,
embracing the ovary. Achene invested with the enlarged scale-like calyx.
Embryo coiled in a flat spiral.--Twining rough perennials, with stems
almost prickly downward, and mostly opposite heart-shaped and palmately
3--7-lobed leaves, with persistent ovate stipules between the petioles.
(A late Latin name, of Teutonic origin.)

1. H. Lupulus, L. (COMMON HOP.) Leaves mostly 3--5-lobed, commonly
longer than the petioles; bracts, etc., smoothish; the fruiting calyx,
achene, etc., sprinkled with yellow resinous grains, which give the
bitterness and aroma to the hop.--Alluvial banks, N. Eng. to western
N. Y., the Great Lakes and westward, and south in the mountains to Ga.
July. (Eu., Asia.)


6. MACLURA, Nutt. OSAGE ORANGE. BOIS D'ARC.

Flowers dioecious; the staminate in loose short racemes, with 4-parted
calyx, and 4 stamens inflexed in the bud; the pistillate in a dense
globose head, with a 4-cleft calyx enclosing the ovary. Style filiform,
long-exserted; ovule pendulous. Fruit an achene, buried in the greatly
enlarged fleshy calyx. Albumen none. Embryo recurved.--Trees with milky
juice, alternate entire pinnately veined leaves, caducous stipules,
axillary peduncles, and stout axillary spines. (Named for the early
American geologist, _William Maclure_.)

1. M. aurantiaca, Nutt. A tree 30--50 deg. high; leaves ovate to
oblong-lanceolate, pointed, mostly rounded at base, green and shining;
syncarp globose, yellowish green, 2--3' in diameter.--E. Kan. and Mo. to
N. Tex.; extensively used for hedges. Wood bright orange.


7. MORUS, Tourn. MULBERRY.

Flowers monoecious or dioecious; the two kinds in separate axillary and
catkin-like spikes. Calyx 4-parted; lobes ovate. Stamens 4; filaments
elastically expanding. Ovary 2-celled, one of the cells smaller and
disappearing; styles 2, thread-form, stigmatic down the inside. Achene
ovate, compressed, covered by the succulent berry-like calyx, the whole
spike thus becoming a thickened oblong and juicy (edible) aggregate
fruit.--Trees with milky juice and broad leaves; sterile spikes rather
slender. (The classical Latin name.)

1. M. rubra, L. (RED MULBERRY.) _Leaves_ heart-ovate, serrate, _rough
above, downy beneath_, pointed (on young shoots often lobed); flowers
frequently dioecious; _fruit dark purple_, long.--Rich woods, W. New
Eng. to S. Ont., Dak., E. Kan., and southward. May.--Large tree,
ripening its blackberry-like fruit in July.

M. ALBA, L. (WHITE MULBERRY.) _Leaves_ obliquely heart-ovate,
acute, serrate, sometimes lobed, _smooth and shining; fruit
whitish_.--Spontaneous near houses. (Adv. from Eu.)


8. URTICA, Tourn. NETTLE.

Flowers monoecious, or rarely dioecious, clustered, the clusters mostly
in racemes, spikes, or loose heads. _Ster. Fl._ Sepals 4. Stamens 4,
inserted around the cup-shaped rudiment of a pistil. _Fert. Fl._ Sepals
4, in pairs; the 2 outer smaller and spreading; the 2 inner flat
or concave, in fruit membranaceous and enclosing the straight
and erect ovate flattened achene. Stigma sessile, capitate and
pencil-tufted.--Herbs, armed with stinging hairs. Leaves opposite;
stipules in our species distinct. Flowers greenish; in summer. (The
classical Latin name; from _uro_, to burn.)

[*] _Perennials; flower-clusters in branching panicled spikes, often
dioecious._

1. U. gracilis, Ait. _Sparingly bristly_, slender (2--6 deg. high); _leaves
ovate-lanceolate_, pointed, serrate, 3--5-nerved from the rounded or
scarcely heart-shaped base, _almost glabrous, the elongated slender
petioles sparingly bristly_; spikes slender and loosely
panicled.--Fence-rows and moist ground, common. Stings few.

U. DIOICA, L. _Very bristly and stinging_ (2--3 deg. high); _leaves ovate,
heart-shaped_, pointed, _very deeply serrate, downy beneath_ as well as
the upper part of the stem; _spikes much branched_.--Waste places and
roadsides, rather rare. Canada and N. Eng. to S. C., west to Minn. and
Mo. (Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Annuals; flower-clusters chiefly axillary and shorter than the
petiole, androgynous._

U. URENS, L. _Leaves elliptical or ovate_, very coarsely and deeply
serrate with long spreading teeth, the terminal teeth not longer than
the lateral ones; _flower-clusters 2 in each axil, small and
loose_.--Waste grounds, near dwellings, eastward; scarce. Plant 8--12'
high, with sparse stings. (Nat. from Eu.)

2. U. chamaedryoides, Pursh. _Leaves ovate and mostly heart-shaped_, the
upper ovate-lanceolate, coarsely serrate-toothed; _flower-clusters
globular_, 1--2 in each axil, and spiked at the summit.--Alluvial shaded
soil, from Ky. to the Gulf States. Slender, 6--30' high, sparsely beset
with stings.


9. LAPORTEA, Gaudichaud. WOOD-NETTLE.

Flowers monoecious or dioecious, clustered, in loose cymes; the upper
widely spreading and chiefly or entirely fertile; the lower mostly
sterile. _Ster. Fl._ Sepals and stamens 5, with a rudiment of an ovary.
_Fert. Fl._ Calyx of 4 sepals, the two outer or one of them usually
minute, and the two inner much larger. Stigma elongated awl-shaped,
hairy down one side, persistent. Achene ovate, flat, extremely oblique,
reflexed on the winged or margined pedicel, nearly naked.--Perennial
herbs, with stinging hairs, large alternate serrate leaves, and axillary
stipules. (Named for _M. Laporte_.)

1. L. Canadensis, Gaudichaud. Stem 2--3 deg. high; leaves ovate, pointed,
strongly feather-veined (3--7' long), long-petioled; fertile cymes
divergent; stipule single, 2-cleft.--Moist rich woods. July--Sept.


10. PILEA, Lindl. RICHWEED. CLEARWEED.

Flowers monoecious or dioecious. _Ster. Fl._ Sepals and stamens 3--4.
_Fert. Fl._ Sepals 3, oblong, more or less unequal; a rudiment of a
stamen commonly before each in the form of a hooded scale. Stigma
sessile, pencil-tufted. Achene ovate, compressed, erect, partly or
nearly naked.--Stingless, mostly glabrous and low herbs, with opposite
leaves and united stipules; the staminate flowers often mixed with the
fertile. (Named from the shape of the larger sepal of the fertile flower
in the original species, which partly covers the achene, like the
_pileus_, or felt cap, of the Romans.)

1. P. pumila, Gray. (RICHWEED. CLEARWEED.) Low (3--18' high); stems
smooth and shining, pellucid; leaves ovate, coarsely toothed, pointed,
3-ribbed and veiny; flower-clusters much shorter than the petioles;
sepals of the fertile flowers lanceolate, scarcely unequal.--Cool and
moist shaded places. July--Sept.


11. BOEHMERIA, Jacq. FALSE NETTLE.

Flowers monoecious or dioecious, clustered; the sterile much as in
Urtica; the fertile with a tubular or urn-shaped entire or 2--4-toothed
calyx enclosing the ovary. Style elongated awl-shaped, stigmatic and
papillose down one side. Achene elliptical, closely invested by the dry
and persistent compressed calyx.--No stings. (Named after _G. R.
Boehmer_, Professor at Wittenberg in the last century.)

1. B. cylindrica, Willd. Perennial, smoothish or pubescent and more or
less scabrous; stem (1--3 deg. high) simple; leaves chiefly opposite (rarely
all alternate), ovate to ovate- or oblong-lanceolate, pointed, serrate,
3-nerved; stipules distinct; petioles short or elongated; flowers
dioecious, or the two kinds intermixed, the small clusters densely
aggregated in simple and elongated axillary spikes, the sterile
interrupted, the fertile often continuous, frequently leaf-bearing at
the apex.--Moist or shady ground, common. Very variable.


12. PARIETARIA, Tourn. PELLITORY.

Flowers monoeciously polygamous; the staminate, pistillate, and perfect
intermixed in the same involucrate-bracted cymose axillary clusters; the
sterile much as in the last; the fertile with a tubular or bell-shaped
4-lobed and nerved calyx, enclosing the ovary and the ovoid achene.
Style slender or none; stigma pencil-tufted.--Homely, diffuse or tufted
herbs, not stinging, with alternate entire 3-ribbed leaves, and no
stipules. (The ancient Latin name, because growing on old walls.)

1. P. Pennsylvanica, Muhl. Low, annual, simple or sparingly branched,
minutely downy; leaves oblong-lanceolate, thin, veiny, roughish with
opaque dots; flowers shorter than the involucre; stigma sessile.--Shaded
rocky banks, E. Mass. and Vt. to Minn., and southward. June--Aug.


ORDER 100. PLATANACEAE. (PLANE-TREE FAMILY.)

_Trees, with watery juice, alternate palmately-lobed leaves, sheathing
stipules, and monoecious flowers in separate and naked spherical heads,
destitute of calyx or corolla; the fruit merely club-shaped 1-seeded
nutlets, furnished with a ring of bristly hairs about the base_;
consists only of the following genus (of uncertain relationship).


1. PLATANUS, L. SYCAMORE. BUTTONWOOD.

Sterile flowers of numerous stamens, with club-shaped little scales
intermixed, filaments very short. Fertile flowers in separate catkins,
consisting of inversely pyramidal ovaries mixed with little scales.
Style rather lateral, awl-shaped or thread-like, simple. Nutlets
coriaceous, small, tawny-hairy below, containing a single orthotropous
pendulous seed. Embryo in the axis of thin albumen.--Large trees, with
the bark deciduous in broad thin brittle plates; dilated base of the
petiole enclosing the bud of the next season. (The ancient name, from
[Greek: platy/s], _broad_.)

1. P. occidentalis, L. Leaves mostly truncate at base, angularly
sinuate-lobed or toothed, the short lobes sharp-pointed; fertile heads
solitary, hanging on a long peduncle.--Alluvial banks, S. Maine to N.
Vt., Ont., S. E. Minn., E. Kan., and southward. Our largest tree, often
90--130 deg. high, with a trunk 6--14 deg. in diameter.


ORDER 101. JUGLANDACEAE. (WALNUT FAMILY.)

_Trees, with alternate pinnate leaves, and no stipules; flowers
monoecious, the sterile in catkins (aments) with an irregular calyx
adnate to the bract; the fertile solitary or in a small cluster or
spike, with a regular 3--5-lobed calyx adherent to the incompletely
2--4-celled but only 1-ovuled ovary. Fruit a kind of dry drupe, with a
crustaceous or bony nut-shell, containing a large 4-lobed orthotropous
seed._ Albumen none. Cotyledons fleshy and oily, sinuous or corrugated,
2-lobed; radicle short, superior. Petals sometimes present in the
fertile flowers.--A small family of important trees, consisting chiefly
of the two following genera.


1. JUGLANS, L. WALNUT.

Sterile flowers in long and simple lateral catkins from the wood of the
preceding year; the calyx adherent to the entire bracts or scales,
unequally 3--6-cleft. Stamens 12--40; filaments free, very short.
Fertile flowers solitary or several together on a peduncle at the end of
the branches, with a 4-toothed calyx, bearing 4 small petals at the
sinuses. Styles 2, very short; stigmas 2, somewhat club-shaped and
fringed. Fruit with a fibrous-fleshy indehiscent epicarp, and a mostly
rough irregularly furrowed endocarp or nut-shell.--Trees, with
strong-scented or resinous-aromatic bark, few-scaled or almost naked
buds (3 or 4 superposed, and the uppermost far above the axil),
odd-pinnate leaves of many serrate leaflets, and the embryo sweet and
edible. Pith in plates. (Name contracted from _Jovis glans_, the nut of
Jupiter.)

1. J. cinerea, L. (BUTTERNUT. WHITE WALNUT.) Leaflets 5--8 pairs,
oblong-lanceolate, pointed, rounded at base, downy, especially beneath,
the _petioles and branchlets downy with clammy hairs; fruit oblong,
clammy_, pointed, the nut deeply sculptured and rough with ragged
ridges, 2-celled at the base.--Rich woods, N. Eng. to the mountains of
Ga., west to Minn., E. Kan., and Ark. Tree 50--75 deg. high, with gray bark,
widely spreading branches, and lighter brown wood than in the next.

2. J. nigra, L. (BLACK WALNUT.) Leaflets 7--11 pairs, ovate-lanceolate,
taper-pointed, somewhat heart-shaped or unequal at base, smooth above,
the lower surface and the _petioles minutely downy; fruit spherical_,
roughly dotted, the nut corrugated, 4-celled at top and bottom.--Rich
woods, W. Mass. and Conn. to Fla., west to Minn., E. Neb., E. Kan., and
southward. A large and handsome tree (often 90--150 deg. high), with rough
brown bark, and valuable purplish-brown wood turning blackish with age.


2. CARYA, Nutt. HICKORY.

Sterile flowers in slender lateral and clustered catkins; calyx naked,
adherent to the bract, unequally 2--3-parted. Stamens 3--10; filaments
short or none, free. Fertile flowers 2--5 in a cluster or short spike,
on a peduncle terminating the shoot of the season; calyx 4-toothed;
petals none. Stigmas sessile, 2 or 4, large, papillose, persistent.
Fruit with a 4-valved, firm and at length dry exocarp (involucre),
falling away from the smooth and crustaceous or bony endocarp or
nut-shell, which is incompletely 2-celled, and at the base mostly
4-celled.--Fine timber-trees, with hard and very tough wood, and scaly
buds, from which in spring are put forth usually both kinds of flowers,
the sterile below and the fertile above the leaves. Nuts ripen and fall
in October. ([Greek: Kary/a], an ancient name of the Walnut.)

Sec. 1. _Sterile catkins fascicled (no common peduncle or sometimes a very
short one) from separate lateral scaly buds near the summit of shoots of
the preceding year; bud-scales few; fruit elongated-oblong; the
thin-shelled nut 2-celled below; seed sweet; leaflets short-stalked,
numerous._

1. C. olivaeformis, Nutt. (PECAN-NUT.) Minutely downy, becoming nearly
smooth; leaflets 13--15, oblong-lanceolate, tapering gradually to a
slender point, falcate, serrate; nut olive-shaped.--River bottoms, S.
Ind., S. Ill., and Iowa, to La. and Tex. A large tree (90--160 deg. high),
with delicious nuts.

Sec. 2. _Sterile catkins in threes (rarely more) on a common peduncle from
the axil of the inner scales of the common bud, therefore at the base of
the shoot of the season, which, then bearing 3 or 4 leaves, is
terminated by the fertile flowers; fruit globular or oval; nut 4-celled
at base; leaflets sessile or nearly so._

[*] _Bud-scales numerous, about 10, successively enwrapping, the inner
ones accrescent, becoming thin and membranaceous and rather tardily
deciduous; husk of the fruit splitting promptly into 4 more or less
thick and when dry hard or woody valves; seed sweet and delicious._ (The
_hickory nuts_ of the market.)

2. C. alba, Nutt. (SHELL-BARK or SHAG-BARK HICKORY.) Bark of trunk
shaggy, exfoliating in rough strips or plates; inner bud-scales becoming
large and conspicuous, persistent till the flowers are fully developed;
_leaflets 5--7_, when young minutely downy beneath, finely serrate, the
three upper obovate-lanceolate, the _lower pair much smaller_ and
oblong-lanceolate, all taper-pointed; fruit globular or depressed;
_nut white_, flattish-globular, barely mucronate, the shell
thinnish.--N. Eng. to N. shore of L. Erie and S. E. Minn., south to
Fla., E. Kan., and Tex. Large and handsome tree (70--90 deg. high, or more),
of great economic value. The principal hickory-nut of the markets.

3. C. sulcata, Nutt. (BIG SHELL-BARK. KING-NUT.) Bark, etc., as in n. 1;
_leaflets 7--9_, more downy beneath; _fruit oval or ovate_, 4-ribbed
above the middle, the husk very thick; _nut large_ (11/4--2' long) and
usually angular, _dull white or yellowish, thick-walled, usually
strongly pointed at both ends_.--Central N. Y. and Penn. to S. Ind.,
E. Kan., and Ind. Terr. Tree 70--90 deg. high, or more, in rich soil of
bottom lands.

4. C. tomentosa, Nutt. (MOCKER-NUT. WHITE-HEART HICKORY.) _Bark close_,
rough, but not shaggy and exfoliating on old trunks; catkins, shoots,
and lower surface of the leaves _tomentose_ when young, resinous
scented; _leaflets_ 7--9, lance-obovate or the lower oblong-lanceolate,
pointed; _fruit globular or ovoid_, with a very thick and hard husk;
_nut globular, not compressed, 4-ridged toward the slightly pointed
summit, brownish_, very thick-shelled, 1' in diameter or smaller.--N.
Eng. to N. shore of L. Erie, E. Neb., and south to the Gulf. Tree
70--100 deg. high, usually on rich upland hillsides.

5. C. microcarpa, Nutt. With rough close bark, small ovate buds, and the
glabrous foliage, etc., of n. 6; fruit small, subglobose, with rather
thin husk; nut thin-shelled, not angled.--N. Y. to Del., west to Mich.
and Ill.

[*][*] _Bud-scales numerous or few; husk of the fruit thin and rather
friable at maturity, 4-valved only to the middle or tardily to near the
base; seed more or less bitter; bark of old trunk not exfoliating._

6. C. porcina, Nutt. (PIG-NUT or BROOM H.) Bud-scales nearly as in n. 4,
but smaller, caducous; shoots, catkins, and leaves _glabrous_ or nearly
so; _leaflets_ 5--7, oblong- or obovate-lanceolate and taper-pointed,
serrate; fruit pear-shaped, oblong, or oval; _nut oblong or oval_
(11/2--2' long), with a _thick bony shell_; the oily seed at first sweet
in taste, then bitterish.--S. Maine to Fla., west to Minn., E. Neb., and
Tex. Tree 70--90 deg. high (rarely 120 deg.), on dry hills and uplands.

7. C. amara, Nutt. (BITTER-NUT or SWAMP H.) Scales of the small
yellowish buds about 6, valvate in pairs, caducous in leafing; catkins
and young herbage more or less pubescent, soon becoming almost glabrous;
_leaflets_ 7--11, _lanceolate_ or oblong-lanceolate; fruit globular,
narrowly 6-ridged; _nut globular, short-pointed_, white (barely 1'
long), _thin-walled_; seed at first sweet-tasted, soon extremely
bitter.--Moist soil, N. Eng. to Fla., west to Minn., E. Neb., and Tex.
Tree 50--75 deg. high; husk and nut-shell thinner and less hard than in
other species.


ORDER 102. MYRICACEAE. (SWEET-GALE FAMILY.)

_Monoecious or dioecious shrubs, with both kinds of flowers in short
scaly catkins, and resinous-dotted often fragrant leaves_,--differing
from the Birches chiefly in the 1-celled ovary with a single erect
orthotropous ovule, and the drupe-like nut. Involucre and perianth none.


1. MYRICA, L. BAYBERRY. WAX-MYRTLE.

The only genus.--Flowers solitary under a scale-like bract and with a
pair of bractlets, the sterile in oblong or cylindrical, the fertile in
ovoid or globular catkins, from axillary scaly buds; stamens 2--8;
filaments somewhat united below; anthers 2-celled. Ovary with 2--8
scales at its base, and 2 thread-like stigmas. Fruit a small globular or
oblong nut, or dry drupe, coated with resinous grains or wax. ([Greek:
Myri/ke], the ancient name of the Tamarisk or some other shrub; perhaps
from [Greek: myri/zo], _to perfume_.)

[*] _Mostly dioecious; fertile catkins ovoid; ovary with 2--4 scales at
base; nut globular; leaves entire or somewhat serrate._

1. M. Gale, L. (SWEET GALE.) Shrub 3--5 deg. high; _leaves
wedge-lanceolate_, serrate toward the apex, _pale, later than the
flowers; sterile catkins closely clustered_; nuts in imbricated heads,
2-winged by the two thick ovate scales which coalesce with its
base.--Wet borders of ponds, Newf. to N. Eng. and along the Great Lakes
to Minn., south in the mountains to Va.

2. M. cerifera, L. (BAYBERRY. WAX-MYRTLE.) _Leaves oblong-lanceolate_,
narrowed at the base, entire or wavy-toothed toward the apex, _shining
and resinous-dotted both sides, somewhat preceding the flowers,
fragrant; sterile catkins scattered_, oblong; scales wedge-shaped at the
base; nuts scattered and naked, bony, and incrusted with white
wax.--Sandy soil near the coast, from Nova Scotia to Fla. and Ala.; also
on L. Erie. Shrub 3--8 deg. high, but sometimes a tree 35 deg. high; fruit
sometimes persistent for 2 or 3 years.

[*][*] _Frequently monoecious; fertile catkins globular; ovary
surrounded by 8 long linear-awl-shaped persistent scales; nut
ovoid-oblong; leaves pinnatifid with many rounded lobes._

3. M. asplenifolia, Endl. Shrub 1--2 deg. high, with sweet scented fern-like
linear-lanceolate leaves; stipules half heart-shaped; scales of the
sterile catkins kidney-heart-shaped, pointed. (Comptonia asplenifolia,
_Ait._)--Sterile hills, N. Eng. to N. C., west to Minn. and Ind.


ORDER 103. CUPULIFERAE. (OAK FAMILY.)

_Monoecious trees or shrubs, with alternate simple straight-veined
leaves, deciduous stipules, the sterile flowers in catkins (or
capitate-clustered in the_ Beech), _the fertile solitary, clustered,
spiked, or in scaly catkins, the 1-celled and 1-seeded nut with or
without an involucre._ Ovary more or less 2--7-celled, with 1 or 2
pendulous anatropous ovules in each cell; but all the cells and ovules
except one disappearing in the fruit. Seed with no albumen, filled with
the embryo.

Tribe I. BETULEAE. Flowers in scaly catkins, 2 or 3 to each bract.
Sterile catkins pendulous. Stamens 2--4, and calyx usually 2--4-parted.
Fertile flowers with no calyx, and no involucre to the compressed and
often winged small nut. Ovary 2-celled, 2-ovuled.

1. Betula. Stamens 2, bifid. Fertile scales thin, 3-lobed, deciduous
with the nuts.

2. Alnus. Stamens 4. Fertile scales thick, entire, persisting after the
nuts have fallen.

Tribe II. CORYLEAE. Sterile catkins pendulous, with no calyx; stamens 3
or more to each bract and more or less adnate to it, the filaments often
forked (anthers 1-celled). Fertile flowers in a short ament or head, 2
to each bract, and each with one or more bractlets which form a
foliaceous involucre to the nut. Ovary 2-celled, 2-ovuled.

[*] Bract of staminate flower furnished with a pair of bractlets inside;
fertile flowers few.

3. Corylus. Involucre leafy-coriaceous, enclosing the large bony nut.

[*][*] Bract of staminate flower simple; fertile flowers in short
catkins; nut small, achene-like.

4. Ostrya. Each ovary and nut included in a bladdery and closed bag.

5. Carpinus. Each nut subtended by an enlarged leafy bractlet.

Tribe III. QUERCINEAE. Sterile flowers with 4--7-lobed calyx and stamens
indefinite (3--20). Fertile flowers 1 or few, enclosed in a cupule
consisting of consolidated bracts, which becomes indurated (scaly or
prickly) and surrounds or encloses the nut.

[*] Sterile flowers in slender catkins.

6. Quercus. Cupule 1-flowered, scaly and entire; nut hard and terete.

7. Castanea. Cupule 2--4-flowered, forming a prickly hard bur,
2--4-valved when ripe.

[*][*] Sterile flowers in a small head.

8. Fagus. Cupule 2-flowered, 4-valved, containing 2 sharply triangular
nuts.


1. BETULA, Tourn. BIRCH.

Sterile flowers 3, and bractlets 2, to each shield-shaped scale or bract
of the catkins, consisting each of a calyx of one scale bearing 4 short
filaments with 1-celled anthers (or strictly of two 2-parted filaments,
each division bearing an anther-cell). Fertile flowers 2 or 3 to each
3-lobed bract, without bractlets or calyx, each of a naked ovary,
becoming a broadly winged and scale-like nutlet (or small samara)
crowned with the two spreading stigmas.--Outer bark usually separable in
sheets, that of the branchlets dotted. Twigs and leaves often
spicy-aromatic. Foliage mostly thin and light. Buds sessile, scaly.
Sterile catkins long and drooping, terminal and lateral, sessile, formed
in summer, remaining naked through the succeeding winter, and expanding
their golden flowers in early spring, with or preceding the leaves;
fertile catkins oblong or cylindrical, peduncled, usually terminating
very short 2-leaved early lateral branches of the season. (The ancient
Latin name, of Celtic origin.)

[*] _Trees, with brown or yellow-gray bark, sweet-aromatic as well as
the twigs, membranaceous and straight-veined Hornbeam-like leaves
heart-shaped or rounded at base, on short petioles, and sessile very
thick fruiting catkins; their scales about equally 3-cleft, rather
persistent; wing of fruit not broader than the seed-bearing body._

1. B. lenta, L. (CHERRY B. SWEET or BLACK BIRCH.) _Bark_ of trunk _dark
brown, close_ (outer layers scarcely laminate), very sweet-aromatic;
leaves ovate or oblong-ovate from a more or less heart-shaped base,
acuminate, sharply and finely doubly serrate all round, when mature
shining or bright green above and glabrous except on the veins beneath;
_fruiting catkins oblong-cylindrical_ (1--11/4' long), the scales with
short and _divergent lobes_.--Rich woodlands, Newf. to N. Del., and
south in the mountains, west to Minn., and S. Ind. Tree 50--75 deg. high,
with reddish bronze-colored spray; wood rose-colored, fine-grained,
valuable for cabinet-work.

2. B. lutea, Michx. f. (YELLOW or GRAY BIRCH.) _Bark_ of trunk
_yellowish- or silvery-gray, detaching in very thin filmy layers_,
within and the twigs much less aromatic; leaves (3--5' long) slightly or
not at all heart-shaped and often narrowish toward the base,
duller-green above and usually more downy on the veins beneath; fruiting
catkins _oblong-ovoid_ (1' or less in length, 6--9'' thick), the thinner
scales (5--6'' long) twice as large as in n. 1, and with narrower
_barely spreading lobes_.--Rich moist woodlands, Canada and N. Eng. to
Del., west to Minn.; also along high peaks to Tenn. and N. C. Often
60--90 deg. high at the north; wood whiter and less valuable.

[*][*] _Trees, with chalky-white bark separable in thin sheets, ovate or
triangular leaves of firmer texture, on long slender petioles; fruiting
catkins cylindrical, usually hanging on rather slender peduncles; their
scales glabrous, with short diverging lobes, freely deciduous; wing of
the fruit much broader than its body._

3. B. populifolia, Ait. (AMERICAN WHITE BIRCH. GRAY BIRCH.) Trunk
usually ascending (15--30 deg. high); _leaves triangular_ (deltoid), _very
taper-pointed_ (usually abruptly), truncate or nearly so at the broad
base, _smooth and shining both sides_, except the resinous glands when
young. (B. alba, var. populifolia, _Spach_.)--Poor sandy soils, N.
Brunswick to Del., west to L. Ontario. Bark much less separable than
the next; leaves on slender petioles, tremulous as those of the aspen.

4. B. papyrifera, Marshall. (PAPER or CANOE BIRCH. WHITE BIRCH.) _Leaves
ovate, taper-pointed_, heart-shaped or abrupt (or rarely wedge-shaped)
at base, _smooth and green above_, pale, glandular-dotted, and a little
hairy on the veins beneath, sharply and unequally doubly serrate, 3--4
times the length of the petiole. (B. papyracea, _Ait._)--Rich woodlands
and stream-banks, N. Eng. to N. Penn., N. Ill., and Minn., and far north
and westward. Tree 50--75 deg. high, with bark freely splitting into
paper-like layers.--Var. MINOR, Tuckerman, is a dwarf form of the
alpine region of the White Mts.

[*][*][*] _Tree, with greenish-brown bark, somewhat laminate, and
reddish twigs, ovate leaves whitish beneath, and soft-downy peduncled
fruiting catkins._

5. B. nigra, L. (RIVER or RED BIRCH.) Leaves rhombic-ovate, acutish at
both ends, irregularly doubly serrate, whitish and (until old) downy
underneath; petioles and peduncle of nearly the same length (3--7'') and
with the oblong catkin tomentose; the bracts with oblong linear nearly
equal lobes; fruit broadly winged.--Banks of streams, Mass, to Fla.,
west to Minn., E. Kan., and Tex. Tree 50--75 deg. high, with light-colored
wood and somewhat Alder-like leaves.

[*][*][*][*] _Shrubs, with brownish bark, rounded or wedge-shaped
crenate and mostly small leaves of thickish or coriaceous texture, and
oblong or cylindrical glabrous and mostly erect catkins, on short
peduncles._

6. B. pumila, L. (LOW BIRCH.) Stems (2--8 deg. high) erect or ascending,
_not glandular_; young branches and lower face of young leaves mostly
_soft-downy; leaves_ obovate, roundish, or orbicular (6--16'' long),
_pale beneath, veinlets on both faces finely reticulated_; wing of the
fruit mostly narrower than the body.--Bogs, W. Conn, and N. J. to Ind.
and Minn., and northward throughout Canada. Leaves usually not at all
resiniferous or glandular-dotted.

7. B. glandulosa, Michx. (DWARF BIRCH.) Stems erect or mostly spreading
(1--4 deg. high), or when alpine procumbent; _branchlets glabrous,
conspicuously dotted with resinous wart-like glands_; leaves roundish
wedge-obovate or sometimes orbicular (6--9'' long), green and glabrous
both sides, less reticulated; fruiting catkins mostly shorter and oblong
or oval; wing of the fruit narrower than or sometimes equalling the
body.--High mountains of N. Eng. and N. Y., to L. Superior, and far
northward.


2. ALNUS, Tourn. ALDER.

Sterile catkins elongated and drooping, with 4 or 5 bractlets and 3
(rarely 6) flowers upon each short-stalked shield-shaped scale; each
flower usually with a 3--5-parted calyx and as many stamens; filaments
short and simple; anthers 2-celled. Fertile catkins ovoid or oblong; the
fleshy scales each 2--3-flowered, with a calyx of 4 little scales
adherent to the scales or bracts of the catkin, which are thick and
woody in fruit, wedge-obovate, truncate, or 3--5-lobed, and
persistent.--Shrubs or small trees, with few-scaled leaf-buds, and
solitary or often racemose-clustered catkins, terminating leafless
branchlets or peduncles. (The ancient Latin name.)

Sec. 1. _Flowers developed in spring with the leaves; the sterile from
catkins which have remained naked over winter; while the fertile have
been enclosed in a scaly bud; fruit with a conspicuous thin wing, as in_
Birch.

1. A. viridis, DC. (GREEN or MOUNTAIN ALDER.) Shrub 3--8 deg. high; leaves
round-oval, ovate, or slightly heart-shaped, glutinous and smooth or
softly downy beneath, irregularly serrulate or biserrulate with very
sharp and closely set teeth, sometimes sinuate-toothed and serrulate
(var. SINUATA, Regel), on young shoots often cut-toothed; fertile
catkins slender-stalked, clustered, ovoid (6--8'' long).--On mountains
and mountain streams, Newf. to W. Mass., N. Y., L. Superior, and far
north and west; also in the Alleghanies to N. C. (Eu., Asia.)

Sec. 2. _Flowers developed in earliest spring, before the leaves, from
mostly clustered catkins which (of both sorts) were formed the foregoing
summer and have remained naked over winter; fruit wingless or with a
narrow coriaceous margin._

2. A. incana, Willd. (SPECKLED or HOARY A.) _Leaves broadly oval or
ovate, rounded at base_, sharply and often doubly serrate, _whitened and
mostly downy beneath_; stipules oblong-lanceolate; fruit
orbicular.--Borders of streams and swamps, Newf. to Mass., E. Neb.,
Minn., and westward. Shrub or tree 8--20 deg. high; the common Alder
northward. (Eu., Asia.)

3. A. serrulata, Willd. (SMOOTH A.) _Leaves obovate, acute at base_,
sharply serrate with minute teeth, thickish, _green both sides_, smooth
or often downy beneath; stipules oval; fruit ovate.--Borders of streams
and swamps, Mass. to Fla., west to S. E. Minn. and Tex.; common. Shrub
forming dense thickets, or sometimes at the south a small tree 6--35 deg.
high.

Sec. 3. _Flowers in autumn (Sept.) from catkins of the season; the fertile
mostly solitary in the axils of the leaves, ripening the fruit a year
later; fruit wingless._

4. A. maritima, Muhl. (SEA-SIDE A.) Glabrous; leaves oblong, ovate, or
obovate with a wedge-shaped base, slender-petioled, sharply serrulate,
bright green, or rather rusty beneath; fruiting catkins large, ovoid or
oblong (9--12'' long, 6'' thick).--Borders of streams and swamps. S.
Del. and E. Md., near the coast. Small tree 15--25 deg. high. (E. Asia.)


3. CORYLUS, Tourn. HAZEL-NUT. FILBERT.

Sterile flowers in drooping cylindrical catkins, consisting of 8 (half-)
stamens with 1-celled anthers, their short filaments and pair of scaly
bractlets cohering more or less with the inner face of the scale of the
catkin. Fertile flowers several in a scaly bud, each a single ovary in
the axil of a scale or bract, and accompanied by a pair of lateral
bractlets; ovary tipped with a short limb of the adherent calyx,
incompletely 2-celled, with 2 pendulous ovules, one of them sterile;
style short; stigmas 2, elongated and slender. Nut ovoid or oblong,
bony, enclosed in a leafy or partly coriaceous cup or involucre,
consisting of the two bractlets enlarged and often grown together,
lacerated at the border. Cotyledons very thick (raised to the surface
in germination), edible; the short radicle included.--Shrubs or small
trees, with thinnish doubly-toothed leaves, folded lengthwise in the
bud, flowering in early spring; sterile catkins single or fascicled from
scaly buds of the axils of the preceding year, the fertile terminating
early leafy shoots. (The classical name, probably from [Greek: ko/rys],
_a helmet_, from the involucre.)

1. C. Americana, Walt. (WILD HAZEL-NUT.) _Leaves roundish-heart-shaped_,
pointed; _involucre open above_ down to the globose nut, _of 2 broad
foliaceous cut-toothed almost distinct bracts_, their base coriaceous
and downy, or with glandular bristles intermixed.--Thickets,
N. Eng. to Ont. and Dak., and southward. Twigs and petioles often
glandular-bristly.

2. C. rostrata, Ait. (BEAKED HAZEL-NUT.) _Leaves ovate or ovate-oblong,
somewhat heart-shaped_, pointed; _involucre of united bracts, much
prolonged_ above the ovoid nut _into a narrow tubular beak, densely
bristly_.--N. Scotia to northern N. J., Mich., Minn., and westward, and
south in the mountains to Ga. Shrub 2--6 deg. high.


4. OSTRYA, Micheli. HOP-HORNBEAM. IRON-WOOD.

Sterile flowers in drooping cylindrical catkins, consisting of several
stamens in the axil of each bract; filaments short, often forked,
bearing 1-celled (half-) anthers; their tips hairy. Fertile flowers in
short catkins; a pair to each deciduous bract, each of an incompletely
2-celled 2-ovuled ovary, crowned with the short bearded border of the
adherent calyx, tipped with 2 long-linear stigmas, and enclosed in a
tubular bractlet, which in fruit becomes a closed bladdery oblong bag,
very much larger than the small and smooth nut; these inflated
involucres loosely imbricated to form a sort of strobile, in appearance
like that of the Hop.--Slender trees, with very hard wood, brownish
furrowed bark, and foliage resembling that of Birch; leaves open and
concave in the bud, more or less plaited on the straight veins. Flowers
in the spring, appearing with the leaves; the sterile catkins 1--3
together from scaly buds at the tip of the branches of the preceding
year; the fertile single, terminating short leafy shoots of the season.
(The classical name.)

1. O. Virginica, Willd. (AMERICAN HOP-HORNBEAM. LEVER-WOOD.) Leaves
oblong-ovate, taper-pointed, very sharply doubly serrate, downy beneath,
with 11--15 principal veins; buds acute; involucral sacs bristly-hairy
at the base.--Rich woods, common, from the Atlantic to N. Minn., Neb.,
E. Kan., and southward. Tree 25--45 deg. high; hop-like strobiles
full-grown in Aug.


5 CARPINUS, L. HORNBEAM. IRON-WOOD.

Sterile flowers in drooping cylindrical catkins, consisting of several
stamens in the axil of a simple and entire scale-like bract; filaments
very short, mostly 2-forked, the forks bearing 1-celled (half-) anthers
with hairy tips. Fertile flowers several, spiked in a sort of loose
terminal catkin, with small deciduous bracts, each subtending a pair of
flowers, as in Ostrya; but the single involucre-like bractlet is open,
enlarged in fruit and foliaceous, merely subtending the small ovate
several-nerved nut.--Trees or tall shrubs, with smooth close gray bark,
in this and in the slender buds and straight-veined leaves resembling
the Beech; leaf-buds and inflorescence as in Ostrya. (The early Latin
name.)

1. C. Caroliniana, Walter. (AMERICAN HORNBEAM. BLUE or WATER BEECH.)
Leaves ovate-oblong, pointed, sharply doubly serrate, soon nearly
smooth; bractlets 3-lobed, halberd-shaped, sparingly cut-toothed on one
side, acute. (C. Americana, _Michx._)--Along streams, N. Scotia to Fla.,
west to Minn., Iowa, E. Kan., and Tex. Tree or shrub, 10--45 deg. high, with
ridged trunk, and very hard wood.


6. QUERCUS, L. OAK.

Sterile flowers in slender naked catkins; bracts caducous; calyx
2--8-parted or lobed; stamens 3--12; anthers 2-celled. Fertile flowers
scattered or somewhat clustered, consisting of a nearly 3-celled and
6-ovuled ovary, with a 3-lobed stigma, enclosed by a scaly bud-like
involucre which becomes an indurated cup (_cupule_) around the base of
the rounded nut or acorn. Cotyledons remaining underground in
germination; radicle very short, included.--Flowers greenish or
yellowish. Sterile catkins single or often several from the same lateral
scaly bud, filiform and hanging in all our species. (The classical Latin
name.) All flower in spring, and shed their nuts in Oct. of the same or
the next year.

Sec. 1. LEUCOBALANUS. _Bark pale, often scaly; leaves and their lobes or
teeth obtuse, never bristle-pointed; stamens 6--8; scales of the cup
more or less knobby at base; stigmas sessile or nearly so; abortive
ovules at the base of the perfect seed; inner surface of nut glabrous;
fruit maturing the first year, often peduncled; kernel commonly
sweetish; wood tough and dense._

[*] _Leaves deciduous, lyrate or sinuate-pinnatifid, pale
beneath._--WHITE OAKS.

1. Q. alba, L. (WHITE OAK.) Mature _leaves smooth, pale or glaucous
underneath, bright green above_, obovate-oblong, obliquely cut
into 3--9 oblong or linear and obtuse mostly entire lobes; _cup
hemispherical-saucer-shaped, rough or tubercled at maturity, naked, much
shorter than the ovoid or oblong acorn_ (1' long).--All soils, Maine to
S. E. Minn., E. Kan., and south to the Gulf. A large and valuable tree;
lobes of the leaves short and broad (3--5), or deep and narrow (5--9).

2. Q. stellata, Wang. (POST OAK. IRON OAK.) _Leaves grayish or
yellowish-downy underneath, pale and rough above, thickish_, sinuately
cut into 5--7 rounded divergent lobes, the upper ones much larger and
often 1--3-notched; _cup deep saucer-shaped, naked, one third or half
the length of the ovoid acorn_ (6--9'' long). (Q. obtusiloba,
_Michx._)--Sandy or sterile soil, Martha's Vineyard to Mich. and E.
Neb., south to Fla. and Tex.; common, especially southward. A small tree
with very durable wood.

3. Q. macrocarpa, Michx. (BUR OAK. OVER-CUP or MOSSY-CUP OAK.) _Leaves_
obovate or oblong, _lyrately-pinnatifid or deeply sinuate-lobed, or
nearly parted_, sometimes nearly entire, irregular, downy or pale
beneath; the lobes sparingly and obtusely toothed, or the smaller ones
entire; _cup deep_, thick and woody (9''--2' across), conspicuously
imbricated with hard and thick _pointed scales, the upper ones awned_,
so as usually to make a mossy-fringed border; _acorn_ broadly ovoid
(1--11/2' long), _half immersed in or entirely enclosed by the cup_.--Rich
soil, N. Scotia to W. Mass. and Penn., west to Minn., central Neb., and
Kan. A large and valuable tree; extremely variable in the size and
fringe of the acorns.--Var. OLIVAEFORMIS, Gray, is only a narrower-leaved
form with unusually small oblong acorns.

4. Q. lyrata, Walt. (OVER-CUP OAK. SWAMP POST OAK.) Leaves crowded at
the end of the branchlets, obovate-oblong, acute at base, more or less
deeply _7--9-lobed, white-tomentose beneath_ or at length smoothish,
_the lobes triangular to oblong, acute or obtuse, entire_ or sparingly
toothed; fruit short-peduncled or sessile; cup round-ovate, thin, _with
rugged scales, almost covering the depressed-globose acorn_
(8--10''long).--River swamps, S. E. Mo. to S. Ind., Tenn., N. C., and
southward.--A large tree, with flaky bark; intermediate between n. 3 and
n. 5.

[*][*] _Leaves coarsely sinuate-toothed, but not lobed_ (except slightly
in n. 5), _whitish and more or less downy beneath; cup hoary,
hemispherical or a little depressed, about half as long as the
oblong-ovoid edible acorn_.--CHESTNUT-OAKS.

5. Q. bicolor, Willd. (SWAMP WHITE OAK.) _Leaves_ obovate or
oblong-obovate, _wedge-shaped at base, coarsely sinuate-crenate_ and
often rather _pinnatifid_ than toothed, usually _soft-downy and
white-hoary_ beneath, the main primary veins 6--8 pairs, lax and little
prominent; fruiting _peduncle much longer than the petiole_; upper
scales of the cup awn-pointed, sometimes forming a mossy-fringed margin;
acorn scarcely 1' long.--Borders of streams and swamps, S. Maine to
Ont., Minn., and E. Kan., and south in the mountains to N. Ga.--A large
tree, with flaky bark.

6. Q. Michauxii, Nutt. (BASKET-OAK. COW-OAK.) Leaves (5--6' long) oval
or obovate, acute, _obtuse or even cordate at base_, regularly _dentate_
(commonly not deeply), _rather rigid, usually very tomentose beneath;
stamens usually 10_; fruit short-peduncled; cup shallow, tuberculate
with hard and stout acute scales, without fringe; acorn 11/2' long. (Q.
Prinus, var Michauxii, _Chapm._)--Borders of streams and swamps, Del. to
Fla., and in the west from S. Ind. to Mo., and south to the Gulf.--A
large and valuable tree, with gray flaky bark and large sweet edible
acorns. Intermediate forms appear to connect with n. 5, of which Dr.
Engelmann considered it a sub-species.

7. Q. Prinus, L. (CHESTNUT-OAK.) _Leaves_ thick, varying, obovate or
oblong to lanceolate, sometimes acuminate, _with an obtuse or acute
base, undulately crenate-toothed, pale and minutely downy beneath_, the
main primary ribs 10--16 pairs, straight, prominent beneath; fruiting
_peduncles shorter than the petioles, often very short_; cup thick
(6--12'' wide), mostly tuberculate with hard and stout scales; acorn
large (sometimes 1--11/4' long). (Incl. var. monticola, _Michx._)--Rocky
banks and hillsides, E. Mass. to N. Y. and Ont., and south in the
mountains to N. Ala. A large tree, with thick and deeply furrowed bark,
rich in tannin.

8. Q. Muhlenbergii, Engelm. (YELLOW OAK. CHESTNUT-OAK.) _Leaves_ (5--7'
long) _slender-petioled, often oblong or even lanceolate, usually acute
or pointed, mostly obtuse or roundish at base, almost equably and rather
sharply toothed_; cup subsessile, shallow, thin, of small appressed
scales, 5--7'' broad; acorn globose or obovate, 7--9'' long. (Q. Prinus,
var. acuminata, _Michx._)--Dry hillsides and rich bottoms, Mass. to
Del., along the mountains to N. Ala., west to Minn., E. Neb., and
Tex.--Leaves more like those of the Chestnut than any other; the primary
veins very straight, impressed above, prominent beneath. A tall tree,
with thin flaky bark.

9. Q. prinoides, Willd. Like the last, but of _low stature_ (usually
2--4 deg. high), _with smaller more undulate leaves on shorter petioles_
(3--6'' long), and deeper cups with _more tumid scales_. (Q. Prinus,
var. humilis, _Marsh._)--Same range as last. Apparently quite distinct
at the east, where it is very low, but running into Q. Muhlenbergii at
the far west.

[*][*][*] _Leaves coriaceous, evergreen, entire or rarely
spiny-toothed._--LIVE OAKS.

10. Q. virens, Ait. (LIVE OAK.) Leaves small, oblong or elliptical,
hoary beneath as well as the branchlets; peduncle usually conspicuous,
1--3-fruited; cup top-shaped; acorn oblong; cotyledons completely united
into one mass.--Along the coast from Va. to Fla. and Tex. Becoming a
large tree at the south, and formerly extensively used in ship-building.

Sec. 2. MELANOBALANUS. _Bark dark, furrowed; leaves deciduous, their lobes
and teeth acute and bristle-pointed (at least in youth); stamens mostly
4--6; cup-scales membranaceous; styles long and spreading; abortive
ovules near the top of the perfect seed; inner surface of nut tomentose;
fruit maturing the second year, sessile or on short thick peduncles;
wood porous and brittle._--BLACK OAKS.

[*] _Leaves pinnatifid or lobed, slender-petioled, not coriaceous, the
lobes or teeth conspicuously bristle-pointed._

[+] _Mature leaves glabrous on both sides or nearly so, oval, oblong or
somewhat obovate in outline, from moderately sinuate-pinnatifid to
deeply pinnatifid, turning various shades of red or crimson in late
autumn; large trees, with reddish coarse-grained wood; species closely
related and apparently readily hybridizing._

11. Q. rubra, L. (RED OAK.) _Cup saucer-shaped_ or flat, with a narrow
raised border (9--12'' in diameter), of rather fine closely appressed
scales, sessile or on a very short and abrupt narrow stalk or neck,
_very much shorter than the oblong-ovoid or ellipsoidal acorn_, which is
1' or less in length; leaves rather thin, turning dark red after frost,
moderately (rarely very deeply) pinnatifid, the lobes acuminate from a
broad base, with a few coarse teeth; bark of trunk dark gray,
smoothish.--Common both in rich and poor soil, westward to E. Minn. and
E. Kan. Timber coarse and poor.--Var. RUNCINATA, A. DC., is a form with
regular nearly entire lobes and the fruit nearly a half smaller; found
near St. Louis.

12. Q. coccinea, Wang. (SCARLET OAK.) _Cup top-shaped, or hemispherical
with a conical base_ (7--9'' broad), coarsely scaly, covering half or
more of the _broadly or globular-ovoid acorn_, the scales somewhat
appressed and glabrate, or in western localities yellowish-canescent and
squarrose as in var. tinctoria; leaves in the ordinary forms, at least
on full-grown trees, bright green, shining above, turning red in autumn,
deeply pinnatifid, the slender lobes divergent and sparingly
cut-toothed; buds small; acorns 6--9'' long; bark of the trunk gray, the
interior reddish.--Moist or dry soil; common, from S. Maine to Del.,
Minn., N. Mo., and south in the mountains.

Var. tinctoria, Gray. (QUERCITRON, YELLOW-BARKED, or BLACK OAK.) Leaves
with broader undivided lobes, commonly paler and somewhat pubescent
beneath, turning brownish, orange, or dull red in autumn; cup-scales
large and loosely imbricated or squarrose when dry, yellowish gray,
pubescent; bark of trunk darker-colored and rougher on the surface,
thicker, and internally orange, much more valuable for the tanner and
dyer; buds longer and more pointed; cup sometimes less top-shaped. (Q.
tinctoria, _Bartram_.)--Dry or gravelly uplands, S. Maine to S. Minn.,
E. Neb. and Tex. Intermediate forms connect this with the type. The bark
is largely used in tanning.

Var. ambigua, Gray. (GRAY OAK.) Found along our northeastern borders to
Lake Champlain and northward, figured and briefly characterized by
Michaux as with the foliage of Q. rubra and the fruit of Q. coccinea. It
was considered by Dr. Engelmann as a form of Q. rubra with cups
hemispherical or even turbinate.

13. Q. palustris, Du Roi. (SWAMP SPANISH or PIN OAK.) _Cup
flat-saucer-shaped_, sometimes contracted into a short scaly base or
stalk, fine-scaled (5--7'' broad), _very much shorter than the usually
globose or depressed acorn_, which is 5--7'' long; leaves deeply
pinnatifid with divergent lobes and broad rounded sinuses.--Low grounds;
rather common, from Mass. to Del. and Md., west to Minn., E. Kan., and
Ark.

[+][+] _Mature leaves soft-downy beneath; cup saucer-shaped, with a
somewhat top-shaped base, about half the length of the fully developed
small acorn._

14. Q. falcata, Michx. (SPANISH OAK.) _Leaves grayish-downy or fulvous
underneath_, obtuse or rounded at base, _3--5-lobed above_ (sometimes
entire); _the lobes prolonged, mostly narrow and more or less
scythe-shaped_, especially the terminal one, entire or sparingly
cut-toothed; acorn globose, 4--5'' long.--Dry or sandy soil, Long Island
to Fla., and from S. Ind. to Mo. and Tex. A large or small tree,
extremely variable in foliage; bark excellent for tanning.

15. Q. ilicifolia, Wang. (BEAR or BLACK SCRUB-OAK.) _Dwarf_ (3--8 deg.
high), straggling; _leaves_ (2--4' long) thickish, _obovate,
wedge-shaped at base, angularly about 5- (3--7-) lobed, white-downy
beneath_; lobes short and triangular, spreading; acorn ovoid, globular,
5--6'' long.--Sandy barrens and rocky hills, N. Eng. to Ohio and Ky.

[*][*] _Leaves entire or with a few teeth (or somewhat 3--5-lobed at the
summit), coriaceous, commonly bristle-pointed; acorns globular, small
(not over 6'' long)._

[+] _Leaves thick, widening or often much dilated upward and more or
less sinuate or somewhat 3--5-lobed; acorns globular-ovoid._

16. Q. aquatica, Walter. (WATER-OAK.) _Leaves glabrous and shining,
obovate-spatulate or narrowly wedge-form, with a long tapering base_ and
an often obscurely 3-lobed summit, varying to oblanceolate; cup
saucer-shaped or hemispherical.--Wet grounds, around ponds, etc., Del.
to the Gulf, and from Ky. and Mo. to Tex.--Tree 30--40 deg. high; running
into many varieties, especially southward; the leaves on seedlings and
strong shoots often incised or sinuate-pinnatifid; then mostly
bristle-pointed.

17. Q. nigra, L. (BLACK-JACK or BARREN OAK.) _Leaves broadly
wedge-shaped_, but sometimes rounded or obscurely cordate at the base,
_widely dilated_ and somewhat 3-lobed (rarely 5-lobed) at the summit,
occasionally with one or two lateral conspicuously bristle-tipped lobes
or teeth, rusty-pubescent beneath, shining above, large (4--9' long);
_cup top-shaped_, coarse-scaly; acorn short-ovoid.--Dry sandy barrens,
or heavy clay soil, Long Island to S. Minn., E. Neb., and southward. A
small tree (sometimes 30--40 deg. high), of little value.

[+][+] _Leaves not dilated upward, generally entire; acorn globose._

18. Q. imbricaria, Michx. (LAUREL or SHINGLE OAK.) _Leaves
lanceolate-oblong_, thickish, smooth, and _shining above, downy
underneath, the down commonly persistent_; cup between saucer-shaped and
top-shaped.--Rich woodlands, Penn. to Ga., west to S. Wisc., Iowa,
E. Neb., and N. Ark.--Tree 30--90 deg. high. The specific name is in
allusion to its early use for shingles.

19. Q. Phellos, L. (WILLOW-OAK.) _Leaves linear-Lanceolate, narrowed to
both ends, soon glabrous_, light green (3--4' long); cup
saucer-shaped.--Bottom lands or rich sandy uplands, Staten Island to N.
Fla., west to S. Ky., Mo., and Tex.

In addition to the above, the following hybrids have been recognized:--

Q. ALBA x MACROCARPA; N. Ill. (_Bebb_); central Ill. (_Hall_).

Q. ALBA x STELLATA; N. Ill. (_Bebb_); D. C. (_Vasey_); S. C.
(_Mellichamp_).

Q. ALBA x PRINUS; near Washington, D. C. (_Vasey._)

Q. IMBRICARIA x NIGRA (Q. tridentata, _Engelmann_); S. Ill.
(_Engelmann_).

Q. IMBRICARIA x PALUSTRIS; Mo. (_Engelmann_).

Q. IMBRICARIA x COCCINEA (Q. Leana, _Nutt._); Ohio to Mo., and near
Washington, D. C.

Q. PHELLOS x RUBRA (?) or COCCINEA (?) (Q. heterophylla, _Michx._);
Staten Island and N. J. to Del. and N. C. (BARTRAM'S OAK.)

Q. PHELLOS x NIGRA (Q. Rudkini, _Britt._); N. J. (_Rudkin_).

Q. ILICIFOLIA x COCCINEA (?); Uxbridge, Mass. (_Robbins._)


7. CASTANEA, Tourn. CHESTNUT.

Sterile flowers interruptedly clustered in long and naked cylindrical
catkins; calyx mostly 6-parted; stamens 8--20; filaments slender;
anthers 2-celled. Fertile flowers few, usually 3 together in an ovoid
scaly prickly involucre; calyx with a 6-lobed border crowning the
3--7-celled 6--14-ovuled ovary; abortive stamens 5--12; styles linear,
exserted, as many as the cells of the ovary; stigmas small. Nuts
coriaceous, ovoid, enclosed 2--3 together or solitary in the hard and
thick very prickly 4-valved involucre. Cotyledons very thick,
somewhat plaited, cohering together, remaining underground in
germination.--Leaves strongly straight-veined, undivided. Flowers
appearing later than the leaves, cream-color; the catkins axillary near
the end of the branches, wholly sterile or the upper ones androgynous
with the fertile flowers at the base. (The classical name, from that of
a town in Thessaly.)

1. C. sativa, Mill., var. Americana. (CHESTNUT.) A large tree, _leaves
oblong-lanceolate, pointed_, serrate with coarse pointed teeth, acute at
base, when mature _smooth and green both sides_; nuts 2 or 3 in each
involucre, therefore flattened on one or both sides, very sweet. (C.
vesca, var., of the Manual.)--Rocky woods and hillsides, S. Maine to
Del., along the mountains to N. Ala., and west to S. Mich., S. Ind., and
Tenn.

2. C. pumila, Mill. (CHINQUAPIN.) A spreading shrub or small tree;
_leaves oblong, acute_, serrate with pointed teeth, _whitened-downy
beneath_; involucres small, often spiked; the ovoid pointed nut scarcely
half as large as a common chestnut, very sweet, solitary, not
flattened.--Rich hillsides and borders of swamps, S. Penn. to Fla., west
to S. Ind. and Tex.


8. FAGUS, Tourn. BEECH.

Sterile flowers in small heads on drooping peduncles, with deciduous
scale-like bracts; calyx bell-shaped, 5--7-cleft; stamens 8--16;
filaments slender; anthers 2-celled. Fertile flowers usually in pairs at
the apex of a short peduncle, invested by numerous awl-shaped bractlets,
the inner coherent at base to form the 4-lobed involucre; calyx-lobes 6,
awl shaped; ovary 3-celled with 2 ovules in each cell; styles 3,
thread-like, stigmatic along the inner side. Nuts sharply 3-sided,
usually 2 in each urn-shaped and soft-prickly coriaceous involucre,
which divides to below the middle into 4 valves. Cotyledons thick,
folded and somewhat united; but rising and expanding in
germination.--Trees, with a close and smooth ash-gray bark, a light
horizontal spray, and undivided strongly straight-veined leaves, which
are open and convex in the tapering bud and plaited on the veins.
Flowers appearing with the leaves, the yellowish staminate flowers from
the lower, the pistillate from the upper axils of the leaves of the
season. (The classical Latin name, from [Greek: pha/go], _to eat_, in
allusion to the esculent nuts.)

1. F. ferruginea, Ait. (AMERICAN BEECH.) Tree 75--100 deg. high; leaves
oblong-ovate, taper-pointed, distinctly and often coarsely toothed;
petioles and midrib soon nearly naked; prickles of the fruit mostly
recurved or spreading.--N. Scotia to Fla., west to Wisc., E. Ill., Mo.,
and Tex.


ORDER 104. SALICACEAE. (WILLOW FAMILY.)

_Dioecious trees or shrubs, with both kinds of flowers in catkins, one
to each bract, without perianth; the fruit a 1-celled and 2--4-valved
pod, with 2--4 parietal or basal placentae, bearing numerous seeds
furnished with long silky down._--Style usually short or none; stigmas
2, often 2-lobed. Seeds ascending, anatropous, without albumen.
Cotyledons flattened.--Leaves alternate, undivided, with scale-like and
deciduous, or else leaf-like and persistent, stipules. Wood soft and
light; bark bitter.

1. Salix. Bracts entire. Flowers with small glands, disks none. Stamens
few. Stigmas short. Buds with a single scale.

2. Populus. Bracts lacerate. Flowers with a broad or cup-shaped disk.
Stamens numerous. Stigmas elongated. Buds scaly.


1. SALIX, Tourn. WILLOW. OSIER. (By M. S. BEBB, Esq.)

Bracts (_scales_) of the catkins entire. Sterile flowers of 3--10,
mostly 2, distinct or united stamens, accompanied by 1 or 2 small
glands. Fertile flowers also with a small flat gland at the base of the
ovary; stigmas short.--Trees or shrubs, generally growing along streams,
with terete and lithe branches. Leaves mostly long and pointed, entire
or glandularly toothed. Buds covered by a single scale, with an inner
adherent membrane (separating in n. 14). Catkins appearing before or
with the leaves. (The classical Latin name.)

Sec. 1. _Aments borne on short lateral leafy branchlets; scales yellowish,
falling before the capsules mature; filaments hairy below, all free;
style very short or obsolete; stigmas thick, notched. Trees or large
shrubs; leaves taper-pointed._

[*] _Leaves closely serrate with inflexed teeth; capsules glabrous._

[+] _Stamens 3--5 or more._

[++] _Trees 15--50 deg. high, with rough bark and slender twigs; no petiolar
glands; sterile aments elongated, narrowly cylindrical; flowers somewhat
remotely subverticillate; scales entire, short and rounded,
crisp-villous on the inside._

1. S. nigra, Marsh. (BLACK WILLOW.) _Leaves narrowly lanceolate, very
long-attenuate from near the roundish or acute base to the usually
curved tip_, often downy when young, at length _green and glabrous_
except the petiole and midrib; stipules large, semicordate, pointed and
persistent, or small, ovoid and deciduous; fruiting aments (11/2--3' long)
more or less dense; capsules ovate-conical, shortly pedicelled.--Banks
of streams and lakes, bending over the water; common.--Var. FALCATA,
Torr. Leaves narrower and scythe-shaped--Var. WARDI, Bebb. Leaves
broader, often 1' wide, glaucous and veined beneath; stipules large,
round-reniform; aments long, loosely flowered; capsules globose-conical,
long-pedicelled. Rocky islands of the Potomac (_Ward_); Falls of the
Ohio (_Short_); Mo. The leaves alone are easily mistaken for those of
n. 14.--A hybrid of this species with S. alba, var. vitellina, is found
in Wayne Co., N. Y. (_E. L. Hankenson_).

2. S. amygdaloides, Anders. _Leaves lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate_,
2--4' long, attenuate-cuspidate, _pale or glaucous beneath; petioles
long and slender_; stipules minute, very early deciduous; _fertile
aments becoming very loose in fruit_ from the lengthening of the slender
pedicels.--Central N. Y. (_Dudley_) to Mo.; common westward.

[++][++] _A shrub or small bushy tree, 6--15 deg. high, with smooth bark and
rather stout polished twigs; petioles glandular; sterile aments thick,
oblong-cylindrical, densely flowered; stamens commonly 5; scales
dentate, hairy at base, smooth above._

3. S. lucida, Muhl. (SHINING W.) Leaves ovate-lanceolate or narrower,
tapering to a very long acuminate point, at length coriaceous, smooth
and shining both sides; stipules small, oblong; fruiting aments often
persistent, the capsules becoming rigid and polished, as in the nearly
allied S. pentandra of Europe.--Banks of streams, N. Eng. to Penn., west
and northward. A beautiful species on account of its showy staminate
aments and large glossy leaves.

[+][+] _Stamens mostly 2; capsules subsessile or very shortly
pedicelled; leaves lanceolate, long-acuminate._

S. FRAGILIS, L. (CRACK WILLOW.) _Leaves green and glabrous_, pale or
glaucous beneath, 3--6' long; stipules when present half-cordate;
stamens rarely 3--4; _capsule long-conical, shortly pedicelled_.--A tall
and handsome tree, which was planted at an early day about Boston and
elsewhere.--The var. DECIPIENS, Smith, with yellowish-white or crimson
twigs, buds black in winter, and smaller and brighter green leaves,
ought perhaps to be excluded, the plant so named by Barratt, etc., being
one of the hybrids mentioned below. (Adv. from Eu.)

S. ALBA, L. (WHITE W.) _Leaves ashy-gray or silky-white on both
sides_, except when old, 2--4' long; stipules ovate-lanceolate,
deciduous; capsules ovate-conical, sessile or nearly so.--Var. CAERULEA,
Koch; twigs olive; old leaves smooth, glaucous beneath, dull bluish
green.--Var. VITELLINA, Koch; twigs yellow or reddish; old leaves
glabrous above.--A familiar tree of rapid growth, attaining a height of
50--80 deg. The typical form, with olive twigs and old leaves silky on both
sides, is rarely found with us, but the var. VITELLINA is common. Pure
S. FRAGILIS is also scarce, but a host of hybrids between the two,
representing S. viridis, _Fries_, S. Russelliana, _Smith_, etc., are the
commonest of introduced willows. These forms are rendered almost
inextricable by a further cross, by no means rare, with our native S.
lucida. (Adv. from Eu.)

S. BABYLONICA, Tourn. (WEEPING W.) Extensively planted for ornament, and
in some places widely spread along river-banks and lake-shores by the
drifting of detached limbs. (Adv. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Leaves remotely denticulate with projecting teeth; stamens 2;
capsule glabrous or silky._

4. S. longifolia, Muhl. Leaves linear-lanceolate, 2--4' long, tapering
at each end, nearly sessile, more or less silky when young, at length
smooth and green both sides; stipules small, lanceolate, deciduous;
aments linear-cylindric, often clustered at the ends of the branchlets;
capsule shortly pedicelled; stigmas large, sessile.--Found sparingly
along the Atlantic coast from Maine to the Potomac; common westward. A
shrub, rooting extensively in alluvial deposits and forming dense
clumps. This species is a peculiar American type, and exceedingly
variable; the earliest leaves after germination pinnately lobed.

Sec. 2. _Aments lateral or terminal, with or without bracts; scales
persistent, colored at the tip; stamens 2 (usually 1 in n. 19), with
glabrous filaments (united and hairy in_ S. purpurea); _shrubs or small
trees._

[*] _Capsules tomentose._

[+] _Pedicels 3--6 times the length of the gland; style medium or none._

[++] _Large shrubs or small trees (8--15 deg. high); leaves obovate or
elliptic-lanceolate, 2--4' long, acute or acuminate, more or less
obscurely and irregularly serrate, thin becoming rigid, glaucous
beneath; fertile aments oblong-cylindric, 2--3' long, loosely flowered._

5. S. rostrata, Richardson. _Leaves dull green and downy above_, stoutly
veined and _soft-hairy beneath_, serrate, crenate or subentire; stipules
when present semi-cordate, toothed, acute; _aments appearing with the
leaves_, the sterile narrowed at base, pale yellow; capsules tapering to
a very long slender beak; _pedicels thread-like, much exceeding the
pale, rose-tipped, linear, thinly villous scales_; style scarcely any;
stigma-lobes entire or deeply parted. (S. livida, var. occidentalis,
_Gray_.)--Moist or dry ground, N. Eng. to Penn., and far west and
northward. Not spreading from the root but having rather the habit of a
small tree, with a distinct trunk.

6. S. discolor, Muhl. (GLAUCOUS W.) _Leaves smooth and bright green
above, soon smooth beneath_, irregularly crenate-serrate, the serratures
remote at base, closer, finer and becoming obsolete toward the point;
stipules 1/2' long or more, and sharply toothed, or small and nearly
entire; _aments closely sessile, thick, oblong-cylindrical_, 1' long or
more, _appearing before the leaves_ in earliest spring; _scales dark red
or brown, becoming black, copiously clothed with long glossy hairs_;
style short but distinct.--Var. ERIOCEPHALA, Anders. Aments more densely
flowered and more silvery silky; leaves sometimes retaining a
ferruginous pubescence beneath even when fully grown.--Var. PRINOIDES,
Anders. Aments more loosely flowered, less silky; capsules more thinly
tomentose; style longer; stigma-lobes laciniate; leaves narrower. (S.
prinoides, _Pursh._) Includes narrow-leaved forms of the type, and
others which are probably hybrids with S. cordata.--Low meadows and
river-banks, common. The just expanding leaves are often overspread with
evanescent ferruginous hairs.

[++][++] _Upland grayish shrubs, 1--8 deg. high; leaves oblanceolate,
pointed, the lowest obtuse, downy above becoming glabrate, beneath
glaucous, rugose-veined and softly tomentose, the margin revolute,
undulate-entire; aments ovoid or oblong, closely sessile, appearing
before the leaves, naked at base; capsules rather shortly pedicelled,
greenish or reddish, spreading; scales dark red or brownish; style
distinct; stigmas bifid._

7. S. humilis, Marsh. (PRAIRIE W.) _Leaves oblanceolate or
oblong-lanceolate_, the lowest obovate; _stipules medium-sized_,
semi-ovate, entire or oftener toothed; _petioles distinct_; aments often
recurved, about 1' long.--Dry plains and barrens, common. A shrub, 3--8 deg.
high, varying much in the size and shape of the leaves. Hybrids with
n. 6 have equally broad and large but duller green leaves, softly
tomentose beneath and with shorter petioles, the aments equally thick
but usually recurved, and the capsules on shorter pedicels. Small forms
apparently pass into the next.

8. S. tristis, Ait. (DWARF GRAY W.) _Leaves small_ (1--2' long),
_crowded, linear-oblanceolate_, tapering to a _very short petiole;
stipules minute, deciduous_; aments very small, globular or oval, about
1/2' long in fruit.--Sandy plains or on the borders of hillside thickets,
common. A tufted shrub, 1--11/2 deg. high, rising from a strong large root.

[++][++][++] _Low shrubs, 3--10 deg. high, of cold swamps, with slender
yellowish or reddish twigs; leaves lanceolate, smooth above, glaucous
beneath and covered when young with appressed silvery-silky hairs;
aments (especially the fertile) with a few leafy bracts at base; capsule
pedicelled, silvery-silky; stigmas bifid._

[=] _Shrubs of lowland swamps; leaves narrowly lanceolate, 2--3' long,
taper-pointed, finely and evenly serrate; stipules linear or
semi-cordate, deciduous; aments sessile or in fruit slightly peduncled;
style very short._

9. S. sericea, Marsh. (SILKY W.) Leaves at first (principally beneath)
very silky, turning black in drying; aments narrowly cylindrical, the
fertile densely flowered; capsule short-pedicelled, ovate-oblong, rather
obtuse.--Common, but more prevalent from the region of the Great Lakes
eastward.

10. S. petiolaris, Smith. Leaves only slightly silky when young, soon
smooth, with less tendency to blacken in drying; fertile aments
ovoid-cylindric, in fruit broad and loose from the lengthening of the
pedicels; capsule rostrate from an ovate base, rather acute.--Var.
GRACILIS, Anders., has extremely loose aments, and very long-pedicelled
attenuate-rostrate capsules.--Common, but more prevalent from the Great
Lakes westward. This species, like the preceding, hybridizes freely with
S. cordata.

[=][=] _Alpine shrub; leaves 1--2' long, repand-crenate; stipules
minute, fugacious; aments leafy-peduncled; style distinct._

11. S. argyrocarpa, Anders. Leaves tapering evenly to both ends, acute,
or the earliest obovate and obtuse, at length rigid, the margin slightly
revolute; petiole short; fruiting ament short (about 1' long), loosely
flowered; capsule tapering, densely silky-silvery; gland of the
staminate flower variously doubled.--Moist alpine ravines in a few
limited localities on or near Mt. Washington, N. H.; also in Lower
Canada and Lab. A bushy branched shrub, erect or depressed at base,
1--2 deg. high, growing in wide dense patches. A hybrid with n. 13 was
detected by Mr. _E. Faxon_ in Tuckerman's ravine (its leaves collected
by Dr. Gray as early as 1842!), appearing like a large form of the
species with the aments of S. phylicifolia.

[+][+] _Pedicels twice the length of the gland; style elongated._

12. S. candida, Willd. (SAGE W. HOARY W.) Leaves lanceolate or
linear-lanceolate, 2--4' long, taper-pointed or the lowest obtuse,
rather rigid, downy above, becoming glabrate, _beneath covered with a
dense white tomentum_, the revolute margin subentire; _stipules
lanceolate, about as long as the petioles_; aments cylindrical, densely
flowered, 2' long in fruit; anthers red; the dark gland elongated;
capsule densely white-woolly; style dark red; stigmas short, spreading,
notched.--Cold bogs, N. Eng. and N. J. to Iowa, and northward.--A hoary
shrub 2--5 deg. high; young shoots white-woolly, the older red. Two
beautiful hybrids, with n. 10 and n. 14, have been found near Flint,
Mich. (_Dr. Clarke_).

13. S. phylicifolia, L. Leaves lanceolate, ovate-lanceolate or elliptic,
somewhat equally pointed or obtuse at both ends, remotely and minutely
repand-toothed, 2--3' long, _very smooth on both sides_, dark green and
shining above, glaucous beneath, at length coriaceous; _stipules
obsolete_; aments sessile with a few small bracts at base, 1' long,
rather densely flowered, oblong-cylindric, the fertile somewhat
stipitate, becoming 2' long in fruit; scales dark, silky-villous;
capsule conic-rostrate from an ovoid base; stigmas bifid or entire,
yellow drying black. (S. chlorophylla, of _Man._; S. chlorophylla, var.
denudata, _Anders_.)--Moist ravines on alpine summits of the White
Mountains, and of Mt. Mansfield, Vt.--A divaricately much branched shrub
1--10 deg. high; twigs glabrous, sometimes covered with a glaucous bloom.
(Eu.)

S. VIMINALIS, L., the OSIER WILLOW of Europe, is occasionally planted,
but soon dies out. Some of its hybrids, as S. SMITHIANA, Willd., etc.,
stand our climate better, but cannot be regarded as adventive.

[+][+][+] _Capsules sessile; filaments and often the reddish anthers
united so as to appear as one._

S. PURPUREA, L. (PURPLE W.) Leaves oblanceolate or tongue shaped,
slightly serrulate, very smooth, glaucescent, subopposite; stipules
obsolete; aments densely flowered, narrow-cylindrical, the sterile at
least closely sessile, with only very small bracts at base; scale small,
round, crisp-villous, tipped with dark purple; capsules
grayish-tomentose, ovate-conical, obtuse.--Low grounds; commonly
cultivated for basket-rods. (Adv. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Capsules glabrous._

[+] _Tall shrubs, 4--10 deg. high; leaves lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate,
2--4' long, acute or acuminate (on vigorous shoots rounded, truncate or
cordate at base), serrate; sterile aments very silky, with a few bracts
at base, 1' long or more, the fertile leafy-peduncled, in fruit 2' long
or more; capsules tapering, pointed._

[++] _Leaves soon smooth; capsules long-pedicelled; style medium._

14. S. cordata, Muhl. (HEART-LEAVED W.) _Leaves oblong-lanceolate or
narrower_, on the flowering branches often tapering at base, sharply
serrate, finely denticulate or subentire, _green both sides or scarcely
paler beneath_, the young often silky or downy, especially on the
midrib, not turning black in drying; stipules reniform or ovate,
serrate, usually large and conspicuous; _aments rather slender_;
capsules greenish or refuscent, 2--3'' long. (S. rigida, _Muhl._)--Var.
ANGUSTATA, Anders. Leaves narrower, gradually acuminate, finely
serrate.--In wet places and along streams, etc.; our most widely
distributed and variable species.--S. MYRICOIDES, Muhl. (S. cordata,
var. myricoides, _Darl_., Fl. Cestr., 3 ed.), is a hybrid between this
species and S. sericea, having the leaves, even those of the most
vigorous shoots, tapering and rather acute at base, glaucous or
glaucescent beneath and sparsely appressed-hairy; stipules small, ovate,
pointed; capsules more or less silky when young, becoming glabrate,
shortly pedicelled; twigs brittle at base. A hybrid with the European S.
incana (surprising on account of the rarity of the cultivated parent) is
found at Ithaca, N. Y. (_Dudley_).

15. S. glaucophylla, Bebb. _Leaves varying from ovate with a broadly
rounded base to oblong-lanceolate_ and equally pointed at both ends
(3--4' long, nearly 2' wide), glandular-serrate, _subcoriaceous,
glabrous throughout, dark green and shining above, glaucous beneath_,
the young drying black; stipules large, ear-shaped, dentate; _aments
thick, oblong-cylindrical_, in size and silkiness resembling n. 6;
capsules attenuate-rostrate, 3--5' long, greenish, drying brown.--Var.
ANGUSTIFOLIA, Bebb; leaves narrower (3' long, 3/4' wide), pointed at both
ends. (S. angustata, of ed. 2, in part.)--Var. BREVIFOLIA, Bebb; leaves
obovate, about 1' long, strongly veined.--Common on the sand dunes of
Lake Michigan, and occasionally found away from the lake shore in N.
Ill. and Wisc.

16. S. balsamifera, Barratt. _Leaves broadly rounded and usually
subcordate at base, at first very thin, subpellucid_ and of a rich
reddish color, _at length rigid, dark green above, paler or glaucous and
prominently reticulate-veined beneath_, slightly glandular-serrulate;
petioles long and slender; _stipules obsolete; fertile aments becoming
very lax in fruit_, the long slender pedicels 6--8 times the length of
the gland; style short. (S. pyrifolia, _Anders._)--In open swamps along
our northern boundary, Maine to Minn., and northward; White Mountains of
N. H. (_Little_, 1823; rediscovered by _Pringle_, and _C. E._ and _E.
Faxon_). A much branched shrub, growing in clumps; recent twigs
shining-chestnut on the sunny side.

[++][++] _Leaves clothed, even when fully grown, with a long silky
tomentum on both sides, which is finally deciduous; capsule subsessile;
style elongated._

17. S. adenophylla, Hook. Leaves ovate or very broadly lanceolate,
cuspidate-acuminate (1--2' long), dull green both sides, very closely
serrate with fine projecting gland-tipped teeth; stipules conspicuous,
ovate-cordate, glandular-serrate, exceeding the short stout petioles,
which are dilated at base and embrace the obtuse silky buds; aments
leafy-peduncled, the fertile not rarely becoming 4' long, densely
flowered.--Shores of the Great Lakes, rooting extensively in the
sand-dunes. A large straggling shrub, with stout tomentose twigs and
crowded leaves. Hybridizes with S. cordata.

[+][+] _Low erect shrub, 1--3 deg. high; leaves small, entire; capsules
oblong-cylindric; stigmas sessile or nearly so._

18. S. myrtilloides, L. Leaves elliptic-obovate, about 1' long, obtuse
or somewhat pointed, entire, smooth on both sides, somewhat coriaceous
when mature, revolute, reticulated, pale or glaucous beneath, fertile
aments oblong, loosely few-flowered, borne on long leafy peduncles;
capsules reddish green; pedicels slender, twice the length of the nearly
smooth greenish yellow scale.--Var. PEDICELLARIS, Anders.; leaves
oblong-linear or oblanceolate, 1--21/2' long.--Cold peat-bogs, N. Eng. and
N. J. to Iowa, and northward. (Eu.)

[+][+][+] _Prostrate or creeping and matted alpine shrubs._

19. S. Uva-ursi, Pursh. (BEARBERRY W.) _Leaves elliptical_ and pointed,
or obovate and obtuse, less than 1' long, 3--4'' wide, tapering at base,
slightly toothed, strongly veined, smooth and shining above, pale and
rather glaucous beneath; _aments borne on slender lateral leafy
peduncles, oblong-cylindric_, 6--9'' long, the fertile lengthening to 2'
and narrowly cylindric, _densely flowered_ above, often loose below;
_scales_ obovate, rose-red at the tip, _covered with long silky hairs_;
stamens rarely 2; capsule ovate-conical, brownish at maturity; pedicel
scarcely exceeding the gland; style distinct. (S. Cutleri,
_Tuckerm._)--Abundant over all the alpine summits of N. New Eng. and
N. Y. Closely prostrate, spreading from a stout central root over an
area 1--2 deg. in diameter.

20. S. herbacea, L. _Leaves roundish oval_, heart-shaped, obtuse or
retuse, less than 1' long, serrate, smooth and shining, reticulately
veined; _aments terminating 2-leaved branchlets, small, ovoid, 4--10
flowered; scales_ concave, obovate, obtuse, _glabrous_ or slightly
pubescent; capsule subsessile.--Alpine summits of the White Mountains,
and far northward. A very small herb-like species, the half-underground
stems creeping and rooting to a considerable extent, the branches seldom
rising above 1--2' from the ground. (Eu.)


2. POPULUS, Tourn. POPLAR. ASPEN.

Bracts (_scales_) of the catkins irregularly cut-lobed at the apex.
Flowers from a cup-shaped disk which is obliquely lengthened in front.
Stamens 8--30, or more; filaments distinct. Stigmas 2--4, elongated.
Capsules 2--4-valved.--Trees, with broad and more or less heart-shaped
or ovate toothed leaves, and often angular branches. Buds scaly, covered
with resinous varnish. Catkins long and drooping, appearing before the
leaves. (The classical Latin name, of uncertain origin.)

Sec. 1. _Styles 2, with 2--3 narrow or filiform lobes; capsules thin,
oblong-conical, 2-valved; seeds very small; leaves ovate._

[*] _Petioles laterally flattened; bracts silky; stamens 6--20; capsules
numerous, small, on very short pedicels._

P. ALBA, L. (WHITE POPLAR. ABELE.) The younger branches and the under
surface of the rhombic-oval sinuate-toothed acute leaves
white-tomentose; scales crenate, fringed.--Frequently cultivated for
shade, spreading widely by the root, and occasionally spontaneous. (Adv.
from Eu.)

1. P. tremuloides, Michx. (AMERICAN ASPEN.) Small tree 20--50 deg. high,
with smooth greenish-white bark; _leaves roundish-heart-shaped_, with a
short sharp point, and _small somewhat regular teeth_, smooth on both
sides, with downy margins, on long slender petioles; _scales cut into
3--4 deep linear divisions_, fringed with long hairs.--Maine to the
mountains of Penn., N. Ky., Minn., and far north and westward.

2. P. grandidentata, Michx. (LARGE-TOOTHED ASPEN.) Tree 60--75 deg. high,
with smoothish gray bark; _leaves roundish-ovate, with large and
irregular sinuate teeth_, when young densely covered with white silky
wool, at length smooth both sides; _scales cut into 5--6 unequal small
divisions_, slightly fringed.--Rich woods and borders of streams,
N. Scotia to the mountains of N. C., west to N. Minn. and Tenn.

[*][*] _Petioles terete; bracts not silky; stamens 12--60._

3. P. heterophylla, L. (DOWNY POPLAR.) Tree 40--80 deg. high; leaves ovate
with a somewhat truncate or cordate base, obtuse, crenate, white-woolly
when young, at length nearly smooth, except on the elevated veins
beneath; fertile catkins few-flowered; capsules 1/2' long, equalling the
pedicels.--Borders of river swamps, Conn. to Ga., and in the west from
S. Ind. and Ill. to Ark. and W. La.

Sec. 2. _Styles 2--4, with dilated lobes; capsules large, often thick,
subglobose to ovate-oblong, 2--4-valved; bracts mostly glabrous; seeds
1--2'' long._

4. P. balsamifera, L. (BALSAM POPLAR. TACAMAHAC.) Tree 50--75 deg. high, the
large buds varnished with a copious fragrant resin; _leaves
ovate-lanceolate, gradually tapering and pointed_, finely crenate,
smooth on both sides, whitish and reticulately veined beneath, on terete
petioles 1/2--2' long; scales dilated, slightly hairy; _stamens 20--30;
capsule ovate, 2-valved_.--Borders of rivers and swamps, N. New Eng. to
Mich. and Minn., and far north and westward.--Var. CANDICANS, Gray.
(BALM OF GILEAD.) _Leaves broader and more or less heart-shaped_;
petiole commonly hairy. Common in cultivation, but rare or unknown in a
wild state.

5. P. monilifera, Ait. (COTTON-WOOD. NECKLACE POPLAR.) Tree 75--150 deg.
high; _leaves broadly deltoid_, with numerous crenate serratures and
narrow very acute acumination, sometimes ovate, rarely cordate, on
elongated flattened petioles; scales lacerate-fringed, not hairy;
_stamens 60 or more; capsules_ on slender pedicels (4--5'' long) in long
catkins, _oblong-ovate, 3--4-valved_. (Incl. P. angulata,
_Ait._)--Borders of streams, western N. Eng. to Fla., west to the Rocky
Mts.


Order 105. EMPETRACEAE. (CROWBERRY FAMILY.)

_Low shrubby evergreens, with the foliage, aspect, and compound pollen
of_ Heaths, _and the drupaceous fruit of_ Arctostaphylos, but the
divided or laciniate stigmas, etc., of some Euphorbiaceae;--probably only
an apetalous and polygamous or dioecious degenerate form of
Ericaceae,--comprising three genera, two of which occur within the limits
of this work, and the third farther south.

1. Empetrum. Flowers scattered and solitary in the axils. Sepals 3,
somewhat petal-like.

2. Corema. Flowers collected in terminal heads. Calyx none.


1. EMPETRUM, Tourn. CROWBERRY.

Flowers polygamous, scattered and solitary in the axils of the leaves
(inconspicuous), scaly-bracted. Calyx of 3 spreading and somewhat
petal-like sepals. Stamens 3. Style very short; stigma 6--9-rayed.
Fruit a berry-like drupe, with 6--9 seed-like nutlets, each containing
an erect anatropous seed. Embryo terete, in the axis of copious albumen,
with a slender inferior radicle and very small cotyledons. (An ancient
name, from [Greek: e)n], _upon_, and [Greek: pe/tros], _a rock_.)

1. E. nigrum, L. (BLACK CROWBERRY.) Procumbent and spreading; leaves
linear-oblong, scattered; fruit black.--Newf., Mount. Desert and
adjacent coast of Maine, alpine summits in N. Eng. and N. Y., L.
Superior, and northward. (Eu.)


2. COREMA, Don. BROOM-CROWBERRY.

Flowers dioecious or polygamous, collected in terminal heads, each in
the axil of a scaly bract, and with 5 or 6 thin and scarious imbricated
bractlets, but no proper calyx. Stamens 3, rarely 4, with long
filaments. Style slender, 3- (or rarely 4--5-) cleft; stigmas narrow,
often toothed. Drupe small, with 3 (rarely 4--5) nutlets. Seed, etc., as
in the last.--Diffusely much-branched little shrubs, with scattered or
nearly whorled narrowly linear heath-like leaves. (Name [Greek:
ko/rema], _a broom_, from the bushy aspect.)

1. C. Conradii, Torr. Shrub 6'--2 deg. high, diffusely branched, nearly
smooth; drupe very small, dry and juiceless when ripe.--Sandy pine
barrens and dry rocky places, N. J. and L. Island (?), Shawangunk Mts.,
N. Y., coast of S. E. Mass. and Maine, to Newf. The sterile plant is
handsome in flower, on account of the tufted purple filaments and
brown-purple anthers.


ORDER 106. CERATOPHYLLACEAE. (HORNWORT FAMILY.)

_Aquatic herbs, with whorled finely dissected leaves, and minute
axillary and sessile monoecious flowers without floral envelopes, but
with an 8--12-cleft involucre in place of a calyx, the fertile a simple
1-celled ovary, with a suspended orthotropous ovule, seed filled by a
highly developed embryo with a very short radicle, thick oval
cotyledons, and a plumule consisting of several nodes and
leaves._--Consists only of the genus


1. CERATOPHYLLUM. L. HORNWORT.

Sterile flowers of 10--20 stamens, with large sessile anthers. Fruit an
achene, beaked with the slender persistent style.--Herbs growing under
water, in ponds or slow-flowing streams; the sessile leaves cut into
thrice-forked thread-like rigid divisions (whence the name from [Greek:
ke/ras], _a horn_, and [Greek: phy/llon], _leaf_).

1. C. demersum, L. Fruit smooth, marginless, beaked with a long
persistent style, and with a short spine or tubercle at the base
on each side.--Var. ECHINATUM, Gray, has the fruit mostly larger
(3'' long), rough-pimpled on the sides, the narrowly winged margin
spiny-toothed.--Slow streams and ponds, across the continent. (Eu.,
etc.)


SUBCLASS II. GYMNOSPERMAE.

Pistil represented by an open scale or leaf, or else entirely wanting;
the ovules and seeds therefore naked (without a pericarp), and
fertilized by the direct application of the pollen. Cotyledons often
more than two.


ORDER 107. CONIFERAE. (PINE FAMILY.)

_Trees or shrubs, with resinous juice, mostly awl-shaped or
needle-shaped entire leaves, and monoecious or rarely dioecious flowers
in catkins or solitary, destitute of calyx or corolla._ Ovules
orthotropous or inverted. Embryo in the axis of the albumen, nearly its
length. (Wood destitute of ducts, composed chiefly of a homogeneous
large woody fibre which is marked with circular disks on two sides.)

SUBORDER I. Pinaceae. Fertile flowers in scaly aments becoming cones or
berry-like. Ovules 2 or more at the base of each scale. Mostly
monoecious and evergreen.

Tribe I. ABIETINEAE. (PINE FAMILY proper.) Fertile flowers in catkins,
consisting of numerous open spirally imbricated carpels in the form of
scales, each scale in the axil of a thin persistent bract; in fruit
forming a strobile or cone. Ovules 2, adherent to the base of each
scale, inverted. Seeds winged. Cotyledons 3--16. Anthers spirally
arranged upon the stamineal column, which is subtended by involucral
scales. Buds scaly. Leaves scattered (or fascicled in n. 1 and 5),
linear to needle-shaped.

[*] Cones maturing the second year, their scales becoming thickened and
corky.

1. Pinus. Leaves 2--5 in a cluster, surrounded by a sheath of scarious
bud-scales.

[*][*] Cones maturing the first year, their scales remaining thin.

[+] Cones pendulous, their scales persistent; bracts smaller than the
scales; leaves jointed upon a prominent persistent base, solitary.

2. Picea. Leaves sessile, keeled on both sides (tetragonal).

3 Tsuga. Leaves petioled, flat.

[+][+] Cones erect; bracts longer than the scales; leaf-scars not
prominent.

4. Abies. Scales of the large cone deciduous. Leaves persistent,
solitary, keeled beneath.

5. Larix. Scales of the small cone persistent. Leaves mostly fascicled,
flat, deciduous.

Tribe II. TAXODIEAE. Fertile aments of several spirally arranged
imbricated scales, without bracts, becoming a globular woody cone.
Ovules 2 or more at the base of each scale, erect. Leaves linear,
alternate; leaf-buds not scaly.

6. Taxodium. Seeds 2 to each scale. Leaves 2-ranked, deciduous.

Tribe III. CUPRESSINEAE. Scales of the fertile ament few, decussately
opposite or ternate, becoming a small closed cone or sort of drupe.
Ovules 2 or more in their axils, erect. Cotyledons 2 (rarely more).
Leaves decussately opposite or ternate, usually scale-like and adnate,
the earlier free and subulate; leaf-buds not scaly.

[*] Monoecious; fruit a small cone; leaves opposite and foliage more or
less 2-ranked.

7. Chamaecyparis. Cone globose; scales peltate. Seeds 1 or 2, narrowly
winged.

8. Thuya. Cone pendulous, oblong, of 8--12 imbricated scales. Seeds 2,
2-winged.

[*][*] Dioecious. Fruit berry-like, with bony ovate seeds.

9. Juniperus. Fruit-scales 3--6, coalescent. Foliage not 2-ranked.

SUBORDER II. Taxaceae. (YEW FAMILY.) Flowers dioecious, axillary and
solitary, the fertile consisting of a naked erect ovule which becomes a
bony-coated seed more or less surrounded or enclosed by the enlarged
fleshy disk (or scale).

10. Taxus. Leaves linear, scattered. Seed surrounded by a red berry-like
cup.


1. PINUS, Tourn. PINE.

Sterile flower at the base of the shoot of the same spring, involucrate
by a nearly definite number of scales, consisting of numerous stamens
spirally inserted on the axis, with very short filaments and a
scale-like connective; anther-cells 2, opening lengthwise. Pollen of 3
united cells, the 2 lateral ones empty. Fertile catkins solitary or
aggregated immediately below the terminal bud, or lateral on the young
shoot, consisting of imbricated carpellary scales, each in the axil of a
persistent bract, bearing a pair of inverted ovules at the base. Fruit a
cone formed of the imbricated woody carpellary scales, which are
thickened at the apex (except in White Pines), persistent, spreading
when ripe and dry; the 2 nut-like seeds partly sunk in excavations at
the base of the scale; in separating carrying away a part of its lining
as a thin fragile wing. Cotyledons 3--12, linear.--Primary leaves thin
and chaff-like, merely bud-scales; from their axils immediately proceed
the secondary needle-shaped evergreen leaves, in fascicles of 2 to 5,
from slender buds, some thin scarious bud scales sheathing the base of
the cluster. Leaves when in pairs semicylindrical, becoming channelled;
when more than 2 triangular; their edges in our species serrulate.
Blossoms developed in spring; the cones maturing in the second autumn.
(The classical Latin name.)

Sec. 1. _Leaves 5, each with a single fibro-vascular bundle; sheath loose,
deciduous; cones subterminal, their scales but slightly thickened at the
end and without prickle or point; bark smooth except on old trunks._

1. P. Strobus, L. (WHITE PINE.) Tree 75--160 deg. high; leaves very slender,
glaucous; sterile flowers oval (4--5'' long), with 6--8 involucral
scales at base; fertile catkins long-stalked, cylindrical; cones narrow,
cylindrical, nodding, often curved (4--6' long); seed smooth; cotyledons
8--10.--Newf. to Penn., along the mountains to Ga., west to Minn. and
E. Iowa. Invaluable for its soft, light, white or yellowish wood, in
large trees nearly free from resin.

Sec. 2. _Leaves in twos or threes, each with two fibro-vascular bundles;
sheath close; woody scales of the cones thickened at the end and usually
spiny-tipped._

[*] _Cones lateral; their scales much thickened at the end; leaves
rigid._

[+] _Leaves in threes (rarely in twos in n. 2)._

2. P. Taeda, L. (LOBLOLLY or OLD-FIELD PINE.) _Leaves long (6--10'), with
elongated sheaths_, light green; cones elongated-oblong (3--5' long) and
tapering; _scales tipped with a stout incurved spine_.--Wet clay or dry
sandy soil, Del. to Fla. near the coast, thence to Tex. and Ark.--A tree
50--150 deg. high; staminate flowers slender, 2' long, with usually 10--13
involucral scales; seeds with 3 strong rough ridges on the under side.

3. P. rigida, Mill. (PITCH PINE.) _Leaves_ (3--5' long) dark green,
_from short sheaths_; cones ovoid-conical or ovate (1--31/2' long), often
in clusters; _scales with a short stout recurved prickle_.--Sandy or
barren soil, N. Brunswick to N. Ga., western N. Y. and E. Ky.--A tree
30--80 deg. high, with very rough dark bark and hard resinous wood; sterile
flowers shorter; scales 6--8.

[+][+] _Leaves in twos (some in threes in n. 4 and 7)._

4. P. pungens, Michx. f. (TABLE MOUNTAIN PINE.) _Leaves stout, short_
(11/4--21/2' long), crowded, bluish, the sheath short (very short on old
foliage); cones ovate (31/2' long), _the scales armed with a strong hooked
spine_ (1/4' long).--Alleghany Mts., Penn., to N. C. and Tenn.--A rather
small tree (20--60 deg. high); cones long-persistent.

5. P. inops, Ait. (JERSEY or SCRUB PINE.) _Leaves short_ (11/2--3' long);
cones oblong-conical, sometimes curved (2--3' long), the _scales tipped
with a straight or recurved awl-shaped prickle_.--Barrens and sterile
hills, Long Island to S. C., mostly near the coast, west through Ky. to
S. Ind.--A straggling tree at the east, 15--40 deg. high, with spreading or
drooping branchlets; larger westward. Young shoots with a purplish
glaucous bloom.

6. P. Banksiana, Lambert. (GRAY or NORTHERN SCRUB PINE.) _Leaves short_
(1' long), _oblique, divergent_; cones conical, oblong, usually curved
(11/2--2' long), smooth, the _scales pointless_.--Barren sandy soil, S.
Maine and N. Vt. to S. Mich., central Minn., and northward. Straggling
shrub or low tree.

7. P. mitis, Michx. (YELLOW PINE.) _Leaves_ sometimes in threes, _from
long sheaths, slender_ (3--5' long); cones ovate- or oblong-conical
(barely 2' long), the _scales with a minute weak prickle_.--Usually dry
or sandy soil, Staten Island to Fla., S. Ind., S. E. Kan. and Tex.--A
straight tree, 50--100 deg. high, with dark green leaves more soft and
slender than the preceding. The western form has more rigid leaves and
more tuberculate and spiny cones.

[*][*] _Cones terminal; leaves long and slender, in twos or threes._

8. P. resinosa, Ait. (RED PINE.) Leaves _in twos_ from long sheaths,
elongated (_5--6' long_), dark green; cones ovate-conical, smooth
_(about 2' long), their scales slightly thickened, pointless_; sterile
flowers oblong-linear (6--9'' long), subtended by about 6 involucral
scales which are early deciduous by an articulation above the base.--Dry
woods, Mass. to N. Penn., Mich., and Minn., and northward.--A tall tree,
with reddish, rather smooth bark and hard wood, not very resinous.

9. P. palustris, Mill. (LONG-LEAVED, YELLOW, or GEORGIA PINE.) Leaves
_in threes_ from long sheaths, _very long_ (10--15'), crowded at the
summit of very scaly branches; sterile flowers 21/2--3' long, rose-purple;
_cones large_, cylindrical or conical-oblong _(6--10' long), the thick
scales armed with a short recurved spine_. (P. australis,
_Michx._)--Sandy soil, S. Va. to Fla. and Tex. A large tree, with
thin-scaled bark and exceedingly hard and resinous wood.

(Addendum) 10. P. ponderosa, Dougl., var. scopulorum, Engelm. Leaves in
twos or usually threes from long sheaths, 3--6' long, rather rigid;
staminate flowers 1' long; cones subterminal, 2--3' long, oval, often
3--5 together, the prominent summit of the thick scales bearing a stout
straight or incurved prickle.--Central Neb. and westward in the Rocky
Mountains.--A large tree with very thick bark.


2. PICEA, Link. SPRUCE.

Sterile flowers axillary (or sometimes terminal) on branchlets of the
preceding year; anthers tipped with a rounded recurved appendage, their
cells opening lengthwise. Fertile catkins and cones terminal; cones
maturing the first year, pendulous; their scales thin, not thickened nor
prickly-tipped, persistent. Leaves scattered, needle-shaped and keeled
above and below (4-sided), pointing every way. Otherwise nearly as in
Pinus. (The classical Latin name.)

1. P. nigra, Link. (BLACK SPRUCE.) _Branchlets pubescent_; leaves short
(usually 4--8'' long), either dark green or glaucous-whitish; _cones
ovate or ovate-oblong_ (10--20'' long), _mostly recurved, persistent_,
the _rigid scales_ with a thin denticulate edge. (Abies nigra,
_Poir._)--Swamps and cold mountain woods, New Eng. to Penn., central
Mich., Minn., and northward, and south in the mountains to Ga. A tree
40--70 deg. high.--Var. RUBRA, Engelm. Leaves larger and darker; cones
larger, bright red-brown, more readily deciduous.

2. P. alba, Link. (WHITE SPRUCE.) _Branchlets glabrous_; leaves more
slender, pale or glaucous; _cones nodding, cylindrical_ (about 2' long),
pale, _deciduous_, the thinner scales with an entire edge. (Abies alba,
_Michx._)--Northern New Eng. and N. Y. to L. Superior, and northward.--A
handsomer tree than n. 1, 50--150 deg. high, in aspect more like a Balsam
Fir.


3. TSUGA, Carriere. HEMLOCK.

Sterile flowers a subglobose cluster of stamens, from the axils of last
year's leaves, the long stipe surrounded by numerous bud-scales; anthers
tipped with a short spur or knob, their confluent cells opening
transversely; pollen-grains simple. Fertile catkins and cones on the end
of last year's branchlets; cones maturing the first year, pendulous;
their scales thin, persistent. Leaves scattered, flat, whitened beneath,
appearing 2-ranked. (The Japanese name of one of the species.)

1. T. Canadensis, Carr. Leaves petioled, short-linear, obtuse (1/2' long);
cones oval (6--8'' long), of few thin scales much longer than the
bracts. (Abies Canadensis, _Michx._)--Mostly hilly or rocky woods, N.
Scotia to Del., and along the mountains to Ala., west to Mich. and
Minn.--A tall tree, with light and spreading spray and delicate foliage,
bright green above, silvery beneath.


4. ABIES, Link. FIR.

Sterile flowers from the axils of last year's leaves; anthers tipped
with a knob, their cells bursting transversely; pollen as in Pinus.
Fertile catkins and cones erect on the upper side of spreading branches;
cones maturing the first year; their thin scales and mostly exserted
bracts deciduous at maturity. Seeds and bark with balsam-bearing
vesicles. Leaves scattered, sessile, flat, with the midrib prominent on
the whitened lower surface, on horizontal branches appearing 2-ranked.
(The classical Latin name.)

1. A. balsamea, Miller. (BALSAM or BALM-OF-GILEAD FIR.) Leaves narrowly
linear (6--10'' long); _cones cylindrical_ (2--4' long, 1' thick),
violet-colored; _the bracts obovate_, serrulate, tipped with an abrupt
slender point, _shorter than the scales_.--Damp woods and mountain
swamps, Newf. to Penn., along the mountains to Va., west to Minn., and
northward. A slender tree or at high elevations a low or prostrate
shrub.


5. LARIX, Tourn. LARCH.

Catkins lateral, terminating short spurs on branches of a year's growth
or more, short or globular, developed in early spring; the sterile from
leafless buds; the fertile mostly with leaves below. Anther-cells
opening transversely. Pollen-grains simple, globular. Cones as in
Spruce, the scales persistent.--Leaves needle-shaped, soft, deciduous,
all foliaceous, very many in a fascicle developed in early spring from
lateral scaly and globular buds, and scattered along the developed
shoots of the season. Fertile catkins crimson or red in flower. (The
ancient name.)

1. L. Americana, Michx. (AMERICAN OR BLACK LARCH. TAMARACK.
HACKMATACK.) Leaves short; cones ovoid (6--9'' long), of few rounded
scales, arranged in {2/5} order.--Chiefly in cold swamps, N. Penn. to N.
Ind. and central Minn., and far northward. A slender tree, 30--100 deg.
high, with hard and very resinous wood.


6. TAXODIUM, Richard. BALD CYPRESS.

Flowers monoecious, the two kinds on the same branches. Sterile flowers
spiked-panicled, of few stamens; filaments scale-like, shield-shaped,
bearing 2--5 anther-cells. Fertile catkins ovoid, in small clusters,
scaly, with a pair of ovules at the base of each scale. Cone globular,
closed, composed of very thick and angular somewhat shield-shaped
scales, bearing 2 angled seeds at the base. Cotyledons 6--9.--Trees,
with narrow linear 2-ranked light and deciduous leaves; a part of the
slender leafy branchlets of the season also deciduous in autumn. (Name
compounded of [Greek: ta/xos], _the yew_, and [Greek: ei~)dos],
_resemblance_, the leaves being Yew-like.)

1. T. distichum, Richard. (AMERICAN BALD CYPRESS.) Leaves linear and
spreading; also some awl-shaped and imbricated on flowering
branchlets.--Swamps, S. Del. to S. Ill. and Mo., and southward, where it
is a very large and valuable tree. March, April.


7. CHAMAECYPARIS, Spach. WHITE CEDAR. CYPRESS.

Flowers monoecious on different branches, in terminal small catkins.
Sterile flowers composed of shield-shaped scale-like filaments bearing
2--4 anther-cells under the lower margin. Fertile catkins globular, of
shield-shaped scales decussate in pairs, bearing few (1--4) erect
bottle-shaped ovules at base. Cone globular, firmly closed, but opening
at maturity; the scales thick, pointed or bossed in the middle; the few
angled or somewhat winged seeds attached to their contracted base or
stalk. Cotyledons 2 or 3.--Strong-scented evergreen trees, with very
small and scale-like or some awl-shaped closely appressed-imbricated
leaves, distichous branchlets, and exceedingly durable wood. (From
[Greek: chamai/], _on the ground_, and [Greek: kypa/rissos], _cypress_.)

1. C. sphaeroidea, Spach. (WHITE CEDAR.) Leaves minute, pale, ovate or
triangular-awl-shaped, often with a small gland on the back, closely
imbricated in 4 rows; anther-cells 2 under each scale; cones small
(3--5'' in diameter) of about 3 pairs of scales; seeds slightly winged.
(Cupressus thyoides, _L._)--Swamps, S. Maine to Fla. and Miss. A tree
30--90 deg. high, the wood and fibrous shreddy bark, as well as foliage,
much as in Arbor Vitae.


8. THUYA, Tourn. ARBOR VITAE.

Flowers mostly monoecious on different branches, in very small terminal
ovoid catkins. Stamens with a scale-like filament or connective, bearing
4 anther-cells. Fertile catkins of few imbricated scales, fixed by the
base, each bearing 2 erect ovules, dry and spreading at maturity.
Cotyledons 2.--Small evergreen trees, with very flat 2-ranked spray, and
closely imbricated, small, appressed, persistent leaves; these of two
sorts, on different or successive branchlets; one awl-shaped; the other
scale-like, blunt, short, and adnate to the branch. ([Greek: Thyi~/a] or
[Greek: Thy/a], the ancient name of some resin-bearing evergreen.)

1. T. occidentalis, L. (ARBOR VITAE. WHITE CEDAR.) Leaves
appressed-imbricated in 4 rows on the 2-edged branchlets; scales of the
cones pointless; seeds broadly winged all round.--Swamps and cool rocky
banks, N. Brunswick to Penn., along the mountains to N. C., west to
Minn. A tree 20--50 deg. high, with pale shreddy bark, and light, soft, but
very durable wood.

9. JUNIPERUS, L. JUNIPER.

Flowers dioecious, or occasionally monoecious, in very small lateral
catkins. Anther-cells 3--6, attached to the lower edge of the
shield-shaped scale. Fertile catkins ovoid, of 3--6 fleshy coalescent
scales, each 1-ovuled, in fruit forming a sort of berry, which is
scaly-bracted underneath, bluish-black with white bloom. Seeds 1--3,
ovate, wingless, bony. Cotyledons 2.--Evergreen trees or shrubs, with
awl-shaped or scale-like rigid leaves, often of two shapes in Sec. 2. (The
classical name.)

Sec. 1. OXYCEDRUS. _Aments axillary; leaves in whorls of 3, free and
jointed at base, linear-subulate, prickly-pointed, channelled and white
glaucous above._

1. J. communis, L. (COMMON JUNIPER.) Shrub or small tree, with spreading
or pendulous branches; leaves rigid, more or less spreading (5--9''
long); berry dark blue (3'' or more in diameter).--Dry sterile hills,
common.

Var. alpina, Gaud., is a decumbent or prostrate form, with shorter
(2--4'' long) less spreading leaves.--Maine to Minn., and northward.

Sec. 2. SABINA. _Aments terminal; leaves mostly opposite, of two forms,
i.e., awl-shaped and loose, and scale-shaped, appressed-imbricated and
crowded, the latter with a resiniferous gland on the back._

2. J. Sabina, L., var. procumbens, Pursh. _A procumbent, prostrate or
sometimes creeping shrub_; scale-like leaves acute; _berry on short
recurved peduncles_, 3--5'' in diameter.--Rocky banks, borders of
swamps, etc., N. Eng. to N. Minn., and northward.

3. J. Virginiana, L. (RED CEDAR or SAVIN.) _From a shrub to a tree
60--90 deg. high_, pyramidal in form; scale-like leaves obtuse or acutish,
entire; _berries on straight peduncles_, about 3'' in diameter.--Dry
hills or deep swamps, common. Bark shreddy, and heart-wood red and
aromatic.


10. TAXUS, Tourn. YEW.

Flowers mostly dioecious, or sometimes monoecious, axillary from scaly
buds; the sterile small and globular, formed of a few naked stamens;
anther-cells 3--8 under a shield-like somewhat lobed connective. Fertile
flowers solitary, scaly-bracted at base, consisting merely of an erect
sessile ovule, with an annular disk, which becomes cup-shaped around its
base and at length pulpy and berry-like, globular and red, nearly
enclosing the nut-like seed. Cotyledons 2.--Leaves evergreen, flat,
mucronate, rigid, scattered, 2-ranked. (The classical name, probably
from [Greek: to/xon], _a bow_; the wood anciently used for bows.)

1. T. Canadensis, Willd. (AMERICAN YEW. GROUND HEMLOCK.) A low
straggling bush, the stems diffusely spreading; leaves linear, green
both sides. (T. baccata, var. Canadensis, _Willd._)--Moist banks and
hills, especially under evergreens; Newf. to N. J., Iowa, Minn., and
northward.


CLASS II. MONOCOTYLEDONOUS OR ENDOGENOUS PLANTS.

Stems with no manifest distinction into bark, wood, and pith, but the
woody fibre and vessels in bundles or threads which are irregularly
imbedded in the cellular tissue; perennial trunks destitute of annual
layers. Leaves mostly parallel-veined (nerved) and sheathing at the
base, seldom separating by an articulation, almost always alternate or
scattered and not toothed. Parts of the flower commonly in threes.
Embryo with a single cotyledon, and the leaves of the plumule alternate.


ORDER 108. HYDROCHARIDACEAE. (FROG'S-BIT FAMILY.)

_Aquatic herbs, with dioecious or polygamous regular flowers, sessile or
on scape-like peduncles from a spathe, and simple or double floral
envelopes, which in the fertile flowers are united into a tube and
coherent with the 1--3-celled ovary._ Stamens 3--12, distinct or
monadelphous; anthers 2-celled. Stigmas 3 or 6. Fruit ripening under
water, indehiscent, many-seeded. Seeds ascending, without albumen;
embryo straight.

Tribe I. HYDRILLEAE. Stem elongated, submerged, leafy. Spathes small,
sessile.

1. Elodea. Leaves verticillate (rarely opposite). Perianth-tube
long-filiform.

Tribe II. VALLISNERIEAE. Stemless. Leaves elongated. Spathes pedunculate.

2. Vallisneria. Submerged; grass-like. Fertile flower solitary on a very
long scape.

Tribe III. STRATIOTEAE. Stem very short, with crowded leaves. Spathes
pedunculate. Ovary 6--9-celled.

3. Limnobium. Stemless, floating; broad leaves long-petioled.


1. ELODEA, Michx. WATER-WEED.

Flowers polygamo-dioecious, solitary and sessile from a sessile tubular
2-cleft axillary spathe. Sterile flowers small or minute, with 3 sepals
barely united at base, and usually 3 similar or narrower petals;
filaments short and united at base, or none; anthers 3--9, oval. Fertile
flowers pistillate or apparently perfect; perianth extended into an
extremely long capillary tube; the limb 6-parted; the small lobes
obovate, spreading. Stamens 3--9, often with imperfect anthers or none.
Ovary 1-celled, with 3 parietal placentae, each bearing a few
orthotropous ovules; the capillary style coherent with the tube of the
perianth; stigmas 3, large, 2-lobed or notched, exserted. Fruit oblong,
coriaceous, few-seeded.--Perennial slender submerged herbs, with
elongated branching stems, thickly beset with pellucid and veinless,
1-nerved, sessile, whorled or opposite leaves. The staminate flowers
(rarely seen) commonly break off, as in Vallisneria, and float on the
surface, where they expand and shed their pollen around the stigmas of
the fertile flowers, raised to the surface by the prolonged calyx-tube,
which varies in length according to the depth of the water. (Name from
[Greek: e(lo/des], _marshy_.)

1. E. Canadensis, Michx. Leaves in 3's or 4's, or the lower opposite,
varying from linear to oval-oblong, minutely serrulate; stamens 9 in the
sterile flowers, 3 or 6 almost sessile anthers in the fertile.
(Anacharis Canadensis, _Planchon._)--Slow streams and ponds, common.
July.


2. VALLISNERIA, L. TAPE-GRASS. EEL-GRASS.

Flowers strictly dioecious; the sterile numerous and crowded in a head
on a conical receptacle, enclosed in an ovate at length 3-valved spathe
which is borne on a very short scape; stamens mostly 3. Fertile flowers
solitary and sessile in a tubular spathe upon an exceedingly lengthened
scape. Perianth (calyx) 3-parted in the sterile flowers; in the fertile
with a linear tube coherent with the 1-celled ovary, but not extended
beyond it, 3-lobed (the lobes obovate); also 3 linear small petals.
Stigmas 3, large, nearly sessile, 2-lobed. Ovules very numerous,
scattered over the walls, orthotropous. Fruit elongated, cylindrical,
berry-like.--Stemless plants, with long linear grass-like leaves, wholly
submerged. The staminate clusters being confined to the bottom by the
shortness of the scape, the flower-buds themselves break from their
short pedicels and float on the surface, where they shed their pollen
around the fertile flowers, which are raised to the surface by sudden
growth at the same time; afterwards the thread-form scapes (2--4 feet
long) coil up spirally, drawing the fruit under water to ripen. (Named
for _Ant. Vallisneri_, an early Italian botanist.)

1. V. spiralis, L. Leaves linear, thin, long and ribbon-like (1--6 deg.
long), obscurely serrulate, obtuse, somewhat nerved and
netted-veined.--Common in slow waters, N. Eng. to Fla., west to Minn.
and Tex.


3. LIMNOBIUM, Richard. AMERICAN FROG'S-BIT.

Flowers dioecious, (or monoecious?) from sessile or somewhat peduncled
spathes; the sterile spathe 1-leaved, producing about 3 long-pedicelled
flowers; the fertile 2-leaved, with a single short-pedicelled flower.
Calyx 3-parted or cleft; sepals oblong-oval. Petals 3, oblong-linear.
Filaments entirely united in a central solid column, bearing 6--12
linear anthers at unequal heights; there are 3--6 awl-shaped rudiments
of stamens in the fertile flowers. Ovary 6--9-celled, with as many
placentae in the axis, forming an ovoid many-seeded berry in fruit;
stigmas as many as the cells, but 2-parted, awl-shaped.--A stemless
perennial herb, floating in stagnant water, proliferous by runners,
with long-petioled and round-heart shaped leaves, which are
spongy-reticulated and purplish underneath; rootlets slender, hairy.
Sterile flowers rather small; the fertile larger; peduncle nodding in
fruit. Petals white? (Name from [Greek: limno/bios], _living in pools_.)

1. L. Spongia, Richard. Leaves 1--2' long, faintly 5-nerved; peduncle of
sterile flower about 3' long and filiform, of the fertile only 1' long
and stout.--Stagnant water, N. J. to Fla.; also L. Ontario, Ill., and
Mo.


ORDER 109. BURMANNIACEAE. (BURMANNIA FAMILY.)

_Small annual herbs, often with minute and scale-like leaves, or those
at the root grass-like; the flowers perfect, with a 6-cleft corolla-like
perianth, the tube of which adheres to the 1-celled or 3-celled ovary;
stamens 3 and distinct, opposite the inner divisions of the perianth;
capsule many-seeded, the seeds very minute._--A small, chiefly tropical
family.


1. BURMANNIA, L.

Ovary 3-celled, with the thick placentae in the axis. Filaments 3, very
short. Style slender; stigma capitate-3-lobed. Capsule often 3-winged.
(Named for _J. Burmann_, an early Dutch botanist.)

1. B. biflora, L. Stem low and slender (2--4' high), 2-flowered at the
summit, or soon several-flowered; perianth (2--3'' long) bright blue,
3-winged.--Peaty bogs, Va. to Fla.


ORDER 110. ORCHIDACEAE. (ORCHIS FAMILY.)

_Herbs, clearly distinguished by their perfect irregular flowers, with
6-merous perianth adnate to the 1-celled ovary, with innumerable ovules
on 3 parietal placentae, and with either one or two gynandrous stamens,
the pollen cohering in masses._ Fruit a 1-celled 3-valved capsule, with
innumerable minute seeds, appearing like fine saw-dust. Perianth of 6
divisions in 2 sets; the 3 outer (_sepals_) mostly of the same
petal-like texture and appearance as the 3 inner (_petals_). One of the
inner set differs more or less in figure, direction, etc., from the
rest, and is called the _lip_; only the other two taking the name of
_petals_ in the following descriptions. The lip is really the upper
petal, i.e. the one next to the axis, but by a twist of the ovary of
half a turn it is more commonly directed forward and brought next the
bract. Before the lip, in the axis of the flower, is the _column_,
composed of a single stamen, or in Cypripedium of two stamens and a
rudiment of a third, variously coherent with or borne on the style or
thick fleshy stigma; anther 2-celled; each cell containing one or more
masses of pollen (_pollinia_) or the pollen granular (in Cypripedium).
Stigma a broad glutinous surface, except in Cypripedium.--Perennials,
often tuber-bearing or tuberous-rooted; some epiphytes. Leaves
parallel-nerved, all alternate. Flowers often showy, commonly singular
in shape, solitary, racemed, or spiked, each subtended by a bract,--in
all arranged for fertilization by the aid of insects, very few capable
of unaided self-fertilization.

Tribe I. EPIDENDREAE. Anther terminal, erect or inclined, operculate.
Pollinia smooth and waxy, 4 or 8 (2 or 4 in each cell), distinct, or
those in each cell (or all in n. 3 and 7) united at base. (Pollinia 8
only in n. 7 of our genera.)

[*] Green-foliaged plants, from solid bulbs, with 1 or 2 leaves.

[+] Column very short; leaf solitary.

1. Microstylis. Flowers racemose, minute, greenish. Petals filiform.

[+][+] Column elongated; leaves radical.

[++] Whole plant (except the flowers) green.

2. Liparis. Leaves 2. Raceme few-flowered. Lip flat, entire.

3. Calypso. Leaf solitary. Flower large, solitary. Lip saccate.

[++][++] A single green autumnal leaf; otherwise mainly brownish or
purplish.

4. Tipularia. Raceme many-flowered; flowers small, greenish; lip
3-lobed.

5. Aplectrum. Raceme loose; flowers rather large; lip 3-ridged, not
spurred or saccate.

[*][*] Leafless, with coralloid roots; whole plant brownish or
yellowish; flowers racemose.

6. Corallorhiza. Pollinia 4, in 2 pairs. Flower gibbous or somewhat
spurred, and lip with 1--3 ridges; sepals and petals 1--3-nerved.

7. Hexalectris. Pollinia 8, united. Flower not gibbous; sepals and
petals several-nerved; lip with 5--6 ridges.

Tribe II. NEOTTIEAE. Anthers erect upon the back of the column at the
summit, or terminal and opercular. Pollinia granular or powdery, more or
less cohering in 2 or 4 delicate masses, and attached at the apex to the
beak of the stigma.

[*] Anthers without operculum, erect upon the back of the short column.
Flowers small, in spikes or racemes.

8. Listera. Stem from a fibrous root, 2-foliate. Lip flat, 2-lobed.

9. Spiranthes. Stems leafy below, from tuberous-fascicled roots. Flowers
1--3-ranked in a twisted spike. Lip embracing the column below, with 2
callosities at base.

10. Goodyera. Leaves radical, white-reticulated. Lip entire, free from
the column, saccate, without callosities.

[*][*] Anther operculate, erect and jointed upon the short column. Stem
stout, very leafy.

11. Epipactis. Flowers racemose; perianth spreading; lip dilated above.

[*][*][*] Anther terminal, operculate, incumbent; column elongated. Stem
scapose or few-leaved; flowers large, solitary or few.

12. Arethusa. Leaf and flower solitary. Lip bearded, its base adherent
to the linear column. Pollinia 4.

13. Calopogon. Leaf solitary, grass-like. Lip bearded, stalked, free.
Column winged at the apex. Pollinia 4.

14. Pogonia. More or less leafy. Lip crested, free. Column clavate.
Pollinia 2.

Tribe III. OPHRYDEAE. Anther without operculum, the cells adnate to the
top of the column and often continuous with the beak of the stigma.
Pollinia 2, of coarse grains united by an elastic web, each attached at
base by a stalk to a viscid gland. Flower (in ours) ringent and
spurred, spicate upon a leafy stem.

15. Orchis. The two glands or viscid disks enclosed in a common pouch.

16. Habenaria. The two glands naked, either approximate or widely
separated.

Tribe IV. CYPRIPEDIEAE. Perfect anthers 2, lateral, the sterile one
forming a dilated fleshy appendage above the terminal stigma. Pollen
granular, not in masses.

17. Cypripedium. Stems more or less leafy. Perianth spreading; lip an
inflated sac.


1. MICROSTYLIS, Nutt. ADDER'S-MOUTH.

Sepals oblong, spreading. Petals thread-like or linear, spreading. Lip
auricled or ovate at base, not tubercled, entire or nearly so. Column
very small, terete, with 2 teeth or auricles at the summit and the erect
anther between them. Pollen-masses 4, in one row (2 in each cell),
cohering by pairs at the apex, waxy, without any stalks, threads, or
gland.--Low herbs, from solid bulbs, producing simple stems, which bear
in our species a single leaf and a raceme of minute greenish flowers.
(Name composed of [Greek: mikro/s], _small_, and [Greek: styli/s], _a
column_ or _style_.)

1. M. monophyllos, Lindl. Slender (4--6' high); leaf sheathing the base
of the stem, ovate-elliptical; _racemes spiked, long and slender;
pedicels not longer than the flowers_; lip long-pointed.--Cold wet
swamps, N. New Eng. to Penn., N. Ind., Minn., and northward. July.
(Eu.)

2. M. ophioglossoides, Nutt. Leaf near the middle of the stem, ovate,
clasping; _raceme short and obtuse; pedicels much longer than the
flowers_; lip truncate-3-lobed at the summit, the middle lobe very
small.--Low moist ground, N. Scotia to Fla., west to Minn. and Mo.
July.--Pollinia (at least sometimes) only 1 in each cell.


2. LIPARIS, Richard. TWAYBLADE.

Sepals and petals nearly equal, linear, or the latter thread-like,
spreading. Lip flat, entire, often bearing 2 tubercles above the base.
Column elongated, incurved, margined at the apex. Anther lid-like,
terminal; pollen-masses 4, in one row (2 to each cell), slightly united
in pairs, without stalk, threads, or gland.--Small, low herbs, with
solid bulbs, producing 2 root-leaves and a low scape, which bears a
raceme of few purplish or greenish flowers. (Name from [Greek:
liparo/s], _fat_ or _shining_, in allusion to the smooth or unctuous
leaves.)

1. L. liliifolia, Richard. Leaves ovate; petals thread-like, reflexed;
_lip large_ (11/2' long), _wedge-obovate, abruptly short-pointed,
brown-purplish_.--Moist woodlands, N. Eng. to Ga., west to Minn. and Mo.
June.

2. L. Loeselii, Richard. Leaves elliptic-lanceolate or oblong, keeled;
_lip obovate or oblong_ (2'' long), mucronate, _yellowish-green, shorter
than the linear unequal petals and sepals_.--Bogs, N. Scotia to Md., S.
Ill., and Minn. (Eu.)


3. CALYPSO, Salisb.

Sepals and petals nearly similar, ascending, spreading, lanceolate,
pointed. Lip larger than the rest of the flower, sac-shaped, inflated
(9'' long), 2-pointed underneath the apex. Column broadly winged and
petal-like, ovate, bearing the lid-like anther just below the apex;
pollen-masses waxy, 2, each 2-parted, all sessile on a square gland.--A
little bog-herb; the solid bulbs producing a single ovate or slightly
heart-shaped thin leaf, as in Aplectrum, and a short (3--5' high) scape,
sheathed below, bearing a large and showy (variegated purple, pink, and
yellow) flower. (Name from the goddess _Calypso_.)

1. C. borealis, Salisb.--Cold bogs and wet woods, the bulbs resting in
moss, with a coralloid root beneath; Maine and Vt. to Mich. and Minn.,
and northward. May.--A very local and beautiful plant. Lip somewhat
resembling that of a Lady's Slipper, woolly-hairy inside. (Eu.)

4. TIPULARIA, Nutt. CRANE-FLY ORCHIS.

Sepals and petals spreading, oblong; the latter rather narrower. Lip
prolonged beneath into a thread-like ascending spur twice or thrice the
length of the flower (9--12'' long), 3-lobed; the middle lobe linear, a
little wavy, as long as the petals, the side lobes short and triangular.
Column narrow and wingless. Anther lid-like, terminal; pollen-masses 2,
waxy, each 2-parted, connected by a linear stalk with the transverse
small gland.--Herb with large solid bulbs connected horizontally, on a
distinct pedicel, producing in autumn a single ovate nerved and plaited
leaf on a slender petiole, purplish beneath, and in summer a long
slender scape, with 1 or 2 sheaths at base, bearing a raceme of many
small greenish flowers tinged with purple. (Name from a fancied
resemblance of the flowers to insects of the genus _Tipula_.)

1. T. discolor, Nutt. Scape 10--18' high; lip blunt at the tip.--Sandy
woods, Vt. to N. J. and Fla., west to Mich.; very scarce.


5. APLECTRUM, Nutt. PUTTY-ROOT. ADAM-AND-EVE.

Perianth neither gibbous nor with any trace of a spur or sac at the
base. Lip free, the palate 3-ridged. Otherwise the flowers and scape
(invested below with 3 greenish sheaths) as in Corallorhiza; but,
instead of a coral like root, a slender naked rootstock produces each
year a thick, globular, solid bulb or corm, often 1' in diameter (filled
with exceedingly glutinous matter), which sends up late in summer a
large, oval, many-nerved and plaited, petioled, green leaf, lasting
through the winter, and early in the succeeding summer its scape is
terminated by a loose raceme of dingy rather large flowers. (The name
composed of [Greek: a]- privative and [Greek: ple~ktron], _a spur_, from
the total want of the latter.)

1. A. hiemale, Nutt. Stem 1 deg. high or more; perianth greenish-brown, or
the lip whitish, and somewhat speckled with purple, 5--6'' long.--Woods,
in rich mould; rather rare or local, N. Eng. to Ga., west to Minn. and
Mo.--Each corm lasts 2 or 3 years before it shrivels, so that 3 or 4 are
found horizontally connected.


6. CORALLORHIZA, Haller. CORAL-ROOT.

Perianth somewhat ringent, oblique and gibbous or obscurely spurred at
base; the oblong or lanceolate sepals and petals nearly alike,
1--3-nerved, the upper arching; the lateral sepals ascending, their
bases with that of the lip forming the gibbosity or short spur which is
mostly adnate to the summit of the ovary; lip slightly adherent to the
base of the 2-edged straightish column, bearing a pair of projecting
ridges on the face below, spreading or recurved at the apex. Anther
terminal, lid-like. Pollen-masses 4, obliquely incumbent, soft-waxy,
free.--Brownish or yellowish herbs, destitute of green foliage, with
much-branched and toothed coral-like root-stocks (probably
root-parasitical), sending up a simple scape, with sheaths in place of
leaves and bearing a raceme of rather small dull-colored flowers; fruit
reflexed. (Name composed of [Greek: kora/llion], _coral_, and [Greek:
r(i/za], _root_.)

Sec. 1. _Small spur or sac adnate to the summit of the ovary; flowers
small; lip whitish or purplish, often mottled with crimson._

1. C. innata, R. Brown. Plant slender, light brownish or yellowish
(3--9' high), 5--12-flowered; pedicels very short; perianth 2--21/2''
long; _lip somewhat hastately 3-lobed above the base_, the lamellae thick
and rather short; spur a very small protuberance; capsule oval or
elliptical (3--4'' long).--Swamps and damp woods, N. Eng. to northern
N. J., Ohio, Mich., Minn., and northward, and south in the mountains to
Ga. May, June. (Eu.)

2. C. odontorhiza, Nutt. Plant light brown or purplish; stem rather
slender, bulbous-thickened at base (6--16' high), 6--20-flowered;
pedicels rather slender; perianth about 3'' long; _lip entire_ or merely
denticulate, _thin_, broadly ovate or obovate, abruptly contracted into
a _claw-like base_, the lamellae a pair of short projections; the spur
represented by a small cavity wholly adnate to the summit of the ovary;
capsule at first very acute at base, at length short-oval (4''
long).--Rich woods, E. Mass. (_Hitchings_) and Vt. to N. J. and Fla.,
west to Mich, and Mo. May--July.

3. C. multiflora, Nutt. Plant purplish, rather stout (9--18' high),
10--30-flowered; perianth 21/2--4'' long; _lip deeply 3-lobed_, with a
short narrowed base and with prominent lamellae; spur manifest and
protuberant; capsule oblong (6--9'' long), short-pedicelled.--Dry woods,
N. Eng. to Md., west to Mo., Iowa, and Minn. July--Sept.

Sec. 2. _Spur none; the broadly gibbous somewhat saccate base wholly free
from the ovary; flowers large for the genus, purple, unspotted, more
expanding._

4. C. striata, Lindl. Plant purplish, stout (6--16' high), bearing
15--25 large flowers in a crowded spike, on very short pedicels;
perianth 6--7'' long; lip oval or obovate, perfectly entire, concave,
barely narrowed at the base, where it bears 1--3 short lamellae; all the
parts of the perianth marked with 3 darker nerves; pod oblong (9''
long). (C. Macraei, _Gray_.)--Woods, from L. Erie westward along the
Great Lakes and to the Pacific.


7. HEXALECTRIS, Raf.

Sepals and petals nearly equal, somewhat spreading, several-nerved, not
gibbous nor spurred at base, free. Lip obovate, with 5--6 prominent
ridges down the middle, 3-lobed above, the middle lobe somewhat concave.
Pollen-masses 8, united into a single fascicle. Otherwise as in
Corallorhiza. (Name probably from [Greek: e(/x], _six_, and [Greek:
a)lektryo/n], _a cock_, from the crests of the lip.)

1. H. aphyllus, Raf. Stem 1--2 deg. high, beset with purplish scales, the
lower sheathing; flowers racemed, bracteate, brownish-purple, 6--8''
long. (Bletia aphylla, _Nutt._)--Rich woods, Ky. and Mo. to Fla. and
Mex.


8. LISTERA, R. Brown. TWAYBLADE.

Sepals and petals nearly alike, spreading or reflexed. Lip mostly
drooping, longer than the sepals, 2-lobed or 2-cleft. Column wingless;
stigma with a rounded beak. Anther borne on the back of the column at
the summit, erect, ovate; pollen powdery, in 2 masses, joined to a
minute gland.--Roots fibrous. Stem bearing a pair of opposite sessile
leaves in the middle, and a spike or raceme of greenish or
brownish-purple small flowers. (Dedicated to _Martin Lister_, an early
and celebrated British naturalist.)

[*] _Column very short; sepals ovate, reflexed; plants delicate, 4--8'
high._

1. L. cordata, R. Brown. Leaves round-ovate, somewhat heart-shaped
(1/2--1' long); raceme smooth; _flowers minute, crowded, on pedicels not
longer than the ovary; lip_ linear, twice as long as the sepals,
1-toothed each side at base, _2-cleft_.--Cold woods, N. J. to Mich.,
Minn., and northward. June. (Eu.)

2. L. australis, Lindl. Leaves ovate; _raceme loose and slender; flowers
very small, on minutely glandular-pubescent pedicels twice the length of
the ovary; lip_ linear, 3--4 times the length of the sepals, _2-parted,
the divisions linear-setaceous_.--Damp thickets, Oswego Co., N. Y., and
from N. J. to Fla. June.

[*][*] _Column longer, arching or straightish._

3. L. convallarioides, Nutt. Plant 4--9' high; leaves oval or roundish,
and sometimes a little heart-shaped (1--11/2' long); raceme loose,
pubescent; pedicels slender, lip wedge-oblong, 2-lobed at the dilated
apex, and 1-toothed on each side at the base, nearly twice the length of
the narrowly lanceolate spreading sepals, purplish, {1/3}' long.--Damp
mossy woods, N. New Eng. to Mich., Minn., and northward, and south in
the mountains to N. C.


9. SPIRANTHES, Richard. LADIES' TRESSES.

Perianth somewhat ringent, oblique on the ovary; the sepals and petals
all narrow, mostly erect or connivent, the three upper pieces sticking
together more or less, the two lower covering the base of the lip. Lip
oblong, short stalked or sessile, the lower part involute around the
column, and with a callous protuberance on each side of the base; the
somewhat dilated summit spreading or recurved, crisped, wavy, or rarely
toothed or lobed. Column short, oblique, bearing the ovate stigma on the
front, and the sessile or short-stalked (mostly acute or pointed)
2-celled erect anther on the back. Pollen-masses 2 (one in each cell),
narrowly obovate, each 2-cleft, and split into thin and tender plates of
granular pollen united by elastic threads, and soon adhering at base to
the narrow boat-shaped viscid gland, which is set in the slender or
tapering thin beak terminating the column. After the removal of the
gland, the beak is left as a 2-toothed or 2-forked tip.--Roots
clustered-tuberous; stem more or less naked above, leaf-bearing below or
at the base. Flowers small (ours all white or greenish-white), bent
horizontally, 1--3-ranked in a spike, which is commonly more or less
spirally twisted (whence the name, from [Greek: spei/ra], _a coil_ or
_curl_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_).

[*] _Flowers in 3 ranks, crowded in a close spike; leaves at the root
and base of the stem present at the flowering season._

1. S. latifolia, Torr. Low; naked stem or scape 4--9' (rarely 12') high,
smooth; _leaves all next the base, oblong or lance-oblong_ (1--4' long,
3--9'' wide), 3--5-nerved, contracted into a sheathing base; spike
narrow (1--3' long); _flowers small_ (2--3'' long); lip quadrate-oblong,
yellowish on the face, not contracted in the middle, thin, wavy-crisped
at the very obtuse or truncate apex, the small _callosities_ at the base
_oblong, marginal and adnate_ for their whole length; gland and beak of
the stigma short.--Moist banks, Vt. and W. Mass. to Mich. and Minn.,
south to Del. and Md.

2. S. Romanzoffiana, Cham. Stem _leafy below and leafy-bracted above_
(5--15' high); leaves varying from oblong-lanceolate to grassy-linear;
spike dense, oblong or cylindrical (1--4' long); perianth curved and the
summit _manifestly ringent_, pure white (4'' long), the sepals and
petals all connivent in the upper portion or galea; the _lip
ovate-oblong, contracted below the rounded wavy-crenulate much recurved
summit_, otherwise entire, the callosities at base globular and smooth;
gland oblong-linear and the 2-horned _beak of the stigma short_.--High
and cool bogs, N. New Eng. to Mich. and Minn., and northward; Norfolk,
Conn. (_Barbour_); central N. Y. July, Aug. (Ireland.)

3. S. cernua, Richard. Stem _leafy below and leafy-bracted_ above
(6--20' high); _leaves linear-lanceolate_, the lowest elongated (4--12'
long, 2--9'' wide); spike cylindrical, rather dense (2--5' long) and
with the white fragrant flowers either pubescent or nearly smooth;
perianth horizontal or recurving (4--5'' long), the _lower sepals not
upturned_ or connivent with the upper; _lip oblong_ and very obtuse when
outspread, but conduplicate or the margins much incurved, wavy-crisped
above the middle, especially at the flattish and recurved-spreading
apex, the callosities at the base prominent, nipple-shaped, somewhat
hairy; gland of the stigma linear, in a _long and very slender
beak_.--Common in wet places, especially eastward and southward. Sept.,
Oct. Very variable in size and foliage, often nearly losing its
root-leaves at flowering time.--A variety, growing in dry ground but
retaining its leaves and blooming somewhat later, has greenish
cream-colored or yellowish stronger-scented flowers. E. Mass. and Del.

[*][*] _Flowers in one straight or spirally twisted rank._

[+] _Stem bearing elongated leaves at and toward the base, which mostly
persist during the flowering season._

4. S. praecox, Watson. Root of fleshy or tuberous-thickened fibres; stem
9'--2 deg. high; lower and root-leaves linear or lance-linear (3--8' long,
2--4'' wide) gradually tapering to the base, the upper reduced to
sheathing bracts; spike linear, dense (2--5' long), usually much
twisted, the axis, ovaries, etc., downy-pubescent; bracts ovate and
gradually, or rhombic-ovate and abruptly taper-pointed, surpassing the
ovary, the margins broadly hyaline; perianth 3'' long; lip ovate-oblong
when outspread, with rather small callosities at base, crisped at the
rounded slightly recurved apex; anther and beak of the stigma very
acute. (S. graminea, var. Walteri, _Gray_.)--Wet, grassy places, Mass.
to N. J. and Fla.

[+][+] _Scape very slender, merely bracted; the leaves with a blade all
in a cluster at the ground, ovate or oblong, abruptly contracted into a
petiole, commonly withering away at or before flowering; flowers small,
and whole plant glabrous or nearly so; bracts small, sharp-pointed, not
longer than the capsule._

5. S. gracilis, Bigelow. _Roots clustered, tuberous-thickened_; scape
8--18' high, bearing a slender many-flowered one-sided or twisted spike;
perianth barely 11/2--2'' long; _lip oval_ when outspread, narrowly oblong
in natural form, _thickish and green above_ with thin white margins, the
recurved obtuse or acutish apex wavy-crisped, the callosities at the
base nipple-shaped.--Hilly woods and sandy plains, common. July--Oct.

6. S. simplex, Gray. Root a _solitary oblong or spindle-shaped tuber_;
no leaves at flowering time; scape 5--9' high, bearing a small narrow
(rarely 1-sided) spike (1--3' long) of _very short flowers_ (perianth
1--11/2'' long); _lip thin, white, obovate-oblong_, the apex eroded and
crisped, the callosities at the base slender.--Dry sandy soil, E. Mass.
to N. J., Del., and Md. Aug., Sept.


10. GOODYERA, R. Br. RATTLESNAKE-PLANTAIN.

Lip sac-shaped, sessile, entire, and without callosities at base.
Otherwise as Spiranthes.--Root of thick fibres, from a somewhat fleshy
creeping rootstock, bearing a tuft of thickish petioled leaves, usually
reticulated with white veining. Scape, spike, and the greenish-white
small flowers usually glandular-downy. (Dedicated to _John Goodyear_,
an early English botanist.)

Sec. 1. _Lip strongly saccate-inflated and with a short spreading or
recurved tip; anther short, borne on a distinct filament attached to the
back of the short column, blunt; gland-bearing tip or beak of the stigma
very short._

1. G. repens, R. Br. Small (5--8' high) and slender; leaves ovate, more
or less white-reticulated (about 1' long); _flowers several, in a loose
1-sided spike_; lip with an ovate recurved tip; sepals ovate.--Woods,
under evergreens, common northward and through the Alleghanies. Aug.
(Eu.)

2. G. pubescens, R. Br. Larger; leaves strongly white-reticulated; scape
6--12' high, the _numerous crowded flowers not one-sided_; tip of the
_globular lip very short_; otherwise like the preceding, and too near to
it.--Rich woods, Newf. to Fla., west to Mich. and Minn.

Sec. 2. _Lip barely saccate below, tapering and its sides involute above;
anther ovate, long-pointed, borne on the base of the very short column,
which is continued above the stigma into a conspicuous tapering
awl-shaped gland-bearing beak._

3. G. Menziesii, Lindl. Leaves ovate-oblong, acute (2--3' long), less
white-reticulated than the preceding, some not at all so; scape 9--12'
high; flowers rather numerous in a looser often 1-sided spike;
flower-buds less pubescent, elongated-ovate and pointed; lip with the
saccate-conduplicate lower portion gradually tapering into the narrow
barely spreading summit.--Woods, Gaspe and Tadousac, L. Can. (_J. A.
Allen, Goodale_); Crawford, N. H. (_Miss Minns_); western N. Y. to
Minn., and westward. July.


11. EPIPACTIS, Haller.

Sepals and petals nearly equal, spreading. Lip free, deeply concave at
base, narrowly constricted and somewhat jointed in the middle, the upper
portion dilated and petaloid. Column short, erect. Anther sessile behind
the broad truncate stigma, on a slender-jointed base; pollen-masses
coarsely granular, becoming attached to the gland capping the small
rounded beak of the stigma.--Stem leafy, with racemed flowers,
conspicuous bracts, and ovaries reflexed at maturity. (The ancient Greek
name of a plant.)

1. E. Helleborine, Crantz. Stems 1--2 deg. high; leaves broadly ovate
(2--3' long), pointed, plicate, the upper narrower; raceme pubescent,
30--50-flowered, 1-sided; flowers varying from light greenish-yellow to
dark purple; sepals ovate-lanceolate, 3--4'' long; petals rather
smaller; lip ovate, pointed above, with a dark centre. (E. latifolia,
_All._)--Near Syracuse and Buffalo, N. Y.; the only known stations.
(Eu.)


12. ARETHUSA, Gronov.

Flower ringent; the lanceolate sepals and petals nearly alike, united at
base, ascending and arching over the column. Lip dilated and
recurved-spreading toward the summit; very slightly gibbous at base.
Column adherent to the lip below, petal-like, dilated at the apex.
Anther lid-like, terminal, of 2 approximate cells; pollen-masses
powdery-granular, 2 in each cell.--Beautiful low herbs, consisting of a
sheathed scape from a globular solid bulb, terminated usually by a
single large rose-purple flower. Leaf solitary, linear, nerved, hidden
in the sheaths of the scape, protruding after flowering. (Dedicated to
the nymph _Arethusa_.)

1. A. bulbosa, L. Flower single (rarely 2), erect (1--2' long), with an
entire lip recurved at the apex and bearded-crested down the
face.--Bogs, Newf. to the mountains of N. C., west to Ind. and Minn.


13. CALOPOGON, R. Br.

Flower with the ovary or stalk not twisting, therefore presenting its
lip on the upper or inner side. Sepals and petals nearly alike,
lance-ovate, spreading, distinct. Lip spreading, distant from the
column, raised on a narrowed base or stalk, dilated at the summit,
strongly bearded along the upper side. Column free, slender, winged at
the apex. Anther terminal and lid-like, sessile; pollen-masses 4 (two in
each cell), of soft powdery grains, lightly connected by delicate
threads.--Scape from a small solid bulb, sheathed below by the base of
the grass-like leaf, naked above, bearing several large flowers. Bracts
minute. (Name composed of [Greek: kalo/s], _beautiful_, and [Greek:
po/gon] _beard_, from the bearded lip.)

1. C. pulchellus, R. Br. Leaf linear; scape about 1 deg. high,
2--6-flowered; flowers 1' broad, pink-purple; lip as if hinged at the
insertion, beautifully bearded toward the dilated summit with white,
yellow, and purple club-shaped hairs.--Bogs, Newf. to Fla., west to
Minn. and Mo.


14. POGONIA, Juss.

Flower irregular, the sepals and petals separate. Lip crested or
3-lobed. Column free, elongated, club-shaped, wingless. Anther terminal
and lid-like, stalked; pollen-masses 2 (one in each cell),
powdery-granular. ([Greek: Pogoni/as] _bearded_, from the lip of some
of the original species.)

Sec. 1. _Sepals and petals nearly equal and alike, pale rose-color,
sometimes white._

1. P. ophioglossoides, Nutt. Root of thick fibres; stem (6--9' high)
bearing a single oval or lance-oblong leaf near the middle and a smaller
one or bract near the terminal flower, rarely one or two others with a
flower in the axil; flower 1' long, sweet-scented; lip spatulate,
appressed below to the column, beard-crested and fringed.--Bogs, Newf.
to Fla., west to N. Ind. and Minn. June, July. (Japan.)

2. P. pendula, Lindl. Stem (3--8' high) from oblong tubers, bearing 3 to
7 alternate ovate-clasping very small (3--6'') leaves, the upper 1--4
with drooping flowers in their axils on slender pedicels; perianth 1/2'
long, narrow; lip spatulate, somewhat 3-lobed, roughish or crisped
above, crestless.--Damp woods, N. Eng. to Fla., west to Wisc. and Mo.

Sec. 2. _Sepals linear, dingy or brownish, longer and much narrower than
the erect or connivent petals; lip 3-lobed at the apex, crested down the
middle, beardless; flowers solitary (or rarely a pair), terminal; root a
cluster of fibres._

3. P. divaricata, R. Br. Stem (1--2 deg. high) bearing _a lanceolate leaf
in the middle, and a leafy bract_ next the flower, which is recurved on
the ovary; but the sepals ascending or diverging, spatulate-linear,
longer than the lanceolate-spatulate pointed and flesh-colored petals,
these about 1--11/2' long.--Wet pine-barrens, N. J. to Fla. June, July.

4. P. verticillata, Nutt. Stem (6--12' high) naked, except some small
scales at the base and a _whorl of mostly 5 obovate or obovate-oblong
sessile leaves_ at the summit; flower dusky purplish, on a _peduncle
longer than the ovary and capsule; sepals more than twice the length of
the petals_, narrowly linear, spreading from a mostly erect base (11/2--2'
long); lip with a narrow crest down the middle.--Low woods, N. Eng. to
Fla., west to Ind. and Wisc.; rather rare, especially eastward. May,
June. Glaucous when young. Fruit-stalk erect, about 11/2' long, more than
half the length of the leaves.

5. P. affinis, Austin. Somewhat smaller than the preceding; leaves paler
and rather narrower; flowers (not rarely in pairs) yellowish or
greenish; _peduncle much shorter than the ovary and capsule; sepals but
little longer than the petals_, tapering to the base; lip crested over
the whole face and on the middle of the lobes.--Low woods, S. W. Conn.,
S. New York, and N. New Jersey; rare.


15. ORCHIS, L.

Flower ringent; the sepals and petals nearly equal. Lip turned downward,
coalescing with the base of the column, spurred below. Anther-cells
contiguous and parallel. Pollen cohering in numerous coarse waxy grains,
which are collected on a cobweb-like elastic tissue into 2 large masses
(one filling each anther-cell) borne on a slender stalk, the base of
which is attached to a gland or sticky disk of the stigma, the two
glands contained in a common little pouch or hooded fold, placed just
above the orifice of the spur. Flowers showy, in a spike.--Our species
with low scape-like stems, with 1 or 2 leaves at base, from
fleshy-fibrous roots. ([Greek: O(rchis], the ancient name.)

1. O. spectabilis, L. (SHOWY ORCHIS.) Root of thick fleshy fibres,
_producing 2 oblong-obovate shining leaves_ (3--6' long), and a
few-flowered 4 angled scape (4--7' high); bracts leaf-like, lanceolate;
sepals and petals all lightly united to form the vaulted galea or upper
lip, pink-purple, the ovate undivided lip white.--Rich woods,
N. Brunswick to Ga., west to Minn. and Mo. May.

2. O. rotundifolia, Pursh. Stem naked above, 1_-leaved at base_ (5--9'
high), from a slender creeping rootstock; leaf varying from almost
orbicular to oblong (11/2--3' long); flowers rose-purple, the lip white
and spotted with purple, 3-lobed, and the larger middle lobe dilated and
2-lobed or strongly notched at the summit (4--6'' long), exceeding the
ovate-oblong petals and sepals, and the slender depending spur.
(Habenaria rotundifolia, _Richardson_.)--Damp woods and bogs, N. Maine
to Vt., N. Y., Minn., and northward.


16. HABENARIA, Willd. REIN-ORCHIS.

Glands or viscid disks (to which the pollen-masses are attached) naked
and exposed, separate, sometimes widely so (becoming attached, some to
the proboscis, others to the face or head of insects feeding upon the
nectar of the spur, the pollen thus carried from one blossom to
another); otherwise nearly as in true Orchis; the lateral sepals,
however, mostly spreading. (Name from _habena_, a thong or rein, in
allusion to the shape of the lip or spur of some species.)

Sec. 1. GYMNADENIA. _Cells of the anther parallel and approximate, their
glands therefore contiguous. (Appendages of the stigma in our species
two or three and much developed, oblong or club-shaped.)_

1. H. tridentata, Hook. Stem slender (6--12' high), with a single oblong
or oblanceolate obtuse leaf below, and 2 or 3 small ones like bracts
above; spike 6--12-flowered, oblong; _flowers greenish or whitish, very
small; lip wedge-oblong, truncate, and with 3 short teeth at the apex_;
the slender and slightly club-shaped spur curved upward, longer than the
ovary.--Wet woods, N. Eng. to Minn. and Ind., and south in the mountains
to N. C. June, July.--Root of few fleshy fibres. Appendages of the
stigma three, oblong-club-shaped, one outside each orbicular gland and
one between them, rising as high as the anther-cell, their cellular
viscid summits receiving pollen in the unopened flower, and penetrated
by pollen-tubes!

2. H. integra, Spreng. Root of very fleshy fibres (or some of them
tuber-like); stem several-leaved (15' high), the 1 or 2 lower leaves
elongated, oblong-lanceolate, acute, the others becoming smaller and
bract-like; spike densely many-flowered, oblong-cylindrical; _flowers
orange-yellow_, small, _lip ovate, entire_ or slightly crenulate or
wavy, shorter than the awl-shaped descending spur.--Wet pine-barrens,
N. J. to Fla. July.--Appendages of the stigma two, lateral, oblong,
fleshy; beak or middle appendage narrow.

3. H. nivea, Spreng. Stem slender, 1--11/2 deg. high, many-leaved, the 1 or 2
lower leaves lance-linear and 4--8' long, the others small and
bract-like; spike cylindrical, loosely many-flowered; _flowers
white, small_; petals and _entire lip linear-oblong_; spur
thread-shaped, ascending, as long as the white ovary, which is not
twisted.--Pine-barren swamps, S. Del. to Fla. Aug.

Sec. 2. PERULARIA. _Cells of the anther nearly parallel, the valves of each
extended at base so as to form the sides of a deep oblong groove or
cavity, which is lined by the dilated orbicular and incurved gland.
(Flowers small, greenish, slender-spurred.)_

4. H. virescens, Spreng. Leaves ovate-oblong or oblong-lanceolate, the
uppermost linear-lanceolate and pointed, passing into the bracts of the
elongated raceme; petals ovate; flowers dull green; lip furnished with a
tooth on each side and a strong nasal protuberance in the middle of the
base, oblong, truncate-obtuse, about the length of the sepals, half the
length of the slender club-shaped spur.--Wet places, common; N. Eng. to
Fla., west to Minn. and Mo. June, July.--Stem 10--20' high; the spike at
first dense, with the bracts longer than the flowers, at length
elongated and often loose, the upper bracts shorter than the flowers,
which are quite small, and with scarcely a tinge of yellow, drying
brownish.

Sec. 3. PLATANTHERA. _Cells of the anther sometimes parallel, more commonly
divergent, so that their tapering bases and the exposed glands
are more or less distant. (Root a cluster of fleshy fibres, or
tuberous-thickened.)_

[*] _Flowers greenish or white, small, numerous in a close spike; spur
not longer than the entire or merely notched narrow lip; anther-cells
almost parallel, wholly adnate; stem leafy._

[+] _Spur short and sac-like; the 3 sepals and 2 narrow petals erect;
glands small, rather widely separated._

5. H. bracteata, R. Br. Stem 6--12' high; lower leaves obovate, the
upper oblong and gradually reduced to lanceolate acute bracts 2--4 times
the length of the green flowers; spike 10--30-flowered; lip
oblong-linear or slightly spatulate, truncate and 2--3-toothed or lobed
at the tip, more than twice the length of the white spur. (H. viridis,
var. bracteata, _Reichenb._)--Damp woods and meadows, N. Eng. to Minn.,
Iowa, Ind., south in the mountains to N. C., and far northward.

[+][+] _Spur slender, incurved, about equalling the entire lip; lateral
sepals spreading._

6. H. hyperborea, R. Br. Stem very leafy (6'--2 deg. high); _leaves
lanceolate_, erect; spike dense (2--15' long); lower bracts lanceolate,
longer than the _(greenish) flowers; lip and petals lanceolate, somewhat
equal_, the latter spreading from the base; anther somewhat overhanging
the transversely dilated stigma; _glands orbicular_; stalk of the
pollen-masses very slender and weak.--Peat bogs and wet cold woods, N.
Eng. to N. Y., S. Ill., Iowa, and northward. June, July. (Eu.)

7. H. dilatata, Gray. Resembles n. 6, but usually more slender, with
narrower commonly _linear leaves; flowers white; lip lanceolate from a
rhomboidal-dilated base_, entire, its base with the bases of the petals
and sepals erect-connivent, above spreading; anther-cells almost
parallel; _glands approximate, large and strap-shaped, vertical_, nearly
as long as the pollen-mass and its short flat stalk together; stigma
narrow; a trowel-shaped conspicuous beak between the bases of the
anther-cells.--Cold bogs, Conn. to N. Y., Mich., Minn., and northward.

[*][*] _Flowers greenish or white, 5--15 in a loose spike, rather large
for the size of the plant; scape or stem naked above, 1-leaved at base
(5--9' high); spur not longer than the lip; anther-cells wholly adnate,
arcuate and widely separated._

8. H. obtusata, Richardson. Leaf obovate or spatulate-oblong; upper
sepal very broad and rounded, the others and the petals lance-oblong;
lip entire, linear or lanceolate, deflexed (3'' long), about the length
of the tapering and curving spur.--Cold peat bogs, Maine and N. New Eng.
(Mt. Wachusett, Mass.), to Minn. and northward. (Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Flowers white or greenish, numerous in a loose spike, on a
naked scape, 2-leaved at base; spur longer than the narrow entire lip;
anther-cells widely diverging, their narrowed beak-like bases projecting
forward; stalk of the pollen-mass laterally affixed to the back of the
orbicular gland, the viscous face of which looks obliquely inward._

9. H. Hookeri, Torr. Leaves orbicular, spreading (3--4' broad); scape
mostly naked (1/2--1 deg. high), bearing 10--20 upright sessile
_yellowish-green flowers in a strict spike_; sepals ovate-lanceolate;
lip lanceolate, pointed, incurved, longer than the _lance-awl-shaped
petals; spur slender, acute, about the length of the ovary_ (nearly 1'
long).--Damp woods and borders of swamps, N. Scotia to N. J., west to
Minn. and Iowa.--Var. OBLONGIFOLIA, Paine, has oblong leaves (3--5' by
11/2--2'). N. Y. and Can.

10. H. orbiculata, Torr. Leaves very large (4--8' wide), orbicular,
spreading flat on the ground, shining above, silvery beneath; scape
bracted (1--2 deg. high), bearing many spreading _greenish-white flowers in
a loose raceme_; upper sepal orbicular, the lateral ovate; _lip narrowly
linear and slightly spatulate, obtuse_, drooping, nearly thrice the
length of the oblong-lanceolate and falcate obtuse petals; _spur
curved_, slender (about 11/2' long), gradually _thickened_ toward the
blunt apex, _twice the length of the ovary_; anther-cells strongly
projecting at the free beak-like base (the glands nearly 1/4'
apart).--Rich woods (especially coniferous), Newf. to Penn. and in the
mountains to N. C., west to Mich. and Minn.

[*][*][*][*] (FRINGED ORCHIS.) _Flowers several or many in an open
spike, with mostly foliaceous bracts; stem (rather tall) leafy; spur
thread-shaped or scarcely club-shaped, longer than the fringed, cleft,
or dissected lip; anther-cells widely separated and usually diverging,
their narrow beak-like bases, supported by the arms of the stigma,
strongly projecting forward or partly upward._

[+] _Lip pectinately fringed but undivided; flowers golden yellow or
white; anther-cells widely divergent, the orbicular glands as if raised
on a tentacle projecting far forward or slightly inward; ovary long,
tapering to the summit._

11. H. cristata, R. Br. Lower leaves lanceolate, elongated; the upper
gradually reduced to sharp-pointed _bracts, nearly the length of the
crowded (yellow) flowers_; spike oblong or cylindrical; petals rounded,
crenate; _lip ovate, with a lacerate-fringed margin, scarcely shorter
than the_ slender obtuse incurved _spur_, which is not half the length
of the ovary.--Bogs, N. J. to Fla. July. Flowers very much smaller than
in the next.

12. H. ciliaris, R. Br. (YELLOW FRINGED-ORCHIS.) Stem 11/2--2 deg. high;
leaves oblong or lanceolate; the upper passing into pointed _bracts_,
which are _shorter than the ovaries_; spike oblong, rather closely
many-flowered; _flowers bright orange-yellow_; lateral sepal rounded,
reflexed; petals linear, cut-fringed at the apex; _lip oblong_ (6''
long), _about half the length of the spur furnished with a very long and
copious capillary fringe_.--Wet sandy places, N. Eng. to Fla. and Tex.,
west to Mich. and Ind. Our most handsome species.

13. H. blephariglottis, Torr. (WHITE FRINGED-ORCHIS.) Stem 1 deg. high;
leaves, etc., as in the last; _flowers white_, rather smaller; petals
spatulate, usually slightly cut or toothed at the apex; lip ovate- or
lanceolate-oblong, with the irregular capillary fringe of the margins
usually shorter than its disk, one third the length of the spur.--Peat
bogs and borders of ponds, Newf. to N. J., west to Mich. and Minn.
July.--Var. HOLOPETALA, Torr., has narrower petals with the toothing
obsolete, and the lip less fringed.

[+][+] (GREENISH FRINGED-ORCHIS.) _Lip 3-parted above the stalk-like
base, the divisions cut into capillary fringes; flowers greenish- or
yellowish-white; anther-cells not very divergent, the beaked bases
projecting forward; the large glands oval or lanceolate, nearly facing
each other; ovary short-tapering above; spurs long, clavate._

14. H. leucophaea, Gray. Stem 2--4 deg. high; leaves oblong-lanceolate; the
bracts similar, rather shorter than the (large, fragrant) flowers; spike
commonly elongated, loose; _petals obovate, minutely cut-toothed;
divisions of the lip_ (7--10'' long) _broadly wedge-shaped or
fan-shaped, many-cleft to the middle into a copious thread-like fringe_;
spur longer than the ovary (1--11/2' long); glands transversely
oval.--Moist meadows, western N. Y. to Ky., Mo., and Minn. July.

15. H. lacera, R. Br. (RAGGED FRINGED-ORCHIS.) Leaves oblong or
lanceolate; raceme loosely many-flowered; _petals oblong-linear, entire;
divisions of the lip narrow, deeply parted into a few long nearly
capillary lobes_; spur about the length of the ovary; _glands
oblong-linear_, as long as the stalk of the pollen-mass.--Bogs and moist
thickets, N. Scotia to N. C. and Ga., west to Minn. and Mo.; common.
July.

[+][+][+] (PURPLE FRINGED-ORCHIS.) _Lip fan-shaped, 3-parted above the
stalk-like base, the divisions erosely fringed; flowers purple;
anther-cells widely separated, little divergent, the orbicular glands
oblique; ovary contracted only at the summit; the long curving spur
somewhat clavate._

16. H. psycodes, Gray. Leaves oblong or lanceolate, the uppermost
passing into linear-lanceolate bracts; _raceme cylindrical, densely
many-flowered; lower sepals round-oval, obtuse; petals wedge-obovate or
spatulate, denticulate above_; divisions of the spreading lip broadly
wedge-shaped, many-cleft into a _short fringe_.--Wet meadows and bogs,
common; Newf. to N. C., west to Ind. and Minn. July, Aug.--Flowers
short-pedicelled, crowded in a spike of 4--10' in length, small, but
very handsome, fragrant; lip short-stalked, barely 1/2' broad and not so
long; the middle lobe broadest and more closely fringed, but not so
deeply cleft as the lateral ones.

17. H. fimbriata, R. Br. Lower leaves oval or oblong, the upper few,
passing into lanceolate bracts; _spike or raceme oblong,
loosely-flowered; lower sepals ovate, acute; petals oblong, toothed down
the sides_; divisions of the pendent large lip (3/4--1' broad) fan-shaped,
more fringed.--Wet meadows, N. Scotia to N. J. and N. C., west to Mich.
June.--Flowers fewer (lilac-purple), 3 or 4 times larger than those of
the preceding.

18. H. peramoena, Gray. Lower leaves oblong-ovate, the upper lanceolate;
spike oblong or cylindrical, densely flowered; lower sepals round-ovate;
petals rounded-obovate, raised on a claw; _divisions of the large lip
very broadly wedge-shaped, irregularly eroded-toothed_ at the broadly
dilated summit, _the lateral ones truncate, the middle one
2-lobed_.--Moist meadows and banks, Penn. and N. J. to Ill., and south
in the mountains. Aug.--Flowers large and showy (violet-purple); the lip
paler and 8--10'' long, variably toothed, but not fringed.


17. CYPRIPEDIUM, L. LADY'S SLIPPER. MOCCASON-FLOWER.

Sepals spreading; all three distinct, or in most cases two of them
united into one under the lip. Petals spreading, resembling the sepals
but usually narrower. Lip a large inflated sac. Column declined; on each
side a fertile stamen, with its short filament bearing a 2-celled
anther; the pollen loose and pulpy or powdery-granular; on the upper
side a dilated-triangular, petal-like but thickish body, which answers
to the fertile stamen of other Orchids, and covers the summit of the
style; stigma terminal, broad, obscurely 3-lobed, moist and roughish
(not smooth and viscid as in the rest of the order). Pollen in most of
our species, especially in n. 6, exposed by the conversion of the face
of the anther into a viscid, varnish-like film, which adheres to
whatever touches it, carrying away some of the pollen.--Root of many
tufted fibres. Leaves large, many-nerved and plaited, sheathing at the
base. Flowers solitary or few, large and showy. (Name composed of
[Greek: Ky/pris], _Venus_, and [Greek: po/dion], _a sock_ or _buskin_,
i.e. _Venus's Slipper_.)

Sec. 1. _The three sepals separate; stem leafy; flower solitary, drooping._

1. C. arietinum, R. Br. (RAM'S-HEAD L.) Stem slender (6--10' high);
upper sepal ovate-lanceolate, pointed; the 2 lower and the petals linear
and nearly alike (greenish-brown), rather longer than the red and
whitish veiny lip (6'' long), which is somewhat pubescent, especially
within, and prolonged at the apex into a short blunt conical point;
leaves 3 or 4, elliptical-lanceolate, nearly smooth.--Cold swamps and
damp woods, Maine to N. Y., Mich. and Minn., and northward.

Sec. 2. _Two of the sepals united into one under the lip._

[*] _Stem leafy to the top, 1--3-flowered; lip slipper-shaped or
roundish, much inflated, horizontal, and with a rounded open orifice._

[+] _Sepals and linear wavy-twisted petals brownish, pointed, longer
than the lip._

2. C. candidum, Muhl. (SMALL WHITE LADY'S SLIPPER.) Slightly pubescent,
1-flowered; leaves lance-oblong, acute; petals and sepals greenish,
purple-spotted; _sepals ovate-lanceolate; lip_ (not 1' long) _white_,
striped with purple inside, flattish laterally, convex above; _sterile
stamen lanceolate_.--Bogs, N. Y. and Penn. to Minn., Mo., and Ky.; rare.
May, June.

3. C. parviflorum, Salisb. (SMALLER YELLOW L.) Stem 1--2 deg. high leaves
oval, pointed; _sepals ovate or ovate-lanceolate; lip flattish from
above, bright yellow_ (1' long or less); sterile stamen
triangular.--Bogs and low woods, Newf. to Ga., west to Minn. and E. Kan.
May, June.--Flowers fragrant; sepals and petals more brown-purple than
in the next, into which it seems to pass.

4. C. pubescens, Willd. (LARGER YELLOW L.) Stem 2 deg. high, pubescent, as
are the broadly oval acute leaves; _sepals elongated-lanceolate; lip
flattened laterally_, very convex and gibbous above, 11/2--2' long, _pale
yellow_.--Bogs and low woods; same range as the last.

[+][+] _Sepals and petals plane, rounded, white, not longer than the
lip._

5. C. spectabile, Swartz. (SHOWY L.) Downy, 2 deg. high; leaves ovate,
pointed; sepals round-ovate or orbicular, rather longer than the oblong
petals; _lip much inflated, white, pink-purple_ in front (11/2' long);
sterile stamen heart-ovate.--Peat-bogs, Maine and W. New Eng. to Minn.
and Mo., and south in the mountains to N. C. July.--The most beautiful
of the genus.

[*][*] _Scape naked, 2-leaved at base, 1-flowered; sepals and petals
greenish, shorter than the drooping lip, which has a closed fissure down
its whole length in front._

6. C. acaule, Ait. (STEMLESS L.) Downy; leaves oblong; scape 8--12'
high, with a green bract at top; sepals oblong-lanceolate, pointed,
nearly as long as the linear petals; lip obovoid or oblong, rose-purple
(rarely white), nearly 2' long, veiny; sterile stamen rhomboid.--Dry or
moist woods; Newf. to N. C., west to N. Ind., Mich., and Minn. May,
June.


ORDER 111. BROMELIACEAE. (PINE-APPLE FAMILY.)

_Herbs (or scarcely woody plants, nearly all tropical), the greater part
epiphytes, with persistent dry or fleshy and channelled crowded leaves,
sheathing at the base, usually covered with scurf; 6-androus_; the
6-cleft perianth adherent to the ovary in the PINE-APPLE, etc., or free
from it in

1. TILLANDSIA, L. LONG MOSS.

Perianth plainly double, 6-parted; the 3 outer divisions (sepals)
membranaceous; the 3 inner (petals) colored; all connivent below into a
tube, spreading above, lanceolate. Stamens 6, hypogynous! or the
alternate ones cohering with the base of the petals; anthers introrse.
Ovary free; style thread-shaped; stigmas 3. Capsule cartilaginous,
3-celled, loculicidally 3-valved; the valves splitting into an inner and
an outer layer. Seeds several or many in each cell, anatropous,
club-shaped, pointed, raised on a long hairy-tufted stalk, like a coma.
Embryo small, at the base of copious albumen.--Scurfy-leaved epiphytes.
(Named for _Prof. Tillands_ of Abo.)

1. T. usneoides, L. (COMMON LONG MOSS or BLACK MOSS.) Stems
thread-shaped, branching, pendulous; leaves thread-shaped; peduncle
short, 1-flowered; flower yellow.--East Shore, Va., south to Fla., and
westward; growing on the branches of trees, forming long hanging tufts.


ORDER 112. HAEMODORACEAE. (BLOODWORT FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with fibrous roots, usually equitant leaves, and perfect
3--6-androus regular flowers, which are woolly or scurfy outside; the
tube of the 6-lobed perianth coherent with the whole surface, or with
merely the lower part, of the 3-celled ovary._--Anthers introrse. Style
single, sometimes 3-partible; the 3 stigmas alternate with the cells of
the ovary. Capsule crowned or enclosed by the persistent perianth,
3-celled, loculicidal, 3--many-seeded. Embryo small, in hard or fleshy
albumen. A small family; chiefly of the southern hemisphere.

[*] Ovary wholly adherent to the calyx-tube; style filiform; seeds
peltate, amphitropous.

1. Lachnanthes. Stamens 3, exserted; anthers versatile. Leaves equitant.

[*][*] Ovary free except at the base; style 3-partible; seeds
anatropous.

2. Lophiola. Stamens 6, on the base of the woolly 6-cleft perianth.
Leaves equitant.

3. Aletris. Stamens 6, in the throat of the warty-roughened and tubular
6-toothed perianth. Leaves flat, spreading.


1. LACHNANTHES, L. RED-ROOT.

Perianth woolly outside, 6-parted down to the adherent ovary. Stamens 3,
opposite the 3 larger or inner divisions; filaments long, exserted;
anthers linear, fixed by the middle. Style thread-like, exserted,
declined. Capsule globular. Seeds few on each fleshy placenta, flat and
rounded, fixed by the middle.--Herb, with a red fibrous perennial root,
equitant sword-shaped leaves, clustered at the base and scattered on the
stem, which is hairy at the top and terminated by a dense compound cyme
of dingy yellow and loosely woolly flowers (whence the name, from
[Greek: la/chne], _wool_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _blossom_).

1. L. tinctoria, Ell.--Sandy swamps, near the coast, S. E. Mass., R. I.,
and N. J. to Fla. July--Sept.


2. LOPHIOLA, Ker.

Perianth densely woolly, deeply 6-cleft; the divisions nearly equal,
spreading, longer than the 6 stamens, which are inserted at their base.
Anthers fixed by the base. Capsule ovate, free from the perianth except
at the base, pointed with the awl-shaped style, which finally splits
into 3 divisions, one terminating each valve. Seeds numerous, oblong,
ribbed, anatropous.--A slender perennial herb, with creeping rootstocks
and fibrous roots, linear and nearly smooth equitant leaves; the stem
leafless and whitened with soft matted wool toward the summit, as also
the crowded or panicled cyme. Perianth dingy yellow inside; the lobes
naked only toward the tip, each clothed with a woolly tuft near the base
(whence the name, from [Greek: lophei~on], _a small crest_).

1. L. aurea, Ker.--Boggy pine-barrens, N. J. to Fla. June--Aug.


3. ALETRIS, L. COLIC-ROOT. STAR-GRASS.

Perianth cylindrical, not woolly, but wrinkled and roughened outside by
thickly-set points which look like scurfy mealiness, the tube cohering
below with the base only of the ovary, 6-cleft at the summit. Stamens 6,
inserted at the base of the lobes; filaments and anthers short,
included. Style awl-shaped, 3-cleft at the apex; stigmas minutely
2-lobed. Capsule ovate, enclosed in the roughened perianth; the
dehiscence, seeds, etc., nearly as in Lophiola.--Perennial and smooth
stemless herbs, very bitter, with fibrous roots, and a spreading cluster
of thin and flat lanceolate leaves; the small flowers in a wand-like
spiked raceme, terminating a naked slender scape (2--3 deg. high). Bracts
awl-shaped, minute. ([Greek: A)letri/s], a female slave who grinds corn;
the name applied to these plants in allusion to the apparent mealiness
dusted over the blossoms.)

1. A. farinosa, L. Flowers oblong-tubular, white; lobes
lanceolate-oblong.--Grassy or sandy woods, Mass. to Fla., Ill., and
Minn. July, Aug.

2. A. aurea, Walt. Flowers bell-shaped, yellow (fewer and shorter);
lobes short-ovate.--Barrens, N. J. to Fla. July.


ORDER 113. IRIDACEAE. (IRIS FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with equitant 2-ranked leaves, and regular or irregular perfect
flowers; the divisions of the 6-cleft petal-like perianth convolute in
the bud in 2 sets, the tube coherent with the 3-celled ovary, and 3
distinct or monadelphous stamens, alternate with the inner divisions of
the perianth, with extrorse anthers._--Flowers from a spathe of 2 or
more leaves or bracts, usually showy. Style single, usually 3-cleft;
stigmas 3, opposite the cells of the ovary, or 6 by the parting of the
style-branches. Capsule 3-celled, loculicidal, many-seeded. Seeds
anatropous; embryo straight in fleshy albumen. Rootstocks, tubers, or
corms mostly acrid.

[*] Branches of the style (or stigmas) opposite the anthers.

1. Iris. Outer divisions of the perianth recurved, the inner erect;
stigmas petal-like.

[*][*] Branches of the style alternate with the anthers. Perianth
regular.

2. Nemastylis. Stem from a coated bulb. Filaments united. Style-branches
2-cleft.

3. Belamcanda. Stems from a creeping rhizome. Filaments distinct.
Stigmas dilated.

4. Sisyrinchium. Root fibrous. Filaments united. Stigmas thread-like.


1. IRIS, Tourn. FLOWER-DE-LUCE.

Perianth 6-cleft; the tube more or less prolonged beyond the ovary; the
3 outer divisions spreading or reflexed, the 3 inner smaller, erect.
Stamens distinct; the oblong or linear anthers sheltered under the
overarching petal-like stigmas (or rather branches of the style, bearing
the true stigma in the form of a thin lip or plate under the apex); most
of the style connate with the tube of the perianth. Capsule 3--6-angled,
coriaceous. Seeds depressed-flattened, usually in 2 rows in each
cell.--Perennials, with sword-shaped or grassy leaves, and large showy
flowers; ours with creeping and more or less tuberous rootstocks.
([Greek: I~)ris], the _rainbow_, anciently applied to this genus on
account of its bright and varied colors.)

[*] _Stems leafy and rather tall (1--3 deg. high), from thickened
rootstocks, often branching; tube of the perianth shorter than the
divisions, which are beardless and crestless, the erect inner ones
(petals) much smaller than the outer._

[+] _Flowers violet-blue, variegated with green, yellow or white, and
purple-veined._

1. I. versicolor, L. (LARGER BLUE FLAG.) Stem stout, angled on one side;
_leaves sword-shaped_ (3/4' wide); ovary obtusely triangular with the
sides flat; flowers (21/2--3' long) short-peduncled, the funnel-form tube
shorter than the ovary; capsule oblong, turgid, with rounded
angles.--Wet places, Newf. to Fla., west to Minn. and Ark. May, June.

2. I. prismatica, Pursh. (SLENDER BLUE FLAG.) Stem _very slender_,
terete; _leaves narrowly linear_ (2--3'' wide); flowers
slender-peduncled (11/2--2' long), the tube extremely short; ovary
3-angled, each side 2-grooved; capsule sharply triangular. (I.
Virginica, _Man._; not _L._)--Marshes near the coast, Maine to N. C.
June.

I. CAROLINIANA, Watson, resembling n. 1, but with longer laxer and
greener leaves, and the very large seeds in one row in each cell,
probably occurs in S. Va.

(Addendum) 2^a. I. hexagona, Walt. Stems flexuous, often low and slender
(1--3 deg. high), leafy; leaves much exceeding the stem, 6--12'' broad;
flowers solitary and sessile in the axils, large, deep blue, variegated
with yellow, purple, and white; tube 1/2' long; segments about 3' long,
the inner narrow; capsule oblong-cylindric, 6-angled, 2' long--Prairies,
Ky. (_Short_) to W. Mo. (_Bush_), and on the coast from S. Car.
southward.

[+][+] _Flowers copper-colored or dull reddish-brown; petals widely
spreading._

3. I. fulva, Ker. Stem and leaves as n. 1; tube of the perianth
cylindrical, as long as the 6-angled ovary; style-branches narrow. (I.
cuprea, _Pursh._)--Swamps, S. Ill. and Mo. to La. and Ga. May.

[*][*] _Stems low (3--6' high), from tufted and creeping slender (or
here and there tuberous-thickened) rootstocks, 1--3-flowered; tube of
the perianth long and slender; the violet-blue divisions nearly equal._

4. I. verna, L. (DWARF IRIS.) _Leaves linear_, grass-like, rather
glaucous; the thread-like tube of the perianth about the length of the
divisions, which are oblong-obovate and on _slender claws_, the outer
ones slightly hairy down the orange-yellow base, _crestless_; capsule
obtusely triangular.--Wooded hillsides, Lancaster Co., Penn., to S. C.,
west to Ky. and Ala. April.--Flowers sometimes white with yellowish
centre.

5. I. cristata, Ait. (CRESTED DWARF IRIS.) _Leaves lanceolate_ (3--5'
long when grown); those of the spathe _ovate-lanceolate_, shorter than
the _thread-like tube of the perianth_, which is 2' long and _much
longer than the_ light blue obovate short-clawed _divisions_, the outer
ones _crested_ but beardless; capsule sharply triangular.--In the
mountains from Md. to N. C.; Trumbull Co., Ohio (_Ingraham_); knobs of
S. Ind. May.--Flowers fragrant.

6. I. lacustris, Nutt. (LAKE DWARF IRIS.) _Tube of the perianth rather
shorter than the divisions_ (yellowish, 1/2--3/4' long), _dilated upward_,
not exceeding the spathe; otherwise as in the last, and too near
it.--Gravelly shores of Lakes Huron and Michigan. May.

I. PSEUDACORUS, L., the YELLOW IRIS of European marshes, with very long
linear leaves and bright yellow beardless flowers, is reported as having
become established in Mass. and N. Y.


2. NEMASTYLIS, Nutt.

Perianth spreading, the segments similar and nearly equal. Filaments
more or less united into a tube. Style short, its slender 2-parted
branches alternate with the anthers and exserted between them; stigmas
minute, terminal. Capsule oblong or ovate, truncate, dehiscent at the
summit. Seeds globose or angled.--Stems terete, from coated bulbs, with
few plicate leaves, and few fugacious flowers from 2-bracted spathes.
(Name from [Greek: ne~ma], _a thread_, and [Greek: styli/s], _style_,
for the slender style-branches.)

1. N. geminiflora, Nutt. Stem 1--2 deg. high; spathes 2-flowered; perianth
pale blue-purple, 1--2' broad, the divisions oblong-obovate; capsule
obovate, 1/2' long.--E. Kan. to Tex.


3. BELAMCANDA, Adans. BLACKBERRY-LILY.

Perianth 6-parted almost to the ovary; the divisions widely and equally
spreading, all nearly alike, oblong with a narrowed base, naked. Stamens
monadelphous only at base; anthers oblong. Style club-shaped, 3-cleft,
the narrow divisions tipped with a small dilated stigma. Capsule
pear-shaped; the valves at length falling away, leaving the central
column covered with the globose black and fleshy-coated seeds, imitating
a blackberry (whence the popular name).--Perennial, with rootstocks,
foliage, etc., of an Iris; the branching stems (3--4 deg. high) loosely
many-flowered; the orange-yellow perianth mottled above with
crimson-purple spots. (An East Indian name of the species.)

B. CHINENSIS, Adans. (Pardanthus Chinensis, _Ker._)--Sparingly escaped
from gardens, Md. to S. Ind. and Mo. (Adv. from China, etc.)


4. SISYRINCHIUM, L. BLUE-EYED GRASS.

Perianth 6-parted; the divisions alike, spreading. Stamens monadelphous
to the top. Stigmas thread-like. Capsule globular, 3-angled. Seeds
globular.--Low slender perennials, with fibrous roots, grassy or
lanceolate leaves, mostly branching 2-edged or winged stems, and
fugacious umbelled-clustered small flowers from a 2-leaved spathe. (A
meaningless name, of Greek origin.)

1. S. angustifolium, Mill. Scape (4--12' high) winged or wingless,
_simple, the spathe solitary_ and terminal, its outer bract more or less
elongated; flowers delicate blue, changing to purplish (rarely white),
the divisions of the perianth more or less notched, bristle-pointed and
ciliate; mature _seeds_ globose, _large_ (1/2'' broad), faintly pitted or
_nearly smooth_. (S. Bermudiana, var. mucronatum, _Gray_, excl.
descr.)--Moist meadows, etc., among grass; common everywhere. June--Aug.
(Addendum)--Sisyrinchium angustifolium. What appears to be a form of
this species with pale yellow flowers is found near Independence, Mo.
(_Bush_).

2. S. anceps, Cav. Scape (6--18' high) usually branching and bearing 2
or more peduncled spathes; seeds more ovate, much smaller, deeply
pitted. (S. Bermudiana, var. anceps, _Gray_, excl. descr.)--Similar
localities; common.


ORDER 114. AMARYLLIDACEAE. (AMARYLLIS FAMILY.)

_Chiefly bulbous and scape-bearing herbs, not scurfy or woolly, with
linear flat root-leaves, and regular (or nearly so) and perfect
6-androus flowers, the tube of the corolline 6-parted perianth coherent
with the 3-celled ovary; the lobes imbricated in the bud._--Anthers
introrse. Style single. Capsule 3-celled, several--many-seeded. Seeds
anatropous or nearly so, with a straight embryo in the axis of fleshy
albumen.--An order represented in our gardens by the _Narcissus,
Daffodil, Snowdrop_, etc., but with very few indigenous representatives
in this country. Bulbs acrid. Differs from Liliaceae chiefly in the
inferior ovary.

[*] Capsule 3-valved, loculicidal; anthers versatile; perianth
funnel-shaped; glabrous.

1. Zephyranthes. Flower naked in the throat; the tube short or none.
Bulbs coated.

2. Hymenocallis. Flower with a slender tube and narrow recurved lobes; a
cup-shaped crown connecting the stamens. Bulbs coated.

3. Agave. Flower equally 6-cleft, persistent, no crown. Fleshy-leaved,
not bulbous.

[*][*] Capsule indehiscent; anthers sagittate; villous.

4. Hypoxis. Perianth 6-parted nearly down to the ovary, persistent. Bulb
solid.


1. ZEPHYRANTHES, Herb.

Perianth funnel-form, from a tubular base; the 6 divisions petal-like
and similar, spreading above; the 6 stamens inserted in its naked
throat; anthers versatile. Pod membranaceous, 3-lobed.--Leaves and low
scape from a coated bulb. Flowers solitary from a scarious simple bract.
(From [Greek: ze/phyros], _a wind_ and [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_.)

1. Z. Atamasco, Herb. (ATAMASCO LILY.) Leaves bright green and shining,
very narrow, channelled, the margins acute; scape 6--12' high; peduncle
short; spathe 2-cleft at the apex; perianth white and pink, 3' long;
stamens and style declined.--Penn. to Va. and Fla. June. (Addendum)
(Amaryllis Atamasco, _L._).


2. HYMENOCALLIS, Salisb.

Perianth with a long and slender tube, and an equal 6-parted limb; lobes
long and narrow, recurved; the throat bearing a tubular or cup-shaped
corolla-like delicate crown, which connects the bases of the 6 exserted
stamens. Anthers linear, versatile. Capsule thin, 2--3-lobed; seeds
usually 2 in each cell, basal, fleshy, often like bulblets.--Scapes and
leaves from a coated bulb. Flowers white, fragrant, large and showy,
sessile in an umbel-like head or cluster, subtended by 2 or more
scarious bracts. (Name composed of [Greek: y(me/n], _a membrane_, and
[Greek: ka/llos], _beauty_.)

1. H. occidentalis, Kunth. Leaves strap-shaped, glaucous, 1--11/2 deg. long,
9--18'' broad; scape 3--6-flowered; bracts narrow, 2' long;
perianth-tube about 21/2--4' long, the linear segments scarcely shorter;
the crown 12--15'' long, tubular below, broadly funnel-form above, the
margin deltoid and entire, or 2-toothed and erose, between the white
filaments, which are twice longer; anthers yellow; style green.--Marshy
banks of streams, S. Ill. to N. Ga. and Ala.--Apparently distinct from
H. lacera, _Salisb._ (Pancratium rotatum, _Ker._), of the southern
coast.


3. AGAVE, L. AMERICAN ALOE.

Perianth tubular-funnel-form, persistent, 6-parted; the divisions nearly
equal, narrow. Stamens 6; anthers linear, versatile. Capsule coriaceous,
many-seeded. Seeds flattened.--Leaves thick and fleshy, often with
cartilaginous or spiny teeth, clustered at the base of the many-flowered
scape, from a thick fibrous-rooted crown. (Name from [Greek: a)gaue/],
_noble_,--not inappropriate as applied to A. AMERICANA, the
CENTURY-PLANT.)

1. A. Virginica, L. (FALSE ALOE.) Herbaceous; leaves entire or
denticulate; scape 3--6 deg. high; flowers scattered in a loose wand-like
spike, greenish-yellow, fragrant, the perianth 9--12'' long, its narrow
tube twice longer than the erect lobes.--Dry or rocky banks, Md. and Va.
to Fla., west to S. Ind., Mo., and Tex.


4. HYPOXIS, L. STAR-GRASS.

Perianth persistent, 6-parted, spreading; the 3 outer divisions a little
herbaceous outside. Stamens 6; anthers sagittate, erect. Capsule crowned
with the withered or closed perianth, not opening by valves. Seeds
globular, with a crustaceous coat, ascending, imperfectly anatropous,
the rhaphe not adherent quite down to the micropyle, the persistent
seed-stalk thus forming a sort of lateral beak. Radicle
inferior!--Stemless small herbs, with grassy and hairy linear leaves and
slender few-flowered scapes, from a solid bulb. (An old name for a plant
having sourish leaves, from [Greek: y(/poxys], _sub-acid_.)

1. H. erecta, L. Leaves linear, grass-like, longer than the umbellately
1--4-flowered scape; divisions of the perianth hairy and greenish
outside, yellow within.--Meadows and open woods, N. Eng. to Fla., west
to Minn., E. Kan., and Tex.


ORDER 115. DIOSCOREACEAE. (YAM FAMILY.)

_Plants with twining stems from large tuberous roots or knotted
rootstocks, and ribbed and netted-veined petioled leaves, small
dioecious 6-androus and regular flowers, with the 6-cleft calyx-like
perianth adherent in the fertile plant to the 3-celled ovary. Styles 3,
distinct._--Ovules 1 or 2 in each cell, anatropous. Fruit usually a
membranaceous 3-angled or winged capsule. Seeds with a minute embryo in
hard albumen.


1. DIOSCOREA, Plumier. YAM.

Flowers very small, in axillary panicles or racemes. Stamens 6, at the
base of the divisions of the 6-parted perianth. Capsule 3-celled,
3-winged, loculicidally 3-valved by splitting through the winged angles.
Seeds 1 or 2 in each cell, flat, with a membranaceous wing. (Dedicated
to the Greek naturalist, _Dioscorides_.)

1. D. villosa, L. (WILD YAM-ROOT.) Herbaceous. Stems slender, from
knotty and matted rootstocks, twining over bushes; leaves mostly
alternate, sometimes nearly opposite or in fours, more or less downy
beneath, heart-shaped, conspicuously pointed, 9--11-ribbed; flowers pale
greenish-yellow, the sterile in drooping panicles, the fertile in
drooping simple racemes; capsules 8--10'' long.--Thickets, S. New Eng.
to Fla., west to Minn., Kan., and Tex.


ORDER 116. LILIACEAE. (LILY FAMILY.)

_Herbs, or rarely woody plants, with regular and symmetrical almost
always 6-androus flowers; the perianth not glumaceous, free from the
chiefly 3-celled ovary; the stamens one before each of its divisions or
lobes_ (i.e. 6, in one instance 4), _with 2-celled anthers; fruit a
few--many-seeded pod or berry; the small embryo enclosed in copious
albumen._ Seeds anatropous or amphitropous (orthotropous in Smilax).
Flowers not from a spathe, except in Allium; the outer and inner ranks
of the perianth colored alike (or nearly so) and generally similar,
except in Trillium.

SUBORDER I. Smilaceae. Shrubby or rarely herbaceous, the petiole of the
3--9-nerved netted-veined leaves often tendril-bearing. Flowers (in
ours) dioecious, in axillary umbels, small, with regular 6-parted
deciduous perianth. Anthers apparently 1-celled. Stigmas 3, sessile.
Fruit a 3-celled berry, with 1--2 pendulous orthotropous seeds in each
cell. Embryo minute in horny albumen.

1. Smilax. Characters as above.

SUBORDER II. Liliaceae proper. Never climbing by tendrils. Very rarely
dioecious. Seeds anatropous or amphitropous.

SERIES A. Floral bracts scarious. Stamens perigynous on the usually
withering-persistent nerved perianth; anthers introrse. Style undivided,
mostly persistent. Fruit a loculicidal capsule or a berry. Leaves
transversely veined.

[*] Scape from a coated bulb; fruit capsular; leaves linear.

[+] Flowers umbellate; segments 1-nerved; pedicels not jointed.

2. Allium. Perianth 6-parted. Capsule deeply lobed, often crested; cells
1--2-seeded. Very alliaceous.

3. Nothoscordum. Perianth 6-parted. Seeds several in each cell. Not
alliaceous.

4. Androstephium. Perianth tubular-funnel form. Filaments in the throat,
united into a crown.

[+][+] Flowers racemose, 6-parted, the segments 3--several-nerved.

5. Camassia. Flowers light blue, long racemose. Filaments filiform.

6. Ornithogalum. Flowers greenish white, sub-corymbose. Filaments
dilated.

[+][+][+] Flowers densely racemose; perianth urn-shaped, 6-toothed.

7. Muscari. Flowers deep blue, small. Stamens included.

[*][*] Stem or scape not from a bulb, several-flowered; capsule
many-seeded.

8. Hemerocallis. Scape from a fleshy-fibrous root. Flowers few, large,
yellow, tubular-funnel-form; limb 6-parted. Stamens and long style
declined. Seeds globose.

9. Yucca. Stem woody, leafy. Flowers white, campanulate, 6-parted.
Stigmas sessile. Seeds flat.

[*][*][*] Leafy stems (scape in n. 10) from running rootstocks; fruit a
berry; leaves cordate to lanceolate (except n. 12); flowers white;
pedicels jointed.

[+] Perianth gamophyllous, 6-lobed.

10. Convallaria. Leaves sheathing the scape. Flowers racemose; perianth
bell-shaped.

11. Polygonatum. Stem leafy. Flowers axillary; perianth cylindrical.

[+][+] Perianth-segments distinct, small, spreading, persistent.

12. Asparagus. Stems branching, the apparent leaves thread-like. Flowers
axillary.

13. Smilacina. Stem simple, leafy. Flowers 6-parted, racemose or
paniculate.

14. Maianthemum. Stem low, 2-leaved. Flowers 4-merous, racemose.

SERIES B. Floral bracts none or foliaceous. Stamens hypogynous or at the
base of the distinct segments of the deciduous perianth (persistent in
n. 23); anthers extrorse or dehiscent laterally. Style undivided,
deciduous (stigmas sessile and persistent in n. 23). Fruit a loculicidal
capsule or a berry. Veinlets anastomosing (transverse in n. 15, 17--19).

[*] Fruit a berry; stem or scape from a creeping rootstock; leaves
broad, alternate or radical; flowers narrowly campanulate.

15. Streptopus. Stem leafy. Flowers axillary, on bent pedicels. Anthers
sagittate, acute; filaments deltoid or subulate.

16. Disporum. Stem leafy. Flowers few, in terminal umbels. Anthers
oblong, obtuse; filaments slender. Veinlets anastomosing.

17. Clintonia. Flowers umbellate on a scape, few or many.

[*][*] Fruit a capsule.

[+] Stems leafy, from a short or creeping rootstock; flowers few,
solitary, pendulous; capsule few-seeded.

18. Uvularia. Stem terete. Leaves perfoliate. Flowers terminal. Capsule
truncate, 3-lobed.

19. Oakesia. Stem angled. Leaves sessile. Flowers opposite the leaves.
Capsule acutely 3-winged.

[+][+] Stem or scape from a bulb or corm; capsule many-seeded.

20. Erythronium. Scape from a solid bulb, with a pair of leaves. Flower
solitary. Seeds angled, obovoid.

21. Lilium. Stem leafy from a scaly bulb. Seeds horizontal, flattened.

[*][*][*] Fruit a berry; stem from a tuber-like rootstock, bearing 1 or
2 whorls of leaves; flowers terminal; stigmas sessile.

22. Medeola. Leaves in 2 whorls. Flowers umbellate. Perianth-segments
similar, colored, deciduous.

23. Trillium. Leaves (3) in a terminal whorl. Flower solitary; outer
sepals leaf-like, persistent.

SERIES C. Floral bracts green or greenish (rarely scarious), or none.
Stamens at the base of the distinct 1--several-nerved persistent
perianth-segments; anthers small, versatile. Styles or sessile stigmas
distinct. Capsule mostly septicidal. Seeds with a loose testa or
appendaged. Leaves with transverse veinlets (except in n. 24 and 25).

[*] Stems leafy or bracteate, from a thick tuberous rootstock; flowers
racemose; anthers 2-celled; stigmas linear.

24. Helonias. Leaves radical, oblanceolate. Flowers perfect. Capsule
broadly obovate, many-seeded.

25. Chamaelirium. Stem very leafy. Flowers dioecious. Capsule oblong,
many-seeded.

26. Xerophyllum. Stem very leafy; leaves very narrow. Flowers perfect.
Capsule few-seeded.

[*][*] Stems distichously equitant-leafy, from a creeping rootstock;
flowers on bracteolate pedicels, racemose; anthers 2-celled; stigmas
small, terminal; seeds often appendaged.

27. Tofieldia. Bractlets 3, verticillate. Styles short. Seeds
horizontal.

28. Narthecium. Bractlet linear. Stigma slightly lobed. Seeds ascending.

[*][*][*] Anthers heart- or kidney-shaped, confluently 1-celled and
peltate after opening; stigmas terminal; capsule 3-beaked by the
persistent styles; seeds angled or flattened and margined.

[+] Stems tall, leafy, from a thick rootstock, pubescent above; flowers
polygamous, racemose-paniculate; seeds flat, winged.

29. Melanthium. Sepals free from the ovary, their long claws bearing the
filaments.

30. Veratrum. Sepals without claws, slightly adnate to the ovary. Leaves
strongly nerved and plicate.

[+][+] Root mostly bulbous; glabrous; flowers racemose or panicled;
seeds narrow, angled; leaves linear.

31. Stenanthium. Sepals lanceolate, acuminate, without glands.

32. Zygadenus. Sepals oblong to ovate, glandular toward the base.

33. Amianthium. Flowers in a dense raceme. Sepals ovate-oblong,
glandless, free from the ovary. Cells of the capsule widely divergent,
1--2-seeded.


1. SMILAX, Tourn. GREENBRIER. CAT-BRIER.

Flowers dioecious in umbels or axillary peduncles, small, greenish or
yellowish, regular, the perianth-segments distinct, deciduous. Filaments
linear, inserted on the very base, the introrse anthers linear or
oblong, fixed by the base, apparently 1-celled. Ovary of fertile flowers
3-celled (1-celled, with single stigma, in n. 11); stigmas thick and
spreading, almost sessile; ovules 1 or 2 in each cell, pendulous,
orthtropous; fruit a small berry.--Shrubby or rarely herbaceous, usually
climbing or supported by a pair of tendrils on the petiole of the ribbed
and netted-veined simple leaves. (The ancient Greek name, of obscure
meaning.)

Sec. 1. _Stems herbaceous, not prickly; flowers carrion-scented; ovules 2
in each cell; leaves membranous, mucronate-tipped; berries bluish-black
with a bloom._

1. S. herbacea, L. (CARRION-FLOWER.) Stem climbing, 3--15 deg. high; _leaves
ovate or rounded, mostly heart-shaped_ or truncate at base, abruptly
acute to short-acuminate, _7--9-nerved_, smooth; petioles 1/2--1' long;
peduncles elongated (3--4' long, or sometimes even 6--8' and much longer
than the leaves), 20--40-flowered; seeds 6.--Moist meadows and
river-banks; common, from the Atlantic to Minn., Mo., and Tex. June.
Very variable.--Var. PUBERULENTA, Gray, has the leaves more or less
soft-downy beneath.

2. S. tamnifolia, Michx. Stem upright or climbing; leaves _mostly
5-nerved_, smooth, broadly ovate to lanceolate, truncate or cordate at
base, abruptly acute to acuminate, some of them _hastate with broad
rounded lobes_; peduncles longer than the petioles; berry smaller,
2--3-seeded.--Pine-barrens, N. J. to S. C.

3. S. ecirrhata, Watson. Erect, 1/2--3 deg. high, _without tendrils_ (or only
the uppermost petioles tendril-bearing), glabrous; lower leaves reduced
to narrow scale-like bracts, the rest thin, 5--7-nerved, _broadly
ovate-elliptical_ to roundish, acute, mostly cordate at base, 2--5'
long, sometimes verticillate, sparsely pubescent beneath; peduncles
about equalling the petioles (1--21/2' long), on the lower part of the
stem; umbels 10--20-flowered; berry 3-seeded.--Md. to S. C., west to
Mich. and Mo. May, June.

Sec. 2. _Stems woody, often prickly; ovules solitary; glabrous throughout._

[*] _Leaves ovate or roundish, etc., most of them rounded or
heart-shaped at base, and 5--9-nerved, the three middle nerves or ribs
stronger and more conspicuous._

[+] _Peduncles shorter or scarcely longer than the petioles (2--6''),
flattened; leaves thickish, green both sides._

4. S. Walteri, Pursh. Stem low, somewhat angled, prickly near the base
or unarmed; _leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate or oblong, somewhat
heart-shaped_ or rounded at base (3--4' long); _berries
coral-red_.--Pine barrens, N. J. to Fla.

5. S. rotundifolia, L. (COMMON GREENBRIER. HORSE-BRIER.) Stem armed with
scattered prickles, as well as the terete branches; branchlets more or
less 4-angular; _leaves ovate or round-ovate_, often broader than long,
slightly heart-shaped, abruptly short-pointed (2--3' long); _berries
blue-black_, with a bloom.--Moist thickets, N. Eng. to Ga., west to
Minn. and Tex. Very variable, passing into var. QUADRANGULARIS, Gray,
which has branches, and especially branchlets, 4-angular, and is more
common west.

[+][+] _Peduncle longer than but seldom twice the length of the short
petiole, flattened; leaves tardily deciduous or partly persistent;
berries black, with a bloom._

6. S. glauca, Walt. Terete branches and somewhat 4-angular branchlets
armed with scattered stout prickles, or naked; _leaves ovate_, rarely
subcordate, _glaucous beneath_ and sometimes also above, as well as the
branchlets when young (about 2' long), abruptly mucronate, the edges
smooth and naked.--Dry thickets, E. Mass. to Fla., west to S. Ind., Mo.,
and Tex.

7. S. bona-nox, L. Branches and the angular (often square) branchlets
sparsely armed with short rigid prickles; _leaves_ varying from
round-heart-shaped and slightly contracted above the dilated base to
fiddle-shaped and halberd-shaped or 3-lobed, _green and shining both
sides_, cuspidate-pointed, the margins often somewhat bristly-ciliate or
spinulose. (S. tamnoides, _Man._; probably not _L._)--Thickets;
Nantucket, Mass. (_L. L. Dame_); N. J. to Fla., west to Ill., Mo., and
Tex.

[+][+][+] _Peduncle 2--4 times the length of the petiole; leaves ample
(3--5' long), thin or thinnish, green both sides; berries black; stem
terete and branchlets nearly so._

8. S. hispida, Muhl. Rootstock cylindrical, elongated; stem (climbing
high) below densely _beset with long and weak blackish bristly
prickles_, the flowering branchlets mostly naked; _leaves_ ovate and the
larger heart-shaped, pointed, slightly rough-margined, _membranaceous
and deciduous_; peduncles 11/2--2' long; sepals lanceolate, almost 3''
long.--Moist thickets, Conn. to Va., west to Minn. and Tex. June.

9. S. Pseudo-China, L. _Rootstock tuberous; stems and branches unarmed_,
or with very few weak prickles; leaves ovate-heart-shaped, or on the
branchlets ovate-oblong, cuspidate-pointed, often rough-ciliate,
becoming firm in texture; peduncles flat (2--3' long).--Dry or sandy
soil, N. J. to Fla., west to S. Ind. and Mo. July.

[*][*] _Leaves varying from oblong-lanceolate to linear, narrowed at
base into a short petiole, 3--5-nerved, shining above, paler or glaucous
beneath, many without tendrils; peduncles short, seldom exceeding the
petioles, terete; the umbels sometimes panicled; branches terete,
unarmed._

10. S. lanceolata, L. _Leaves thinnish_, rather deciduous,
ovate-lanceolate or lance-oblong; _stigmas 3; berries dull red_.--Rich
woods and margins of swamps, Va. to Fla., west to Ark. and Tex. June.

11. S. laurifolia, L. _Leaves thick and coriaceous, evergreen_, varying
from oblong-lanceolate to linear (21/2--5' long); _stigmas solitary_ and
_ovary 1-celled; berries black_ when ripe, 1-seeded, maturing in the
second year.--Pine-barrens, N. J. to Fla., west to Ark. and La. July,
Aug.


2. ALLIUM, L. ONION. GARLIC.

Perianth of 6 entirely colored sepals, which are distinct, or united at
the very base, 1-nerved, often becoming dry and scarious and more or
less persistent; the 6 filaments awl-shaped or dilated at base. Style
persistent, but jointed upon the very short axis of the ovary,
thread-like; stigma simple. Capsule lobed, loculicidal, 3-valved, with
1--2 ovoid-kidney-shaped amphitropous or campylotropous black seeds in
each cell.--Strong-scented and pungent stemless herbs; the leaves and
scape from a coated bulb; flowers in a simple umbel, some of them
frequently changed to bulblets; spathe scarious, 1--2-valved. (The
ancient Latin name of the Garlic.)

Sec. 1. _Bulbs cespitose, narrowly oblong and crowning a rhizome; coats
membranous._

[*] _Leaves (2 or 3) elliptic-lanceolate; ovules solitary in each cell._

1. A. tricoccum, Ait. (WILD LEEK.) Scape naked (4--12' high from
clustered pointed bulbs, 2' long), bearing an erect many-flowered umbel;
leaves 5--9' long, 1--2' wide; sepals oblong (greenish white), equalling
the nearly distinct filaments; capsule strongly 3-lobed.--Rich woods,
W. N. Eng. to Minn. and Iowa, south in the mountains to N. C. Leaves
appearing in early spring and dying before the flowers are developed.

[*][*] _Leaves linear; ovules a pair in each cell._

2. A. Schoenoprasum, L. (CHIVES.) Scape naked or leafy at base (6--12'
high), bearing a globular _capitate umbel_ of many rose-purple flowers;
sepals lanceolate, pointed, longer than the simple downwardly dilated
filaments; _leaves awl-shaped, hollow; capsule not crested_.--From N.
Brunswick and the Great Lakes to the Pacific. (Eu., Asia.)

3. A. cernuum, Roth. (WILD ONION.) _Scape naked, angular_ (1/2--2 deg. high),
nodding at the apex, bearing a _loose or drooping few--many-flowered
umbel; leaves linear, flattened, sharply keeled_ (1 deg. long); sepals
oblong-ovate, acute (rose-color), shorter than the slender filaments and
style; _capsule 6-crested_.--In the Alleghanies to S. C., west to Minn.,
Mo., Tex., and westward.

Sec. 2. _Bulbs mostly solitary, not rhizomatous; coats often fibrous;
leaves narrowly linear, flat or channelled (terete in A. vineale)._

4. A. stellatum, Nutt. _Scape terete_ (6--18' high), slender, bearing an
_erect umbel_; bulb-coats membranous; _sepals broad_, acute; _stamens
and style exserted; capsule prominently 6-crested_.--Rocky slopes, Minn.
to W. Ill. and Mo., and westward.

5. A. reticulatum, Fraser. Scape 3--8' high; _bulbs densely and coarsely
fibrous-coated_; spathe 2-valved; umbel rarely bulbiferous; sepals
ovate- to narrowly lanceolate, _thin and lax_ in fruit, _a third longer
than the stamens; capsule crested_.--Sask. to Iowa and N. Mex.

6. A. Nuttallii, Watson. Scape 4--6 deg. high, from a _very fibrous-coated
bulb_; spathe usually 3-valved; sepals usually broader, _rather rigid_
in fruit; _capsule not crested_.--Central Kan. to Tex., and westward.

7. A. Canadense, Kalm. (WILD GARLIC.) Scape 1 deg. high or more; bulb-coats
somewhat fibrous; _umbel densely bulbiferous_ or few-flowered; sepals
narrowly lanceolate, obtusish, equalling or exceeding the stamens;
_capsule not crested_.--Moist meadows, N. Eng. to Minn., south to the
Gulf. May, June.

A. VINEALE, L. (FIELD GARLIC.) Scape slender, clothed with the sheathing
bases of the leaves below the middle (1--3 deg. high); _leaves terete and
hollow_, slender, channelled above; _umbel often densely bulbiferous;
filaments much dilated, the alternate ones cuspidate_ on each side of
the anther.--Moist meadows and fields; a vile weed eastward. June. (Nat.
from Eu.)


3. NOTHOSCORDUM, Kunth.

Flowers greenish or yellowish white. Capsule oblong-obovate, somewhat
lobed, obtuse, with the style obscurely jointed on the summit; cells
several-ovuled and -seeded. Filaments filiform, distinct, adnate at
base. Bulb tunicated, not alliaceous. Otherwise as in Allium. (Name from
[Greek: no/thos], _false_, and [Greek: sko/rdion], _garlic_.)

1. N. striatum, Kunth. Scape 1 deg. high or less; bulb small, often
bulbiferous at base; leaves narrowly linear; flowers few, on slender
pedicels, the segments narrowly oblong, 4--6'' long; ovules 4--7 in each
cell. (Allium striatum, _Jacq._)--Prairies and open woods, Va. to Ind.,
Neb., and southward.


4. ANDROSTEPHIUM, Torr.

Perianth funnel-form, the cylindrical tube equalling the somewhat
spreading limb or shorter; segments 1-nerved. Stamens 6, in one row upon
the throat; the filaments united to form an erect tubular crown, with
bifid lobes alternate with the oblong versatile anthers. Capsule
sessile, subglobose-triquetrous, beaked by the stout persistent style;
seeds large, few to several in each cell.--Scape and linear leaves from
a membranous- or fibrous-coated corm; pale lilac flowers umbellate;
pedicels not jointed; involucral bracts several. (Name from [Greek:
a)ne/r], for _stamen_, and [Greek: ste/phos], _crown_, referring to the
stamineal crown.)

1. A. violaceum, Torr. Scape 2--6' high; flowers 8--12'' long or more,
usually exceeding the stout pedicels, the tube nearly as long as the
limb; crown scarcely shorter than the limb.--Kan. to Tex.


5. CAMASSIA, Lindl.

Perianth of 6 colored (blue or purple) spreading sepals, 3--7-nerved,
slightly irregular, mostly deciduous; the 6 filiform filaments at their
base. Style thread-like, the base persistent. Capsule oblong or obovate,
3-angled, loculicidal, 3-valved, with several black roundish seeds in
each cell.--Scape and linear leaves from a coated bulb; the flowers in a
simple raceme, mostly bracted, on jointed pedicels. (From the native
Indian name _quamash_ or _camass_.)

1. C. Fraseri, Torr. (EASTERN CAMASS. WILD HYACINTH.) Scape 1 deg. high or
more; leaves keeled; raceme elongated; bracts longer than the pedicels;
sepals pale blue, 3-nerved, 4--7'' long; capsule acutely
triangular-globose. (Scilla Fraseri, _Gray_.)--Rich ground, W. Penn. to
Minn. and E. Kan., and in the mountains to Ga.


6. ORNITHOGALUM, Tourn. STAR-OF-BETHLEHEM.

Perianth of 6 colored (white) spreading 3--7-nerved sepals. Filaments 6,
flattened-awl-shaped. Style 3-sided; stigma 3-angled. Capsule
membranous, roundish-angular, with few dark and roundish seeds in each
cell, loculicidal.--Scape and linear channelled leaves from a coated
bulb. Flowers corymbed, bracted; pedicels not jointed. (An ancient
whimsical name from [Greek: o)/rnis], _a bird_, and [Greek: ga/la],
_milk_.)

O. UMBELLATUM, L. Scape 4--9' high; flowers 5--8, on long and spreading
pedicels; sepals green in the middle on the outside.--Escaped from
gardens. (Nat. from Eu.)

O. NUTANS, L. Scape 1 deg. high or more; flowers 5 or 6, large (1' long),
nodding on very short pedicels; filaments very broad.--Rarely escaped
from gardens; Penn. (Adv. from Eu.)


7. MUSCARI, Tourn. GRAPE-HYACINTH.

Perianth globular or ovoid, minutely 6-toothed (blue). Stamens 6,
included; anthers short, introrse. Style short. Capsule loculicidal,
with 2 black angular seeds in each cell.--Leaves and scape (in early
spring) from a coated bulb; the small flowers in a dense raceme,
sometimes musk-scented (whence the name).

M. BOTRYOIDES, Mill. Leaves linear, 3--4'' broad; flowers globular
(1--11/2'' long), deep blue, appearing like minute grapes.--Escaped from
gardens into copses and fence-rows. (Adv. from Eu.)

M. RACEMOSUM, Mill. Leaves 1--11/2'' broad; flowers oblong-urceolate,
2--21/2'' long, deep blue, fragrant.--Rare escape, Md. and Penn. (Adv.
from Eu.)


8. HEMEROCALLIS, L. DAY-LILY.

Perianth funnel-form, lily-like; the short tube enclosing the ovary, the
spreading limb 6-parted; the 6 stamens inserted on its throat. Anthers
as in Lilium, but introrse. Filaments and style long and thread-like,
declined and ascending; stigma simple. Capsule (at first rather fleshy)
3-angled, loculicidally 3-valved, with several black spherical seeds in
each cell.--Showy perennials, with fleshy-fibrous roots; the long and
linear keeled leaves 2-ranked at the base of the tall scapes, which bear
at the summit several bracted and large yellow flowers; these collapse
and decay after expanding for a single day (whence the name, from
[Greek: e(me/ra], _a day_, and [Greek: ka/llos], _beauty_.)

H. FULVA, L. (COMMON DAY-LILY.) Inner divisions (petals) of the tawny
orange perianth wavy and obtuse.--Roadsides, escaped from gardens (Adv.
from Eu.)


9. YUCCA, L. BEAR-GRASS. SPANISH BAYONET.

Perianth of 6 petal-like (white or greenish) oval or oblong and acute
flat sepals, withering-persistent, the 3 inner broader, longer than the
6 stamens. Stigmas 3, sessile. Capsule oblong, somewhat 6-sided,
3-celled, or imperfectly 6-celled by a partition from the back, fleshy,
at length loculicidally 3-valved from the apex. Seeds very many in each
cell, flattened.--Stems woody, either very short or rising into thick
and columnar palm-like trunks, bearing persistent rigid linear or
sword-shaped leaves, and an often ample compound panicle or branched
raceme of showy flowers. (The native Haytian name for the root of the
Cassava-plant.)

1. Y. angustifolia, Pursh. Caudex none or very short; leaves straight
_very stiff and pungent_, 1/2--2 deg. long by 1--6'' wide, filiferous on the
margin; _raceme mostly simple, nearly sessile_ (1--4 deg. long); flowers
11/2--21/2' wide; stigmas green, shorter than the ovary; capsule 6-sided (3'
long); _seeds 5--6'' broad_.--Dak. to Iowa, Kan., and N. Mex. May,
June.

2. Y. filamentosa, L. (ADAM'S NEEDLE.) Caudex 1 deg. high or less, from a
running rootstock; leaves numerous, coriaceous, more or less tapering to
a short point, rough on the back, 11/2--2 deg. long by 1--3' wide, filiferous
on the margin; _panicle pyramidal, densely flowered, on a stout
bracteate scape, 4--9 deg. high_; flowers large; stigmas pale, elongated;
capsule 11/2' long; _seeds 3'' broad_.--Near the coast, Md. to Fla. and
La. July. Very variable.


10. CONVALLARIA, L. LILY OF THE VALLEY.

Perianth bell-shaped (white), 6-lobed, deciduous; the lobes recurved.
Stamens 6, included, inserted on the base of the perianth; anthers
introrse. Ovary 3-celled, tapering into a stout style; stigma
triangular. Ovules 4--6 in each cell. Berry few-seeded (red).--A low
perennial herb, glabrous, stemless, with slender running rootstocks,
sending up from a scaly-sheathing bud 2 oblong leaves, with their long
sheathing petioles enrolled one within the other so as to appear like a
stalk, and an angled scape bearing a one-sided raceme of pretty and
sweet-scented nodding flowers. (Altered from _Lilium convallium_, the
popular name.)

1. C. majalis, L.--High mountains of Va. to S. C. Apparently identical
with the European LILY OF THE VALLEY of the gardens.


11. POLYGONATUM, Tourn. SOLOMON'S SEAL.

Perianth cylindrical-oblong, 6-lobed at the summit; the 6 stamens
inserted on or above the middle of the tube, included; anthers introrse.
Ovary 3-celled. with 2--6 ovules in each cell; style slender, deciduous
by a joint; stigma obtuse or capitate, obscurely 3-lobed. Berry
globular, black or blue; the cells 1--2-seeded.--Perennial herbs, with
simple erect or curving stems, from creeping thick and knotted
rootstocks, naked below, above bearing nearly sessile or half-clasping
nerved leaves, and axillary nodding greenish flowers; pedicels jointed
near the flower. (The ancient name, composed of [Greek: poly/s], _many_,
and [Greek: go/ny], _knee_, alluding to the numerous joints of the
rootstock and stem.)--Ours are alternate-leaved species, the stem terete
or scarcely angled when fresh.

1. P. biflorum, Ell. (SMALLER SOLOMON'S SEAL.) Glabrous, except the
ovate-oblong or lance-oblong _nearly sessile leaves_, which are commonly
_minutely pubescent as well as pale or glaucous underneath_; stem
slender (1--3 deg. high); _peduncles 1--3- but mostly 2-flowered_; perianth
4--6'' long; _filaments papillose-roughened_, inserted toward the summit
of the perianth.--Wooded hillsides, N. Brunswick to Fla., west to Minn.,
E. Kan., and Tex.

2. P. giganteum, Dietrich. (GREAT S.) _Glabrous throughout_; stem stout
and mostly tall (2--7 deg. high), terete; _leaves ovate, partly clasping_
(3--8' long), or the upper oblong and nearly sessile, many-nerved;
_peduncles several-(2--8-) flowered_, jointed below the flower; flowers
5--9'' long; _filaments smooth and naked_, or nearly so, inserted on the
middle of the tube.--Meadows and river-banks, N. Eng. to Va., west to
the Rocky Mts. June.


12. ASPARAGUS, Tourn. ASPARAGUS.

Perianth 6-parted, spreading above; the 6 stamens on its base; anthers
introrse. Style short; stigma 3-lobed. Berry spherical, 3-celled; the
cells 2-seeded.--Perennials, with much-branched stems from thick and
matted rootstocks, and small greenish-yellow axillary flowers on jointed
pedicels. The narrow, commonly thread-like, so-called leaves are really
branchlets, acting as leaves, clustered in the axils of little scales
which are the true leaves. (The ancient Greek name.)

A. OFFICINALIS, L. (GARDEN ASPARAGUS.) Herbaceous, tall, bushy-branched;
leaves thread-like.--A frequent escape from gardens. June. (Adv. from
Eu.)


13. SMILACINA, Desf. FALSE SOLOMON'S SEAL.

Perianth 6-parted, spreading, withering-persistent (white). Stamens 6,
inserted at the base of the divisions; filaments slender, anthers short,
introrse. Ovary 3-celled, with 2 ovules in each cell; style short and
thick, stigma obscurely 3-lobed. Berry globular, 1--2-seeded.--Perennial
herbs, with simple stems from creeping or thickish rootstocks, alternate
nerved mostly sessile leaves, and white, sometimes fragrant flowers in a
terminal and simple or compound raceme. (Name a diminutive of _Smilax_,
to which, however, these plants bear little resemblance.)

[*] _Flowers on very short pedicels in a terminal racemose panicle;
stamens exceeding the small (1'' long) segments; ovules collateral;
rootstock stout, fleshy._

1. S. racemosa, Desf. (FALSE SPIKENARD.) Minutely downy (1--3 deg. high);
leaves numerous, oblong or oval-lanceolate, taper-pointed, ciliate,
abruptly somewhat petioled; berries pale red, speckled with purple,
aromatic.--Moist copses, N. Brunswick to S. C., west to Minn., E. Kan.
and Ark.

[*][*] _Flowers larger (2--3'' long), on solitary pedicels in a simple
few-flowered raceme; stamens included; ovules not collateral; rootstock
rather slender._

2. S. stellata, Desf. Plant (1 deg. high or less) nearly glabrous, or the
7--12 _oblong-lanceolate leaves_ minutely downy beneath when young,
slightly clasping; raceme sessile or nearly so; _berries
blackish_.--Moist banks, Lab. to N. J., west to E. Kan., Minn., and
westward. (Eu.)

3. S. trifolia, Desf. Glabrous, _dwarf_ (2--6' high); _leaves 3_
(sometimes 2 or 4), oblong, tapering to a _sheathing base_; raceme
peduncled; _berries red_.--Cold bogs, Lab. to N. Eng., west to Mich. and
Min. (Sib.)


14. MAIANTHEMUM, Wigg.

Perianth 4-parted, with as many stamens. Ovary 2-celled; stigma 2-lobed.
Otherwise as in Smilacina.--Flowers solitary or fascicled, in a simple
raceme upon a low 2--3-leaved stem. Leaves ovate- to lanceolate-cordate.
(Name from _Maius_, May, and [Greek: a)/nthemon], _a flower_.)

1. M. Canadense, Desf. Pubescent or glabrous (3--5' high); leaves
lanceolate to ovate, cordate at base with a very narrow sinus, sessile
or very shortly petioled; perianth-segments 1'' long. (Smilacina
bifolia, var. Canadensis, _Gray_.)--Moist woods, Lab. to N. C., west to
Minn. and Iowa. May.


15. STREPTOPUS, Michx. TWISTED-STALK.

Perianth recurved-spreading from a bell-shaped base, deciduous; the 6
distinct sepals lanceolate, acute, the 3 inner keeled. Anthers
arrow-shaped, extrorse, fixed near the base to the short flattened
filaments, tapering above to a slender entire or 2-cleft point. Ovary
with many ovules in each cell; style and sometimes the stigmas one.
Berry red, roundish-ovoid, many-seeded.--Herbs, with rather stout stems
from a creeping rootstock, forking and divergent branches, ovate and
taper-pointed rounded-clasping membranaceous leaves, and small (extra-)
axillary flowers, either solitary or in pairs, on slender thread-like
peduncles, which are abruptly bent or contorted near the middle (whence
the name, from [Greek: strepto/s], _twisted_, and [Greek: pou~s], _foot_
or _stalk_).

1. S. amplexifolius, DC. Stem 2--3 deg. high, glabrous; _leaves very smooth,
glaucous underneath_, strongly clasping; _flower greenish-white_ (4--6''
long) on a long abruptly bent peduncle; anthers tapering to a slender
entire point; _stigma entire, truncate_.--Cold moist woods, N. Eng. to
N. Minn., south to Ohio, Penn., and in the mountains to N. C. June.
(Eu.)

2. S. roseus, Michx. _Lower leaves green both sides, finely ciliate_,
and the branches sparingly beset with short bristly hairs; _flower
rose-purple_ (3--4'' long), more than half the length of the slightly
bent peduncle; anthers 2-horned; _stigma 3-cleft_.--Cold damp woods, N.
Eng. to N. Minn., and south in the mountains to Ga. May.


16. DISPORUM, Salisb.

Perianth narrowly bell-shaped, the 6 sepals lanceolate or linear,
deciduous. Filaments thread-like, much longer than the linear-oblong
blunt anthers, which are fixed by a point above the base and extrorse.
Ovary with 2 ovules (in our species) suspended from the summit of each
cell; style one; stigmas short, recurved-spreading, or sometimes united
into one! Berry ovoid or oblong, pointed, 3--6-seeded, red.--Downy low
herbs, with creeping rootstocks, erect stems sparingly branched above,
with closely sessile ovate thin and transversely veined leaves, and
greenish-yellow drooping flowers, on slender terminal peduncles,
solitary or few in an umbel. (Name from [Greek: di/s], _double_, and
[Greek: spora/], _seed_, in allusion to the 2 ovules in each cell.)

1. D. lanuginosum, Benth. & Hook. Leaves ovate-oblong, taper-pointed,
rounded or slightly heart-shaped at base, closely sessile, downy
beneath; flowers solitary, [or] in pairs; sepals linear-lanceolate,
taper-pointed (1/2' long), soon spreading, twice the length of the
stamens, greenish; style smooth; stigmas 3. (Prosartes lanuginosa,
_Don._)--Rich woods, western N. Y. to Va. and Ga., west to Ky. and
Tenn. May.


17. CLINTONIA, Raf.

Perianth of 6 separate sepals, bell-shaped, lily-like, deciduous; the 6
stamens inserted at their base. Filaments long and thread-like; anthers
linear or oblong, extrorsely fixed by a point above the base, the cells
opening down the margins. Ovary ovoid-oblong, 2--3-celled;
style long; stigmas 2 or 3, or in ours united into one. Berry
few--many-seeded.--Short-stemmed perennials, with slender creeping
rootstocks, bearing a naked peduncle sheathed at the base by the stalks
of 2--4 large oblong or oval ciliate leaves; flowers rather large,
umbelled, rarely single. (Dedicated to _De Witt Clinton._)

1. C. borealis, Raf. Scape and leaves 5--8' long; _umbel 3--6-flowered_;
perianth greenish-yellow, somewhat downy outside (3--4'' long); berry
ovoid, blue; _ovules 20 or more_.--Cold moist woods, Lab. to N. C., west
to Minn.

2. C. umbellata, Torr. Flowers half the size of the last, white,
speckled with green or purplish dots; _umbel many-flowered_; berry
globular, black; _ovules 2 in each cell_.--Rich woods, in the
Alleghanies from N. Y. to Ga.


18. UVULARIA, L. BELLWORT.

Perianth narrowly bell-shaped, lily-like, deciduous; the 6 distinct
sepals spatulate-lanceolate, acuminate, obtusely gibbous at base, with a
deep honey-bearing groove within bordered on each side by a callus-like
ridge. Stamens much shorter, barely adherent to their base; anthers
linear, much longer than the filaments, adnate and extrorse, but the
long narrow cells opening laterally. Style deeply 3-cleft; the
divisions stigmatic along the inner side. Capsule truncate, coriaceous,
3-lobed, loculicidal at the summit. Seeds few in each cell, obovoid,
with a thin white aril.--Stems rather low, terete, from a short
rootstock with fleshy roots, naked or scaly at base, forking above,
bearing oblong perfoliate flat and membranaceous leaves with smooth
margins, and yellowish drooping flowers, in spring, solitary on terminal
peduncles. (Name "from the flowers hanging like the _uvula_, or
palate.")

1. U. perfoliata, L. _Glaucous throughout_, 1/2--11/2 deg. high, with 1--3
leaves below the fork; _leaves glabrous_, oblong- to ovate-lanceolate,
acute; _perianth-segments granular-pubescent within_ (8--16'' long);
_stamens shorter than the styles; tip of the connective acuminate_;
cells of the capsule with 2 dorsal ridges and 2-beaked at the
apex.--Rich woods, N. Eng. to Dak., and southward.

2. U. grandiflora, Smith. Yellowish-green, _not glaucous_; stem naked or
with a single leaf below the fork; _leaves whitish-pubescent beneath_,
usually somewhat acuminate; _perianth-segments smooth within_ or nearly
so (12--18'' long); _stamens exceeding the styles, obtusely tipped_;
capsule obtusely lobed. (U. flava, _Smith_.)--Rich woods, Canada to
Ga., west to Minn. and Mo.


19. OAKESIA, Watson.

Flowers resembling those of Uvularia, but the segments obtuse or
acutish, carinately gibbous and without ridges within. Capsule
membranous, elliptical, acutish at each end or shortly stipitate,
triquetrous and acutely winged, very tardily dehiscent. Seeds globose,
with a very tumid spongy rhaphe.--Stem acutely angled, from a slender
creeping rootstock, with sessile clasping leaves scabrous on the margin,
and 1 or 2 flowers terminal on slender peduncles but soon appearing
opposite to the leaves by the growth of the branches. (Dedicated to
_William Oakes_.)

1. O. sessilifolia, Watson. Leaves lance-oblong, acute at each end,
pale, glaucous beneath, sessile or partly clasping; sepals 7--12'' long;
anthers obtuse; capsule short-stipitate, 6--10'' long. (Uvularia
sessilifolia, _L._)--Low woods, N. Brunswick to Fla., west to Minn.,
Neb. and Ark.

2. O. puberula, Watson. Slightly puberulent; leaves bright green both
sides and shining, oval, mostly rounded at base, with rougher edges;
styles separate to near the base, not exceeding the acute anthers;
capsule not stipitate, 10--12'' long. (Uvularia puberula,
_Michx._)--Mountains, Va. to S. C.


20. ERYTHRONIUM, L. DOG'S-TOOTH VIOLET.

Perianth lily-like, of 6 distinct lanceolate sepals, recurved or
spreading above, deciduous, the 3 inner usually with a callous tooth on
each side of the erect base, and a groove in the middle. Filaments 6',
awl-shaped; anthers oblong-linear, continuing erect. Style elongated.
Capsule obovate, contracted at base, 3-valved, loculicidal. Seeds rather
numerous, ovoid, with a loose membranaceous tip.--Nearly stemless herbs,
with two smooth and shining flat leaves tapering into petioles and
sheathing the base of the commonly one-flowered scape, rising from a
deep solid-scaly bulb. Flowers rather large, nodding, in spring. (The
Greek name for the purple-flowered European species, from [Greek:
e)rythro/s], _red_.)

1. E. Americanum, Ker. (YELLOW ADDER'S-TONGUE.) Scape 6--9' high; leaves
elliptical-lanceolate, pale green, mottled with purplish and whitish and
commonly minutely dotted; _perianth light yellow_, often spotted near
the base (10--20'' long); style club-shaped; _stigmas united_.--Rich
ground, N. Brunswick to Fla., west to Minn. and Ark.

2. E. albidum, Nutt. (WHITE DOG'S-TOOTH VIOLET.) Leaves
elliptical-lanceolate, less or not at all spotted; _perianth
pinkish-white_; inner divisions toothless; style more slender except at
the apex, bearing 3 short _spreading stigmas_.--Rich ground, N. Y. to
N. J., west to Minn. and Kan.

3. E. propullans, Gray. _Offshoot arising from the stem, near the
middle_; leaves smaller and more acuminate; _flowers bright rose-color_,
yellowish at base (6'' long); _style slender; stigmas united_.--In rich
soil, Minn. and Ont.


21. LILIUM, L. LILY.

Perianth funnel-form or bell-shaped, colored, of 6 distinct sepals,
spreading or recurved above, with a honey-bearing furrow at the base,
deciduous; the 6 stamens somewhat adhering to their bases. Anthers
linear, extrorsely attached near the middle to the tapering apex of the
long filament, which is at first included, at length versatile; the
cells dehiscent by a lateral or slightly introrse line. Style elongated,
somewhat club-shaped; stigma 3-lobed. Capsule oblong, containing
numerous flat and horizontal (depressed) soft-coated seeds densely
packed in 2 rows in each cell. Bulbs scaly, producing simple stems, with
numerous alternate-scattered or whorled narrow sessile leaves, and from
one to several large and showy flowers; in summer. (The classical Latin
name, from the Greek [Greek: lei/rion].)

[*] _Flowers erect, the sepals narrowed below into claws; bulbs not
rhizomatous._

1. L. Philadelphicum, L. (WILD ORANGE-RED LILY. WOOD LILY.) Stem 2--3 deg.
high; _leaves linear-lanceolate, whorled or scattered_; flowers (2--4'
long) 1--3, open-bell-shaped, _reddish-orange_ spotted with purplish
inside; the lanceolate sepals not recurved at the summit; bulb of thick
fleshy jointed scales.--Dry or sandy ground, N. Eng. to N. C., west to
Minn. and Mo.

2. L. Catesbaei, Walt. (SOUTHERN RED LILY.) _Leaves linear-lanceolate,
scattered_; flower solitary, open-bell-shaped, the long-clawed sepals
wavy on the margin and recurved at the summit, _scarlet_, spotted with
dark purple and yellow inside; bulb-scales thin, narrow and
leaf-bearing.--Pine-barrens, N. C. to Fla., west to Ky. and Mo.

[*][*] _Flowers nodding, the sepals sessile; bulbs rhizomatous._

3. L. superbum, L. (TURK'S-CAP LILY.) Stem 3--7 deg. high; _lower leaves
whorled_, lanceolate, pointed, 3-nerved, smooth; flowers (3' long) often
many (3--20 or 40) in a pyramidal raceme; _sepals strongly revolute_,
bright orange, with numerous dark purple spots inside.--Rich low
grounds, N. Brunswick to Ga., west to Minn. and Mo.

4. L. Canadense, L. (WILD YELLOW LILY.) Stem 2--5 deg. high; _leaves
remotely whorled_, lanceolate, strongly 3-nerved, the margins and nerves
rough; flowers few (2--3' long), long-peduncled, oblong-bell-shaped, the
_sepals recurved-spreading above_, yellow or orange, usually spotted
with brown.--Moist meadows and bogs, N. Brunswick to Ga., west to Minn.
and Mo.

5. L. Grayi, Watson. Stems 2--3 deg. high; leaves in whorls of 4--8,
lanceolate, acute or slightly acuminate, smooth; _flowers_ 1 or 2,
_nearly horizontal_, _the sepals_ (11/2--21/2' long) but _little spreading
above the rather broad base_, rather abruptly acute, deep reddish
orange, thickly spotted within.--Peaks of Otter, Va., and southward in
the mountains to N. C.

L. TIGRINUM, Ker. (TIGER LILY.) Tall, pubescent above; leaves scattered,
narrowly lanceolate, dark green, 5--7-nerved, the upper axils
bulbiferous; flowers large, resembling those of L. superbum.--An escape
from gardens. (Adv. from E. Asia.)


22. MEDEOLA, Gronov. INDIAN CUCUMBER-ROOT.

Perianth recurved, the 3 sepals and 3 petals oblong and alike (pale
greenish-yellow), deciduous. Stamens 6; anthers shorter than the slender
filaments, oblong, extrorsely attached above the base, but the line of
dehiscence of the closely contiguous parallel cells lateral or slightly
introrse. Stigmas, or styles, stigmatic down the upper side,
recurved-diverging from the globose ovary, long and thread-form,
deciduous. Berry globose (dark purple), 3-celled, few-seeded.--A
perennial herb, with a simple slender stem (1--3 deg. high, clothed with
flocculent and deciduous wool), rising from a horizontal and tuberous
white rootstock (which has the taste of cucumber), bearing near the
middle a whorl of 5--9 obovate-lanceolate and pointed, sessile, lightly
parallel-ribbed and netted-veiny, thin leaves; also another of 3 (rarely
4 or 5) much smaller ovate ones at the top, subtending a sessile umbel
of small recurved flowers. (Named after the sorceress _Medea_, for its
supposed great medicinal virtues.)

1. M. Virginiana, L.--Rich damp woods, N. Eng. to Minn., Ind., and
southward. June.


23. TRILLIUM, L. WAKE ROBIN. BIRTHROOT.

Sepals 3, lanceolate, spreading, herbaceous, persistent. Petals 3,
larger, withering in age. Stamens 6; anthers linear, on short filaments,
adnate, usually introrse; the cells opening down the margins. Stigmas
sessile, awl-shaped or slender, spreading or recurved above, persistent,
stigmatic down the inner side. Ovary 3--6-angled. Berry ovate, usually
6-angled or -winged, 3-celled (purple or red). Seeds ovate, horizontal,
several in each cell.--Low perennial herbs, with a stout and simple stem
rising from a short and praemorse tuber-like rootstock, naked, bearing at
the summit a whorl of 3 ample, commonly broadly ovate, more or less
ribbed but netted-veined leaves, and a terminal large flower;
in spring. (Name from _triplum_, triple; all the parts being in
threes.)--Monstrosities are not rare with the calyx and sometimes petals
changed to leaves, or the parts of the flower increased in number.

[*] _Ovary and fruit 6-angled and more or less winged._

[+] _Flower sessile; the very broad connective produced beyond the
anther-cells._

1. T. sessile, L. _Leaves sessile, ovate_ or rhomboidal, acute, often
blotched or spotted; sepals spreading; _sessile petals erect-spreading_,
narrowly lanceolate or oblanceolate, dark and dull purple, varying to
greenish, fruit globose, 6'' long.--Moist woods, Penn. to Fla., west to
Minn. and Ark.

2. T. recurvatum, Beck. _Leaves contracted at the base into a petiole,
ovate, oblong, or obovate; sepals reflexed; petals_ pointed, the base
_narrowed into a claw_, oblong-lanceolate to -ovate, dark purple; fruit
ovate, strongly winged above, 9'' long.--Rich woods, Ohio and Ind. to
Minn. and Ark.

[+][+] _Flower pedicelled; connective narrow, not produced; leaves
subsessile._

[++] _Pedicel longer than the flower; filament shorter than the anther._

3. T. erectum, L. Leaves very broadly rhombic (21/2--6' wide), shortly
acuminate; pedicel (1--3' long) usually more or less inclined or
declinate; _petals ovate to lanceolate_ (9--18'' long), brown-purple or
often white or greenish or pinkish; stamens equalling or exceeding the
_stout distinct spreading or recurved stigmas_; fruit ovate, 1' long,
reddish.--Rich woods, N. Scotia to N. C., west to Minn. and Mo. Flowers
ill-scented.

4. T. grandiflorum, Salisb. Leaves less broadly rhombic-ovate (11/2--4'
wide); pedicel erect or ascending; _petals oblanceolate_, often broadly
so (11/2--21/2' long), white turning rose-color or marked with green;
stamens with stout filaments (persistently green about the fruit) and
anthers, _exceeding the very slender erect or suberect and somewhat
coherent stigmas_; fruit globose, 1/2--1' long.--Rich woods, Vt. to N. C.,
west to Minn. and Mo.

[++][++] _Pedicel short, recurved or strongly declinate; filaments
slender, about equalling the anther._

5. T. cernuum, L. Leaves very broadly rhombic-ovate (2--4' broad);
petals white or pink, ovate- to oblong-lanceolate (6--12'' long), wavy,
recurved-spreading; stamens with short anthers, shorter than the stout
recurved distinct stigmas; fruit ovate.--Moist woods, N. Eng. to Minn.,
south to Ga. and Mo.

[*][*] _Ovary and fruit 3-lobed or angled, not winged; filaments
slender, about equalling the anthers; pedicel erect or inclined; leaves
petiolate._

6. T. nivale, Riddell. (DWARF WHITE T.) Small (2--4' high); _leaves oval
or ovate, obtuse_ (1--2' long); _petals oblong, obtuse_ (6--15'' long),
_white_, scarcely wavy, spreading from an erect base, equalling the
peduncle; styles long and slender; fruit depressed globose, with 3
rounded lobes, 3--4'' long.--Rich woods, W. Penn. and Ky. to Minn. and
Iowa.

7. T. erythrocarpum, Michx. (PAINTED T.) _Leaves ovate, taper-pointed_;
_petals ovate or oval-lanceolate, pointed, wavy_, widely spreading,
_white painted with purple stripes at the base_, shorter than the
peduncle; fruit broad-ovate, obtuse, 7--9'' long.--Cold damp woods and
bogs, N. Brunswick to Ga., west to Wisc. and Mo.


24. HELONIAS, L.

Flowers perfect. Perianth of 6 spatulate-oblong purple sepals,
persistent, several-nerved, glandless, turning green, shorter than the
thread-like filaments. Anthers 2-celled, roundish-oval, blue, extrorse.
Styles revolute, stigmatic down the inner side, deciduous. Capsule
obcordately 3-lobed, loculicidally 3-valved; the valves divergently
2-lobed. Seeds many in each cell, linear, with a tapering appendage at
both ends.--A smooth perennial, with many oblong-spatulate or
oblanceolate evergreen flat leaves, from a tuberous rootstock, producing
in early spring a stout hollow sparsely bracteate scape (1--2 deg. high),
sheathed with broad bracts at the base, and terminated by a simple and
short dense raceme. Bracts obsolete; pedicels shorter than the flowers.
(Name probably from [Greek: e(/los], _a swamp_, the place of growth.)

1. H. bullata, L.--Wet places, Penn. and N. J. to Va.; rare and local.


25. CHAMAELIRIUM, Willd. DEVIL'S-BIT.

Flowers dioecious. Perianth of 6 spatulate-linear (white) spreading
1-nerved sepals, withering-persistent. Filaments and (white) anthers, as
in Helonias; fertile flowers with rudimentary stamens. Styles
linear-club-shaped, stigmatic along the inner side. Capsule
ovoid-oblong, not lobed, of a thin texture, loculicidally 3-valved from
the apex, many-seeded. Seeds linear-oblong, winged at each end.--Smooth
herb, with a wand-like stem from a (bitter) thick and abrupt tuberous
rootstock, terminated by a long wand-like spiked raceme (4--12' long) of
small bractless flowers; fertile plant more leafy than the staminate.
Leaves flat, lanceolate, the lowest spatulate, tapering into a petiole.
(Name formed of [Greek: chamai/] _on the ground_, and [Greek: lei/rion],
_lily_, the genus having been founded on a dwarf undeveloped specimen.)

1. C. Carolinianum, Willd. (BLAZING-STAR.) Stem 1--4 deg. high. (C. luteum,
_Gray_.)--Low grounds, N. Eng. to Ga., west to Neb. and Ark. June.


26. XEROPHYLLUM, Michx.

Flowers perfect. Perianth widely spreading; sepals petal-like (white),
oval, distinct, without glands or claws, 5--7-nerved, at length
withering, about the length of the awl-shaped filaments. Anthers
2-celled, short, extrorse. Styles thread-like, stigmatic down the inner
side, persistent. Capsule globular, 3-lobed, obtuse (small),
loculicidal; the valves bearing the partitions. Seeds 2 in each cell,
collateral, 3-angled, not margined.--Herb with the stem simple, 1--4 deg.
high, from a thick tuberous rootstock, bearing a simple dense bracteate
raceme of showy flowers, and thickly beset with needle-shaped leaves,
the upper reduced to bristle-like bracts; those from the root very many
in a dense tuft, reclined, a foot long or more, 1'' wide below, rough on
the margin, remarkably dry and rigid. (Name from [Greek: xero/s],
_arid_, and [Greek: phy/llon], _leaf_.)

1. X. setifolium, Michx. Stem 1--4 deg. high. (X. asphodeloides,
_Nutt._)--Pine-barrens, N. J. to Ga. June.


27. TOFIELDIA, Hudson. FALSE ASPHODEL.

Flowers perfect, usually with a little 3-bracted involucre underneath.
Perianth more or less spreading, persistent; the sepals (white or
greenish) concave, oblong or obovate, without claws, 3-nerved. Filaments
awl-shaped; anthers short, innate or somewhat introrse, 2-celled. Styles
awl-shaped; stigmas terminal. Capsule 3-angular, 3-partible or
septicidal; cells many-seeded. Seeds oblong, horizontal.--Slender
perennials, mostly tufted, with short or creeping rhizomes, and simple
stems leafy only at the base, bearing small flowers in a close raceme or
spike. Leaves 2-ranked, equitant, linear, grass-like. (Named for _Mr.
Tofield_, an English botanist of the last century.)

[*] _Glabrous; pedicels solitary, in a short raceme or head; seeds not
appendaged._

1. T. palustris, Hudson. Scape leafless or nearly so (2--6' high),
slender, bearing a globular or oblong head or short raceme of whitish
flowers; leaves tufted, 1/2--11/2' long.--L. Superior, and northward. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Stem and inflorescence pubescent; pedicels fascicled in threes;
seeds caudate._

2. T. glutinosa, Willd. Stem (6--16' high) and pedicels very _glutinous
with dark glands_; leaves broadly linear, short; perianth not becoming
rigid; capsule thin; seeds with a contorted tail at each end.--Moist
grounds, Maine to Minn., and northward; also south in the Alleghanies.
June.

3. T. pubens, Ait. Stem (1--3 deg. high) and pedicels _roughened with minute
glands_; leaves longer and narrower; perianth rigid about the firm
capsule; seeds with a short white appendage at each end.--Pine-barrens,
N. J. to Fla. and Ala. July.


28. NARTHECIUM, Moehring. BOG-ASPHODEL.

Sepals 6, linear-lanceolate, yellowish, persistent. Filaments 6, woolly;
anthers linear, introrse. Capsule cylindrical-oblong, attenuate upward
and bearing the slightly lobed sessile stigma, loculicidal, many-seeded.
Seeds ascending, appendaged at each end with a long bristle-form
tail.--Rootstock creeping, bearing linear equitant leaves, and a simple
stem or scape, terminated by a simple dense bracteate raceme; pedicels
bearing a linear bractlet. (Name an anagram of _Anthericum_, from
[Greek: a)nthe/rikos], supposed to have been the Asphodel.)

1. N. Americanum, Ker. Stem 1 deg. high or more; leaves 1'' wide,
7--9-nerved; raceme dense (1--2' long); perianth-segments narrowly
linear (2--21/2'' long), scarcely exceeding the stamens. (N. ossifragum,
var. Americanum, _Gray_.)--Sandy bogs, pine-barrens of N. J. June, July.


29. MELANTHIUM, Linn.

Flowers monoeciously polygamous. Perianth of 6 separate and free widely
spreading somewhat heart-shaped or oblong and halberd-shaped or
oblanceolate sepals, raised on slender claws, cream-colored or greenish,
the base marked with 2 approximate or confluent glands, or glandless,
turning greenish brown and persistent. Filaments shorter than the
sepals, adhering to their claws often to near the summit, persistent.
Anthers heart-shaped or kidney-shaped, confluently 1-celled,
shield-shaped after opening, extrorse. Styles 3, awl-shaped, diverging,
tipped with simple stigmas. Capsule ovoid-conical, 3-lobed, of 3
inflated membranaceous carpels united in the axis, separating when ripe,
and splitting down the inner edge, several-seeded. Seeds flat, broadly
winged.--Stems tall and leafy, from a thick rootstock, roughish-downy
above, as well as the open and ample pyramidal panicle (composed chiefly
of simple racemes), the terminal part mostly fertile. Leaves linear to
oblanceolate or oval, not plaited. (Name composed of [Greek: me/las],
_black_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_, from the darker color which
the persistent perianth assumes after blossoming.)

[*] _Sepals with a conspicuous double gland at the summit of the claw._

1. M. Virginicum, L. (BUNCH-FLOWER.) Stem 3--5 deg. high, leafy, rather
slender; leaves linear (4--10'' wide); sepals flat, ovate to oblong or
slightly hastate (21/2--4'' long); capsule 6'' long; seeds 10 in each
cell, 2--3'' long.--Wet meadows, N. Eng. to N. C., west to Minn. and
Tex.

2. M. latifolium, Desrouss. Leaves more oblanceolate, often 2' broad;
sepals undulate (2--3'' long), the very narrow claw nearly equalling the
orbicular or ovate blade; capsule 6--8'' long; styles more slender;
seeds 4--8 in each cell, 3--4'' long. (M. racemosum, _Michx._)--W. Conn.
to S. C.

[*][*] _Sepals oblanceolate, without glands._

3. M. parviflorum, Watson. Stem rather slender (2--5 deg. high), sparingly
leafy, naked above; leaves oval to oblanceolate (2--4' wide), on long
petioles; sepals 2--3'' long, oblanceolate or spatulate, those of the
sterile flowers on claws; stamens very short; capsule 6'' long; seeds
4--6 in each cell, 4'' long. (Veratrum parviflorum, _Michx._)--In the
Alleghanies, Va. to S. C.


30. VERATRUM, Tourn. FALSE HELLEBORE.

Flowers monoeciously polygamous. Perianth of 6 spreading and separate
obovate-oblong (greenish or brownish) sepals, more or less contracted at
the base (but not clawed), nearly free from the ovary, not
gland-bearing. Filaments free from the sepals and shorter
than they, recurving. Anthers, pistils, fruit, etc., nearly as in
Melanthium.--Somewhat pubescent perennials, with simple stems from a
thickened base producing coarse fibrous roots (very poisonous),
3-ranked, plaited and strongly veined leaves, and racemed-panicled dull
or dingy flowers; in summer. (Name from _vere_, truly, and _ater_,
black.)

1. V. viride, Ait. (AMERICAN WHITE HELLEBORE. INDIAN POKE.) _Stem stout,
very leafy_ to the top (2--7 deg. high); _leaves broadly oval_, pointed,
_sheath-clasping; panicle pyramidal_, the _dense spike-like racemes_
spreading; _perianth yellowish-green_, moderately spreading,
_the segments ciliate-serrulate; ovary glabrous_; capsule
many-seeded.--Swamps and low grounds, common.

2. V. Woodii, Robbins. _Stem slender, sparingly leafy_ (2--5 deg. high);
_leaves oblanceolate_, only the lowest sheathing; _panicle very narrow;
perianth greenish-purple, with entire segments; ovary tomentose_, soon
glabrate; capsule few-seeded.--Woods and hilly barrens, S. Ind. to Mo.


31. STENANTHIUM, Gray.

Flowers polygamous. Perianth spreading; the sepals narrowly lanceolate,
tapering to a point from the broader base, where they are united and
coherent with the base of the ovary, not gland-bearing, persistent, much
longer than the short stamens. Anthers, capsules, etc., nearly as in
Veratrum. Seeds nearly wingless.--Smooth, with a wand-like leafy stem
from a bulbous base, long and grass-like conduplicate-keeled leaves, and
numerous small flowers in compound racemes, forming a long terminal
panicle; in summer. (Name composed of [Greek: steno/s], _narrow_, and
[Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_, from the slender sepals and panicles.)

1. S. angustifolium, Gray. Stem leafy (3--4 deg. high), _very slender;
leaves 2--3'' broad_; panicle elongated, nearly simple, very open, with
slender flexuous branches; flowers nearly sessile or the fertile on
short pedicels; sepals linear-lanceolate (white), 2--3'' long; _capsule
strongly reflexed_, narrowly oblong-ovate, with spreading beaks.--In the
Alleghanies from Va. to S. C.

2. S. robustum, Watson. Resembling the last; _stem stout_, leafy, erect
(3--5 deg. high); _leaves 4--10'' broad_; panicle or raceme often 2 deg. long,
frequently compound with numerous slender branches; sepals (white or
green) 3--4'' long; _capsule erect_, ovate, with recurved beaks.--Penn.
to S. C., Ohio and Tenn.


32. ZYGADENUS, Michx.

Flowers perfect or polygamous. Perianth withering-persistent, spreading;
the petal-like oblong or ovate sepals 1--2-glandular near the more or
less narrowed but not unguiculate base, which is either free, or united
and coherent with the base of the ovary. Stamens free from the sepals
and about their length. Anthers, styles, and capsule nearly as in
Melanthium. Seeds angled, rarely at all margined.--Very smooth and
somewhat glaucous perennials, with simple stems from creeping rootstocks
or coated bulbs, linear leaves, and rather large panicled greenish-white
flowers; in summer. (Name composed of [Greek: zygo/s], _a yoke_, and
[Greek: a)de/n], _a gland_, the glands being sometimes in pairs.)

[*] _Glands on the perianth conspicuous._

[+] _Rootstock creeping; glands 2, orbicular, above the broad claw._

1. Z. glaberrimus, Michx. Stems 1--3 deg. high; leaves grass-like,
channelled, conspicuously nerved, elongated, tapering to a point;
panicle pyramidal, many-flowered; flowers perfect; sepals nearly free
(1/2' long), ovate, becoming lance-ovate, with a short claw.--Grassy low
grounds, Va. to Fla. and Ala.

[+][+] _Root bulbous; glands covering the base of the sepals._

2. Z. elegans, Pursh. Stem 1--3 deg. high; leaves flat, carinate; raceme
simple or sparingly branched and few-flowered; bracts ovate-lanceolate;
base of the perianth coherent with the base of the ovary, the thin ovate
or obovate sepals marked with a large obcordate gland, the inner
abruptly contracted to a broad claw. (Z. glaucus, _Nutt._)--N. Eng. to
N. Ill., Minn., and westward.

3. Z. Nuttallii, Gray. Like the last; raceme rather densely flowered,
with narrow bracts; perianth free; sepals with an ill-defined gland at
base, not at all clawed; seeds larger (3'' long).--Kan. to Tex. and Col.

[*][*] _Glands of the perianth obscure; perianth small, rotate; bulb
somewhat fibrous._

4. Z. leimanthoides, Gray. Stem 1--4 deg. high, slender; leaves narrowly
linear; flowers small (4'' in diameter) and numerous, in a few crowded
panicled racemes; only a yellowish spot on the contracted base of the
divisions of the free perianth.--Low grounds, pine-barrens of N. J., to
Ga.


33. AMIANTHIUM, Gray. FLY-POISON.

Flowers perfect. Perianth widely spreading; the distinct and free
petal-like (white) sepals oval or obovate, without claws or glands,
persistent. Filaments capillary, equalling or exceeding the perianth.
Anthers, capsules, etc., nearly as in Melanthium. Styles thread-like.
Seeds wingless, oblong or linear, with a loose coat, 1--4 in each
cell.--Glabrous, with simple stems from a bulbous base or coated bulb,
scape-like, few-leaved, terminated by a simple dense raceme of handsome
flowers, turning greenish with age. Leaves linear, keeled, grass-like.
(From [Greek: a)mi/antos], _unspotted_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_;
a name formed with more regard to euphony than to good construction,
alluding to the glandless perianth.)

1. A. muscaetoxicum, Gray. (FLY-POISON.) _Leaves broadly linear_,
elongated, obtuse (1/2--1' wide); _raceme simple_; capsule abruptly
3-horned; seeds oblong, with a fleshy red coat.--Open woods, N. J. to
Fla., west to Ky. and Ark. June, July.


ORDER 117. PONTEDERIACEAE. (PICKEREL-WEED FAMILY.)

_Aquatic herbs, with perfect more or less irregular flowers from a
spathe; the petal-like 6-merous perianth free from the 3-celled ovary;
the 3 or 6 mostly unequal or dissimilar stamens inserted in its
throat._--Perianth with the 6 divisions colored alike, _imbricated_ in 2
rows in the bud, the whole together sometimes revolute-coiled after
flowering, then withering away, or the base thickened-persistent and
enclosing the fruit. Anthers introrse. Ovules anatropous. Style 1;
stigma 3-lobed or 6-toothed. Fruit a perfectly or incompletely 3-celled
many-seeded capsule, or a 1-celled 1-seeded utricle. Embryo slender, in
floury albumen.

1. Pontederia. Spike many-flowered. Perianth 2-lipped, its fleshy
persistent base enclosing the 1-seeded utricle. Stamens 6.

2. Heteranthera. Spathe 1--few-flowered. Perianth salver-shaped.
Stamens 3. Capsule many-seeded.


1. PONTEDERIA, L. PICKEREL-WEED.

Perianth funnel-form, 2-lipped; the 3 upper divisions united to form the
3-lobed upper lip; the 3 lower spreading, and their claws, which form
the lower part of the curving tube, more or less separate or separable
to the base; after flowering the tube is revolute-coiled from the apex
downward, and its fleshy-thickened persistent base encloses the fruit.
Stamens 6; the 3 anterior long-exserted; the 3 posterior (often sterile
or imperfect) with very short filaments, unequally inserted lower down;
anthers versatile, oval, blue. Ovary 3-celled; two of the cells empty,
the other with a single suspended ovule. Utricle 1-celled, filled with
the single seed.--Stout herbs, growing in shallow water, with thick
creeping rootstocks, producing erect long-petioled mostly heart-shaped
leaves, and a 1-leaved stem, bearing a spike of violet-blue ephemeral
flowers. Root-leaves with a sheathing stipule within the petiole.
(Dedicated to _Pontedera_, Professor at Padua at the beginning of the
last century.)

1. P. cordata, L. Leaves arrow-heart-shaped, blunt, or sometimes
triangular-elongated and tapering and scarcely cordate (var.
ANGUSTIFOLIA, Torr.); spike dense, from a spathe-like bract; upper lobe
of perianth marked with a pair of yellow spots (rarely all white);
calyx-tube in fruit crested with 6 toothed ridges.--N. Scotia to Fla.,
west to Minn. and Tex. July--Sept.


2. HETERANTHERA, Ruiz & Pav. MUD-PLANTAIN.

Perianth salver-form with a slender tube; the limb somewhat equally
6-parted, ephemeral. Stamens 3, in the throat, usually unequal; anthers
erect. Capsule 1-celled or incompletely 3-celled by intrusion of the
placentae, many-seeded.--Creeping, floating or submerged low herbs, in
mud or shallow water, with a 1--few-flowered spathe bursting from the
sheathing side or base of a petiole. (Name from [Greek: e(te/ra],
_different_, and [Greek: a)nthera/], _anther_.)

[*] _Stamens unequal; 2 posterior filaments with ovate yellow anthers;
the other longer, with a larger oblong or sagittate greenish anther;
capsule incompletely 3-celled; leaves rounded, long-petioled; creeping
or floating plants._

1. H. reniformis, Ruiz & Pav. Leaves round-kidney-shaped to cordate and
acute; spathe 3--5-flowered; flowers white or pale blue.--Conn. to
N. J., west to Ill. and E. Kan., and southward. (S. Am.)

2. H. limosa, Vahl. Leaves oblong or lance-oblong, obtuse at both ends;
spathe 1-flowered; flowers larger, blue.--Va. to Mo. and La. (S. Am.)

[*][*] _Stamens alike, with sagittate anthers; capsule 1-celled, with 3
parietal placentae; leaves linear, translucent, sessile; submerged
grass-like herbs, with only the flowers reaching the surface._

3. H. graminea, Vahl. The slender branching stems clothed with leaves
and bearing a terminal 1-flowered spathe (becoming lateral); flowers
small, pale yellow, with a very long thread-like tube. (Schollera
graminifolia, _Willd._)--N. Eng. to N. C., west to Minn. and E. Kan.


ORDER 118. XYRIDACEAE. (YELLOW-EYED-GRASS FAMILY.)

_Rush-like herbs, with equitant leaves sheathing the base of a naked
scape, which is terminated by a head of perfect 3-androus flowers, with
extrorse anthers, glumaceous calyx, and a regular colored corolla; the
3-valved mostly 1-celled capsule containing several or many orthotropous
seeds with a minute embryo at the apex of fleshy albumen._


1. XYRIS, Gronov. YELLOW-EYED GRASS.

Flowers single in the axils of coriaceous scale-like bracts, which are
densely imbricated in a head. Sepals 3; the 2 lateral glume-like,
boat-shaped or keeled and persistent; the anterior one larger and
membranaceous, enwrapping the corolla in the bud and deciduous with it.
Petals 3, with claws, which cohere more or less. Fertile stamens 3, with
linear anthers, inserted on the claws of the petals, alternating with 3
sterile filaments, which are cleft and in our species plumose or bearded
at the apex. Style 3-cleft. Capsule oblong, free, 1-celled,
with 3 parietal more or less projecting placentae, 3-valved,
many-seeded.--Flowers yellow, produced all summer. Ours apparently all
perennials. ([Greek: Xyri/s], a name of some plant with 2-edged leaves,
from [Greek: xyro/n], a _razor_.)

1. X. flexuosa, Muhl. Scape slender (10--16' high), barely flattened at
the summit, often from a bulbous base, very smooth, much longer than the
narrowly linear leaves, both commonly twisted with age; head
roundish-ovoid (3--4'' long); _lateral sepals_ oblong lanceolate,
_finely ciliate-scarious on the narrow wingless keel_, usually with a
minute bearded tuft at the apex, shorter than the bract.--Sandy or peaty
bogs, Mass. to Fla., west to Minn. and Mo.

Var. pusilla, Gray. Small and very slender, seldom twisted, 2--9' high,
the base not bulbous; head 2--3'' long.--White Mts. to Penn., west to
L. Superior.

2. X. torta, Smith. Scape terete, with one sharp edge, slender, 9--20'
high, from a dark bulbous base, and with the _linear-filiform rigid
leaves_ becoming spirally twisted; head ovoid, becoming spindle-shaped,
or oblong and acute (5--9'' long); sepals exceeding the bract; _lateral
sepals winged on the keel and fringed above the middle_.--Pine barrens,
in dry sand, N. J. to Fla., Tex. and Ark.

3. X. Caroliniana, Walt. Scape flattish, 1-angled below, 2-edged at the
summit, smooth, 1/2--2 deg. high, the base hardly bulbous; _leaves
linear-sword-shaped, flat_, 2--4'' broad; head globular-ovoid (5--7''
long); _lateral sepals obscurely lacerate-fringed above on the winged
keel_, rather shorter than the bract.--Sandy swamps, near the coast,
Mass. to Fla.

4. X. fimbriata, Ell. Scape somewhat angled, 2-edged above, rough (2 deg.
high), rather longer than the linear-sword-shaped or strap-shaped
leaves, the base not bulbous; head oblong-ovate (6--10'' long); _lateral
sepals_ lanceolate-linear, _nearly twice the length of the bract, above
the middle conspicuously fringed on the wing-margined keel, and even
plumose at the summit_.--Pine-barrens, N. J. to Fla. and Tex.


ORDER 119. MAYACEAE. (MAYACA FAMILY.)

_Moss-like aquatic plants, densely leafy, with narrowly-linear sessile
pellucid leaves, axillary naked peduncles terminated by a solitary
perfect 3-androus flower, herbaceous calyx, white corolla, and a
3-valved 1-celled several-seeded capsule._


1. MAYACA, Aublet.

The only genus. Perianth persistent, of 3 herbaceous lanceolate sepals,
and 3 obovate petals. Stamens alternate with the petals. Ovary with 3
parietal few-ovuled placentae; style filiform; stigma simple.--Creeping
or floating in shallow water; the leaves 1-nerved, entire, notched at
the apex; the peduncle solitary, sheathed at base. (An aboriginal name.)

1. M. Michauxii, Schott & Endl. Peduncles not much exceeding the leaves,
nodding in fruit.--Va. to Fla. and Tex.


ORDER 120. COMMELINACEAE. (SPIDERWORT FAMILY.)

_Herbs, with fibrous or sometimes thickened roots, jointed and often
branching leafy stems, and chiefly perfect and 6-androus, often
irregular flowers, with the perianth free from the 2--3-celled ovary,
and having a distinct calyx and corolla_; viz., 3 persistent commonly
herbaceous sepals, and 3 petals, ephemeral, decaying or deciduous.
Stamens hypogynous, some of them often sterile; anthers with 2 separated
cells. Style 1; stigma undivided. Capsule 2--3-celled, 2--3-valved,
loculicidal, 3--several-seeded. Seeds orthotropous. Embryo small,
pulley-shaped, partly sunk in a shallow depression at the apex of the
albumen. Leaves ovate, lanceolate or linear, parallel-veined, flat,
sheathed at base; the uppermost often dissimilar and forming a kind of
spathe.--Chiefly tropical.

1. Commelina. Cyme sessile within a cordate or connate bract (spathe).
Petals unequal. Perfect stamens 3; filaments naked.

2. Tradescantia. Bracts leaf-like or small and scarious. Petals equal.
Perfect stamens 6; filaments bearded.


1. COMMELINA, Dill. DAY-FLOWER.

Flowers irregular. Sepals somewhat colored, unequal; the 2 lateral
partly united by their contiguous margins. Two lateral petals rounded or
kidney-shaped, on long claws, the odd one smaller. Stamens unequal, 3 of
them fertile, one of which is bent inward; 3 of them sterile and
smaller, with imperfect cross-shaped anthers; filaments naked. Capsule
3-celled, two of the cells 2-seeded, the other 1-seeded or
abortive.--Stems branching, often procumbent and rooting at the joints.
Leaves contracted at base into sheathing petioles; the floral one
heart-shaped and clasping, folded together or hooded, forming a spathe
enclosing the flowers, which expand for a single morning and are
recurved on their pedicel before and afterwards. Petals blue. Flowering
all summer. Ours all with perennial roots, or propagating by striking
root from the joints. (Dedicated to the early Dutch botanists. _J._ and
_G. Commelin_.)

[*] _Ventral cells 2-ovuled (usually 2-seeded), the dorsal 1-ovuled._

1. C. nudiflora, L. _Slender and creeping_, glabrous; leaves lanceolate,
small (1--2' long); spathe cordate, acute, _with margins not united;
seeds reticulated_. (C. Cayennensis, _Richard._)--Alluvial banks, Del.
to Fla., west to Ind., Mo. and Tex.

2. C. hirtella, Vahl. _Stout, erect_ (2--4 deg. high); leaves large,
lanceolate, _the sheaths brown-bearded_; spathes crowded,
_with margins united; seeds smooth_. (C. erecta, _Gray_, Man., not
_L._)--River-banks, Penn. to Fla., west to Mo. and Tex.

[*][*] _Cells 1-ovuled, 1-seeded; seeds smooth; spathe cucullate; roots
sub-tuberous_.

3. C. erecta, L. Slender, often low; _leaves linear; cells all
dehiscent_.--Penn. to Fla.

4. C. Virginica, L. Slender, usually tall; _leaves lanceolate_ to
linear; _dorsal cell indehiscent, scabrous_.--Damp rich woods and banks,
southern N. Y. to Fla., west to Mich., Iowa, and Mo.


2. TRADESCANTIA, L. SPIDERWORT.

Flowers regular. Sepals herbaceous. Petals all alike, ovate, sessile.
Stamens all fertile; filaments bearded. Capsule 2--3-celled, the cells
1--2-seeded.--Perennials. Stems mucilaginous, mostly upright, nearly
simple, leafy. Leaves keeled. Flowers ephemeral, in umbelled clusters,
axillary and terminal, produced through the summer; floral leaves nearly
like the others. (Named for the elder _Tradescant_, gardener to Charles
the First of England.)

[*] _Umbels terminal or sometimes lateral, sessile, subtended by 1 or 2
leaf-like bracts; leaves linear to narrowly lanceolate, flowers blue._

1. T. Virginica, L. (COMMON SPIDERWORT.) Roots fleshy-fibrous, smooth or
only slightly villous, more or less glaucous, often tall and slender and
with linear leaves, rather rarely with 1 or 2 long lateral peduncles;
bracts usually a pair.--Rich ground, N. Y. to Fla., west to Minn., Tex.,
and the Rocky Mts. Very variable.--Var. VILLOSA, Watson. Often dwarf,
more or less villous throughout as well as pubescent. Mississippi valley
and Gulf States.--Var. FLEXUOSA, Watson. Stout and dark green, with
large linear-lanceolate pubescent leaves, the stem usually flexuous, and
with several short lateral branches or sessile axillary heads. (T.
flexuosa, _Raf._)--Ohio to Ky. and Ga. T. pilosa, _Lehm._, is an
intermediate form.

[*][*] _Umbel pedunculate, subtended by small subscarious bracts;
flowers small, rose-color._

2. T. rosea, Vent. Small, slender (6--10' high), smooth, erect from a
running rootstock; leaves very narrowly linear, grass-like.--Sandy
woods, Md. to Fla., west to Ky. and Mo.


ORDER 121. JUNCACEAE. (RUSH FAMILY.)

_Grass-like or rush-like herbs, with small flowers, a regular and
hypogynous persistent perianth of 6 similar glumaceous sepals, 6 or
rarely 3 stamens with 2-celled anthers, a single short style, 3 filiform
hairy stigmas, and an ovary either 3-celled or 1-celled with 3 parietal
placentae, forming a loculicidal 3-valved capsule._ Seeds anatropous,
with a minute embryo enclosed at the base of the fleshy
albumen.--Flowers liliaceous in structure, but sedge-like in aspect and
texture.

1. Juncus. Capsule 3-celled (or imperfectly so), many-seeded. Plants
never hairy, in moist ground or water.

2. Luzula. Capsule 1-celled, 3-seeded. Plant, often hairy, in dry
ground.


1. JUNCUS, Tourn. RUSH. BOG-RUSH.

Capsule many-seeded, 3-celled, or 1-celled by the placentae not reaching
the axis. Stamens when 3 opposite the 3 outer sepals.--Chiefly
perennials, and in wet soil or water, with pithy or hollow and simple
(rarely branching) stems, and panicled or clustered small (greenish or
brownish) flowers, chiefly in summer. Plant never hairy. (The classical
name, from _jungo_, to join, alluding to the use of the stems for
bands.)

Sec. 1. _Stems leafless and scape-like, from matted running rootstocks,
sheathed at base; the sheaths sometimes bearing terete knotless leaves
like the scape; flowers in sessile apparently lateral panicles, the
involucral leaf being similar to and continuing the scape._--JUNCUS
proper.

[*] _Flowers solitary on the pedicels or ultimate ramifications of the
panicle._

[+] _Sheaths at base of the stem leafless._

[++] _Stamens 3._

1. J. effusus, L. (COMMON or SOFT RUSH.) Scape soft and pliant (2--4 deg.
high); inner sheaths awned; panicle diffusely much branched,
many-flowered; flowers small (11/4'' long), greenish; sepals lanceolate,
very acute, as long as the narrow triangular-obovate retuse and
pointless greenish-brown capsule; anthers as long as the filaments;
style very short; seeds small (about 1/4'' long), with short pale
points.--Marshy ground, very common. (Eu.)--Var. CONGLOMERATUS, Engelm.
Scape more distinctly striate; panicle closely crowded; capsule
short-pointed. In sphagnous swamps.

[++][++] _Stamens 6._

2. J. filiformis, L. Scape very slender (1--2 deg. high), pliant; panicle
few-flowered, almost simple; flowers 11/2'' long; sepals lanceolate, the
inner a little shorter and less acute, longer than the broadly ovate
obtuse but mucronate greenish capsule; anthers shorter than the
filaments; style very short; seed (less than {1/3}'' long) short-pointed
at both ends, indistinctly reticulated.--N. Eng. to Mich., Neb., and
northward. (Eu.)

3. J. Smithii, Engelm. Scape rather slender (2--3 deg. high); panicle
few-flowered, nearly simple; flowers brown (11/4'' long); outer sepals
lanceolate, acute, the inner a little shorter, obtusish, shorter than
the broadly ovate rather triangular acute deep chestnut-brown capsule;
anthers as long as the filaments; style short; seeds large ({1/3}'' long
or more), obtuse, short-appendaged at both ends, many-ribbed and
reticulated.--Sphagnous swamps, on Broad Mt. and in Lebanon Co., Penn.

4. J. Balticus, Dethard, var. littoralis, Engelm. Scape rigid (2--3 deg.
high); panicle loose; flowers larger (2'' long), chestnut-brown with
green; sepals ovate-lanceolate, the outer sharp-pointed, the inner
obtusish, as long as the elliptical rather triangular obtuse and
mucronate deep brown capsule; anthers much longer than the broad
filaments; style about the length of the ovary; seeds rather large (1/2''
long or more), nearly obtuse, delicately ribbed and cross lined.--Sandy
shores, Newf. to Mass., west to Penn., along the Great Lakes, and
westward.--Var. MONTANUS, Engelm. Sepals nearly equal; anthers 4 times
longer than the filament; capsule ovate-pyramidal, angled, beaked; seeds
smaller, narrower, apiculate.--Minn., west and northward.

[+][+] _Innermost sheaths leaf-bearing; stamens 6._

5. J. setaceus, Rostkovius. Scape slender (1--3 deg. high); panicle loose,
rather few-flowered; flowers greenish (2'' long); sepals lanceolate,
sharp-pointed, especially the 3 shining exterior ones, spreading in
fruit, as long as the nearly globose beak-pointed greenish or
light-brown capsule; anthers as long as the filaments; style
conspicuous; seeds ({1/3}'' long) almost globose, ribbed and
cross-lined.--Va. to Fla., west to Mo. and La.

[*][*] _Flowers in clusters, 6-androus; innermost sheaths at base of
stem leaf-bearing._

6. J. Roemerianus, Scheele. Scape stout and rigid (2--3 deg. high), its apex
as well as the leaves pungent; panicle compound, open and spreading,
brown; 3--6 greenish or light-brown flowers (11/2'' long) in a cluster;
outer sepals lanceolate, sharp-pointed, longer than the obtusish inner
ones, as long as the elliptical rather triangular obtuse mucronate brown
capsule; anthers much longer than the broad filaments; styles shorter
than the ovary; seeds ({1/3}'' long) oval, obtuse, very delicately
ribbed.--Brackish marshes, N. J. to Fla. and Tex.

7. J. maritimus, L. Resembling the last, but with a rigid contracted
green panicle, an ovary attenuated into a style of nearly its own
length, a greenish acute capsule which usually exceeds the acute sepals,
and seeds with distinct tails and stronger ribs.--Known in this country
only from Coney Island, N. Y., where it is apparently indigenous. (Eu.)

Sec. 2. _Stems simple (rarely branched), leafy at base or throughout;
leaves flat, or somewhat terete or setaceous and channelled, never
knotted; panicle or head terminal._--GRASSY-LEAVED JUNCI.

[*] _Flowers in close heads (produced in late summer)._

[+] _Leaves thread-like, hollow; stamens 6; seeds few, large and
caudate; the single head (sometimes 2) 1--4-flowered._

8. J. stygius, L. Stems slender (6--16' high) from slender branching
rootstocks, 1--3-leaved below, naked above; heads 1 or rarely 2, of
3--4-flowers, about the length of the sheathing scarious awl-pointed
bract; flowers pale and reddish (21/2--3'' long); sepals lanceolate, the
inner obtusish, 3/4 the length of the oblong acuminate capsule, as long as
the slender stamens; filaments many times longer than the oblong
anthers; recurved stigmas shorter than the style; seeds oblong, with a
very loose coat prolonged at both ends (11/2'' long).--Peat-bogs, Newf. to
northern N. Y., west to Mich. and N. Minn. (Eu.)

9. J. trifidus, L. Stems densely tufted from matted creeping rootstocks,
erect (5--10' high), sheathed and mostly leafless at base, 2--3-leaved
at the summit, the upper thread-like leaves subtending the sessile head;
flowers brown (11/2--2'' long); sepals ovate-lanceolate, acute, equalling
or rather shorter than the ovate beak-pointed deep brown capsule;
anthers much longer than the filaments; seeds few, oblong, angled (1''
long), short-tailed.--Alpine summits of N. Eng. and N. Y., and far
northward; also in N. J. (Eu.)

[+][+] _Leaves flat and grass-like; stamens 3; stems flattened, simple,
leafy._

10. J. repens, Michx. Stems ascending (4--6' high) from a fibrous annual
root, at length creeping or floating; leaves short, linear, those of the
stem nearly opposite and fascicled; heads few in a loose leafy panicle,
3--12-flowered; flowers green (3'' long); sepals rigid, lance-subulate,
slender-pointed, the 3 outer as long as the linear triangular obtuse
capsule, the inner much longer; stamens as long as the outer sepals;
filaments many times longer than the oblong anthers; seeds small
({1/5}'' long), obovate, slightly pointed, very delicately ribbed and
cross-lined.--Miry banks, Md. to Fla. and La.

11. J. marginatus, Rostk. Stem erect, from a bulbous and stoloniferous
base (1--3 deg. high); leaves long-linear; heads 3--8-flowered, panicled;
flowers purplish with green (11/2'' long); sepals oblong, the 3 outer
acute and slightly awned, the inner longer, mostly obtuse, as long as
the almost globular scarcely mucronate capsule; stamens exceeding the
outer sepals; purple anthers shorter than the filaments; style very
short; seeds (1/4--{1/3}'' long) slender, pointed at both ends and
strongly ribbed.--Moist sandy places, S. New Eng. to Fla., west to
Mich., Mo., and Tex.--Var. PAUCICAPITATUS, Engelm., has few large
8--15-flowered heads; and var. BIFLORUS, Engelm., has numerous small
2--3-flowered heads in much-branched panicles.

[*][*] _Flowers solitary, panicled; stamens 6._

[+] _Stems slender, simple, tufted, leafy below; root perennial (fl.
early in summer)._

[++] _Seeds tail-pointed at both ends._

12. J. Vaseyi, Engelm. Stems rigid (1--21/2 deg. high); leaves nearly terete,
very slightly channelled on the inner side; panicle longer than the
involucral leaf, loose; flowers few, often one-sided, greenish or light
brown (2'' long or more); sepals lanceolate, acute, appressed, shorter
than the oblong and retuse green-brown capsule; anthers as long as the
filaments; style very short; seeds slender (1/2--{2/3}'' long), closely
ribbed.--N. Maine (_Pringle_); Mich. to Iowa and westward.

13. J. Greenii, Oakes & Tuckerm. Stems rigid (1--2 deg. high); leaves nearly
terete, very deeply channelled (almost involute) on the inner side;
panicle usually much shorter than the principal erect involucral leaf,
dense, the numerous flowers often one-sided (13/4'' long); sepals
lanceolate, acute, light greenish-brown, appressed, shorter than the
ovoid-oblong obtuse greenish-brown capsule; anthers as long as the
filaments; style very short; seeds ovoid ({1/3}--{2/5}'' long), ribbed
and delicately cross-lined.--Sandy coast of N. Eng., N. Y., and N. J.,
and on the east shore of Lake Michigan.

[++][++] _Seeds merely apiculate at both ends._

14. J. tenuis, Willd. Stem wiry (9--18' high); leaves flat or
channelled; panicle shorter than the involucral leaves, loose, or rarely
crowded; flowers green (2'' long or more); sepals lanceolate, very
acute, spreading in fruit, longer than the ovoid retuse scarcely pointed
green capsule; anthers nearly equal to the filaments; style very short;
seeds small (about 1/4'' long), delicately ribbed and cross-lined.--Fields
and roadsides, very common. (Eu.)--Var. SECUNDUS, Engelm.; flowers
smaller, secund along the incurved branches. N. Eng. to Penn. and
Del.--Var. CONGESTUS, Engelm.; branches contracted into a head and the
flowers darker-colored. Minn. and westward.

15. J. dichotomus, Ell. Stems rigid (11/2--2 deg. high) from a tumid base;
leaves filiform, nearly terete, slightly grooved on the inner side;
panicle loose, often with 1-sided forked branches, mostly longer than
the involucral leaf; flowers greenish (2'' long or more); sepals
lanceolate, sharp-pointed, spreading in fruit, as long as the globular
beaked light mahogany-colored capsule; anthers nearly as long as the
filaments; style short; seeds small ({1/5}--1/4'' long), coarsely
cross-lined.--Low sandy grounds, N. J. to Fla.

16. J. Gerardi, Loisel. (BLACK-GRASS.) Stems scarcely flattened, rigid
(1--2 deg. high); panicle contracted, usually longer than the bracteal leaf;
flowers chestnut-brown with green (13/4'' long); sepals oval-oblong,
obtuse, incurved, as long as the oval obtuse and mucronate capsule;
anthers much longer than the short filaments; style as long as the
ovary; seeds (nearly {1/3}'' long) obovate, delicately ribbed and
cross-lined.--Salt marshes; common along the coast and in W. New York;
rare about the Great Lakes. (Eu.)

[+][+] _Stems branched, diffuse, leafy; root annual, fibrous._

17. J. bufonius, L. Stems low and slender (3--9' high), leafy, often
branched from the base; panicle spreading, mostly with one-sided
dichotomous branches; flowers remote, greenish (2--31/2'' long); sepals
linear-lanceolate, awl-pointed, the 3 outer much exceeding the inner and
the oblong obtuse capsule; stamens short; filaments scarcely longer than
the anthers, seeds elliptical, obtuse ({1/5}--{1/6}'' long).--Low
grounds, by roadsides; common. (Eu.)

Sec. 3. _Stems leafy; leaves terete or laterally flattened, more or less
distinctly knotted by internal transverse partitions; panicle terminal,
with flowers chiefly in heads._--KNOTTY-LEAVED JUNCI.

[*] _Seeds barely pointed, not caudate._

[+] _Flowers solitary or 2 together, panicled; stamens 6._

18. J. pelocarpus, E. Meyer. Stems slender and erect from a slender
running rootstock (6--18' high), bearing few thread-like slightly
knotted leaves, branching above into a compound spreading panicle,
bearing the flowers in the forks and along one side of the branches;
often with the flowers or in place of them are tufts of leaves; flowers
small (1--11/4'' long), greenish with red; sepals oblong, obtuse, the 3
inner ones longer, but shorter than the oblong taper-beaked, 1-celled
capsule; anthers much longer than the filaments; style slender; seeds
(1/4'' long) obovate, short-pointed.--Sandy, wet or swampy places, Newf.
to Fla., west along the Great Lakes to Minn. The proliferous plants are
usually sterile and much larger, with larger diffuse panicles.--Var.
SUBTILIS, Engelm. Creeping or floating, with a single pair of flowers at
the end of the short stems.--Somerset Co., Maine (_C. E. Smith_);
Canada.

[+][+] _Heads numerous, of 3--12-flowers (rarely more); in early
summer._

[++] _Stamens 6._

19. J. articulatus, L. Stems ascending or erect (9--15' high), tufted
from a short creeping rootstock, with 1 or 2 slender leaves; panicle
short, spreading, the crowded heads 3--8-flowered; flowers brown, rarely
pale (11/4--11/2'' long); sepals lance-oblong, acute or mucronate, or the 3
inner obtuse and a little longer, shorter than the ovate-oblong acute or
abruptly mucronate-pointed incompletely 3-celled commonly deep
chestnut-brown shining capsule; anthers as long as the filaments; ovary
attenuate into a short style; seeds (less than {1/3}'' long) obovate,
attenuate below, abruptly pointed above.--Wet grounds, Newf. to Del.,
west to western N. Y. and Mich. (Eu.)

20. J. alpinus, Villars, var. insignis, Fries. Stems erect (9--18' high)
from a creeping rootstock, with 1 or 2 slender leaves; panicle meagre,
with erect branches bearing distant greenish or light-brown heads, each
of 3--6 flowers (11/4--11/2'' long); sepals oblong, obtuse, the outer
mucronate or cuspidate and usually longer than the rounded inner ones,
as long as or shorter than the obtuse short-pointed incompletely
3-celled light-brown capsule; anthers as long as the filaments; style
short; seeds ({1/3}'' or more in length) spindle-shaped.--Wet sandy
banks, L. Champlain, Cayuga Lake, along the Great Lakes, and far west
and northward. (Eu.)

21. J. militaris, Bigel. Stem stout (2--4 deg. high) from a thick creeping
rootstock, bearing a solitary stout erect leaf (1/2--31/2 deg. long) below the
middle, which overtops the crowded and rather contracted panicle; heads
numerous, 5--12- (rarely 25-) flowered; flowers brownish (11/2'' long);
sepals lanceolate, the outer awl-pointed, as long as the ovate-oblong
triangular taper-beaked 1-celled capsule; anthers longer than the
filaments; ovary attenuate into a slender style; seeds (1/4--{1/3}'' long)
globose-obovate, obtuse, abruptly pointed.--In bogs and streams, Maine
to Md. Sometimes producing, in flowing water, numberless capillary
submersed leaves, 2--3 deg. long, from the rootstock.

[++][++] _Stamens 3._

22. J. acuminatus, Michx. Stems tufted, erect, slender (1--2 deg. long),
bearing about 2 leaves and a very loose spreading panicle; heads rather
few and large, 5--many-flowered, greenish, at length straw-colored or
darker; sepals lance-awl-shaped, sharp-pointed, equal (11/2--2'' long), as
long as the triangular-prismatic short-pointed 1-celled straw-colored or
light brown capsule; anthers a little shorter than the filaments; style
almost none; seeds small ({1/5}--{1/4}'' long), acute at both ends,
ribbed-reticulated.--N. Eng. to Ga., Minn. and Tex. May, June. Very
variable. Heads often proliferous in autumn.

Var. debilis, Engelm. Stems slender (9--18' high); heads green,
3--6-flowered, in a loose panicle; flowers smaller (11/4--11/2'' long);
capsule longer than the sepals.--Wet sandy soil, N. J. to S. C., west to
Ohio, Mo., and Miss. Stem sometimes decumbent and rooting.

Var. robustus, Engelm. Stems stout, tall (2--4 deg. high), bearing numerous
5--8-flowered light-brown heads in a large much-branched panicle;
flowers small (1--1{1/5}'' long); ovoid capsule scarcely longer than the
sepals.--Deep swamps, Ill. to Mo. and La.

[+][+][+] _Heads few, crowded, of numerous flowers._

[++] _Stamens 3; stem rigid from a thick white horizontal rootstock._

23. J. brachycarpus, Engelm. Stem erect (1--21/2 deg. high), bearing about 2
leaves and 2--10 densely flowered spherical heads (4--5'' wide) in a
slightly spreading crowded panicle much exceeding the involucral leaf;
flowers pale green (2'' long); sepals lance-linear, awl-pointed, the 3
outer much longer than the inner, and the ovoid pointed 1-celled capsule
rather shorter; anthers much shorter than the filaments; style very
short; seeds ({1/5}'' long) abruptly apiculate.--Moist places in open
woods and prairies, Ohio and Mich. to Mo., Miss., and Tex.

24. J. scirpoides, Lam. Stem erect (1--3 deg. high), rather slender, bearing
about 2 terete leaves with wide and open sheaths, and a panicle of few
or many densely-flowered pale-green spherical heads, much longer than
the involucral leaf, its branches erect and often elongated; heads
(3--4'' wide) 15--40-flowered; flowers 11/4--11/2'' long; sepals rigid,
awl-shaped and (especially the outer) bristly pointed, at length
pungent, as long as the stamens and nearly equalling the
oblong-triangular taper-pointed 1-celled capsule; anthers very small;
style elongated or very short, seeds ovoid, abruptly pointed at each end
(1/4'' long).--Wet sandy soil, Mass. to N. J. and S. C., west to Ind.,
Mo., and Tex.

Var. echinatus, Engelm. Stouter; leaves terete; branches of the compact
panicle short; heads larger (5--6'' wide), 40--80-flowered; flowers
13/4--2'' long); sepals narrower and more sharply pointed, the outer a
little longer than the inner; stamens shorter and anthers longer than in
the preceding, and seeds rather smaller and more slender.--Md. to Fla.

Var. polycephalus, Engelm. Much stouter; leaves laterally flattened
(3--6'' wide); panicle spreading, branched, bearing many distant heads
as large as in the last; flowers 2--21/2'' long; the 3 outer sepals the
longer; anthers about as long as the filaments; seeds larger ({1/3}''
long).--S. Va. to Fla., west to Mo. and Tex.

[++][++] _Stamens 6._

25. J. nodosus, L. Stem erect (6--15' or 2 deg. high), slender from a
creeping thread-like and tuber-bearing rootstock, mostly with 2 or 3
slender leaves; heads few or several, rarely single, 8--20-flowered
(31/2--4'' wide), overtopped by the involucral leaf; flowers brown
(11/2--2'' long); sepals lance-linear, awl-pointed (the 3 outer mostly a
little shorter), nearly as long as the slender triangular taper-pointed
1-celled capsule; anthers oblong, shorter than the filaments; style very
short; seeds (about 1/4'' long) obovate, abruptly mucronate.--Swamps and
gravelly banks, N. J. and Penn. to N. Ind. and Iowa, and
northward.--July, Aug.--Var. MEGACEPHALUS, Torr. Stem stout (1--3 deg.
high), with thick leaves; heads few and large (6--8'' wide),
30--80-flowered; flowers pale green (21/4--23/4'' long); outer sepals
longest; anthers linear, shorter than the filaments.--Western N. Y. to
Minn. and Mo., and westward.

[*][*] _Seeds caudate._

[+] _Stamens 3._

26. J. Canadensis, J. Gay. Tufted stems erect, terete, smooth, bearing
2--3 leaves; heads few- or many-flowered, paniculate; sepals lanceolate,
the 3 outer shorter than the inner, not much longer than the stamens,
equal to or shorter than the triangular-prismatic almost 1-celled
usually short-pointed capsule; style mostly short; seeds more or less
distinctly tail pointed, delicately many ribbed.--Common almost
everywhere. Aug., Sept. Easily distinguished by its late flowering from
the similar n. 22. Very variable.

Var. longicaudatus, Engelm. Stem stout and rigid (11/2--3 deg. high), bearing
in a decompound somewhat spreading panicle the numerous 5--50-flowered
heads; flowers greenish or light brown (11/2--2'' long); sepals
awl-pointed, mostly shorter than the abruptly short-pointed capsule;
seeds slender ({2/3}--1'' long), conspicuously tail-pointed.--Mass. to
S. C., west to Minn. and La. The most common form.

Var. subcaudatus, Engelm. Stem slender, often decumbent (1--2 deg. high),
bearing in simpler spreading panicles fewer 8--20-flowered heads;
flowers greenish, as large as in the last; sepals awl-shaped, but not so
rigid; capsule mostly tapering; seeds large (1/2--{2/3}'' long), with
short white membranous appendages, not reticulated.--Conn. to Penn. and
Ga.

Var. brachycephalus, Engelm. Stem slender (11/2--21/2 deg. high), bearing
numerous small 3--5-flowered heads in a large spreading panicle; flowers
greenish or light brown (11/4--11/2'' long); sepals mostly obtuse, shorter
than the brown abruptly short-pointed capsule; style longer than in
other forms; seeds smaller (1/4--{1/3}'' long), slender, with rather short
appendages.--Penn. and western N. Y., to Wisc. and Ill.

Var. coarctatus, Engelm. Stem slender, shorter (9--18' high), bearing
fewer deep-brown 3--5-flowered heads in a somewhat erect contracted
panicle; flowers as large as in the last; sepals acute, or rarely
obtusish, much shorter than the prismatic abruptly pointed deep-brown
capsule; seeds as in the last.--N. Eng. to N. J., N. Minn., and
westward.

[+][+] _Stamens 6._

27. J. asper, Engelm. Stems tufted, erect (2--3 deg. high), terete, stout,
rigid, and with the rigid leaves rough; panicle with rigid slightly
spreading branches, bearing scattered few- (2--6-) flowered heads;
flowers greenish with brown (21/2'' long); sepals ovate-lanceolate,
awl-pointed, rigid and strongly nerved, the outer much shorter than the
inner, these a little shorter than the triangular-ovoid beaked
incompletely 3-celled brown capsule, ovary tapering into a conspicuous
style; seeds large, oblong, with white or often reddish appendages (11/4''
long).--Sphagnous swamps, N. J. Aug.


2. LUZULA, DC. WOOD-RUSH.

Capsule 1-celled, 3-seeded, one seed to each parietal
placenta.--Perennials, often hairy, usually in dry ground, with flat and
soft usually hairy leaves, and spiked-crowded or umbelled flowers. (From
_Gramen Luzulae_, or _Luxulae_, dim. of _lux_, light,--a name given to one
of the species from its shining with dew.)

[*] _Pedicels 1-flowered, in a loose compound cyme or umbel._

1. L. vernalis, DC. Plant 6--9' high; leaves lance-linear, hairy; _umbel
mostly simple_; sepals pointed, shorter than the obtuse capsule; seeds
with a curved appendage, (L. pilosa, _Willd_.)--Woods and banks, Newf.
to the mountains of N. C., west to Minn. (Eu.)

2. L. spadicea, DC., var. melanocarpa, Meyer. Nearly smooth (1--3 deg.
high); leaves broadly linear; _corymb decompound, loose; pedicels
drooping_; sepals pointed, straw-color, about the length of the minutely
pointed and brown capsule; seeds not appendaged. (L. parviflora, var.
melanocarpa, _Gray_.)--Mountains of Maine, Vt., and northern N. Y., to
Mich. and N. Minn. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Flowers crowded in spikes or close clusters. (Plants 6--12'
high.)_

3. L. campestris, DC. _Leaves flat, linear; spikes 4--12, somewhat
umbelled_, ovoid, straw-color, some of them long-peduncled, others
nearly sessile; sepals bristle-pointed, longer than the obtuse capsules;
seeds with a conical appendage at base.--Dry fields and woods, common.
May. (Eu.)

4. L. arcuata, Meyer. _Leaves channelled_, linear; _spikes 3--5, on
unequal often recurved peduncles_, ovoid, chestnut-brown; bracts
ciliate-fringed; sepals taper-pointed, longer than the obtuse capsule;
seeds not appendaged.--Alpine summits of the White Mts. and far
northward. (Eu.)

5. L. spicata, Desvaux. _Leaves channelled_, narrowly linear; _flowers
in sessile clusters, forming a nodding interrupted spiked panicle_,
brown; sepals bristle-pointed, scarcely as long as the abruptly
short-pointed capsule; seeds merely with a roundish projection at
base.--With the last, and more common. (Eu.)


ORDER 122. TYPHACEAE. (CAT-TAIL FAMILY.)

_Marsh or aquatic herbs, with nerved and linear sessile leaves, and
monoecious flowers on a spadix or in heads, destitute of proper floral
envelopes._ Ovary 1--2-celled, with as many persistent styles and
(usually elongated) 1-sided stigmas; cells 1-ovuled. Fruit nut-like when
ripe, 1-seeded, rarely 2-seeded. Seed suspended, anatropous; embryo
straight in copious albumen. Root perennial.

1. Typha. Flowers in a cylindrical compact terminal spike, spathe-like
bract deciduous.

2. Sparganium. Flowers in globular heads with foliaceous bracts.


1. TYPHA, Tourn. (CAT-TAIL FLAG.)

Flowers in a long and very dense cylindrical spike terminating the stem;
the upper part consisting of stamens only, inserted directly on the
axis, and intermixed with long hairs; the lower part consisting of
stipitate 1-celled ovaries, the stipes bearing club-shaped bristles,
which form the copious down of the fruit. Nutlets minute, very
long-stalked.--Spathes merely deciduous bracts, or none. Root-stocks
creeping. Leaves long, sheathing the base of the simple jointless stems,
erect, thickish. Flowering in summer. ([Greek: Ty/phe], the old Greek
name.)

1. T. latifolia, L. (COMMON CAT-TAIL.) Stout and tall (4--6 deg. high), the
flat sheathing leaves 3--10'' broad, exceeding the stem; the staminate
and dark brown pistillate parts of the spike (each 3--6' long or more)
_usually contiguous_, the latter at length 1' in diameter; _pistillate
flowers without bractlets; stigma rhombic-lanceolate; pollen-grains in
fours_.--In marshes, throughout N. Am. (Eu.)

2. T. angustifolia, L. Leaves narrower (3--6'' broad), taller, somewhat
convex on the back; pistillate and staminate inflorescence usually
separated by a short interval, the light brown spike becoming 5--6'' in
diameter; _pollen-grains simple; pistillate flowers with a linear stigma
and a hair-like bractlet_ slightly dilated at the summit.--N. Eng. to
N. J., west to Mich. and Mo.; less frequent, and mainly near the coast.
(Eu.)


2. SPARGANIUM, Tourn. BUR-REED.

Flowers collected in separate dense and spherical leafy-bracted heads,
which are scattered along the summit of the stem; the upper sterile,
consisting merely of stamens, with minute scales irregularly interposed;
the lower or fertile larger, consisting of numerous sessile 1--2-celled
pistils, each surrounded by 3--6 scales much like a calyx. Fruit
wedge-shaped or club-shaped, more or less corky toward the summit, the
hard endocarp perforated at the apex.--Rootstocks creeping and
stoloniferous; roots fibrous. Stems simple or branching, sheathed below
by the base of the linear leaves. Flowering through the summer. (Name
from [Greek: spa/rganon], _a fillet_, from the ribbon-like leaves.)

[*] _Fruit sessile, broad and truncate, often 2-seeded; stigmas often 2,
elongated; scales rigid, nearly equalling the fruit; erect, with
branched inflorescence._

1. S. eurycarpum, Engelm. Stems stout, erect (2--4 deg. high); leaves mostly
flat and merely keeled; pistil attenuate into a short style bearing 1 or
2 elongated stigmas; fruit-heads 2--6 or more, 1' wide; fruit
many-angled (31/2--4'' long) when mature, with a broad and depressed or
retuse summit abruptly tipped in the centre.--Borders of ponds, lakes,
and rivers, N. Eng. to Va., west to the Pacific.

[*][*] _Fruit comparatively narrow, and mostly somewhat stipitate,
1-celled, longer than the scales._

2. S. simplex, Huds. _Stems slender, erect_ (1/2--2 deg. high); _leaves more
or less triquetrous_ (21/2--4'' wide); fertile heads (1--4) of the usually
simple inflorescence often above the axils, sessile or peduncled, 6--8''
wide in fruit; stigma linear, equalling the rather slender style or
shorter; nutlets pale, _fusiform_ or narrowly oblong (about 2'' long),
more or less contracted in the middle.--N. Eng. to N. J., west to
Mich., Minn., and northward. (Eu.)

Var. androcladum, Engelm. Stouter (11/2--3 deg. high), with usually _broader
leaves_ (4--9'') and _branching inflorescence_, the head or peduncles
axillary or nearly so; fruiting _heads_ (1--7) often _larger_ (6--12''
broad), the nutlets 2--3'' long. (S. androcladum, _Morong._)--In bogs or
shallow water, common; N. Eng. to Fla., west to Minn. and Mo.

Var. angustifolium, Engelm. Very slender; leaves floating, long and
narrow (1/2--21/2'' wide), flat; inflorescence simple; heads (4--6'' broad)
and nutlets smaller.--Mountain lakes and slow streams, N. Y., N. Eng.,
and northward; sometimes nearly out of water, dwarf and with shorter
erect leaves.

Var. fluitans, Engelm. Floating in deep water, with long slender stems
and flat narrow leaves; inflorescence usually short, sparingly branched;
style stout with a short oval stigma; fruiting heads 4--6'' broad;
nutlets dark, as large as in the type. (S. androcladum, var. fluctuans,
_Morong._; not S. fluitans, _Fries._)--Ponds, Penn., W. Conn., White
Mts., N. Minn., and northward.

3. S. minimum, Fries. _Usually floating, with very slender stems and
thin flat narrow leaves_; fertile heads 1 or 2, axillary, sessile or
peduncled (4--5'' wide); stigma oval, about as long as the short style,
scarcely surpassing the oval or obovate denticulate scales; _fruit
oblong-obovate_ (1--2'' long), pointed, somewhat triangular, the stipe
very short or none.--N. Eng. to Penn., N. Ind., Minn., north and
westward.--Stems 3--6' high when growing out of water, much longer when
submerged. (Eu.)


ORDER 123. ARACEAE. (ARUM FAMILY.)

_Plants with acrid or pungent juice, simple or compound often veiny
leaves, and flowers crowded on a spadix, which is usually surrounded by
a spathe._--Floral envelopes none, or of 4--6 sepals. Fruit usually a
berry. Seeds with fleshy albumen, or none, but filled with the large
fleshy embryo. A large family, chiefly tropical. Herbage abounding in
slender rhaphides.--The genuine Araceae have no floral envelopes, and are
almost all monoecious or dioecious; but the genera of the second
section, with more highly developed flowers, are not to be separated.

[*] Spathe surrounding or subtending the spadix; flowers naked, i.e.
without perianth.

1. Arisaema. Flowers monoecious or dioecious, covering only the base of
the spadix.

2. Peltandra. Flowers monoecious, covering the spadix; anthers above,
ovaries below.

3. Calla. Flowers perfect (at least the lower ones), covering the whole
of the short spadix. Spathe open and spreading.

[*][*] Spathe surrounding the spadix in n. 4, none or imperfect in the
rest; flowers with a calyx or perianth and perfect, covering the whole
spadix.

4. Symplocarpus. Spadix globular, in a fleshy shell-shaped spathe.
Stemless.

5. Orontium. Spadix narrow, naked, terminating the terete scape.

6. Acorus. Spadix cylindrical, borne on the side of a leaf-like scape.


1. ARISAEMA, Martius. INDIAN TURNIP. DRAGON ARUM.

Spathe convolute below and mostly arched above. Flowers monoecious or by
abortion dioecious, covering only the base of the spadix, which is
elongated and naked above. Floral envelopes none. Sterile flowers above
the fertile, each of a cluster of almost sessile 2--4-celled anthers,
opening by pores or chinks at the top. Fertile flowers consisting each
of a 1-celled ovary, tipped with a depressed stigma, and containing 5 or
6 orthotropous ovules erect from the base of the cell; in fruit a
1--few-seeded scarlet berry. Embryo in the axis of albumen.--Low
perennial herbs, with a tuberous rootstock or corm, sending up a simple
scape sheathed with the petioles of the simple or compound veiny leaves.
(Name from [Greek: a)ri/s], a kind of _arum_, and [Greek: ai~(ma],
_blood_, from the spotted leaves of some species.)

1. A. triphyllum, Torr. (INDIAN TURNIP.) _Leaves mostly 2, divided into
3 elliptical-ovate pointed leaflets; spadix mostly dioecious,
club-shaped_, obtuse, much shorter than the spathe, which is flattened
and incurved-hooded at the ovate-lanceolate, pointed summit.--Rich
woods, N. Scotia to Fla., west to Minn. and E. Kan. May.--Corm
turnip-shaped, wrinkled, farinaceous, with an intensely acrid juice;
spathe with the petioles and sheaths green, or often variegated with
dark purple and whitish stripes or spots.

2. A. Dracontium, Schott. (GREEN DRAGON. DRAGON-ROOT.) _Leaf usually
solitary, pedately divided_ into 7--11 oblong-lanceolate pointed
leaflets; _spadix often androgynous, tapering to a long and slender
point_ beyond the oblong and convolute pointed greenish spathe.--Low
grounds, N. Eng. to Fla., west to Minn., E. Kan., and Tex. June.--Corms
clustered; petiole 1--2 deg. long, much longer than the peduncle.


2. PELTANDRA, Raf. ARROW ARUM.

Spathe elongated, convolute throughout or with a dilated blade above.
Flowers monoecious, thickly covering the long and tapering spadix
throughout (or only its apex naked). Floral envelopes none. Anthers
sessile, naked, covering all the upper part of the spadix, each of 5 or
6 cells imbedded in the margin of a thick and shield-shaped connective,
opening by a terminal pore. Ovaries at the base of the spadix, each
surrounded by 4--5 staminodia connate into a cup, 1-celled, bearing
1--few amphitropous or nearly orthotropous ovules at the base; stigma
almost sessile. Fruit a leathery or fleshy berry, 1--3-seeded. Seed
obovate, surrounded by a tenacious jelly, the base empty, the upper part
filled with a large and fleshy spherical embryo; no albumen.--Stemless
herbs, with arrow-shaped leaves and simple scapes from a thick-fibrous
or subtuberous root. Fruit in a globose cluster, enclosed by the
persistent fleshy base of the spathe. (Name from [Greek: pe/lte], _a
target_, and [Greek: a)ne/r], for _stamen_, from the shape of the
latter.)

1. P. undulata, Raf. Root of thick tufted fibres; scape 1--11/2 deg. high,
about equalling the leaves; basal lobes of the leaves rather long and
often acutish; spathe convolute throughout, wavy on the margin, mostly
green, 4--7' long; sterile portion of the spadix several times longer
than the pistillate; ovules several; fruit green; seeds 1--3. (P.
Virginica, _Kunth_, and most authors.)--Shallow water, New Eng. to Fla.,
west to Mich. and Ind. June.

2. P. alba, Raf. Rootstock tuberous, covered with thick-fleshy roots and
propagating by offshoots; lobes of the leaves mostly short and broad,
obtuse; spathe 3--4' long, the blade broader, acuminate, somewhat
expanded, white; sterile part of the spadix scarcely longer than the
pistillate; ovules and seeds solitary; berry scarlet, 5--6'' long. (P.
Virginica, _Schott._ Xanthosoma sagittifolia, _Chapm._, not _Schott._
Caladium glaucum, _Ell._ Arum Virginicum, _L._, in part?)--Marshes, S.
Va.(?) and N. C. to Fla.


3. CALLA, L. WATER ARUM.

Spathe open and spreading, ovate (abruptly pointed, the upper surface
white), persistent. Spadix oblong, entirely covered with flowers; the
lower perfect and 6-androus; the upper often of stamens only. Floral
envelopes none. Filaments slender; anthers 2-celled, opening lengthwise.
Ovary 1-celled, with 5--9 erect anatropous ovules; stigma almost
sessile. Berries (red) distinct, few-seeded. Seeds with a conspicuous
rhaphe and an embryo nearly the length of the hard albumen.--A low
perennial herb, growing in cold bogs, with a long creeping rootstock,
bearing heart-shaped long-petioled leaves, and solitary scapes. (An
ancient name, of unknown meaning.)

1. C. palustris, L.--Cold bogs, N. Scotia to N. J., west to Mich. and
Minn., and northward. June.--Seeds surrounded with jelly. (Eu.)


4. SYMPLOCARPUS, Salisb. SKUNK CABBAGE.

Spathe hooded-shell-form, pointed, very thick and fleshy, decaying in
fruit. Spadix globular, short-stalked, entirely and densely covered
with perfect flowers, their 1-celled or abortively 2-celled ovaries
immersed in the fleshy receptacle. Sepals 4, hooded. Stamens 4, opposite
the sepals, with at length rather slender filaments; anthers extrorse,
2-celled, opening lengthwise. Style 4-angled and awl-shaped; stigma
small. Ovule solitary, suspended, anatropous. Fruit a globular or oval
mass, composed of the enlarged and spongy spadix, enclosing the
spherical seeds just beneath the surface, which is roughened with the
persistent fleshy sepals and pyramidal styles. Seeds filled by the large
globular and fleshy corm-like embryo, which bears one or several
plumules at the end next the base of the ovary; albumen none.--Perennial
herb, with a strong odor like that of the skunk, and also somewhat
alliaceous; a very thick rootstock, bearing a multitude of long and
coarse fibrous roots, and a cluster of very large and broad entire veiny
leaves, preceded in earliest spring by the nearly sessile spathes, which
barely rise out of the ground. (Name from [Greek: symploke/],
_connection_, and [Greek: karpo/s], _fruit_, in allusion to the
coalescence of the ovaries into a compound fruit.)

1. S. foetidus, Salisb. Leaves ovate, cordate, becoming 1--2 deg. long,
short-petioled; spathe spotted and striped with purple and
yellowish-green, ovate, incurved; fruit (in autumn) 2--3' in diam., in
decay shedding the bulblet-like seeds, which are 4--6'' long.--Bogs and
moist grounds, N. Scotia to N. C., west to Minn. and Iowa.


5. ORONTIUM, L., GOLDEN-CLUB.

Spathe incomplete and distant, merely a leaf-sheath investing the lower
part of the slender scape, and bearing a small and imperfect bract-like
blade. Flowers crowded all over the narrow spadix, perfect; the lower
with 6 concave sepals and 6 stamens; the upper ones with 4. Filaments
flattened; anthers 2-celled, opening obliquely lengthwise. Ovary
1-celled, with an anatropous ovule; stigma sessile, entire. Fruit a
green utricle. Seed without albumen. Embryo thick and fleshy, "with a
large concealed cavity at the summit, the plumule curved in a groove on
the outside." (_Torr._)--An aquatic perennial, with a deep rootstock,
long-petioled and entire oblong and nerved floating leaves, and the
spadix terminating the elongated scape; its rather club-shaped emersed
apex as thick as the spadix. (Origin of the name obscure.)

1. O. aquaticum, L.--Ponds, Mass. to Fla. May.


6. ACORUS, L. SWEET FLAG. CALAMUS.

Spadix cylindrical, lateral, sessile, emerging from the side of a simple
2-edged scape which resembles the leaves, densely covered with perfect
flowers. Sepals 6, concave. Stamens 6; filaments linear; anthers
kidney-shaped, 1-celled, opening across. Ovary 2--3-celled, with several
pendulous orthotropous ovules in each cell; stigma minute. Fruit at
length dry, gelatinous inside, 1--few-seeded. Embryo in the axis of
albumen.--Pungent aromatic plants, especially the thick creeping
rootstocks (_calamus_ of the shops), which send up 2-edged sword-like
leaves, and scapes somewhat like them, bearing the spadix on one edge;
the upper and more foliaceous prolongation sometimes considered as a
kind of open spathe. ([Greek: A)/koras], the ancient name, of no known
meaning.)

1. A. Calamus, L. Scape leaf-like and prolonged far beyond the
(yellowish-green) spadix.--Margins of rivulets, swamps, etc., N. Scotia
to Fla., west to Minn., Iowa, and E. Kan.


ORDER 124. LEMNACEAE. (DUCKWEED FAMILY.)

_Minute stemless plants, floating free on the water, destitute of
distinct stem and foliage, being merely a frond, producing one or few
monoecious flowers from the edge or upper surface, and commonly hanging
roots from underneath; ovules rising from the base of the cell. Fruit a
1--7-seeded utricle. Seed large; the apex or radicular extremity of the
seed-coat separable as an operculum or lid_ (as in Cabomba, etc.).
_Embryo straight, surrounded by fleshy or sometimes very scanty
albumen._--The simplest, and some of them the smallest of flowering
plants, propagating by the proliferous growth of a new individual from a
cleft in the edge or base of the parent frond, remaining connected for
some time or separating, also by autumnal fronds in the form of minute
bulblets, which sink to the bottom of the water, but rise and vegetate
in spring; the flowers (in summer) and fruit scarce, in some species
hardly ever seen. Frond more or less cavernous; the upper surface
furnished with stomata.--These plants may be regarded as very simplified
Araceae.

1. Spirodela. Frond 7--11-nerved, with several rootlets.

2. Lemna. Frond 1--5-nerved, with a single rootlet.

3. Wolffia. Frond thick, very minute (1/4--{2/3}' broad), without
rootlets.


1. SPIRODELA, Schleiden.

Anther-cells bilocellate by a vertical partition and longitudinally
dehiscent. Ovules 2. Frond 7--11-nerved or more; rootlets several, with
axile vascular tissue. Otherwise as Lemna. (From [Greek: spei~ra], _a
cord_, and [Greek: de~los], _evident_.)

1. S. polyrrhiza, Schleid. Fronds round-obovate (2--4'' long), thick,
purple and rather convex beneath, dark green above, palmately (mostly
7-) nerved. (Lemna polyrrhiza, _L._)--Very common in ponds and pools,
throughout N. Am., but very rarely found in flower or fruit. (Eu.)


2. LEMNA, L. DUCKWEED. DUCK'S-MEAT.

Flowers produced from a cleft in the margin of the frond, usually three
together surrounded by a spathe; two of them staminate, consisting of a
stamen only; the other pistillate, of a simple pistil; the whole
therefore imitating a single diandrous flower. _Ster. Fl._ Filament
slender; anther 2-celled, didymous; the cells dehiscent transversely;
pollen-grains large, spherical, muricate. _Fert. Fl._ Ovary 1-celled;
style and truncate or funnel-shaped stigma simple. Ovules and seeds
1--7.--Fronds 1--5-nerved, producing a single rootlet beneath (which is
destitute of vascular tissue), proliferous from a cleft in the margin
toward the base, and at length stipitate; the tissue abounding with
bundles of rhaphides. (An old Greek name of uncertain meaning.)

[*] _Ovule solitary, orthotropous or nearly so; frond 1--3-nerved,
thin._

[+] _Fronds oblong, stalked at base, remaining connected._

1. L. trisulca, L. Fronds oblong to oblong-lanceolate (6--9'' long),
attenuate at base into a slender stalk, denticulate at the tip, very
obscurely 3-nerved, often without rootlets, usually several series of
offshoots remaining connected; spathe sac-like; seeds ovate,
amphitropous, with small round operculum.--Ponds and springy places,
N. Scotia to N. J., west to the Pacific. (Eu.)

[+][+] _Fronds oblong to elliptical or round-ovate, sessile, soon
separating._

2. L. Valdiviana, Philippi. _Fronds elliptic-oblong_, small (about 1''
long), rather thick, usually somewhat falcate, _obscurely 1-nerved;
spathe broad-reniform_; utricle long-ovate, pointed by the long style;
_seed orthotropous_, oblong, _with a prominent acute operculum_. (L.
Torreyi, _Austin._)--Pools, N. J. and southward, westward across the
continent. (S. Am.)

3. L. perpusilla, Torr. _Fronds obovate or roundish-obovate_, oblique
(1--11/2'' long), _obscurely 3-nerved_; utricle ovate; style rather long;
_seed orthotropous_, ovate or oval, obtuse, _with scarcely apiculate
operculum_.--N. Y. and N. J., west to Mich. and Wisc.--Var. TRINERVIS,
Austin, has larger, distinctly 3-nerved fronds, and an unequally cordate
seed.

4. L. minor, L. _Fronds round- to elliptic-obovate_ (1--21/2'' in
diameter), rather thick, _very obscurely 3-nerved; spathe sac-like_;
utricle short-urn-shaped, tipped with a short style; seed
oblong-obovate, _amphitropous, with prominent rounded
operculum_.--Stagnant waters, throughout N. Am. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Ovules 2--7, anatropous; fronds very thick and spongy, flat
above, very obscurely 5-nerved (11/2--3'' long)._

5. L. gibba, L. Fronds obovate-elliptic to nearly orbicular, almost
hemispherical, soon separating; bract sac-like.--Mo. (?) to Ariz. and
Calif.


3. WOLFFIA, Horkel.

Flowers central, bursting through the upper surface of the globular (or
in some foreign ones flat) and loosely cellular frond, only 2; one
consisting of a single stamen with a 1-celled 2-valved anther; the other
of a globular ovary, tipped with a very short style and a depressed
stigma. Ovule orthotropous, rather oblique in the cell. Utricle
spherical. Albumen thin.--Fronds rootless, proliferous from a cleft or
funnel-shaped opening at the base, the offspring soon detached; no
rhaphides.--The simplest and smallest of flowering plants, from
1/4--{2/3}'' long (an African and Cuban species much larger), floating as
little grains on the water. (Named for _John Fred. Wolff_, who wrote on
Lemna in 1801.)

1. W. Columbiana, Karsten. Globose or globular, {1/3}--{2/3}'' long,
very loosely cellular, light green all over, not dotted; stomata 1--6;
the opening at the base circular and with a thin border.--Floating
rather beneath the surface of stagnant waters, Conn. to N. J., west to
Minn. and La.

2. W. Brasiliensis, Weddell. Oblong, smaller and more densely cellular,
flattish and deep green with many stomata above, tumid and pale below,
brown-dotted all over, anterior edge sharp, opening at base
circular.--Growing with the last, but floating on the surface.


ORDER 125. ALISMACEAE. (WATER-PLANTAIN FAMILY.)

_Marsh herbs, with scape-like stems, sheathing leaves, and perfect or
monoecious or dioecious flowers; perianth of 3 herbaceous persistent
sepals and as many (often conspicuous) white deciduous petals, which are
imbricate or involute in bud; stamens 6 or more, included; ovaries
numerous, distinct, 1-celled and mostly 1-ovuled, becoming achenes in
fruit_ (in our genera); _seeds erect; campylotropous._--Roots fibrous;
leaves radical, petiolate and strongly nerved with transverse veinlets,
the earlier sometimes without blade; flowers long-pedicellate, mostly
verticillate, in a loose raceme or panicle, with lanceolate scarious
bracts slightly connate at base.

1. Alisma. Flowers perfect, usually 6-androus. Carpels flattened, in one
whorl.

2. Sagittaria. Flowers mostly unisexual. Stamens rarely few. Carpels
flattened, in dense heads, winged.

3. Echinodorus. Flowers perfect. Stamens 6 or more. Carpels capitate,
turgid and ribbed, often beaked.


1. ALISMA, L. WATER-PLANTAIN.

Flowers perfect. Petals involute in the bud. Stamens definite, mostly 6.
Ovaries many in a simple circle on a flattened receptacle, forming
flattened coriaceous achenes, which are dilated and 2--3-keeled on the
back.--Roots fibrous. Leaves all from the root, several-ribbed, with
connected veinlets. Scape with whorled panicled branches. Flowers
small, white or pale rose-color. (The Greek name; of uncertain
derivation.)

1. A. Plantago, L. Perennial by a stout proliferous corm; leaves
long-petioled, ovate, oblong, or lanceolate or even linear, acute,
mostly rounded or heart shaped at base, 3--9-nerved; panicle loose,
compound, many-flowered (1--2 deg. long); carpels obliquely obovate, forming
an obtusely triangular whorl in fruit.--Shallow water and ditches,
across the continent. Very variable as to foliage, but the leaves
usually more broadly cordate-ovate than in Old World forms (var.
Americanum, _R. & S._); when growing under water thinner and narrowly
lanceolate. (Eu., etc.)


2. SAGITTARIA, L. ARROW-HEAD.

Flowers monoecious, or often dioecious in n. 1 and 4, and polygamous in
n. 7. Petals imbricated in the bud. Stamens indefinite, rarely few.
Ovaries many, crowded in a spherical or somewhat triangular depressed
head on a globular receptacle, in fruit forming flat membranaceous
winged achenes.--Marsh or aquatic, mostly perennial, stoloniferous
herbs, with milky juice and fibrous roots; the scapes sheathed at base
by the bases of the long cellular petioles, of which the primary ones,
and sometimes all, are flattened, nerved, and destitute of any proper
blade (i.e. are phyllodia); when present the blade is arrow-shaped or
lanceolate, nerved and with cross-veinlets as in Alisma. Flowers
produced all summer, whorled in threes, with membranous bracts; the
sterile above. (Name from _sagitta_, an arrow, from the prevalent form
of the leaves.)

Sec. 1. SAGITTARIA proper. _Flowers monoecious, with the lower whorls
pistillate, or dioecious; stamens few or numerous, covering the
receptacle; sepals spreading or reflexed in fruit._

[*] _Filaments numerous, narrow, as long as or longer than the
linear-oblong anthers; bracts 3, distinct; fruiting heads larger._

1. S. variabilis, Engelm. Scape (1/4--4 deg. high) angled, with one or more of
the lower whorls fertile; leaves very various, almost always sagittate;
bracts mostly pointed; pedicels of the fertile flowers at least half the
length of the sterile ones; petals wholly white; filaments glabrous,
nearly twice the length of the anthers; achenes obovate (about 1''
long), winged on both margins, with a long curved or usually horizontal
beak 1/4--{1/3} its length. (S. sagittaefolia, _L._, var. variabilis, _M.
Micheli._)--In water or wet places, very common; exceedingly variable in
size and foliage, ordinarily with narrow halberd-shaped or sagittate
leaves,--sometimes dioecious, with large, broad and obtuse leaves (var.
OBTUSA), or monoecious, with large, broad and acute leaves (var.
LATIFOLIA), or the narrow leaves with long and linear diverging lobes
(var. ANGUSTIFOLIA), or with some leaves lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate,
others more or less sagittate (var. DIVERSIFOLIA), etc. Root propagating
by stolons tuberiferous at the extremity.--The European species has the
fertile pedicels only {1/3} or 1/4 the length of the sterile; claws of the
petals purple-tinged; filaments not longer than the anthers; and achenes
almost orbicular, very broadly winged and with a short straight beak.

Var. pubescens, Engelm. Upper part of petiole and scape and especially
the orbicular-ovate obtuse bracts and sepals pubescent or woolly; beak
of fruit horizontal.--N. J. and Penn. to Ga.

Var. (?) gracilis, Engelm. Lobes of the sagittate leaves very narrowly
linear (1/2--2'' wide); achene narrowly cuneate-obovate (2'' long), the
beak long, stout, and strongly recurved, the sides usually strongly
1--3-crested. (S. cristata, _Engelm._?)--Mass. to western N. Y.; Iowa.

2. S. lancifolia, L. Scape 2--5 deg. high, with several of the lower whorls
fertile; leaves lanceolate or lance-oblong, rarely linear, all with a
tapering base, thick or coriaceous (6--18' long and on a long and stout
petiole, never sagittate), the nerves mostly arising from the very thick
midrib; bracts ovate, acute or acuminate; pedicels slender, the fertile
scarcely shorter than the sterile ones; filaments pubescent; achenes
falcate, winged on the back, pointed with an incurved beak.--Swamps, Md.
to Ky., Mo., and southward. (W. Ind.)

[*][*] _Filaments very short, with enlarged mostly glandular base;
anthers ovate or short-oblong; fruiting heads small; bracts more or less
connate; leaves very rarely sagittate._

3. S. heterophylla, Pursh. Scape weak (3'--2 deg. high), at length
procumbent; leaves lanceolate or lance-oval, entire, or with one or two
narrow basal sagittate appendages; _bracts roundish, obtuse_; flowers of
the lowest whorl fertile and _almost sessile_; the sterile on long
pedicels; filaments glandular-pubescent; _achenes narrowly obovate with
a long erect beak_.--N. Eng to Fla., west to Minn. and Mo. Varies as to
foliage, the leaves being broad (var. ELLIPTICA, Engelm.), or rigid and
narrowly lanceolate with stout petioles (var. RIGIDA, Engelm.), or
nearly linear (var. ANGUSTIFOLIA, Engelm.)

4. S. graminea, Michx. Scape 3'--2 deg. high; _phyllodia flat_, mostly
_broadly linear, acuminate_; leaves ovate-lanceolate to linear, on long
slender petioles, sometimes reduced to the petiole merely; bracts rather
obtuse; whorls of flowers often few, all staminate or the lower fertile;
_pedicels_ slender, _spreading_, nearly equal; _filaments 15--20,
glandular-pubescent; achene small_ (1/2'' long), narrowly obovate, almost
beakless, _winged on the back, flat and scarcely costate on the
sides_.--N. Eng. to Minn., south to the Gulf; very variable.

5. S. teres, Watson. _Phyllodia terete, very acutely attenuate_ upward,
3--12' long, very rarely bearing a narrow blade; scape 1/2--11/2 deg. high;
bracts connate at base; _pedicels_ in 1--3 whorls, all very _slender and
spreading_, 1 or 2 fruiting, 1/2--1' long; filaments 12, dilated,
pubescent; _achene_ obovate, 1'' _long, with an erect beak_, the margins
and sides _crenately several-crested_.--In shallow water, S. New Eng. to
N. J. (Hyannis, Mass., _Deane_; Wading River, L. I., _Miller_; barrens
of N. J., _Torrey_.) Phyllodia usually very strongly nodose.
(Addendum)--Sagittaria teres has been collected also at Brewster, Mass.
(_Farlow_).

6. S. natans, Michx., var. lorata, Chapm. Usually dwarf; _leaves linear,
strap-shaped, obtuse or acutish_, 1--6' long, equalling or shorter than
the scape, very rarely with a narrow blade; pedicels in 1--3 whorls,
only 1 or 2 fruiting, _stouter and recurved_; bracts connate or
spathe-like; _filaments 6--8, glabrous; achene_ obovate, _short-beaked,
1'' long_, the margins and sides _crenately crested_. (S. pusilla,
_Pursh._)--In mud or shallow water, near the coast; N. Y. to Fla.

Var. (?) gracillima, Watson. Scape and the almost or wholly bladeless
leaves very slender and greatly elongated (2--4 deg. long, 1'' wide);
pedicels all elongated, in usually distant whorls, the lower pistillate,
slender and spreading; fruit unknown. (S. natans, _Engelm._ in Torr.
Bull. ix. 4.)--In deep water of streams in E. Mass. (_Hitchings, Boott,
C. E. Faxon_, etc.) Wholly submerged, only 1 or 2 flowers appearing at a
time, floating on the surface. The fruit, maturing under water, has not
yet been collected.

Sec. 2. LOPHIOCARPUS. _Fertile flowers perfect; stamens 9--15, at the base
of the receptacle; sepals erect and embracing the fruit._

7. S. calycina, Engelm. Scape weak (3--9' high), at length mostly
procumbent; usually only the lowest whorl fertile, with pedicels as long
as those of the sterile flowers, recurved in fruit; bracts orbicular,
obtuse or rarely pointed; filaments slightly rough, as long as the
anthers; achenes obovate with a short horizontal style; leaves broadly
halberd-shaped, obtuse or acutish, with wide spreading lobes, often
wider than long, or lanceolate or sometimes reduced to linear
phyllodia.--Maine to Del., west to Wisc., Mo., and Tex. Quite variable,
several forms being enumerated, as var. SPONGIOSA, with spongy texture
and bladeless submerged leaves, eastward; and westward, var. FLUITANS,
with lance-linear floating leaves.


3. ECHINODORUS, Richard.

Flowers perfect. Petals imbricated in the bud. Stamens 6--21 or more.
Ovaries several or many, imbricated in a head, forming thick and ribbed
achenes in fruit, often beaked with a projecting persistent
style.--Mostly annuals, with the habit of Sagittaria, the naked stems
sparingly branched or simple, and the flowers on rather short pedicels,
in whorls of 3--6 or more. Fl. summer and autumn. (Name from [Greek:
e)chino/des], _prickly_, or from [Greek: e)chi~nos], and [Greek: doro/s]
_a leathern bottle_, applied to the ovary, which is in most species
armed with the persistent style, so as to form a sort of prickly head of
fruit.)

1. E. parvulus, Engelm. Scapes 1--3' high; shoots often creeping and
proliferous; _leaves lanceolate or spatulate, acute_ (1/2--11/2' long,
including the petiole); umbel single, 2--8-flowered; pedicels reflexed
in fruit; flower 3'' broad; _stamens 9; styles much shorter than the
ovary; achenes beakless_, obtusely few-ribbed.--In mud, Mass. to Mich.
and E. Minn., south to Fla. and Tex. (S. Am.)

2. E. rostratus, Engelm. _Scape erect_, 3'--2 deg. high, longer than the
leaves; _leaves broadly ovate, cordate or truncate at base, obtuse_ (the
blade 1--3' long); umbel proliferous, in a branched panicle; flower 5''
broad; _stamens 12; styles longer than the ovary; achenes beaked_,
acutely many-ribbed.--Swamps and ditches, Ill. to Fla., Mo., and Tex.--A
low form (var. LANCEOLATUS, Engelm.) has the leaves lanceolate with an
acute base. Ill., Mo.

3. E. radicans, Engelm. _Stems or scape prostrate, creeping_ (2--4 deg.
long), proliferous, bearing many whorls of flowers; leaves somewhat
truncately broadly heart-shaped, obtuse (2--8' broad), long-petioled;
flowers 6--9'' broad; _stamens about 21; styles shorter than the ovary;
achenes short-beaked_, the keeled back denticulate.--Swamps, Ill. to
N. C. and Fla., west to Mo. and Tex.


ORDER 126. NAIADACEAE. (PONDWEED FAMILY.)

_Marsh or mostly immersed aquatic herbs, with stems jointed and leafy
or_ (in Triglochin) _naked and scape-like, leaves sheathing at base or
stipulate, and flowers perfect or unisexual, often spathaceous, with
perianth of 4 or 6 herbaceous distinct valvate segments, or membranous
and tubular or cup-shaped, or none._ Stamens 1, 2, 4 or 6, with extrorse
anthers. Ovaries 1--6, distinct or more or less coherent, 1-celled,
usually 1-ovuled, in fruit follicular or capsular or an indehiscent
berry or utricle.

SUBORDER I. Juncagineae. Marsh plants, with terete bladeless leaves;
flowers perfect, spicate or racemose, with herbaceous 6- (rarely 3-)
lobed perianth; carpels 3 or 6, more or less united, separating at
maturity. Seeds anatropous; embryo straight.

1. Triglochin. Ovaries 3--6, united until maturity. Leaves radical.
Flowers bractless, in a spike-like raceme terminating a jointless scape.

2. Scheuchzeria. Ovaries 3, nearly distinct, at length divergent.
Flowers bracteate in a loose raceme upon a leafy stem.

SUBORDER II. Naiadeae. Immersed aquatics, with flat leaves; ovaries
solitary or distinct, 1-ovuled.

[+] Flowers perfect, spiked or clustered; anthers 4 or 2, sessile;
leaves alternate.

3. Potamogeton. Spike peduncled. Sepals 4, herbaceous. Anthers 4.
Ovaries 4, sessile.

4. Ruppia. Flowers on an enclosed spadix, at length long-exserted,
without perianth. Anther-cells 4, distinct. Ovaries 4, becoming
stipitate.

[+][+] Flowers monoecious or dioecious, axillary, naked, monandrous;
leaves opposite (alternate in n. 6).

5. Zannichellia. Monoecious. Pistils (2--5) from a cup-shaped involucre
or sheath.

6. Zostera. Pistils and stamens alternate in 2 vertical rows on the
inner side of a leaf-like enclosed spadix. Stigmas 2, linear. Stem
creeping.

7. Naias. Dioecious; pistil solitary, naked. Stamen enclosed in a
membranous spathe. Stems floating, with opposite or ternate leaves.


1. TRIGLOCHIN, L. ARROW-GRASS.

Sepals and petals nearly alike (greenish), ovate, concave, deciduous.
Stamens 3--6; anthers oval, on very short filaments. Pistils united into
a 3--6-celled compound ovary; stigmas sessile; ovules solitary. Capsule
splitting when ripe into 3--6 carpels, which separate from a persistent
central axis.--Perennials, with rush-like, fleshy leaves, below
sheathing the base of the wand-like naked and jointless scape. Flowers
small, in a spiked raceme, bractless. (Name composed of [Greek:
trei s], _three_, and [Greek: glochi/n], _point_, from the three points
of the ripe fruit in n. 1 when dehiscent.)

[*] _Fruit of 3 carpels._

1. T. palustris, L. Scape (6--18' high) and leaves slender; _sepals and
stamens 6; fruit linear-club-shaped; carpels_ when ripe separating from
below upward, leaving a triangular axis, _awl-pointed at
base_.--Marshes, western N. Y. to Ill., Minn., and westward. Aug. (Eu.,
Asia, etc.)

2. T. striata, Ruiz & Pav. Scape (6--12' high) and leaves slender;
flowers very small; _sepals and stamens 3; fruit globose-triangular_, or
when dry 3-lobed. (T. triandra, _Michx._)--Sea-shore, Md. to Fla.
(S. Am., etc.)

[*][*] _Fruit of 6 carpels (rarely 5)._

3. T. maritima, L. Scape (1--3 deg. high) and leaves thickish, fleshy; fruit
ovate or oblong, acutish; carpels rounded at base and slightly grooved
on the back, the edges acute.--Salt-marshes along the coast, Lab. to
N. J., and in saline places in the interior across the continent. (Eu.,
Asia, etc.)


2. SCHEUCHZERIA, L.

Sepals and petals oblong, spreading, nearly alike (greenish-yellow), but
the latter narrower, persistent. Stamens 6; anthers linear. Ovaries 3,
globular, slightly united at base, 2--3 ovuled, bearing flat sessile
stigmas, in fruit forming 3 diverging and inflated 1--2 seeded pods,
opening along the inside.--A low bog-herb, with a creeping jointed
rootstock, tapering into the ascending simple stem, which is zigzag,
partly sheathed by the bases of the grass-like conduplicate leaves, and
terminated by a loose raceme of a few flowers, with sheathing bracts;
leaves tubular at the apex. (Named for _John_ and _John Jacob
Scheuchzer_, distinguished Swiss botanists early in the 18th century.)

1. S. palustris, L.--Peat-bogs, N. Brunswick to N. J., westward across
the continent. June. (Eu., Asia.)


3. POTAMOGETON, Tourn. PONDWEED.

Flowers perfect. Sepals 4, rounded, valvate in the bud. Stamens 4,
opposite the sepals; anthers nearly sessile, 2-celled. Ovaries 4 (rarely
only one), with an ascending campylotropous ovule; stigma sessile or on
a short style. Fruit drupe-like when fresh, more or less compressed;
endocarp (_nutlet_) crustaceous. Embryo hooked, annular, or cochleate,
the radicular end pointing downward.--Herbs of fresh, or one in
brackish, ponds and streams, with jointed mostly rooting stems, and
2-ranked leaves, which are usually alternate or imperfectly opposite;
the submersed ones pellucid, the floating ones often dilated and of a
firmer texture. Stipules membranous, more or less united and sheathing.
Spikes sheathed by the stipules in the bud, mostly raised on a peduncle
to the surface of the water. (An ancient name, composed of [Greek:
potamo/s], _a river_, and [Greek: gei/ton], _a neighbor_, from the place
of growth.)--By _fruit_, the full-grown fresh or macerated fruit is
intended; by _nutlet_, that with the fleshy outer portion or epicarp
removed. All except n. 19 flower in summer; the month mentioned
indicates the time of ripening of the fruit.

Sec. 1. _Leaves of two sorts; floating ones more or less coriaceous, with a
dilated petioled blade, different in form from the thinner submersed
ones._

[*] _Submersed leaves reduced to narrowly grass-like or filiform sessile
phyllodia._

[+] _Stems rather stout; stipules free; spikes all emersed, cylindrical
and densely fruited; fruits fleshy and turgid, obliquely obovate._

1. P. natans, L. _Stem simple or sparingly branched_; floating leaves
all long-petioled, elliptical or ovate, somewhat cordate at base, obtuse
but with a blunt point, 21--29-nerved; upper submersed leaves
lanceolate, early perishing, the lower (later in the season) very
slender (3--7' long, barely 1'' wide); upper _stipules very long, acute;
peduncle about the thickness of the stem_; spikes 1--2' long; sides of
the turgid _nutlet with a small deep impression in the middle_; embryo
coiled into an incomplete elliptical ring.--Ponds and ditches, N. Scotia
to Va., westward across the continent. In deeper or flowing water the
plant becomes more slender and often wholly submersed (var. PROLIXUS,
_Koch_).--Aug., Sept. (Eu., Asia.)

2. P. Oakesianus, Robbins. Stem more slender, _much branched_; floating
leaves smaller (1--11/2' long), ovate- or oblong-elliptical, obtuse,
fewer-(17--23-) nerved; lowest submersed ones almost capillary (only
1/4--1/2'' wide), continuing through the flowering season; spikes shorter
(3/4--1' long), on _peduncles much thicker than the stem_; fruit smaller
and more acute; _sides of the turgid nutlet not at all impressed_;
curvature of the embryo nearly circular, its apex directed to a point
above its base.--Ponds, and especially pools and stagnant ditches, Mass.
to N. J.; also Anticosti. Aug.

3. P. Pennsylvanicus, Cham. _Stems compressed_, often simple from the
creeping rootstocks; floating leaves chiefly opposite (1--31/2' long),
11--17-nerved, oblong, tapering into a _short petiole_, the lower
gradually narrowing and passing into the submersed ones, which are very
numerous and approximate, 2-ranked, linear (2--5' long, and 1--21/2''
wide), 5--7-nerved, the lateral nerves slender and nearly marginal, the
space within the inner nerves _coarsely cellular-reticulated; stipules
very obtuse_; spikes numerous, about the length of the thickened
peduncle; _fruit round-obovate_, flattish, 3-keeled when dry; _nutlet
distinctly impressed on the sides_; curvature of the embryo transversely
oval. (P. Claytonii, _Tuckerm._)--Still or flowing water, N. Brunswick
to S. C., west to N. Ind. and Minn. July, Aug.

[+][+] _Like the preceding section, but all the parts small, slender and
delicate, only the fertile plants producing floating leaves; spikes very
small and few-flowered; propagated by autumn buds._

4. P. Vaseyi, Robbins. Very delicate; stem almost capillary; _floating
leaves obovate_ (3--5'' long) and about the length of their filiform
petioles, with 5 nerves deeply impressed beneath, cross-veins distinct;
submersed leaves filiform-linear, very attenuate (1--2' long, {1/8}--1/4''
wide) and acute; _stipules_ not adnate, scarious, _long_, acute; spikes
all emersed, few, interrupted-oblong, 3--5-flowered, on a thickish
peduncle; fruit oblique, round-obovate ({2/3}'' long), compressed,
slightly sharp-margined, tipped with a distinct recurved style, the
sides impressed and face acute; upper portion of the embryo circularly
incurved, its apex transverse to the fruit.--Canada and N. Eng.; also
Ill. The fruiting form, with floating leaves, rare; the submerged form
apparently much more abundant.

5. P. lateralis, Morong. Stem filiform, branching; _floating leaves
elliptical_ (4--6'' long by 2'' wide), with 5--7 nerves deeply impressed
beneath, tapering at base into a somewhat dilated petiole shorter than
the blade; _submersed leaves linear_, acute (1--3' long by 1/4--1/2'' wide),
1--3-nerved, the mid-nerve with fine veins or cellular reticulations on
each side, bi-glandular at base; _stipules short; peduncles with a very
peculiar lateral appearance_, widely spreading at maturity, sometimes
even recurved, often thicker than the stem; spikes often interrupted
(2--4-flowered); fruit obliquely obovate (hardly 1'' long), the back
much curved, with two fine grooves upon it; embryo oval in its curve,
the apex nearly touching the base.--Mass. and Mich.; rare. Undeveloped
specimens resemble P. pusillus.

[+][+][+] _Stems slender or filiform, much branched; floating leaves
sometimes wanting; stipules adnate to the base of the leaf; spikes of
two kinds, one emersed, cylindrical and many-flowered, on a club-shaped
peduncle, the other submersed, globular and few-flowered; fruit flat,
cochleate, with thin or scarcely any flesh and a thin nutlet; embryo
spiral._

6. P. Spirillus, Tuckerm. Floating leaves oval to lance-oblong and
lanceolate (the largest 10'' long, 4'' wide), usually obtuse, about
equalling the _rather dilated petioles_, with 5--many nerves beneath
deeply impressed; upper submersed leaves either with or without a
lance-oblong or broad-linear proper blade; the numerous lower ones
narrow-linear, tapering toward the obtuse apex (3/4--11/2' long, 1/4--{2/3}''
wide); stipules early lacerate; _submersed flowers usually solitary on
very short erect peduncles; fruit_ with the back either _winged and with
4--5 distinct teeth or wingless and entire; embryo coiled 13/4
turns_.--Rivers, and even far up small streams, N. Eng. to Va., west to
Mich. and Mo. June--Aug.--Stem less slender than in the next.

7. P. hybridus, Michx. Floating leaves oval to lance-oblong (the largest
10'' long, 6'' wide), often acute, longer than the _filiform petioles_,
with about 5--7 nerves beneath deeply impressed; submersed leaves very
numerous, almost setaceous (1--3' long, very rarely 1/2'' wide); stipules
obtuse; emersed spikes 4--7'' long; _submersed_ spikes 1--4-flowered,
their _peduncles_ (of their own length) _frequently recurved; fruit
minute, about 8-toothed on the margin; embryo coiled 11/2 turns_.--Shallow
stagnant waters, N. Brunswick to Fla., west to Mich., Mo., and N. Mex.
June--Aug.

[*][*] _Submersed leaves lanceolate, rarely oval or linear,
membranaceous; spikes dense, many-flowered, on stout peduncles._

8. P. rufescens, Schrad. Stem simple; floating leaves (often wanting)
2--5' long, rather thin, _wedge-oblanceolate, narrowed into a short
petiole_, 11--17-nerved; _submersed leaves almost sessile_, lanceolate
and lance-oblong, smooth on the margin, fewer-nerved; stipules broad,
hyaline, obtuse, upper ones acuminate; spike 1--2' long, often somewhat
compound; fruit obovate, lenticular, pitted when immature, with an acute
margin and pointed with the rather long style; embryo incompletely
annular.--In streams or ponds, N. Brunswick to N. J., west to Minn. and
Tex. Aug., Sept. (Eu.)

9. P. fluitans, Roth. Stem often branching below; _floating leaves
thinnish, lance-oblong or long-elliptical_, often acute,
_long-petioled_, 17--23-nerved; _submersed leaves very long_ (3--12', by
2--12'' wide), _lanceolate and lance-linear_, 7--15-nerved, coarsely
reticulated; peduncles somewhat thickened upward; fruit obliquely
obovate, obscurely 3-keeled when fresh, and distinctly so when dry, the
middle one winged above and sometimes with 3--5 shallow indentations;
the rounded slightly curved face surmounted by the short style; nutlet
with the sides scarcely impressed; upper part of the embryo circularly
in-curved. (P. lonchites, _Tuckerm._)--In streams or rarely in ponds,
N. Brunswick to N. J., west to Minn. and Iowa. Aug., Sept. (Eu.)

10. P. pulcher, Tuckerm. Stem simple, black-spotted; _leaves of three
kinds_; floating ones becoming very large (41/2 by 31/2'), _roundish-ovate
and cordate or ovate-oblong_, 25--37-nerved, _all alternate; upper
submersed ones (3--5) usually lanceolate_, acute at base and very
long-acuminate, 10--15-nerved, very thin, cellular each side of the
midrib, undulate, short-petioled; _lowest_ (2--4 near the base of the
stem) _thicker, plane, oval or oblong_ with a rounded base, or
spatulate-oblong, on longer petioles; stipules rather short and obtuse;
peduncles thicker than the stem; fruit with a rounded back and angular
face, pointed, distinctly 3-keeled when fresh, sharply so when dry;
nutlet with two deep dorsal furrows, and a sinus below the angle in
front; sides flat; embryo circularly much incurved above.--Ponds, Vt. to
Ga. and Mo. July, Aug.

11. P. amplifolius, Tuckerm. Stems simple, of very variable length;
_floating leaves_ (sometimes wanting) large, _oblong or lance-ovate_,
sometimes slightly cordate at base, abruptly acutish, 30--50-nerved, on
_rather long petioles_; submersed leaves often very large (reaching 7'
by 2'), lanceolate or oval, acute at each end, _usually much recurved,
undulate_, mostly on short petioles; _stipules very long and tapering to
a point_, soon becoming loose; peduncles thickened upward, in deep water
much elongated; fruit very large (over 2'' long), rather obliquely
obovate, 3-keeled, with a broad stout beak; nutlet slightly impressed on
the sides; upper part of the embryo curved into a ring.--Ponds and
rivers, N. Eng. to N. J., west to Minn. and Kan. Aug., Sept.

12. P. Illinoensis, Morong. _Stem stout, branching_ towards the summit;
floating leaves opposite, oval or ovate (2--5' long by 11/2--2' broad),
19--25-nerved, rounded or subcordate at base, with a short blunt point
at apex, on short petioles, _submersed leaves rather few,
oblong-elliptical_, acute at each end, _usually ample_ (largest 8' by
11/2'); _stipules coarse, obtuse, strongly bicarinate_ (2' long);
peduncles often clustered at the summit (2--4' long), thickening upward;
_fruit roundish-obovate_ (13/4--2'' long), 3-keeled on the back, middle
keel prominent; nutlet flattened and slightly impressed on the sides,
obtuse or pointed at base; apex of embryo directed transversely
inward.--Streams and ditches, western N. Y. to Ill., Iowa, and Minn.
Very near the last.

13. P. heterophyllus, Schreb. _Stem slender, very branching_ below;
floating leaves mostly thin, variable, but with a short blunt point,
9--15-nerved, usually 1--2' long and 6--9'' wide; submersed ones usually
lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, acuminate or cuspidate, narrowed toward
the base, about 7-nerved on the stem and 3-nerved on the branches; upper
ones petioled, lower sessile; _stipules obtuse_, loose; peduncles
somewhat thickened upward; fruit small, roundish, compressed, scarcely
keeled; embryo annular above. (P. gramineus, _Fries_.)--Still or flowing
water, common. Varies exceedingly in its submersed leaves, peduncles,
etc.; the var. GRAMINIFOLIUS (Fries), growing in rapid streams, with
stems much elongated and less branched, and the flaccid submersed leaves
2--7' long by 2--10'' wide.

Var. (?) myriophyllus, Robbins. Sending up from running rootstocks many
short repeatedly dichotomous and densely leafy stems; fertile stems very
slender; floating leaves small, delicate, lance-oblong, on long filiform
petioles; submersed stem-leaves larger, early perishing; those of the
branches (deep-green) linear-oblanceolate, very small (3/4--1' long),
acute, sometimes minutely serrulate; spike slender, loosely-flowered,
much shorter than the thickened peduncle.--Apponaug Pond, R. I., without
fruit.

13^a. P. Zizii, Mert. & Koch. Resembling P. lucens, but smaller, much
branched at base; _upper leaves coriaceous or subcoriaceous,
long-petioled_ and _sometimes emersed_, the others subsessile, all
usually numerous, undulate and _shining_; peduncle elongated. (P.
lucens, var. minor, _Nolte_. Also P. gramineus, var. (?) spathulaeformis,
_Robbins_; P. spathaeformis, _Tuckerm._; "P. varians, _Morong_.")--N. Eng
to Fla., and westward. Connecting with the next section. (Eu.)

Sec. 2. _Leaves all submersed and similar, mostly sessile, membranaceous
and dilated, lanceolate, oblong, or oval; stipules obtuse, becoming
loose._

14. P. lucens, L. Stem thick, branching, sometimes very large; _leaves
more or less petioled_, oval or lanceolate, _mucronate_, often rough
serrulate, _frequently shining_; peduncles often elongated; _fruit_
roundish and compressed, _with obtuse margins, slightly keeled_; embryo
circularly incurved above.--Ponds, N. Eng. to Fla., west to the Pacific.
Aug., Sept. (Eu.)

Var. (?) Connecticutensis, Robbins. Stem flexuous; _leaves_ all
submersed, nearly sessile, lanceolate, _acuminate, crisped, not shining
nor serrulate; fruit larger, distinctly keeled_; nutlet thick and
hard.--Lake Saltonstall, East Haven, Conn.

15. P. praelongus, Wulf. Stem very long, branching, flexuous; _leaves_
lance-oblong or lanceolate (sometimes 7' long), _half-clasping, obtuse
with a boat-shaped cavity_ at the extremity, thence splitting on
pressure; stipules scarious, very obtuse; spikes rather loose-flowered;
_peduncles very long_ (sometimes reaching 20'); _fruit_ obliquely
obovate, compressed, _sharply keeled_ when dry; style terminating the
nearly straight face; curve of the embryo oval and longitudinal.--Ponds
and large rivers, N. Scotia to Mass., west to Minn. and Iowa. Sept.,
Oct.--Stem white; foliage bright green. (Eu.)

16. P. perfoliatus, L. Stem branching; _leaves orbicular, ovate or
lanceolate from a cordate-clasping base_, usually obtuse and often
minutely serrulate; peduncles short, cylindrical; _fruit_ irregularly
obovate, _obtusely margined_; embryo incurved in an oval.--Ponds and
slow streams, common. N. Scotia to Fla., west to Minn. and Iowa. Sept.,
Oct. (Eu.)

Var. lanceolatus, Robbins. Larger; _leaves long-lanceolate_ from a
cordate clasping base and _acuminate_, wavy, 3--41/2' long; _peduncles
thickened upward_.--Same range as the species, and extending west to the
Pacific.

17. P. crispus, L. _Stem compressed; leaves linear-oblong_,
half-clasping, obtuse, _serrulate, crisped-wavy, 3-nerved; fruit
long-beaked_; upper portion of the embryo incurved in a large
circle.--Flowing and stagnant waters, Mass. to N. J. and Va., west to
western N. Y. June, July. (Eu.)

18. P. Mysticus, Morong. _Stem very slender_ and irregularly branching,
nearly filiform (1--3 deg. high); _leaves oblong-linear_ (1/2--11/2' long by
2--3'' wide), 5--7-nerved, _finely undulate and entire, obtuse or
bluntly pointed, abruptly narrowing at base, sessile or partly
clasping_; spikes few, capitate (4--6-flowered). on erect peduncles
(1--2' long); fruit (immature) obovate, small (hardly 3/4'' long),
_obscurely 3-keeled on the back_, a little beaked by the slender
recurved style.--Mystic Pond, Medford, Mass.

Sec. 3. _Leaves all submersed and similar, mostly membranaceous and
sessile, linear or setaceous._

[*] _Stipules free from the sheathing base of the leaf._

19. P. zosteraefolius, Schum. _Stem branching, wing-fattened; leaves_
linear and grass-like (commonly 4' by 11/2''), _abruptly pointed, with
many fine and 3 larger nerves_; stipules (seen young) oblong, very
obtuse; _spikes cylindrical_, 12--15-flowered, _not half as long as the
peduncle_; fruit obliquely obovate, somewhat keeled and with slight
teeth on the back, the sides not impressed, the face arching and
terminated by the short style; _summit of the large embryo lying
transverse to the fruit_. (P. compressus, _Fries_; not _L._?)--Still and
slow-flowing waters, N. Eng. to N. J., Iowa, and Minn. Aug., Sept. (Eu.)

20. P. Hillii, Morong. Stem slender, _widely branching, flattish_;
leaves linear, _acute_ (1--21/2' long by 1/2--11/4'' wide), _3-nerved_, the
lateral nerves delicate and near the margin; stipules whitish, striate,
obtuse (3--5'' long); _spikes capitate_ (3--6-fruited), _on short
spreading or recurved peduncles_; fruit as in the last.--Mich. and
western N. Y.

21. P. obtusifolius, Mertens & Koch. _Stem flattened, very branching;
leaves_ linear, tapering toward the base, obtuse and mucronate or very
acute, _3- (rarely 5-) nerved; stipules elongated_, very obtuse; _spike
ovate, continuous_, 5--8-flowered, _about the length of the peduncle_;
fruit oval, apiculate with the style, not keeled when fresh, _upper
portion of embryo_ coiled inward and _lying transverse to the
fruit_.--Slow streams and ponds, Canada and N. Eng. to western N. Y. and
Mich. Sept., Oct. (Eu.)

22. P. pauciflorus, Pursh. _Stem filiform, flattish and very branching;
leaves narrowly linear_ (1--2' long and seldom 1/2'' wide),
acute, _obscurely 3-nerved; stipules obtuse; spikes_ capitate,
1--4- _(usually 2-) flowered_, on short club-shaped peduncles; _fruit
roundish-lenticular_; the _back_ more or less _crested_; upper portion
of the embryo incurved in a circle.--Still or stagnant waters, N.
Brunswick to Ga., Iowa, Minn., and westward.

Var. Niagarensis, Gray. Stem often longer (1--3 deg.); leaves larger
(11/2--31/2' long by 1'' wide or less), 3--5-nerved at base, very acute and
mucronate, narrowed to the subpetiolate base. (P. Niagarensis,
_Tuckerm_.)--Running water, Great Lakes to S. C.; also in Cal.

23. P. pusillus, L. _Stem slender_, flattish or nearly cylindrical,
often very branching; _leaves narrow- or setaceous-linear_, acuminate,
_acute or subacute, 1--3-nerved_, furnished with _translucent glands_ on
each side at the base; stipules at first obtuse; spikes interrupted or
capitate, 2--8-flowered, on rather long peduncles; _fruit_ obliquely
elliptical, _scarcely keeled; apex of embryo_ incurved and _directed
obliquely downward_.--Pools and ditches, N. Scotia to N. J., west to
Minn. and Mo., and westward.--Leaves sometimes almost setaceous (var.
tenuissimus, _Koch_).

Var. polyphyllus, Morong. Dwarf form (3--5' high), divaricately
branching from the base, very leafy throughout; leaves very obtuse, not
cuspidate, 3-nerved; non-flowering but abundantly provided with
propagating buds which are formed on the thickened and hardened ends of
the branches and closely invested by imbricated leaves.--In a shallow
pool, S. Natick, Mass.

24. P. mucronatus, Schrad. Resembling P. pusillus, but stem less
branching; _leaves broader_ (almost 1'' wide), _often 5-nerved; spikes
interrupted_. (P. pusillus, var. major, _Fries_.)--N. Brunswick to
western N. Y., Mich., and Minn. July. (Eu.)

25. P. gemmiparus, Robbins. Stem filiform, branching, terete, varying
greatly in height; _leaves hair-like_, sometimes not as broad as the
stem, often with no apparent midrib, _tapering to the finest point_
(1--3' long), bi-glandular at base; stipules 1/2--1' long; spikes few
(3--6-flowered), _interrupted_, on long filiform peduncles; _propagating
buds very numerous_; fruit like that of P. pusillus, very rare. (P.
pusillus, var.? gemmiparus, _Robbins_.)--Slow-moving streams and still
water, Mass. Aug., Sept.

26. P. Tuckermani, Robbins. _Very slender and delicate_ from a creeping
rootstock, of a fine light green; stem filiform with several short and
repeatedly dichotomous leaf-bearing branches; _leaves_ thin and flat,
but _setaceous and tapering to near the fineness of a hair_ (1--4' long
and {1/3}'' extreme width), obscurely 1--3-nerved, with a few coarse
reticulations; stipules rather persistent below, {1/3}' long, obtuse;
_peduncle solitary, very long_, rather thickened upward; _spike
4--8-flowered, in fruit continuous, oblong; fruit thick-lenticular_,
obscurely 3-keeled; _nutlet slightly impressed on the sides; shell thick
and hard_; embryo nearly annular.--Cold ponds, White Mountains of N. H.,
N. Y., and N. J.

[*][*] _Stipules united with the sheathing base of the leaf._

27. P. pectinatus, L. _Stem filiform_, repeatedly dichotomous; _leaves
very narrowly linear_, attenuate to the apex, 1-nerved with a few
transverse veins; _spikes interrupted_, on long filiform peduncles;
fruit obliquely broad-obovate, compressed, _bluntly keeled_; shell of
nutlet very thick; _embryo spirally incurved_.--N. Brunswick to Fla.,
westward across the continent. Aug.--Oct. (Eu.)

28. P. marinus, L. Resembling narrow-leaved forms of the last species,
_low and very leafy_; peduncles much elongated; _fruit much smaller_
(1'' long) and thinner, round-obovate, _not keeled_ upon the rounded
back, tipped with the broad sessile stigma; _embryo annular_.--Western
N. Y., Ill., Mich., and southward. Probably the range of this species
is much more extensive than indicated, as it has been confounded with P.
pectinatus.

29. P. Robbinsii, Oakes. _Stem_ ascending from a creeping base, _rigid_,
very branching, _invested by the bases of the leaves and stipules;
leaves crowded in two ranks, recurved-spreading_, narrow-lanceolate or
linear (3--5' long and 2--3'' wide), acuminate, _ciliate-serrulate_ with
translucent teeth, many-nerved; stipules obtuse when young, their nerves
soon becoming bristles; _spikes numerous, loosely few-flowered_, on
short peduncles; fruit oblong-obovate (2'' long), _keeled with a
broadish wing_, acutely beaked; embryo stout, ovally annular.--In ponds
and slow streams, N. Brunswick to N. J., the N. shore of L. Superior,
and far westward.


4. RUPPIA, L. DITCH-GRASS.

Flowers perfect, 2 or more approximated on a slender spadix, which is at
first enclosed in the sheathing spathe-like base of a leaf, entirely
destitute of floral envelopes, consisting of 2 sessile stamens, each
with 2 large and separate anther-cells, and 4 small sessile ovaries,
with solitary campylotropous suspended ovules; stigma sessile,
depressed. Fruit small obliquely ovate pointed drupes, each raised on a
slender stalk which appears after flowering; the spadix itself also then
raised on an elongated thread-form peduncle. Embryo ovoid, with a short
and pointed plumule from the upper end, by the side of the short
cotyledon.--Marine herbs, growing under water, with long and thread-like
forking stems, and slender almost capillary alternate leaves, sheathing
at the base. Flowers rising to the surface at the time of expansion.
(Dedicated to _H. B. Ruppius_, a German botanical author of the early
part of the 18th century.)

1. R. maritima, L. Leaves linear-capillary; nut ovate, obliquely erect,
11/2'' long; fruiting peduncles capillary (3--6' long); stipes 1--12''
long.--Shallow bays, along the entire coast; also occasionally in saline
places in the interior. (Eu., Asia, etc.)


5. ZANNICHELLIA, Micheli. HORNED PONDWEED.

Flowers monoecious, sessile, naked, usually both kinds from the same
axil; the sterile consisting of a single stamen, with a slender filament
bearing a 2--4-celled anther; the fertile of 2--5 (usually 4) sessile
pistils in the same cup-shaped involucre, forming obliquely oblong
nutlets in fruit, beaked with a short style, which is tipped by an
obliquely disk-shaped or somewhat 2-lobed stigma. Seed orthotropous,
suspended, straight. Cotyledon taper, bent and coiled.--Slender
branching herbs, growing under water, with mostly opposite long and
linear thread-form entire leaves, and sheathing membranous stipules.
(Named in honor of _Zannichelli_, a Venetian botanist.)

1. Z. palustris, L. Style at least half as long as the fruit, which is
flattish, somewhat incurved, even, or occasionally more or less toothed
on the back (not wing-margined in our plant), nearly sessile; or, in
var. PEDUNCULATA, both the cluster and the separate fruits evidently
peduncled.--Ponds and slow streams, throughout N. America, but not
common. July. (Eu., Asia.)


6. ZOSTERA, L. GRASS-WRACK. EEL-GRASS.

Flowers monoecious; the two kinds naked and sessile and alternately
arranged in two rows on the midrib of one side of a linear leaf-like
spadix, which is hidden in a long and sheath-like base of a leaf
(spathe); the sterile flowers consisting of single ovate or oval
1-celled sessile anthers, as large as the ovaries, and containing a tuft
of threads in place of ordinary pollen; the fertile of single
ovate-oblong ovaries attached near their apex, tapering upward into an
awl-shaped style, and containing a pendulous orthotropous ovule; stigmas
2, long and bristle-form, deciduous. Utricle bursting irregularly,
enclosing an oblong longitudinally ribbed seed (or nutlet). Embryo short
and thick (proper cotyledon almost obsolete), with an open chink or
cleft its whole length, from which protrudes a doubly curved slender
plumule.--Grass-like marine herbs, growing wholly under water, from a
jointed creeping stem or rootstock, sheathed by the bases of the very
long and linear, obtuse, entire, grass-like, ribbon-shaped leaves
(whence the name, from [Greek: zoste/r], _a band_).

1. Z. marina, L. Leaves obscurely 3--5-nerved.--Common in shoal water of
bays along the coast, from Newf. to Fla. (Eu.)


7. NAIAS, L. NAIAD.

Flowers dioecious or monoecious, axillary, solitary and sessile; the
sterile consisting of a single stamen enclosed in a little membranous
spathe; anther at first nearly sessile, the filament at length
elongated. Fertile flowers consisting of a single ovary tapering into a
short style; stigmas 2--4, awl-shaped; ovule erect, anatropous. Fruit a
little seed-like nutlet, enclosed in a loose and separable membranous
epicarp. Embryo straight, the radicular end downward.--Slender branching
herbs, growing under water, with opposite and linear leaves, somewhat
crowded into whorls, spinulose-toothed, sessile and dilated at base.
Flowers very small, solitary, but often clustered with the branch-leaves
in the axils; in summer. ([Greek: Naia/s], _a water-nymph_.)

1. N. marina, L. _Stem rather stout and often armed with broad prickles;
leaves broadly linear_ (3--18'' long), _coarsely and sharply toothed_,
the dilated base entire; fruit 2--21/2'' long; _seed very finely lineate,
oblong_, slightly compressed. (N. major, _All._)--Marshes and
salt-springs of western N. Y. and Mich. Teeth of one or more brownish
cells upon a many-celled base. (Eu.)

Var. gracilis, Morong. Internodes long (1--3') and nearly naked, with
only a few teeth above; leaves very narrow, the dilated base also
toothed; fruit smaller.--Canoga marshes, western N. Y.; also in Fla.

Var. recurvata, Dudley. Stems short, inclined to be dichotomously
branched, recurved-spreading; leaves usually recurved, the teeth
prominent, the dilated base with a projecting tooth each side.--Cayuga
marshes, N. Y.

2. N. flexilis, Rostk. & Schmidt. _Stems usually very slender; leaves
very narrowly linear_ (1/2--1' long), _very minutely serrulate_; fruit
11/2'' long, narrowly oblong; _seeds lance-oval, smooth and
shining_.--Ponds and slow streams, N. Scotia to S. C., Iowa and Minn.
Teeth on the margins of the leaves 1-celled. (Eu.)--Var. ROBUSTA,
Morong. Stem stout, few-leaved, sparsely branching, elongated; leaves
flat, abruptly acute.--E. Mass., Mich., and Tex.

3. N. Indica, Cham., var. gracillima, A. Br. Branches alternate;
_leaves_ very narrowly linear, _nearly capillary_, straight, _serrate,
the rounded lobes of the sheathing base spinulose-ciliate; fruit linear,
impressed-dotted between the numerous ribs_.--Mass. to Penn., west to
Ind. and Mo. Teeth of 3 cells each.


ORDER 127. ERIOCAULEAE. (PIPEWORT FAMILY.)

_Aquatic or marsh herbs, stemless or short-stemmed, with a tuft of
fibrous roots, a cluster of linear and often loosely cellular grass-like
leaves, and naked scapes sheathed at the base, bearing dense heads of
monoecious or rarely dioecious small 2--3-merous flowers, each in the
axil of a scarious bract; the perianth double or rarely simple, chaffy;
anthers introrse_; the fruit a _2--3-celled 2--3-seeded capsule_; seeds
pendulous, orthotropous; embryo at the apex of mealy albumen.--Chiefly
tropical plants, a few in northern temperate regions.

1. Eriocaulon. Perianth double, the inner (corolla) tubular-funnel-form
in the staminate flowers; stamens twice as many as its lobes (4).
Anthers 2-celled.

2. Paepalanthus. Perianth as in the last; stamens only as many as the
corolla-lobes (3). Anthers 2-celled.

3. Lachnocaulon. Perianth simple, of 3 sepals. Stamens 3, monadelphous
below. Anthers 1-celled.


1. ERIOCAULON, L. PIPEWORT.

Flowers monoecious and androgynous, i.e. both kinds in the same head,
either intermixed, or the central ones sterile and the exterior fertile,
rarely dioecious. _Ster. Fl._ Calyx of 2 or 3 keeled or boat-shaped
sepals, usually spatulate or dilated upward. Corolla tubular,
2--3-lobed, each of the lobes bearing a black gland or spot. Stamens
twice as many, one inserted at the base of each lobe and one in each
sinus; anthers 2-celled. Pistils rudimentary. _Fert. Fl._ Calyx as in
the sterile flowers, often remote from the rest of the flower (therefore
perhaps to be viewed as a pair of bractlets). Corolla of 2 or 3 separate
narrow petals. Stamens none. Ovary often stalked, 2--3-lobed,
2--3-celled; style 1; stigmas 2 or 3, slender. Capsule membranaceous,
loculicidal.--Leaves mostly smooth, loosely cellular and pellucid, flat
or concave above. Scapes or peduncles terminated by a single head,
involucrate by some outer empty bracts. Flowers, also the tips of the
bracts, etc., usually white-bearded or woolly. (Name compounded of
[Greek: e)/rion], _wool_, and [Greek: kaulo/s], _a stalk_, from the wool
at the base of the scape.)--Our species are all stemless, wholly
glabrous excepting at the base and the flowers, with a depressed head
and dimerous flowers.

1. E. decangulare, L. _Leaves obtuse_, varying from linear-lanceolate to
linear-awl-shaped, rather rigid; scapes 10--12-ribbed (1--3 deg. high); head
hemispherical, becoming globular (2--7'' wide); scales of the involucre
acutish, straw-color or light brown; _chaff_ (bracts among the flowers)
_pointed_.--Pine-barren swamps, N. J. to Fla. July--Sept.

2. E. gnaphalodes, Michx. _Leaves spreading_ (2--5' long),
_grassy-awl-shaped_, rigid, or when submersed thin and pellucid,
tapering gradually to a _sharp point_, mostly shorter than the sheath of
the _10-ribbed scape_; scales of the involucre very obtuse, turning
lead-color; _chaff obtuse_.--Pine-barren swamps, N. J. to Fla.

3. E. septangulare, Withering. _Leaves short_ (1--3' long), _awl-shaped,
pellucid_, soft and very cellular; _scape 4--7-striate_, slender, 2--6'
high, or when submersed becoming 1--6 deg. long, according to the depth of
the water; _chaff acutish_; head 2--3'' broad; the bracts, chaff, etc.,
lead-color, except the white coarse beard.--In ponds or along their
borders, Newf. to N. J., west to Ind., Mich., and Minn. July, Aug. (Eu.)


2. PAEPALANTHUS, Martius.

Stamens as many as the (often involute) lobes of the funnel-form corolla
of the sterile flowers, and opposite them, commonly 3, and the flower
ternary throughout. Otherwise nearly as in Eriocaulon. (Name from
[Greek: paipa/le], _dust_ or _flour_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_,
from the meal-like down or scurf of the heads and flowers of many South
American species.)

1. P. flavidulus, Kunth. Tufted, stemless; leaves bristle-awl-shaped (1'
long); scapes very slender, simple, minutely pubescent (6--12' high),
5-angled; bracts of the involucre oblong, pale straw-color, those among
the flowers mostly obsolete; perianth glabrous; sepals and petals of the
fertile flowers linear-lanceolate, scarious-white.--Low pine-barrens, S.
Va. to Fla.


3. LACHNOCAULON, Kunth. HAIRY PIPEWORT.

Flowers monoecious, etc., as in Eriocaulon. Calyx of 3 sepals. Corolla
none! _Ster. Fl._ Stamens 3; filaments below coalescent into a
club-shaped tube around the rudiment of a pistil, above separate and
elongated; anthers 1-celled! _Fert. Fl._ Ovary 3-celled, surrounded by
3 tufts of hairs (in place of a corolla). Stigmas 3, two-cleft.--Leaves
linear-sword-shaped, tufted. Scape slender, bearing a single head,
2--3-angled, hairy. (Name from [Greek: la/chnos], _wool_, and [Greek:
kaulo/s], _stalk_.)

1. L. Michauxii, Kunth.--Low pine-barrens, Va. to Fla.


ORDER 128. CYPERACEAE. (SEDGE FAMILY.)

_Grass-like or rush-like herbs, with fibrous roots, mostly solid stems_
(culms), _closed sheaths, and spiked chiefly 3-androus flowers, one in
the axil of each of the glume-like imbricated bracts _(scales, glumes)_,
destitute of any perianth, or with hypogynous bristles or scales in its
place; the 1-celled ovary with a single erect anatropous ovule, in fruit
forming an achene._ Style 2-cleft with the fruit flattened or
lenticular; or 3-cleft and fruit 3-angular. Embryo minute at the base of
the somewhat floury albumen. Stem-leaves when present 3-ranked.--A
large, widely diffused family.

I. Flowers all perfect, rarely some of them with stamens or pistal
abortive; spikes all of one sort.

Tribe I. SCIRPEAE. Spikelets mostly many-flowered, with only 1 (rarely 2)
of the lower scales empty.

[*] Scales of the spikelet strictly 2-ranked, conduplicate and keeled.

[+] Flowers destitute of bristles and of beak to the achene,
inflorescence terminal.

1. Cyperus. Spikelets few--many-flowered, usually elongated or slender.

2. Kyllinga. Spikelets 1-flowered (but of 3 or 4 scales), glomerate in a
sessile head.

[+][+] Flower furnished with bristles; achene beaked; inflorescence
axillary.

3. Dulichium. Spikelets 6--10-flowered, slender, clustered on an
axillary peduncle.

[*][*] Scales of the several--many-flowered spikelet imbricated all
round (subdistichous in n. 5).

[+] Achene crowned with the bulbous persistent base of the style
(usually deciduous in n. 7); flowers without inner scales (bractlets).

[++] Hypogynous bristles (perianth) generally present; culm naked.

4. Eleocharis. Spikelets solitary, terminating the culm. Stamens 3.

[++][++] Bristles always none; culm leafy.

5. Dichromena. Spikelets crowded into a leafy-involucrate head,
laterally flattened, the scales more or less conduplicate and keeled.
Many of the flowers imperfect or abortive.

6. Psilocarya. Spikelets in broad open cymes. Style almost wholly
persistent.

7. Fimbristylis. Spikelets in an involucrate umbel. Culm leafy at base.
Style usually wholly deciduous.

[+][+] Style not bulbous at base.

[++] Flowers without inner scales, but bristles generally present.

8. Scirpus. Spikelets solitary or clustered, or in a compound umbel, the
stem often leafy at base and inflorescence involucrate. Barbed bristles
3--8 or none. Stamens mostly 3.

9. Eriophorum. As Scirpus, but the bristles naked, exserted and often
silky in fruit. Stamens 1--3.

[++][++] Flower with one or more inner scales.

10. Fuirena. Scales of the spikelet awned below the apex. Flower
surrounded by 3 stalked petal-like scales alternating with 3 bristles.

11. Hemicarpha. Flower with a single very minute hyaline scale next the
axis of the spikelet; bristles none.

12. Lipocarpha. Flower enclosed by 2 inner scales, one next the axis,
the other in front of the achene; bristles none.

Tribe II. RHYNCHOSPOREAE. Spikelets mostly 1--2-flowered, with 2--many of
the lower scales empty.

13. Rhynchospora. Spikelets terete or flattish; scales convex, either
loosely enwrapping or regularly imbricated. Achene crowned with a
persistent tubercle or beak, and commonly surrounded by bristles.

14. Cladium. Spikelets terete, few-flowered, the scales, etc., as in the
preceding. Achene destitute of tubercle. No bristles.

II. Flowers unisexual.

Tribe III. SCLERIEAE. Flowers monoecious; the staminate and pistillate in
the same or in different clustered spikes. Achene naked, bony or
crustaceous, supported on a hardened disk.

15. Sclerlia. Spikes few-flowered; lower scales empty. No bristles or
inner scales.

Tribe IV. CARICEAE. Flowers monoecious in the same (androgynous) or in
separate spikes or sometimes dioecious. Achene enclosed in a sac
(_perigynium_).

16. Carex. Hypogynous bristle short and enclosed in the perigynium or
none.


1. CYPERUS, Tourn. GALINGALE. (Pl. 1.)

Spikelets many--few-flowered, mostly flat, variously arranged, mostly in
clusters or heads, which are commonly disposed in a simple or compound
terminal umbel. Scales 2-ranked, conduplicate and keeled (their
decurrent base below often forming margins or wings to the hollow of the
joint of the axis next below), deciduous when old. Stamens 1--3. No
bristles or inner scales. Style 2--3-cleft, deciduous. Achene lenticular
or triangular, naked at the apex.--Culms mostly triangular, simple,
leafy at base, and with one or more leaves at the summit, forming an
involucre to the umbel or head. Peduncles or rays unequal, sheathed at
base. All flowering in late summer or autumn. ([Greek: Ky/peiros], the
ancient name.)

Sec. 1. PYCREUS. _Achene lenticular, the edge turned to the rhachis;
spikelet flattened, many flowered; rhachis narrow, not winged. Annuals._

[*] _Umbel simple or capitate, rarely slightly compound._

1. C. flavescens, L. Culms 4--10' high, spikelets 5--8'' long; involucre
3-leaved, very unequal; spikelets becoming linear, obtuse, clustered on
the 2--4 very short rays (peduncles); _scales obtuse, straw-yellow;
stamens 3; achene shining, orbicular_, its superficial cells
oblong.--Low grounds, N. Eng. to Mich., Ill., and southward. (Eu.,
etc.)

2. C. diandrus, Torr. (Pl. 1, fig. 1--4.) Spikelets lance-oblong
(3--9''), scattered or clustered on the 2--5 very short or unequal rays;
_scales rather obtuse, purple-brown_ on the margins or nearly all over;
_stamens 2, or sometimes 3; achene dull, oblong-obovate_; otherwise much
like the last.--Low grounds, common from the Atlantic to Minn., Ark.,
and N. Mex.--Var. CASTANEUS, Torr. Scales more firm and browner; with
the type.

3. C. Nuttallii, Torr. Culms 4--12' high; spikelets lance-linear, acute
and very flat (1/2--1' long), crowded on the few usually very short (or
some of them distinct) rays; _scales oblong, yellowish-brown_, rather
loose; _stamens 2; achene oblong-obovate, very blunt, dull_.--Mostly in
salt or brackish marshes, along the coast from Mass. to the Gulf.

4. C. polystachyus, Rottb., var. leptostachyus, Boeckl. Culms very
slender, 6--15' high; leaves and elongated involucre very narrow;
spikelets few to many on the 4--8 rays, linear, acute, 2--9'' long;
_scales thin, ovate, acute, closely imbricated, pale brown_; stamens 2;
_achene linear-oblong or clavate, short-pointed, grayish and minutely
pitted_. (C. microdontus, _Torr._)--Margins of ponds and streams, Va. to
Fla. and Tex.

[*][*] _Umbel compound._

5. C. flavicomus, Vahl. Culm stout (1--3 deg. high); leaves of the involucre
3--5, very long; spikelets linear (4--9'' long), spiked and crowded on
the whole length of the branches of the several-rayed umbel, spreading;
_scales oval, very obtuse, yellowish and brownish, broadly scarious-
(whitish-) margined; stamens 3; achene obovate, mucronate_,
blackish.--Low grounds, Va. to Fla.

Sec. 2. CYPERUS proper. _Achene triangular; spikelets usually
many-flowered, more or less flattened, with carinate scales, the rhachis
marginless or nearly so (winged in n. 12)._

[*] _Stamen 1; spikelets short and small (11/2--5'' long) in globular
heads, ovate or linear-oblong, many-flowered; achene oblong-obovate to
linear._

[+] _Low annuals; involucre 2--3-leaved; heads few; scales pointed._

6. C. aristatus, Rottb. Dwarf (1--5' high); _spikelets chestnut-brown,
oblong becoming linear_, 7--13-flowered, in 1--5 ovate heads (sessile
and clustered, or short-peduncled); _scales nerved, tapering to a long
recurved point_; achene oblong-obovate, obtuse. (C. inflexus,
_Muhl._)--Sandy wet shores; common. Sweet-scented in drying.

7. C. acuminatus, Torr. Slender (3--12' high); _spikelets ovate,
becoming oblong_, 16--30-flowered, _pale; scales obscurely 3-nerved,
short-tipped_; achene oblong, pointed at both ends.--Low ground, Ill.
and southwestward.

[+][+] _Tall perennial (1--4 deg. high); heads many, greenish; scales
pointless._

8. C. calcaratus, Nees. Culm obtusely triangular; leaves and involucre
very long, keeled; umbel compound, many-rayed; spikelets ovate (11/2''
long), in numerous small heads; achenes pale, linear, on a slender
stipe; scales narrow, acutish, obscurely 3-nerved. (C. virens, _Gray_,
in part; not _Michx._ C. Luzulae, var. umbellatus, _Britt._)--Wet
places, Del. to Fla. and Tex.

[*][*] _Stamens 3 (2 in _C. fuscus_); spikelets clustered on the rays of
a simple umbel (or in a single sessile head); scales mostly green or
greenish and many-nerved, abruptly sharp-pointed; achene obovate,
sharply triangular._

[+] _Low annuals._

9. C. Compressus, L. Culms 3--9' high, with a simple sessile or a few
umbellate clusters of oblong to linear spikelets (15--30-flowered and
3--8'' long) with crowded strongly keeled and very acute pale
scales.--Sterile fields along the coast, Md. to Fla. and Tex.; also
adventive near Philadelphia.

C. FUSCUS, L. Of similar habit; spikelets much smaller (2--4'' long),
the thin brown scales (greenish only on the keel) barely acutish and
very faintly nerved.--Revere Beach, Mass. (_Young_); on ballast at
Philadelphia. (Adv. from Eu.)

[+][+] _Perennial, propagating from hard clustered corms or bulb-like
tubers._

10. C. Schweinitzii, Torr. _Culm rough on the angles (1--2 deg. high)_;
umbel 4--8-rayed, rays very unequal, erect; _spikelets loosely or
somewhat remotely 6--12-flowered, with convex many-nerved scales_;
joints narrowly winged.--Dry sandy shores and ridges, western N. Y. and
Penn. to Minn. and Kan.

11. C. filiculmis, Vahl. Culm slender, wiry, often reclined (8--15'
high); _leaves linear_ (1/2--2'' wide) or filiform; _spikelets numerous
and clustered in one sessile dense head, or in 1--7 additional looser
heads on spreading rays_ of an irregular umbel; _joints of the axis
naked; scales blunt_, greenish.--Dry sterile soil; common, especially
southward.

12. C. Grayii, Torr. Culm thread-form, wiry (6--12' high); _leaves
almost bristle-shaped_, channelled; _umbel simple, 4--6-rayed; spikes
5--10 in a loose head, spreading; joints of the axis winged; scales
rather obtuse_, greenish-chestnut-color.--Barren sands, Plymouth, Mass.,
to N. J., near the coast.

Sec. 3. PAPYRUS. _Style 3-cleft; achene triangular; stamens 3; spikelets
many-flowered, flattened, the carinate scales decurrent upon the rhachis
as scarious wings; spikes in simple or compound umbels._

[*] _Wings of the rhachis soon separating to the base as a pair of free
scales; annual._

13. C. erythrorhizos, Muhl. (Pl. 1, fig. 5--8.) Culm obtusely triangular
(3'--3 deg. high); umbel many-rayed; involucre 4--5-leaved, very long;
involucels bristle-form; spikelets very numerous, crowded in oblong or
cylindrical nearly sessile heads or spikes, spreading horizontally,
linear, flattish (3--6'' long), bright chestnut-colored; scales
lanceolate, mucronulate.--Alluvial banks, L. I. to Penn., Mich., Minn.,
and southward; also adventive in N. Eng.

[*][*] _Wings of the rhachis persistently attached; perennial by slender
running rootstocks._

[+] _Achene round-obovate; scales mucronate or acute, free or
spreading._

14. C. Haspan, L. Culms sharply angled (1--11/2 deg. high); leaves linear,
often reduced to membranous sheaths; _umbel spreading, the filiform rays
mostly longer than the 2-leaved involucre_; spikelets narrowly linear;
scales light reddish-brown, oblong, _mucronate, 3-nerved_.--Ponds and
ditches, Va. to Fla. and Tex.

15. C. dentatus, Torr. (Pl. 1, fig. 9.) Culms slender (1 deg. high); leaves
rigid and keeled; _umbel erect, shorter than the 3--4-leaved involucre_;
scales reddish-brown, _with green keel_, ovate, _acute,
7-nerved_.--Sandy swamps, N. Eng. and northern N. Y. to S. C. and W.
Va. Spikes often abortive and changed into leafy tufts.

[+][+] _Achene linear to oblong; scales appressed, pointless or nearly
so._

[++] _Perennial by tuberiferous stolons._

16. C. rotundus, L. (NUT-GRASS.) Culm slender (1/2--11/2 deg. high), longer than
the leaves; umbel simple or slightly compound, about equalling the
involucre; the few rays each bearing 4--9 _dark chestnut-purple_
12--40-flowered _acute spikelets_ (4--9'' long); _scales ovate, closely
appressed, nerveless_ except on the keel.--Sandy fields, Va. to Fla. and
Tex.; also adventive near Philadelphia and New York city. (Eu.)

17. C. esculentus, L. Culm (1--21/2 deg. high) equalling the leaves; umbel
often compound, 4--7-rayed, much shorter than the long involucre;
_spikelets numerous, light chestnut or straw-color, acutish_,
12--30-flowered (4--7'' long); _scales ovate or ovate-oblong narrowly
scarious-margined, nerved_, the acutish _tips rather loose_; achene
oblong-obovate. (C. phymatodes, _Muhl._)--Low grounds, along rivers,
etc., N. Brunswick to Fla., west to Minn, and Tex.; spreading
extensively by its small nut-like tubers and becoming a pest in
cultivated grounds.

[++][++] _Perennial, propagating by corm-like tubers from the base;
spikelets narrow, acuminate, often teretish; scales oblong-lanceolate;
achene linear-oblong._

18. C. strigosus, L. Culm mostly stout (1--3 deg. high); most of the rays of
the umbel elongated (1--5'), their sheaths 2-bristled; _spikelets
5--25-flowered_, spreading; scales several-nerved, much longer than the
achene.--Damp or fertile soil, Canada to Fla., west to Minn., Tex., and
the Pacific. Very variable in the number and length of the rays of the
simple or compound umbel, and in the size of the spikelets (21/2--6 or
even 12'' long), more or less densely crowded on the axis.

Sec. 4. DICLIDIUM. _Style 3-cleft; spikelets narrow, terete or nearly so,
few--many-flowered, the scales closely appressed and the broad wings of
the jointed rhachis enclosing the triangular achene._

19. C. speciosus, Vahl. Culm stout, _mostly low_ (5--20' high); _rays of
the simple or compound umbel mostly all short and crowded; spikelets
10--20-flowered, yellowish-brown_ at maturity (3--7'' long), the short
joints of its axis winged with very broad scaly margins which embrace
the _ovate triangular achene; the scales ovate, obtusish, imbricately
overlapping_. (C. Michauxianus, _Gray_, Manual; not _Schultes_.)--Low
grounds and sandy banks, N. Eng. to Fla., west to Minn. and Tex.

20. C. Engelmanni, Steud. Resembles n. 19; but the _spikelets more
slender_ and terete, _somewhat remotely 5--15-flowered_, the zigzag
joints of the axis slender and narrowly winged, and the oblong or oval
broadly scarious _scales proportionally shorter_, so as to expose a part
of the axis of each joint, _the successive scales not reaching the base
of the one above_ on the same side; achene oblong-linear, very
small.--Low grounds, Mass. to Wisc. and southward.

Sec. 5. MARISCUS. _Spikelets 1--4-flowered, subterete, usually in dense
heads; scales oppressed, several-nerved, the lower empty and often
persistent after the fall of the rest of the spikelet; joints of the
rhachis winged, enclosing the triangular achene. Perennial._

[*] _Spikelets slender and acuminate, more or less refracted in usually
close umbelled spikes.--Connecting with Sec. 4._

21. C. Lancastriensis, Porter. Culm (1--2 deg. high) triangular; _leaves
rather broadly linear_; umbel of 6--9 mostly elongated rays; _spikelets
very numerous in short-oblong close heads_, soon reflexed, of 3--6
narrow scales, the upper and lower empty, twice the length of the
linear-oblong achene, which is nearly 1'' long.--Rich soil, Penn. and
N. J. to Ala.

22. C. retrofractus, Torr. Culm and leaves usually minutely downy and
rough on the obtusish angles (1--3 deg. high); umbel many-rayed; _spikelets
slender-awl-shaped_, very numerous in obovate or oblong heads
terminating the elongated rays, _soon strongly reflexed, 1--2-flowered_
in the middle (3--5'' long); scales usually 4 or 5, the two lowest ovate
and empty, the fertile lanceolate and pointed, the uppermost
involute-awl-shaped; achene linear, 11/4'' long.--Sandy fields, N. J. to
Fla. and Tex.

23. C. refractus, Engelm. Culm 1--2 deg. high; rays usually more or less
elongated; spikelets very slender, in rather loose heads, divaricate or
more or less reflexed, 2--4-flowered; achene linear, 11/4'' long.--N. J.
to N. C. and Mo.

[*][*] _Spikelets very short, blunt, in densely compacted globose or
cylindrical heads._

24. C. ovularis, Torr. Culm sharply triangular (6'--2 deg. high); umbel
1--6-rayed; _spikelets_ (50--100) in a _globular head, 3-flowered,
oblong, blunt_ (11/2--2'' long); scales ovate, obtuse, a little longer
than the ovate-oblong achene.--Sandy dry soil, southern N. Y. to Fla.,
west to Ill., Ark., and Tex.--Var. ROBUSTUS, Boeckl., is a form with
large heads (4--8'' long), the spikelets 3--4-flowered. (C. Wolfii,
_Wood_.)--Ill. to Ark., and southward.

25. C. Torreyi, Britton. Like the last, but the _heads cylindrical or
oblong, spikelets usually 2-flowered_, and _achene linear-oblong_.--L.
Island to Fla., west to Tex.


2. KYLLINGA, Rottboell. (Pl. 1.)

Spikelets of 3 or 4 two-ranked scales, 1--1{1/2}-flowered; the 2 lower
scales minute and empty, as in Cyperus, Sec. 4, but style oftener 2-cleft
and achene lenticular; spikes densely aggregated in solitary or triple
sessile heads.--Culms leafy at base; involucre 3-leaved. (Named after
_Peter Kylling_, a Danish botanist of the 17th century.)

1. K. pumila, Michx. Annual; culms 2--9' high; head globular or 3-lobed,
whitish-green (about 4'' broad), spikelets strictly 1-flowered; upper
scales ovate, pointed, rough on the keel; stamens and styles 2; leaves
linear.--Low grounds, Ohio to Ill., south to Fla. and Tex. Aug.


3. DULICHIUM, Pers. (Pl. 1.)

Spikelets many- (6--10-) flowered, linear, flattened, sessile in 2 ranks
on axillary solitary peduncles emerging from the sheaths of the leaves;
scales 2-ranked, lanceolate, decurrent, forming flat wing-like margins
on the joint below. Perianth of 6--9 downwardly barbed bristles.
Stamens 3. Style 2-cleft above. Achene flattened, linear-oblong, beaked
with the long persistent style.--A perennial herb, with a terete simple
hollow culm (1--2 deg. high), jointed and leafy to the summit; leaves short
and flat, linear, 3-ranked. (An alteration of _Dulcichinum_, an old name
for a species of Cyperus.)

1. D. spathaceum, Pers.--Borders of ponds, N. Scotia to Fla., west to
Minn. and Tex. July--Sept.


4. ELEOCHARIS, R. Br. SPIKE-RUSH. (Pl. 3.)

Spikelet single, terminating the naked culm, many--several-flowered.
Scales imbricated all round in many (rarely in 2 or 3) ranks. Perianth
of 3--12 (commonly 6) bristles, usually rough or barbed downward, rarely
obsolete. Stamens 2--3. Style 2--3-cleft, its bulbous base persistent as
a tubercle jointed upon the apex of the lenticular or triangular
achene.--Leafless, chiefly perennial, with tufted culms sheathed at the
base, from matted or creeping root-stocks; flowering in summer. (Name
from [Greek: e(/los], _a marsh_, and [Greek: chai/ro] _to delight in_;
being marsh plants.)

Sec. 1. _Spikelet terete, hardly if at all thicker than the spongy-cellular
culm; scales firmly persistent; style mostly 3-cleft; bristles 6 (rarely
7), firm or rigid, mostly barbed downward, equalling or surpassing the
triangular or lenticular achene._

[*] _Spikelet linear or lanceolate-awl-shaped, few-flowered; scales
(only 3--9) few-ranked, convolute-clasping the long flattened joints of
the axis, lanceolate, herbaceous (green) and several-nerved on the back,
and with thin scarious margins._

1. E. Robbinsii, Oakes. _Flower-bearing culms exactly triangular_,
rather stout, erect (8'--2 deg. high), also producing tufts of capillary
abortive stems or fine leaves, which float in the water; sheath
obliquely truncate; spikelet 4--10'' long; achene oblong-obovate,
triangular, minutely reticulated, about half the length of the bristles,
tipped with a flattened awl-shaped tubercle.--Shallow water, N. Eng. to
Fla.

[*][*] _Spikelet cylindrical, many-flowered, 1--2' long; scales in
several ranks, firm-coriaceous with scarious margin, pale, nerveless or
faintly striate; culms large and stout (2--4 deg. high); basal sheaths often
leaf-bearing._

2. E. equisetoides, Torr. _Culm terete, knotted as if jointed by many
cross-partitions; achene smooth_ (the minute reticulation transversely
linear-rectangular), with a conical-beaked tubercle.--Shallow water,
R. I. to Fla., west to Mich. and Tex.

3. E. quadrangulata, R. Br. (Pl. 3, fig. 6--9.) _Culm continuous and
sharply 4-angled; achene finely reticulated_, with a conical flattened
distinct tubercle.--Shallow water, central N. Y. to Mich., and
southward; rare.

Sec. 2. _Spikelet terete and turgid-ovate, much thicker than the very
slender culm; scales thin-coriaceous or firm-membranaceous, persistent,
ovate; style 3-cleft; bristles stout, barbed downward (or sometimes
upward), as long as the striate and pitted-reticulated triangular achene
and its tubercle; culms tufted from fibrous roots, 1--2 deg. high._

4. E. tuberculosa, R. Br. (Pl. 3, fig. 10.) _Culms flattish_, striate;
spikelet 3--6'' long, many-flowered; _tubercle flattish-cap-shaped, as
large as the body of the achene_.--Wet sandy soil, from Mass. along the
coast to Fla.

5. E. tortilis, Schult. _Culms sharply triangular, capillary_, twisting
when dry; spikelet 2--3'' long, few-flowered; _conical-beaked tubercle
much smaller than the achene_. (E. simplex, _Torr._)--Eastern shore of
Md. to Fla.

Sec. 3. _Spikelets terete, much thicker than the culm, many-flowered;
scales imbricated in many or more than 3 ranks, thin-membranaceous or
scarious, with a thicker midrib, usually brownish or purplish, sometimes
deciduous._

[*] _Style 2-cleft (often 3-cleft in n. 7 and 10) and the smooth achene
lenticular; culms slender or thread-form, terete or compressed._

[+] _Annuals; culms tufted, from fibrous roots._

6. E. capitata, R. Br. Culms terete, 1/4--8' high or more; _spikelets
ovate to oblong_ (1--3'' long), obtuse, 15--40-flowered; _scales
thickish_, round-ovate, _obtuse_, brown or brownish with green keel and
paler margins; stamens 2; achene obovate, _black, about equalling the
6--8 bristles_, tipped with a flattened or saucer-shaped tubercle. (E.
dispar, _E. J. Hill_.)--In sand or gravel near sloughs, Md. (_Canby_) to
Fla. and Tex.; N. Ind. (_Hill_). (S. Am., etc.)

7. E. ovata, R. Br. Culms nearly terete, 8--14' high; _spikelet
globose-ovoid to ovate-oblong, obtuse_, 1--6'' long (dull brown);
_scales very obtuse, densely crowded in many ranks; style_ 3- (rarely
2-) _cleft_; achene obovate with narrow base, pale-brownish, shining,
shorter than the 6--8 bristles, _broader than the short-deltoid, acute
and flattened tubercle_. (E. obtusa, _Schult._)--Muddy places,
N. Brunswick to Minn., south and westward. Variable as to the length of
its bristles. A low form, with smaller and more narrowly obovate
achenes, and the bristles very short or none, is E. diandra, _Wright_. A
dwarf form occurs with very small and few-flowered heads. (Eu.)

8. E. Engelmanni, Steud. Like the last; spikelets usually narrowly
cylindrical and acute or acutish, 2--8'' long; achene broad and
truncate, the tubercle covering the summit; bristles not exceeding the
achene. (E. obtusa, var. detonsa, _Gray_.)--Mass. to Penn. and Mo.

[+][+] _Perennials, with running rootstocks._

9. E. olivacea, Torr. (Pl. 2, fig. 1--5.) Culms flattish, grooved,
diffusely tufted on slender matted rootstocks (2--4' high); _spikelet
ovate, acutish, 20--30-flowered; scales ovate, obtuse_, rather loosely
imbricated (purple with a green midrib and slightly scarious margins);
achene obovate, dull, abruptly beaked with a narrow tubercle, shorter
than the _6--8 bristles_.--Wet, sandy soil, Mass. to N. C., and western
N. Y.

10. E. palsutris, R. Br. Culms nearly terete, striate, 1--5 deg. high;
_spikelet oblong-lanceolate, pointed, many-flowered; scales
ovate-oblong_, loosely imbricated, reddish-brown with a broad and
translucent whitish margin and a greenish keel, the upper acutish, the
lowest rounded and often enlarged; achene rather narrowly obovate,
somewhat shining, crowned with a short ovate or ovate-triangular
flattened tubercle, shorter than the _usually 4 bristles_.--Very common,
either in water, when it is pretty stout and tall, or in wet grassy
grounds, when it is slender and lower. (Eu., Asia.)--Var. GLAUCESCENS,
Gray. Culms slender or filiform; tubercle narrower, acute, beak-like,
sometimes half as long as the achene. With the type.--Var. CALVA, Gray.
Bristles none; tubercle short, but narrower than in the type.--Var.
VIGENS, L. H. Bailey. Culms very stout, rigid; achene more broadly
obovoid. Lake Champlain and along the Great Lakes to Minn.

[*][*] _Achene triangular or turgid; style 3-cleft._

[+] _Bristles at least equalling the smooth achene, downwardly barbed,
persistent._

11. E. rostellata, Torr. _Culms flattened and striate-grooved_, wiry,
erect (1--21/2 deg. high), _the sterile ones reclining, rooting and
proliferous_ from the apex (1--2 deg. high), the sheath transversely
truncate; _spikelet spindle-shaped_, 12--20-flowered; scales ovate,
obtuse (light-brown); achene obovate-triangular, narrowed into the
confluent pyramidal tubercle, which is overtopped by the 4--6
bristles.--Marshes, N. Eng. to S. C., west to Mich. and Ky.

12. E. intermedia, Schultes. _Culms capillary, wiry_, striate-grooved,
densely tufted from fibrous roots, _diffusely spreading or reclining_
(6--12' long); _spikelet oblong-ovate, acutish, loosely 10--20-flowered_
(2--3'' long); scales oblong, obtuse, green-keeled, the sides
purplish-brown; achene obovoid with a narrowed base, beaked with a
slender conical-awl-shaped distinct tubercle, which nearly equals the 6
bristles.--Wet slopes, Penn. to Iowa, north to Canada.

13. E. Torreyana, Boeckl. Like the preceding, but more capillary and
heads smaller (11/2--2'' long), _sometimes proliferous_, the one or more
short new culms from the axil of its lowest scale, which persists as an
herbaceous bract; achene very much smaller, with sharper angles and a
short conical tubercle, which is hardly equalled by the 3--6 slender
bristles. (E. microcarpa, var. filiculmis, _Torr._)--Wet pine-barrens,
N. J. to Fla.

(Addendum) 13^a. E. albida, Torr. Like n. 12 and 13 in habit, somewhat
stouter; spikelet dense, ellipsoidal or oblong, 1--4'' long, acutish,
with pale obtuse scales; achene very small, triangular-obovate, very
smooth, with a broadly triangular tubercle upon a narrow base, shorter
than or exceeding the reddish bristles.--Salt marshes, Northampton Co.,
Va. (_Canby_), and south to Fla. and Tex.

[+][+] _Bristles 2--4, shorter than the achene, slender and fragile, or
none._

14. E. tenuis, Schultes. _Culms almost capillary, erect_ from running
rootstocks, _4-angular_ and flattish (1 deg. high), the sides concave;
_spikelet elliptical, acutish, 20--30-flowered_ (3'' long); _scales
ovate, obtuse_, chestnut-purple with a broad scarious margin and green
keel; _achene obovate, roughish-wrinkled, crowned with a small depressed
tubercle_, persistent after the fall of the scales; bristles 1/2 as long
as the achene or none.--N. Scotia to N. C., Minn., and Mo. June.

15. E. compressa, Sullivant. _Culms flat_, striate, tufted, erect (1--2 deg.
high); _spikelet ovate-oblong_, or at length lanceolate,
_20--30-flowered_ (4--7'' long); _scales lanceolate-ovate, acute_, dark
purple with broad white pellucid margins and summit; _achene_ yellowish,
_obovate-pear-shaped_, obtusely triangular, _wrinkled, crowned with a
small conical_ and pointed _tubercle; bristles 1--4, very slender_,
fragile, shorter than or equalling the achene (sometimes none or a
single rudiment).--Wet places, N. Y. and Ont. to Minn. and Mo.

16. E. melanocarpa, Torr. _Culms flattened_, grooved, wiry, erect
(9--18' high); _spikelet cylindrical-ovoid or oblong, thick_, obtuse,
densely many-flowered (3--6'' long); scales closely many-ranked,
roundish-ovate, very obtuse, brownish with broad scarious margins;
_achene smooth, obovate-top-shaped, obtusely triangular, the broad
summit entirely covered like a lid by the flat depressed tubercle_,
which is raised in the centre into a short abrupt triangular point;
bristles often obsolete; achene soon blackish.--Wet sand, Mass. to Fla.

17. E. tricostata, Torr. _Culms flattish_ (1--2 deg. high); _spikelet soon
cylindrical_, densely many-flowered (6--9'' long), thickish; scales
ovate, very obtuse, rusty brown, with broad scarious margins; _achene
obovate, with 3 prominent thickened angles, minutely rough-wrinkled,
crowned with a short-conical acute tubercle_; bristles none.--N. J. to
Fla.

18. E. Wolfii, Gray. Culms slender (1 deg. high), from very small creeping
rhizomes, _2-edged_; spikelet ovate-oblong, acute; scales ovate-oblong,
obtuse, scarious, pale purple; achene pyriform, shining, _with 9 nearly
equidistant obtuse ribs and transverse wrinkles between them; tubercle
depressed, truncate_, more or less apiculate; bristles not seen.--Wet
prairies, N. Iowa and S. Minn.

Sec. 4. _Spikelet more or less flattened, thicker than the slender or
capillary culm, few--many-flowered; the thin membranaceous scales
somewhat 2--3-ranked; style 3-cleft; bristles of the perianth 3--6,
fragile or fugacious. Small or delicate species, differing from the last
division chiefly in the flattish spikelets._

[*] _Tubercle contracted at its junction with the achene._

19. E. acicularis, R. Br. Culms finely capillary (2--8' long), _more or
less 4-angular_; spikelet 3--9-flowered; scales ovate-oblong, rather
obtuse (greenish with purple sides); achene obovate-oblong, _with
3-ribbed angles and 2--3 times as many smaller intermediate ribs_, also
transversely striate, longer than the 3--4 very fugacious bristles;
_tubercle conical-triangular_.--Muddy shores, across the continent.
(Eu., Asia.)

20. E. pygmaea, Torr. Culms bristle like, flattened and grooved (1--2'
high); spikelet ovate, 3--8-flowered; scales ovate (greenish), the upper
rather acute; _achene ovoid, acutely triangular, smooth and shining,
tipped with a minute tubercle_; bristles mostly longer than the fruit,
sometimes wanting.--Brackish marshes, from N. Brunswick to Fla.

[*][*] _Tubercle continuous with the nutlet and not contracted at base._

21. E. pauciflora, Link. Culms striate-angled, very slender (3--9'
high), scarcely tufted, on slender running rootstocks, with a short
truncate sheath at base; scales of the ovate spikelet evidently
2-ranked, chestnut-brown, pointless, all flower-bearing, the two lower
larger; bristles 3--6, about as long as the conspicuously beaked
triangular achene. (Scirpus pauciflorus, _Lightfoot_.)--Wet places,
N. Y. to N. Ill. and Minn., north and westward. (Eu., Asia.)


5. DICHROMENA, Richard. (Pl. 4.)

Spikelets aggregated in a terminal leafy-involucrate head, more or less
compressed, few-flowered, all but 3 or 4 of the flowers usually
imperfect or abortive. Scales imbricated somewhat in 2 ranks, more or
less conduplicate or boat-shaped, keeled, white or whitish. Stamens 3.
Style 2-cleft. Perianth, bristles, etc., none. Achene lenticular,
wrinkled transversely, crowned with the persistent and broad tubercled
base of the style.--Culms leafy, from creeping perennial rootstocks; the
leaves of the involucre mostly white at the base (whence the name, from
[Greek: di/s], _double_, and [Greek: chro~ma], _color_).

1. D. leucocephala, Michx. Culm triangular (1--2 deg. high); leaves narrow;
those of the involucre 4--7; achene truncate, not margined.--Damp
pine-barrens, N. J. to Fla. Aug., Sept.

2. D. latifolia, Baldwin. (Pl. 4, fig. 1--5.) Culm stouter, nearly
terete; leaves broadly linear, those of the involucre 8 or 9, tapering
from base to apex; achene round-obovate, faintly wrinkled, the tubercle
decurrent on its edges.--Low pine-barrens, Va. to Fla.


6. PSILOCARYA, Torr. BALD-RUSH. (Pl. 4.)

Spikelets ovoid, terete, the numerous scales all alike and regularly
imbricated, each with a perfect flower. Perianth (bristles) wholly
wanting. Stamens mostly 2. Style 2-cleft, its base or the greater part
of it enlarging and hardening to form the beak of the lenticular or
tumid more or less wrinkled achene.--Annuals, with leafy culms, the
spikelets in terminal and axillary cymes. (Name from [Greek: psilo/s],
_naked_, and [Greek: kary/a], _nut_.)

1. P. scirpoides, Torr. Annual (4--10' high), leafy; leaves flat;
spikelets 20--30-flowered; scales oblong-ovate, acute, chestnut-colored;
achene somewhat margined, beaked with a sword-shaped almost wholly
persistent style. (Rhynchospora scirpoides, _Gray_.)--Inundated places,
S. N. Eng.


7. FIMBRISTYLIS, Vahl. (Pl. 3.)

Spikelets several--many-flowered, terete; scales all floriferous,
regularly imbricated in several ranks. Perianth (bristles, etc.) none.
Stamens 1--3. Style 2--3-cleft, often with a dilated or tumid base,
which is deciduous (except in n. 4) from the apex of the naked
lenticular or triangular achene. Otherwise as in Scirpus.--Culms leafy
at base. Spikelets in our species umbelled, and the involucre
2--3-leaved. (Name compounded of _fimbria_, a fringe, and _stylus_,
style, which is fringed with hairs in the genuine species.)

[*] _Style 2-cleft, flattened and ciliate; achene lenticular; tubercle
soon deciduous; spikelets many-flowered._

1. F. spadicea, Vahl, var. castanea, Gray. Culms (1--2{1/2} deg. high)
tufted from a _perennial root, rigid_, as are the _thread-form
convolute-channelled leaves_, smooth; spikelets ovate-oblong becoming
cylindrical, dark chestnut-color (2'' thick); _stamens 2 or 3; achene
very minutely striate and reticulated_.--Salt marshes along the coast,
N. Y. and N. J. to Fla. July--Sept.--Scales lighter colored than in the
tropical form.

2. F. laxa, Vahl. (Pl. 3, fig. 1--5.) Culms slender (2--12' high) from
an _annual root, weak_, grooved and flattish; _leaves linear, flat,
ciliate-denticulate, glaucous_, sometimes hairy; spikelets ovate, acute
(3'' long); _stamen 1; achene conspicuously 6--8-ribbed on each side,
and with finer cross-lines_.--Low ground, Penn. to Fla., west to Ill.
and La. July--Sept.

[*][*] _Style 3-cleft and achene triangular; tubercle soon deciduous;
spikelets smaller and fewer-flowered._

3. F. autumnalis, Roem. & Schult. (Pl. 3, fig. 6--9.) Annual (3--16'
high), in tufts; culms flat, slender, diffuse or erect; leaves flat,
acute; umbel compound; spikelets oblong, acute (1--2'' long), single or
2--3 in a cluster; scales ovate-lanceolate, mucronate; stamens
1--3.--Low grounds, Maine to Fla., west to Ill. and La.

[*][*][*] _Style 3-cleft, filiform and not ciliate; achene acutely
triangular; tubercle more or less persistent._

4. F. capillaris, Gray. Low annual, densely tufted (3--9' high); culm
and leaves nearly capillary, the latter short; umbel compound or
panicled; spikelets (2'' long) ovoid-oblong; stamens 2; achene minutely
wrinkled, very obtuse.--Sandy fields, N. Eng. to Fla., west to Minn.,
Tex., and the Pacific.

F. VAHLII, Link (F. congesta, _Torr._), a diminutive southern species,
with long filiform leaves, sessile capitate spikelets, narrow acuminate
scales, and the style 2-cleft and not ciliate, has been found in
ballast-sand along the northern coast.


8. SCIRPUS, Tourn. BULRUSH or CLUB-RUSH. (Pl. 3.)

Spikelets several--many-flowered, solitary or in a terminal cluster
which is subtended by a 1--several-leaved involucre (this when simple
often appearing like a continuation of the culm), terete, the scales
being regularly imbricated all round in many or several ranks, or rarely
somewhat compressed and the fewer scales inclining to be 2-ranked.
Flowers to all the scales, or to all but one or two of the lowest, all
perfect. Perianth of 3--6 mostly retrorsely barbed or ciliate bristles
(not elongated), or sometimes wanting. Stamens mostly 3. Style
2--3-cleft, simple, not bulbous at base, wholly deciduous, or sometimes
leaving a tip or point to the lenticular or triangular achene.--Culms
sheathed at base; the sheaths usually leaf-bearing. Mostly perennials;
flowering in summer. (The Latin name of the Bulrush.)

[*] _Spikelets solitary, few-flowered, small, often flattish; achene
triangular, smooth._

[+] _Involucre a short awl-shaped bract; culms tufted (3--12' high),
filiform._

1. S. caespitosus, L. _Culms terete_, wiry, densely sheathed at base, in
compact turfy tufts; the upper sheath bearing a very _short awl-shaped
leaf_; spikelet ovoid, rusty-color; involucral bract a rigid-pointed
scale, resembling the lowest proper scale of the spikelet and scarcely
surpassing it; _bristles 6, smooth_, longer than the abruptly
short-pointed achene.--Coast of Maine, alpine summits of N. Eng., swamps
of northern N. Y., N. Ill., Minn., and northward; also on Roan Mt.,
N. C. (Eu.)

2. S. Clintonii, Gray. _Culms acutely triangular_, almost bristle-like;
sheaths at the base bearing a _very slender almost bristle-shaped leaf_
shorter (usually very much shorter) than the culm; involucral bract
awl-shaped, mostly shorter than the chestnut-colored ovate spikelet,
which has _pointless scales_; otherwise as the next.--Rather dry plains,
N. Y. June.

3. S. planifolius, Muhl. _Culms triangular, leafy_ at base; _leaves
linear, flat, as long as the culm_, and like it rough-edged; involucral
bract a bristle-tipped scale usually overtopping the ovate or oblong
chestnut-colored spikelet, the green midrib of the _scales extended into
sharp points; bristles upwardly hairy_, as long as the pointless
achene.--Dry or moist ground, N. Eng. to Del., west to western N. Y. and
Penn.; W. Mo. (_B. F. Bush._).

[+][+] _One-leaved involucre more conspicuous, and as if continuing the
culm._

4. S. subterminalis, Torr. Aquatic; culms (1--3 deg. long,
thickish-filiform) partly and the shorter filiform leaves wholly
submersed, cellular; the filiform green bract 6--12'' long, much
surpassing the oblong spikelet; scales somewhat pointed; bristles 6,
bearded downward, rather shorter than the abruptly-pointed achene.--Slow
streams and ponds, N. Eng. to N. J., west to Mich. and N. Ind.--Var.
TERRESTRIS, Paine; less tall, with firmer stem and leaves, and fruiting
spike more turgid. Growing chiefly emersed; Herkimer Co., N. Y.

[*][*] _Spikelets clustered (rarely only one), appearing lateral, the
one-leaved involucre resembling and seeming to be a continuation of the
naked culm._

[+] _Culm sharply triangular, stout, chiefly from running rootstocks;
spikelets many-flowered, rusty brown, closely sessile in one cluster;
sheaths at base more or less leaf-bearing._

5. S. pungens, Vahl. Running rootstocks long and stout; _culm sharply
3-angled_ throughout (1--4 deg. high) with concave sides; _leaves 1--3,
elongated_ (4--10' long), keeled and channelled; spikelets 1--6,
capitate, ovoid, usually long, overtopped by the pointed involucral
leaf; scales ovate, sparingly ciliate, 2-cleft at the apex and
awn-pointed from between the acute lobes; _anthers tipped with an
awl-shaped minutely fringed appendage; style 2-cleft_ (rarely 3-cleft);
bristles 2--6, shorter than the obovate plano-convex and mucronate
smooth achene.--Borders of salt and fresh ponds and streams, throughout
N. Am. (Eu., S. Am.)

6. S. Torreyi, Olney. Rootstocks slender if any (so that the plant is
readily pulled up from the mud); _culm 3-angled_, with concave sides,
rather slender (2--4 deg. high), _leafy at base; leaves 2 or 3, more than
half the length of the culm_, triangular-channelled, slender; _spikelets
1--4, oblong or spindle-shaped, acute, distinct_, pale chestnut-color,
long overtopped by the slender erect involucral leaf; scales ovate,
smooth, entire, barely mucronate; _style 3-cleft; bristles longer than
the unequally triangular-obovate very smooth long-pointed
achene_.--Borders of ponds, brackish and fresh, N. Eng. to Penn., Mich.,
and Minn.

7. S. Olneyi, Gray. _Culm 3-wing-angled, with deeply excavated sides_,
stout (2--7 deg. high), the _upper sheath bearing a short triangular leaf or
none_; spikelets 6--12, closely capitate, ovoid, obtuse, overtopped by
the short involucral leaf; scales orbicular, smooth, the inconspicuous
mucronate point shorter than the scarious apex; _anthers with a very
short and blunt minutely bearded tip; style 2-cleft_; bristles 6,
scarcely equalling the narrowly obovate plano-convex and mucronate
achene.--Salt marshes, S. New Eng. to Fla., west to the Pacific.

S. MUCRONATUS, L. Resembling the last, 1--3 deg. high; spikelets numerous in
a dense cluster, oblong-ovate, 6--8'' long or less; scales ovate,
mucronate, firm, scarcely at all scarious; _style 3-cleft_; achene
smaller, broadly obovate.--In a single locality in Delaware Co., Penn.;
probably introduced from S. Europe.

[+][+] _Culm triangular, tall and stout, from slender running
rootstocks; spikelets many-flowered, loosely umbellate or corymbed,
involucellate-bracted._

8. S. Canbyi, Gray. Culm (3--5 deg. high) 3-angled, usually sharply so
above, obtusely below, the sheath at base extended into a long slender
triangular and channelled leaf (2--4 deg. long); involucral leaf similar
(4--8' long), continuing the culm; spikelets oblong (4--6'' long),
single or sometimes proliferously 2 or 3 together, nodding on the apex
of the 5--9 long filiform and flattened peduncles or rays of the
dichotomous umbel-like corymb, or the central one nearly sessile; scales
loosely imbricated, oblong-ovate, acute, pale, thin and scarious, with a
greenish nerved back; bristles 6, firm, furnished above with spreading
hairs rather than barbs, equalling the slender abrupt beak of the
obovate-triangular shining achene (11/2'' long).--In a pond near
Salisbury, Md.

[+][+][+] _Culm terete, very tall and stout, from a deep running
rootstock, leafless or very nearly so; spikelets numerous, clustered in
a one-sided compound umbel-like panicle longer than the involucral leaf;
involucellate bracts small, scale-like and rusty-scarious; scales of the
spikelets rusty or chestnut-brown, scarious, the midrib extended into a
mucronate point._

9. S. lacustris, L. (GREAT BULRUSH.) Culm 3--9 deg. high, 1/2--1' thick at
base; spikelets ovate-oblong (3--4'' long); scales mostly a little downy
on the back and ciliate; style 2-cleft; achene pale and dull, obovate
with a narrowed base, plano-convex, mucronate-pointed, usually
overtopped by the 4--6 slender downwardly barbed bristles. (S. validus,
_Vahl._)--Common everywhere in still fresh water. (Eu., Asia, etc.)

[+][+][+][+] _Culms slender from an annual root, terete, plano-convex or
obtusely triangular, naked; the sheaths rarely bearing a short leaf;
spikelets few or several in a sessile cluster, sometimes solitary, much
overtopped by the involucral leaf; bristles often few or wanting._

10. S. debilis, Pursh. (Pl. 3, fig. 1--5.) _Culms obtusely triangular_,
with somewhat hollowed sides, 1--2 deg. high, yellowish-green, shining;
spikelets 3--12, capitate, ovate-oblong, obtuse (3--4'' long),
chestnut-brown; involucral leaf often horizontal at maturity; scales
roundish; stamens 3; style 2--3-cleft; _bristles 6, stout_, downwardly
barbed, equalling or two surpassing the obovate _turgidly plano-convex_
(or bluntly 3-sided) abruptly mucronate-pointed _smoothish_
achene.--Swamps, Mass. to S. C., Minn. and Neb. Aug., Sept.

11. S. Smithii, Gray. _Culms terete_, slender, 3--12' high, often
leaf-bearing from the upper sheath, dull green as are the 1--3
oblong-ovate acute spikelets; involucral leaf always erect; scales
oblong-oval; style 2-cleft; _bristles 1 or 2 minute rudiments or none_;
achene _somewhat lenticular, smooth_, deciduous with the scales.--Wet
shores, Delaware Bay to L. Ontario, Mich., N. Ind., and Ill. July.

12. S. supinus, L., var. Hallii, Gray. _Culms filiform_, 5--12' high;
upper sheath rarely distinctly leaf-bearing; spikelets 1--7 in a sessile
or sometimes geminately proliferous cluster, ovate-oblong
becoming cylindrical, greenish; scales ovate, strongly keeled,
mucronate-pointed; stamens 2 or 3; style 2-cleft; _bristles none; achene
obovate-orbicular_, mucronate, plano-convex, _strongly wrinkled
transversely_.--Wet shores, Ill. to Tex.; also found in E. Mass.
(_Hitchings_). (Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Spikelets in simple or mostly compound umbellate or
cymose-panicled clusters, many-flowered, terete; involucre of mostly
several flat leaves; culm tall, from tufted or running rootstocks,
triangular, leafy, sedge-like; leaves rough on the margin; style mostly
3-cleft._

[+] _Spikelets large (6--15'' long); midrib of the scales extended
beyond the mostly lacerate or two-cleft apex into a distinct awn._

13. S. maritimus, L. (SEA CLUB-RUSH.) Leaves flat, linear, as long as
the stout culm (1--3 deg. high), those of the involucre 1--4, very unequal;
spikelets few--several in a sessile cluster, and often also with 1--4
unequal rays bearing 1--7 ovate or oblong-cylindrical (rusty-brown)
spikelets; awns of the scales soon recurved; _achene obovate-orbicular,
compressed, flat on one side, convex or obtuse-angled on the other,
minutely pointed, shining, shorter than the_ 1--6 unequal and deciduous
(sometimes obsolete) _bristles_.--Saline localities, on the coast from
N. Scotia to Fla., and in the interior across the continent.
(Eu.)--Var. MACROSTACHYOS, Michx.; larger, with very thick
oblong-cylindrical heads (1--1{1/2}' long), and longer involucral leaf
(often 1 deg. long).

14. S. fluviatilis, Gray. (RIVER C.) Culm very stout, 3--5 deg. high; leaves
flat, broadly linear (1/2' wide or more), tapering gradually to a point,
the upper and those of the very long involucre very much exceeding the
_compound umbel; rays 5--9, elongated, recurved-spreading_, each bearing
1--5 ovate or oblong-cylindrical acute paler heads; scales less lacerate
and awns less recurved; _achene obovate, sharply and exactly triangular,
conspicuously pointed, opaque_, scarcely equalling the 6 rigid
bristles.--Borders of lakes and large streams, W. Vt. to Conn. and
Penn., west to Minn. and Iowa.

[+][+] _Spikelets very numerous, small (1--3'' long); scales
mucronate-pointed or blunt; umbel-like cymose panicle irregular,
compound or decompound; culm 2--5 deg. high, unusually leafy; leaves broadly
linear, green and rather soft; bristles very slender, often more or less
tortuous and naked below._

15. S. sylvaticus, L. _Spikelets lead-colored, clustered 3--10 together
at the end of the mostly slender ultimate divisions_ of the open
decompound panicle, ovoid or lance-ovate, 2'' long; scales bluntish;
bristles 6, downwardly barbed throughout, rather exceeding the
triangular short-pointed achene; style 3-cleft.--Along brooks, E. Mass.
to N. Y.; rare.

Var. digynus, Boeckl. Style 2-cleft and the achene not at all
angled on the back; stamens 2, and bristles 4. (S. microcarpus,
_Presl._)--N. Scotia and N. Eng. to Minn., and westward.

16. S. atrovirens, Muhl. Leaves somewhat more rigid; _spikelets dull
greenish-brown, densely conglomerate (10--30 together) into close
heads_, these also usually densely clustered in a less compound panicle;
scales pointed; _bristles_ sparsely and strongly _downwardly barbed
above the middle, naked below_, nearly straight, as long as the
conspicuously pointed and obovate-oblong triangular achene.--Wet meadows
and bogs, N. Scotia and N. Eng., west to Minn., Kan., and the Pacific.

17. S. polyphyllus, Vahl. Culm usually more leafy; _spikelets
yellow-brown, ovate_, becoming cylindrical, _clustered 3--8 together in
small heads on_ the short ultimate divisions of the _open decompound
umbel_; scales mucronate; _bristles 6, usually twice bent, soft-barbed
toward the summit only_, about twice the length of the achene.--Swamps
and borders of ponds, western N. Eng to N. C., west to Minn, and Ark.


9. ERIOPHORUM, L. COTTON-GRASS. (Pl. 3.)

Bristles naked, usually very numerous, often silky and becoming greatly
elongated. Otherwise as in Scirpus.--Spikelets single or clustered or
umbellate, usually involucrate with erect scale-like bracts, upon a
leafy or naked stem; scales membranaceous, 1--3-nerved. Style very
slender and elongated, 3-cleft. Achene acutely triangular. (Name
composed of [Greek: e)/rion], _wool_ or _cotton_, and [Greek: phoro/s],
_bearing_.)

[*] _Bristles 6, rust-colored, becoming tortuous and entangled; culm
very leafy, bearing numerous spikelets in an involucrate decompound
cymose-panicled umbel._

1. E. lineatum, Benth. & Hook. Culm triangular, leafy (1--3 deg. high);
leaves linear, flat, rather broad, rough on the margins; umbels terminal
and sometimes axillary, loose, drooping, the terminal with a 1--3-leaved
_involucre much shorter than the long slender rays_; spikelets oblong,
becoming cylindrical (2--4'' long), on thread-like drooping pedicels;
_bristles at maturity scarcely exceeding the_ ovate green-keeled
_pointed scales_; achene sharp-pointed. (Scirpus lineatus,
_Michx._)--Low grounds, western N. Eng. to Ga., west to Minn. and Mo.

2. E. cyperinum, L. (Pl. 3, fig. 6--10, under Scirpus.) (WOOL-GRASS.)
Culm nearly terete (2--5 deg. high); leaves narrowly linear, long, rigid,
those of the _involucre 3--5, longer than the umbel_, the rays at length
drooping; spikelets exceedingly numerous, ovate, clustered, or the
lateral pedicelled, woolly at maturity (11/2--3'' long); the rust-colored
_bristles much longer than the pointless scales_; achene short-pointed.
(Scirpus Eriophorum, _Michx._)--Wet meadows and swamps, Newf. to Fla.,
west to Minn. and Iowa. Exceedingly variable in the character and size
of the umbel, the typical form having the spikelets mostly clustered in
small heads.--Var. LAXUM has the spikelets scattered, the lateral
long-pedicelled.

[*][*] _Bristles 6, crisped, white; spikelet single, small; involucre of
one short bract._

3. E. alpinum, L. (Pl. 3, fig. 1--6.) Culms slender, many in a row from
a running rootstock (6--10' high), scabrous, naked; sheaths at the base
awl-tipped.--Cold bogs, Lab. to N. Eng., west to Minn. June. (Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Bristles very numerous, not crisped, forming dense cottony
heads in fruit._

[+] _Culm bearing a single spikelet; involucre none._

4. E. vaginatum, L. Culms in close tufts (1 deg. high), leafy only at the
base, above with 2 inflated leafless sheaths; root-leaves long and
thread-form, triangular-channelled; scales of the ovate spikelet
long-pointed, lead-color at maturity.--Cold and high peat-bogs, N. Eng.
to Penn., Mich., Minn., and northward. May, June. (Eu.)

[+][+] _Culm leafy, bearing several umbellate-clustered heads,
involucrate._

5. E. Virginicum, L. Culm rigid (2--4 deg. high); leaves very narrowly
linear, elongated, flat; _spikelets nearly sessile, crowded in a dense
cluster or head; wool rusty or copper-color_, only thrice the length of
the scale; stamen 1.--Bogs and low meadows, Newf. to Fla., west to Minn.
and Neb. July, Aug.--Var. ALBUM, Gray, has the wool white. N. New York.

6. E. polystachyon, L. Culm rigid (1--2 deg. high), obscurely triangular;
_leaves linear, flat, or barely channelled below_, triangular at the
point; _involucre 2--3-leaved_; spikelets several (4--12), on smooth
nodding peduncles, some of them elongated in fruit; achene obovate;
_wool white_, very straight (1' long or more).--Bogs, Newf. to Ga.,
Minn., and westward. June, July. (Eu.)--Var. LATIFOLIUM, Gray;
peduncles rough; leaves sometimes broader and flatter.

7. E. gracile, Koch. Culm slender (1--2 deg. high), rather triangular;
_leaves slender, channelled-triangular_, rough on the angles; _involucre
short and scale-like, mostly 1-leaved_; peduncles rough or
roughish-pubescent; spikelets 3--7, small, when mature the copious white
wool 6--9'' long; achene elliptical-linear.--Cold bogs, Newf. to N. J.,
west to Minn. and Mo. Scales in our plant mostly light chestnut and
about 3-nerved. June--Aug. (Eu.)


10. FUIRENA, Rottboell. UMBRELLA-GRASS. (Pl. 2.)

Spikelets many-flowered, terete, clustered or solitary, axillary and
terminal. Scales imbricated in many ranks, awned below the apex, all
floriferous. Perianth of 3 ovate or heart-shaped petaloid scales, mostly
on claws, and usually with as many alternating small bristles. Stamens
3. Style 3-cleft. Achene triangular, pointed with the persistent base of
the style. Culms from a perennial root, obtusely triangular. (Named for
_G. Fuiren_, a Danish botanist.)

1. F. squarrosa, Michx., var. hispida, Chapm. (Pl. 2, fig. 1--7.) Stem
(1--3 deg. high) leafy; leaves and sheaths usually densely hairy; spikelets
ovoid-oblong (4--6'' long), clustered in heads, bristly with the
spreading awns of the scales; perianth-scales rhombic or deltoid-ovate,
with a short thick awn or point, the interposed mostly barbed bristles
shorter than the achene.--Sandy wet places, N. J. to Fla., west to Ky.
and Tex.

Var. pumila, Torr. Usually low (1--6' high or more), with 1--6
spikelets; perianth-scales narrowly to broadly oblong or ovate,
long-stipitate and attenuate to a long awn; barbed bristles usually
exceeding the achene.--Mass. to N. J., Fla., and La.; Mich. The
commonest form.


11. HEMICARPHA, Nees. (Pl. 2.)

Spikelet, flowers, etc., as in Scirpus, except that there is a minute
translucent scale (readily overlooked) between the flower and the axis
of the spikelet. Stamen only one. Style 2-cleft. Bristles or other
perianth none. (Name from [Greek: e(/mi], _half_, and [Greek: ka/rphos],
_straw_ or _chaff_, in allusion to the single inner scalelet.)

1. H. subsquarrosa, Nees. Dwarf or minute annual (1--5' high); involucre
1-leaved, as if a continuation of the bristle-like culm, and usually
with another minute leaf; spikelets 2--3 (barely 2'' long); scales
brown, tipped with a short recurved point.--Sandy borders of ponds and
rivers, N. Eng. to Fla., west to the Pacific.


12. LIPOCARPHA, R. Br. (Pl. 2.)

Spikelets terete, many-flowered, in a terminal close cluster involucrate
by leafy bracts. Scales spatulate, regularly imbricated all round in
many ranks, awnless, deciduous, a few of the lowest empty. Inner scales
(bractlets) 2 to each flower, thin, one between the scale of the
spikelet and the flower, one between the latter and the axis of the
spikelet. Bristles or other perianth none. Stamens 1 or 2. Style
2--3-cleft. Achene flattish or triangular, naked at the tip.--Culms
leafy at base. (Name formed of [Greek: li/pos], _fat_, and [Greek:
ka/rphos], _chaff_, from the thickness of the inner scales of some
species.)

1. L. maculata, Torr. Annual; culm (4--8' high) much longer than the
linear concave leaves; spikelets (1--2'' long) green and dark-spotted;
inner scales delicate; stamen one; achene oblong with a contracted
base.--Springy or miry places, Va. to Fla.; near Philadelphia, probably
adventive.


13. RHYNCHOSPORA, Vahl. BEAK-RUSH. (Pl. 4.)

Spikelets panicled or variously clustered, ovate, globular, or
spindle-shaped, terete, or sometimes flattish; but the scales open or
barely concave (not boat-shaped nor keeled); the lower commonly loosely
imbricated and empty, the uppermost often subtending imperfect flowers.
Perianth in the form of bristles (mostly 6). Stamens mostly 3. Achene
lenticular, globular, or flat, crowned with a conspicuous tubercle or
beak consisting of the persistent indurated base or even of the greater
part of the style.--Chiefly perennials, with more or less triangular and
leafy culms; the spikelets in terminal and axillary clusters; flowering
in summer. (Name composed of [Greek: r(y/nchos], _a snout_, and [Greek:
spora/], _a seed_, from the beaked achene.)

Sec. 1. RHYNCHOSPORA proper. _Spikelets terete or biconvex,
few--many-flowered; style conspicuously 2-cleft, its base only forming
the tubercle of the mostly lenticular achene; bristles usually present,
merely rough or barbed-denticulate (not plumose)._

[*] _Achene transversely wrinkled; bristles mostly 6, upwardly
denticulate._

1. R. cymosa, Nutt. _Culm triangular; leaves linear_ (1/4' wide); cymes
corymbose, the _spikelets crowded and clustered; achene round-obovate_,
twice the length of the bristles, four times the length of the
depressed-conical tubercle.--Low grounds, Penn. and N. J. to Fla., west
to N. Ind. and Ill.

2. R. Torreyana, Gray. (Pl. 4, figs. 1--5.) _Culm nearly terete,
slender; leaves bristle-form_; cymes panicled, somewhat loose, the
_spikelets mostly pedicelled; achene oblong-obovate_, longer than the
bristles, thrice the length of the broad compressed-conical
tubercle.--Swamps; pine-barrens of N. J. to S. C.

3. R. inexpansa, Vahl. _Culm triangular_, slender; _leaves narrowly
linear; spikelets spindle-shaped, mostly pedicelled, in drooping
panicles; achene oblong_, half the length of the slender bristles, twice
the length of the triangular-subulate tubercle.--Low grounds, Va. to Ga.

[*][*] _Achene smooth and even._

[+] _Bristles 6, long and conspicuous, upwardly denticulate._

4. R. fusca, Roem. & Schultes. Culm 6--12' high; _leaves bristle-form
channelled_; spikelets ovate-oblong, few, clustered in 1--3 loose heads
(dark chestnut-color); _achene obovate, half the length of the
bristles_, equalling the triangular-sword-shaped acute tubercle, which
is rough serrulate on the margins.--Low grounds, N. Brunswick to N. J.,
west to L. Superior. (Eu.)

5. R. gracilenta, Gray. Culms very slender, 1--2 deg. high; _leaves narrowly
linear_; spikelets ovoid, in 2--4 small clusters, the lateral
long-peduncled; _achene ovoid, rather shorter than the bristles_, about
the length of the flat awl-shaped tubercle.--Low grounds, southern N. Y.
and N. J. to Fla.

6. R. oligantha, Gray. Culm and leaves filiform, 6--12' high; spikelets
very few (1--4), ovate-oblong; bristles plumose below the middle; achene
obovate-oblong, bearing a conical tubercle {1/3} its length.--Del.
(_Canby_) to Fla.

[+][+] _Bristles none, or 1--3 and minute; spikelets pale, 1-flowered._

7. R. pallida, M. A. Curtis. Culm (1--2 deg. high) acutely triangular;
leaves and spikelets as in the next species, but only a terminal dense
cluster, which is less white or turns pale reddish-tawny; achene
obovate-lenticular, tipped with a minute depressed and apiculate
tubercle; the delicate bristles 4--5 times shorter or obsolete.--Bogs in
pine-barrens of N. J. and N. C.

[+][+][+] _Bristles long, denticulate downward, or both ways in n. 11._

[++] _Spikelets white or whitish, becoming tawny with age, perfecting
only a single flower; stamens usually 2; bristles 9--12, or even 20._

8. R. alba, Vahl. Culm slender (1--2 deg. high), triangular above; leaves
narrowly linear or almost bristle-form; spikelets lanceolate, densely
crowded in a head-like terminal corymb and usually one or two lateral
ones; achene oblong-obovate with a narrowed base, scarcely longer than
the flattened-awl-shaped tubercle, shorter than the bristles.--Bogs,
Newf. to Fla., west to N. Ind., Minn., and Oregon. (Eu.)

[++][++] _Spikelets chestnut-colored or darker in_ n. _10 and 11,
few--several-flowered; stamens 3; bristles usually 6._

9. R. capillacea, Torr. Culm 6--9' high, slender; _leaves bristle-form;
spikelets 3--6 in a terminal cluster_, and commonly 1 or 2 on a remote
axillary peduncle, _oblong-lanceolate_ (pale chestnut-color, 3'' long);
_achene oblong-ovoid_, stipitate, very obscurely wrinkled, about _half
the length of the_ (6, rarely 12) _stout bristles_, and twice the length
of the lanceolate-beaked tubercle.--Bogs and rocky river-banks, N. Vt.
to Penn., west to western N. Y. and Minn.--Var. LEVISETA, Hill.
Bristles perfectly smooth. N. W. Ind.

10. R. Knieskernii, Carey. Culm 6--18 deg. high, slender; _leaves narrowly
linear_, short; _spikelets numerous, crowded in 4--6 distant clusters,
oblong-ovate_ (scarcely 1'' long); _achene obovate_, narrowed at base,
_equalling the bristles_, twice the length of the triangular flattened
tubercle.--Pine-barrens of N. J. (on bog iron ore exclusively) to Va.;
rare.

11. R. glomerata, Vahl. Culm 1--3 deg. high; _leaves linear, flat; spikelets
numerous in distant clusters or heads_ (often in pairs from the same
sheath), _ovoid-oblong_; achene obovate, margined, narrowed at base, as
long as the lance-awl-shaped flattened tubercle, which equals the always
_downwardly barbed bristles_.--Low grounds, N. Eng. to Fla., west to
Mich. and N. Ind.

12. R. cephalantha, Gray. Culm stout (2--3 deg. high); _leaves narrowly
linear, flat, keeled; spikelets very numerous, crowded in 2 or 3 or more
dense globular_ heads which are distant (and often in pairs),
_oblong-lanceolate_, dark brown; achene orbicular-obovate, margined,
narrowed at base, about as long as the awl-shaped beak; _bristles_ twice
longer, stout, _barbed downward and sometimes also upward_.--Sandy
swamps, Long Island to N. J. and Fla.

Sec. 2. CERATOSCHOENUS. _Spikelets lanceolate, acuminate, in fruit
flattish, cymose-panicled, of only one perfect and 1--4 staminate
flowers; scales few; bristles rigid, minutely scabrous upward; style
simple or barely 2-toothed, filiform and gradually thickened downward,
in fruit persistent as an exserted, slender-awl-shaped, upwardly
roughened beak, several times longer than the smooth flat obovate
achene; coarse perennials; spikelets in flower 4'', in fruit including
the projecting beak about 1' long._

13. R. corniculata, Gray. (HORNED RUSH.) Culm 3--6 deg. high; leaves about
6'' wide; _cymes decompound, diffuse; bristles awl-shaped_, stout,
unequal, _shorter than the achene._--Wet places, Penn. to Fla., west to
S. Ind. and Mo.

14. R. macrostachya, Torr. (Pl. 4, fig. 1--4.) _Cymes_ decompound, or in
the northern form _somewhat simple_ and smaller, and the spikelets
usually more clustered; _bristles capillary, twice the length of the
achene_.--Borders of ponds, Mass. to N. J. and Fla.; rare.


14. CLADIUM, P. Browne. TWIG-RUSH. (Pl. 5.)

Spikelets ovoid or oblong, of several loosely imbricated scales; the
lower empty, one or two above bearing a staminate or imperfect flower;
the terminal flower perfect and fertile. Perianth none. Stamens 2. Style
2--3-cleft, deciduous. Achene ovoid or globular, somewhat corky at the
summit, or pointed, without any tubercle, in which it differs from
Rhynchospora. (Diminutive of [Greek: kla/dos], _a branch_, from the
repeatedly branched cyme of the original species.)

1. C. mariscoides, Torr. Perennial; culm obscurely triangular (1--2 deg.
high); leaves narrow, channelled, scarcely rough-margined; cymes small;
the spikelets clustered in heads 3--8 together on 2--4 peduncles; style
3-cleft.--Bogs, N. Scotia to Del., west to S. Minn. and Iowa. July.


15. SCLERIA, Berg. NUT-RUSH. (Pl. 5.)

Flowers monoecious; the fertile spikelets 1-flowered, usually intermixed
with clusters of few-flowered staminate spikelets. Scales loosely
imbricated, the lower empty. Stamens 1--3. Style 3-cleft. Achene
globular, stony, bony, or enamel-like in texture. Bristles, etc., none.
Perennials, with triangular leafy culms, mostly from creeping
rootstocks; flowering in summer; all in low ground or swamps.
Inflorescence, in our species, of terminal and axillary clusters, the
lower clusters usually peduncled. (Name, [Greek: skleri/a], _hardness_,
from the indurated fruit.)

[*] _Achene smooth._

1. S. triglomerata, Michx. _Culm_ (11/2--3 deg. high) _and broadly linear
leaves roughish_; fascicles of spikelets few, the lowest peduncled, the
upper _somewhat in threes; achene ovate-globose_ or depressed, on an
obscure crustaceous disk.--Mass. and Vt. to Fla., west to Minn. and
Tex.--Var. GRACILIS, Britton. Culms slender (1--2 deg. long); fascicles
few-flowered, the lower (2--3-flowered) on very long filiform peduncles;
achene not more than half as large, acutish.--N. J.

2. S. oligantha, Ell. Culms slender, 2 deg. high, the angles somewhat
winged; _leaves linear_ (2'' wide), _smooth_ except the scabrous apex;
lateral fascicles 1 or 2, usually on long exserted peduncles; _achene
ovate, on a tuberculate disk_.--Va. to Fla. and Tex.

[*][*] _Achene papillose or warty._

3. S. pauciflora, Muhl. Smoothish or hairy; culm slender (9--24' high);
leaves narrowly linear; fascicles few-flowered, the lateral pedunculate,
sessile, or wanting; bracts ciliate; achene globose-ovate; the disk a
narrow ring bearing 3 pairs of minute tubercles.--N. H. to Ohio, south
to Fla. and Tex.

[*][*][*] _Achene reticulated or wrinkled._

4. S. reticularis, Michx. (Pl. 5, fig. 6--10.) Culms slender, _erect_,
scabrous (1--21/2 deg. high); leaves linear (1--11/2'' wide), smooth; lateral
fascicles 1--3, loose, remote, nearly erect, _on short often included
peduncles_; bracts glabrous; achene globose, _regularly reticulated and
pitted_, not hairy, resting upon a double greenish conspicuously 3-lobed
disk, the inner appressed to and deciduous with the achene.--E. Mass. to
Fla.--Var. PUBESCENS, Britton. Edges of reticulations more or less
hairy, especially toward the apex; lateral fascicles generally on longer
peduncles. Pine-barrens of N. J. to Fla.--Var. OBSCURA, Britton. Achene
bony, its surface with very obscure reticulations, nearly smooth at the
summit. R. I. and N. C.

5. S. Torreyana, Walpers. Culms weak, _diffuse_, slightly scabrous or
smooth; leaves linear (2--4'' wide), smooth; lateral fascicles loose, on
_more or less elongated and drooping filiform peduncles_; achene
_irregularly pitted-reticulated or pitted-rugose with the ridges
somewhat spirally arranged and more or less hairy_ (sometimes smooth);
otherwise as in the last. (S. laxa, _Torr._)--Pine-barrens, N. J. to
Fla. and Tex.

6. S. verticillata, Muhl. Smooth; culms simple, slender (4--24' high);
leaves narrowly linear, _fascicles_ 3--9-flowered, 4--6, _sessile in an
interrupted spikelet; achene_ globose (1/2'' broad), somewhat triangular
at base, _rough-wrinkled with short elevated ridges; disk obsolete_.--E.
Mass. to Ont., Minn., and south to the Gulf.


16. CAREX, Ruppius. SEDGE. (By L. H. BAILEY.)

Flowers unisexual, destitute of floral envelopes, disposed in spikes;
the staminate consisting of three stamens, in the axil of a bract, or
_scale_; the pistillate comprising a single pistil with a bifid or
trifid style, forming in fruit a hard lenticular or triangular achene,
which is enclosed in a sac (_perigynium_) formed by the complete union
of the borders of a bractlet or of connate bractlets and borne in the
axil of a bract, or _scale_. Staminate and pistillate flowers borne in
different parts of the spike (spike _androgynous_), or in separate
spikes on the same culm, or rarely the plant dioecious.--Perennial
grass-like herbs with mostly triangular culms, 3-ranked leaves, usually
with rough margins and keel, and spikes in the axils of leafy or
scale-like bracts, often aggregated into heads. An exceedingly critical
genus, the study of which should be attempted only with complete and
fully mature specimens. (The classical Latin name, of obscure
signification; derived by some from [Greek: kei/ro], _to cut_, on
account of the sharp leaves--as the English name _Shear-grass_.) (Pl. 5
and 6.)

Synopsis of Sections and Groups.

Sec. 1. CAREX proper. Staminate flowers forming one or more terminal linear
or club-shaped spikes (often pistillate at base or apex). Pistillate
flowers usually in distinct and simple mostly peduncled spikes.
Cross-section of perigynium circular, obtusely angled, or prominently
triangular in outline. Style mostly 3-parted and achene triangular or
triquetrous.

[*] 1. Physocarpae. Perigynium mostly straw-colored at maturity, papery
in texture, usually more or less inflated, smooth (sometimes hairy in
n. 6), nerved, tapering into a beak as long as or longer than the body;
spikes few to many, distinct, compactly flowered; stigmas 3 (2 in
n. 10).

[+] 1. _Pauciflorae._ Perigynium greenish, linear-lanceolate or almost
needle shaped, not inflated, strongly deflexed at maturity, several
times longer than the inconspicuous scale; spike androgynous, the
pistillate flowers at base, few.--Sp. 1.

[+] 2. _Lupulinae._ Perigynium green or greenish tawny or sometimes
yellow, more or less inflated (except in n. 2--4) long, usually very
turgid at base, mostly erect or nearly so, very gradually attenuate to a
long slenderly toothed beak exceeding the scale; spikes 3 or more, the
staminate mostly 1 and stalked, the pistillate often sessile, usually
short and thick, often becoming dark colored in drying.--Sp. 2--8.

[+] 3. _Vesicariae._ Perigynium smooth and shining, much inflated, at
maturity straw-colored or sometimes purple, beaked and conspicuously
short toothed (entire in n. 10), usually prominently few nerved, much
shorter than in [+] 2; staminate spikes commonly 2 or more; pistillate
spikes as a rule long and densely cylindrical.--Sp. 9--16.

[+] 4. _Pseudocyperae._ Perigynium less inflated, more conspicuously
nerved or even costate, and with more or less setaceous or awned teeth;
scale usually awned; spikes mostly nodding or spreading, comose in
appearance, greenish, greenish-yellow, or ochroleucous.--Sp. 17--19.

[+] 5. _Squarrosae._ Perigynium obconic or obovoid, squarrose in
exceedingly dense short spikes.--Sp. 20, 21.

[*] 2. Trachychlaenae. Perigynium mostly thick and hard in texture, often
scabrous or hirsute, straight-beaked; pistillate spikes compactly
flowered, mostly large, erect or nearly so; staminate spikes 1 or more;
stigmas 3. Generally large and coarse.

[+] 1. _Shortianae._ Terminal spike androgynous, staminate below;
perigynium small, scabrous, nearly beakless, entire.--Sp. 22.

[+] 2. _Anomalae._ Terminal spike all staminate; pistillate spikes long
and cylindrical, mostly dense; perigynium broad and short, short-beaked,
the orifice very slightly notched or entire, mostly granulate.--Sp. 23.

[+] 3. _Hirtae._ A heterogeneous group, distinguished from [+] 2 by the
longer and more deeply cut beak (slightly toothed in n. 24), and by the
hairy perigynium (smooth in n. 25)--Sp. 24--27.

[+] 4. _Paludosae._ Staminate spikes 2 or more, long stalked; the
pistillate 2--several, usually all peduncled, long and heavy,
loose-flowered, erect or nodding; perigynium large, thick in texture,
strongly nerved, mostly smooth, usually conspicuously beaked. Coarse
species.--Sp. 28, 29.

[*] 3. Microrhynchae. Parallel with [*] 2; distinguished in general by
the much smaller and nearly or entirely beakless and mostly
entire-mouthed perigynium, which is much thinner in texture; stigmas 2
or 3. Paludose and alpine species, of various habit, mostly with colored
spikes, often in dense tufts or tussocks.

[+] 1. _Atratae._ Terminal spike club-shaped and androgynous with the
staminate flowers below (very rarely all staminate in n. 32); pistillate
spikes mostly short and dark-colored, erect or drooping; stigmas 3.--Sp.
30--32.

[+] 2. _Rigidae._ Mostly stiff, with short erect closely flowered spikes,
an entirely staminate terminal spike, dark colored scales, and bracts
with purple or black auricles at base; stigmas 2 or 3.--Sp. 33.

[+] 3. _Acutae._ Mostly larger and more slender, usually paludose, with
green or light-colored large and long spikes; stigmas 2 (3 in n. 39).
Distinguished from [+] 2 mainly by habit.--Sp. 34--39.

[+] 4. _Cryptocarpae._ Large, with nodding or drooping large spikes,
their dark scales very long and conspicuous; stigmas 2.--Sp. 40, 41.

[+] 5. _Pendulinae._ Distinguished from [+] 4 by the smaller size,
smaller spikes, sheathless bracts, and whitish, more or less granulated,
nearly pointless perigynium; stigmas 3.--Sp. 42--45.

[*] 4. Hymenochlaenae. Perigynium mostly light green or whitish, usually
thin and membranous, often somewhat inflated or loosely investing the
achene, commonly smooth and shining (hairy in n. 46, sometimes in
n. 47), slender or oblong, attenuate to a distinct or long minutely
toothed straight beak (or beakless or nearly so in [+] 1 and n. 55);
pistillate spikes several or many, mostly loosely flowered and on
filiform nodding or widely spreading peduncles; bracts leaf-like;
terminal spike staminate or androgynous; stigmas 3. Mostly rather tall
and slender upland species.

[+] 1. _Virescentes._ Terminal spike pistillate at top; pistillate
spikes oblong or cylindrical, dense, erect; perigynium ovate or obovate,
nearly or quite beakless, often hairy.--Sp. 46, 47.

[+] 2. _Sylvaticae._ Terminal spike all staminate; pistillate spikes
mostly long-exserted, slender; perigynium few-nerved, contracted into a
cylindrical beak which is longer than the body.--Sp. 48.

[+] 3. _Flexiles._ Terminal spike all staminate; pistillate spikes
rather thick (very small in n. 50), more or less drooping; perigynium
beaked, few-nerved or nerveless, tawny or whitish.--Sp. 49, 50.

[+] 4. _Debiles._ Terminal spike all staminate (occasionally pistillate
above in n. 53); pistillate spikes very narrow and slender,
long-exserted and nodding, mostly very loosely flowered; perigynium
rather small, not turgid, prominently beaked.--Sp. 51--53.

[+] 5. _Gracillimae._ Terminal spike pistillate at top; pistillate spikes
habitually thicker than in [+] 4; perigynium ovate-oblong, more or less
turgid; the beak short or none.--Sp. 54--57.

[+] 6. _Griseae._ Terminal spike staminate; perigynium more or less
turgid or plump, often glaucous, scarcely beaked, finely striate; spikes
erect.--Sp. 58, 59.

[*] 5. Spirostachyae. Perigynium smooth or minutely granulated or rarely
somewhat serrate on the margins, prominently nerved, mostly yellowish,
squarrose, mostly beaked (entirely beakless in n. 63), the orifice
entire; staminate spike mostly single; pistillate spikes 2--5, short
(usually 1' long or less), yellow or fuscous, compactly flowered;
stigmas 3.--Medium-sized species, growing in meadows and grassy swales.

[+] 1. _Granulares._ Spikes scattered, cylindrical, the lowest
long-stalked; bracts erect, long and leafy; sheaths short or nearly
obsolete.--Sp. 60, 61.

[+] 2. _Extensae._ Spikes mostly approximate or aggregated at the top of
the culm (becoming remote in C. extensa), the lowest 1 or 2 subtended by
a long and leafy mostly abruptly spreading and nearly or entirely
sheathless bract. Terminal spike sometimes androgynous.--Sp. 62.

[+] 3. _Pallescentes._ Spikes globular or short-oblong, obtuse, sessile
or short-peduncled, approximate at the top of the culm; bracts short,
leaf-like, sheathless; perigynium entire at the orifice, the beak none
or very short and stout.--Sp. 63, 64.

[*] 6. Dactylostachyae. Perigynium mostly short and triangular, mostly
with a short and straight or curved beak, green or greenish, scarcely
inflated; scales of the pistillate spikes mostly whitish (sometimes
dark-colored in the _Digitatae_), often small; staminate spike mostly
one; pistillate spikes short (seldom exceeding 1'), commonly rather
loosely flowered and slender (spike single and plant dioecious in n.
83); bracts sheathing, the sheaths often conspicuous and colored.--Low
and lax or slender species inhabiting meadows and copses.

[+] 1. _Oligocarpae._ Slender and narrow-leaved, with leafy bracts and
inconspicuous green sheaths; perigynium rounded on the angles, finely
many-striate, often somewhat punctulate as in n. 58, to which the group
forms a transition.--Sp. 65--67.

[+] 2. _Laxiflorae._ Slender and more or less broad-leaved, with mostly
leafy bracts, green or purple sheaths, and loosely flowered spikes;
perigynium mostly conspicuously three-angled, with a more or less curved
beak.--Sp. 68--74.

[+] 3. _Paniceae._ Mostly stouter and narrow-leaved, with thinner spikes;
perigynium often strongly nerved, not conspicuously triangular, often
somewhat turgid; bracts and sheaths various.--Sp. 75--78.

[+] 4. _Bicolores._ Small species with a beakless, more or less round or
pyriform perigynium, which is commonly glaucous; terminal spike
androgynous or all staminate; stigmas mostly 2.--Sp. 79.

[+] 5. _Digitatae._ Low species; sheaths membranaceous or hyaline and
colored, either not prolonged into a bract or the bract very short and
not foliaceous; perigynium more or less three-angled, often hairy, the
beak straight or nearly so.--Sp. 80--83.

[*] 7. Sphaeridiophorae. Perigynium mostly short and rounded, three-angled
in the _Triquetrae_, firm or hard in texture, not inflated, hairy or
scabrous, the beak straight and usually bifid; staminate spike one;
pistillate spikes short (1' long or less), usually globular or
short-oblong, more or less sessile and approximate or the longer ones
radical (spike single in n. 84); bracts sheathless, short, or obsolete;
stigmas rarely two.--Low species of dry ground, with leaves all radical.

[+] 1. _Scirpinae._ Spike one, unisexual; plant dioecious.--Sp. 84.

[+] 2. _Montanae._ Spikes two to several, the lowest occasionally
long-peduncled and radical; perigynium rounded, contracted above and
below, mostly bearing two prominent ribs, more or less hairy.--Low
species of dry soils.--Sp. 85--91.

[+] 3. _Triquetrae._ Taller; spikes mostly approximate at the top of the
culm, oblong or cylindrical; perigynium conspicuously 3-angled.--Sp. 92.

[*] 8. Phyllostachyae. Perigynium much as in the _Montanae_; spike one,
staminate above; pistillate flowers few, often remote, usually on a more
or less zigzag rhachis; scales prolonged and leaf-like.--Sp. 93--95.

[*] 9. Leptocephalae. Perigynium thin in texture, green, oblong or
lanceolate or linear in general outline, beakless; spike one, staminate
above, thin and slender; stigmas mostly three.--Small, slender and
grass-like.--Sp. 96.

[*] 10. Physocephalae. Spike one, globular or short-oblong, staminate at
the apex; perigynium straw-colored, paper-like, more or less inflated;
stigmas three. Leaves remarkably broad in our species.--Sp. 97.

Sec. 2. VIGNEA. Staminate flowers few and inconspicuous, borne at the base
or apex of the pistillate spikes. Pistillate flowers in short sessile
spikes (or spike single in some cases), which are commonly more or less
aggregated into heads or even panicled. Perigynium plano-convex. Styles
two and achene lenticular.--The spikes, especially the uppermost,
usually have contracted bases when the staminate flowers are borne below
the pistillate ones, and empty scales at the top when the staminate
flowers are borne at the summit.

[*] 11. Acroarrhenae. Staminate flowers borne at the top of the spikes
(or, in the _Multiflorae_ and _Arenariae_, spikes often wholly staminate
and the plants occasionally dioecious).

[+] 1. _Foetidae._ Spikes tawny or brown, not elongated, very densely
aggregated into a continuous globose somewhat chaffy head; perigynium
ovate or ovate-lanceolate, nerveless or nearly so, mostly thin in
texture.--Sp. 98, 99.

[+] 2. _Vulpinae._ Spikes mostly yellow or tawny when mature, densely
aggregated or sometimes somewhat scattered below or even panicled;
perigynium thick in texture, spongy at base, mostly stipitate, bearing
very conspicuous nerves, which converge below and are especially
prominent on the outer side.--Sp. 100--102.

[+] 3. _Multiflorae._ Heads various, mostly loosely flowered, sometimes a
panicle, yellow or tawny; spikes short (rarely longer than broad),
staminate flowers sometimes occupying whole spikes in the middle or at
the apex of the head; perigynium mostly small and short and nearly
nerveless, or in some species becoming nearly lanceolate and more or
less prominently nerved, firm in texture, usually numerous.--Sp.
103--108.

[+] 4. _Arenariae._ Spikes longer than in the last section, linear or
nearly so, aggregated into short, almost globose heads; perigynium
lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, mostly larger and more delicate in
texture; scales awn-pointed or very acute. Staminate flowers variously
situated.--(C. arenaria.)

[+] 5. _Muhlenbergianae._ Spikes green or nearly so when mature,
aggregated or scattered, never in compound heads; perigynium mostly
short-ovate, staminate flowers always at the top of the spike.--Sp.
109--114.

[+] 6. _Dioicae._ Spike commonly one, small; plants small and slender,
often dioecious.--Sp. 115--117.

[*] 12. Hyparrhenae. Staminate flowers borne at the base of the spikes
(or in n. 124 and 125 variously situated).

[+] 1. _Elongatae._ Spikes silvery green or sometimes tawny when mature,
distinct, mostly small; perigynium not wing-margined nor conspicuously
broadened, mostly nearly flat on the inner surface.--Sp. 118--124.

[+] 2. _Ovales._ Spikes tawny or dark, rather large, sometimes crowded;
perigynium with a more or less thin or winged margin, which is mostly
incurved at maturity, rendering the perigynium concave inside.--Sp.
125--132.

[+] 3. _Cyperoideae._ Spikes green, oblong, densely crowded into a short
head subtended by two or three leafy bracts which are erect and
prolonged from six inches to a foot; perigynium linear-lanceolate,
scarcely margined.--Sp. 133.


Artificial Key.

  Spike 1, staminate at top; scales of pistillate flowers leaf-like
                                                               Sp. 93-95

  Spike 1, scales not leaf-like.

    Usually dioecious, stigma 2                                  115-117

    Stigmas 3.--

      Perigynium densely hairy                                        84

      Spike staminate at base; perigynia squarrose                    21

      Spike staminate at top.--

        Globose; leaves broad                                         97

        Perigynium nearly linear, beakless                            96

        Perigynium long, spindle-shaped                                1

  Spikes several or numerous, sessile, spicate or capitate; stigmas 2.

    All in a globose or ovoid uninterrupted head.

      All staminate above.--

        Usually green at maturity                               112, 114

        Usually yellow or tawny or brown                98, 99, 104, 105

      All staminate below.--

        Leafy-bracteate                                              133

        Not leafy-bracteate.--

          Green                                                  118-120

          Usually tawny or brown                                 125-132

  Some or all of the spikes distinct or the head interrupted.

    Staminate and pistillate flowers variously disposed, some of the
    spikes often unisexual.

      Head large and long                               108, C. arenaria

      Head short or linear                                      124, 125

    Spikes staminate above                                       100-114

    Spikes staminate below                                       118-133

  Spikes usually more or less pedicelled, the wholly or partially
  staminate spikes uppermost.

    Terminal spike (rarely the 2 or 3 uppermost) staminate only at base.

      Stigmas 2                                                34-38, 79

      Stigmas 3; spikes erect,

        Short and squarrose                                       20, 21

        Not squarrose                         22, 30, 32, 46, 47, 54, 79

      Stigmas 3; spikes more or less drooping           31, 51-53, 55-57

    Terminal spike or spikes staminate.

      Stigmas 2.--

        Spikes spreading or pendulous                     34, 37, 40, 41

        Spikes erect or nearly so                 9-16, 34-41, 85-91, 79

      Stigmas 3; spikes spreading or drooping.

        Perigynium prominently 3-angled                            68-74

        Perigynium large, thin, much inflated                       9-16

        Perigynium firmer, not inflated.

          Beakless                                                 42-45

          Beaked or prominently pointed.--

            Teeth long, stiff and sharp                            17-19

            Teeth short and thin, or none              30, 31, 39, 48-53

      Stigmas 3; spikes erect or ascending.

        Perigynium hairy.--

          Spikes very large, globose                                   6

          Spikes very small, sessile or nearly so           81-83, 85-92

          Spikes cylindrical, heavy                                24-28

        Perigynium granular-roughened                                 23

        Perigynium smooth,

          Thin and turgid, loosely enclosing the achene.--

            Beakless                                              58, 59

            Beaked                                                  5-17

          Firm in texture, not inflated,

            Long-beaked, deeply toothed                      2-4, 26, 28

            Less prominently beaked, short-toothed, sharply 3-angled
                                                                   69-74

            Wholly beakless and pointless             58, 59, 63, 78, 79

            Very small, black and shining; leaves capillary           80

            Culm and leaves thinly pubescent                          64

            Perigynium more or less pointed or beaked.

              Spikes spreading or drooping              51-53, 68-70, 75

              Spikes erect                           60-62, 65-68, 71-78

[*] 1. PHYSOCARPAE.--[+] 1. _Pauciflorae_.

1. C. pauciflora, Lightf. (Pl. 5, fig. 1--16.) Very slender but erect,
6--18' high; leaves very narrow, much shorter than the culm; staminate
and pistillate flowers 2--5; perigynium at maturity easily
detached.--Cold sphagnum swamps, New Eng. to N. Penn. and Minn.; local.
(Eu.)

[*] 1.--[+] 2. _Lupulinae_.

[++] _Teeth of the perigynium strongly reflexed._

2. C. subulata, Michx. Green, very slender but erect, 6'--2 deg. high;
leaves narrow, somewhat shorter than the culm; bracts leafy, sheathing;
pistillate spikes 2--4, scattered, 2--6-flowered; perigynium
deflexed.--Deep sphagnum swamps, R. I. to E. Penn., and southward; very
local.

[++][++] _Teeth erect or spreading._

[=] _Whole plant yellowish; perigynium little or not at all inflated._

3. C. Michauxiana, Boeckl. Slender but stiff and erect, 1--2 deg. high;
leaves narrow and firm, shorter than the culm; spikes 2--3, the lowest
usually remote and short-peduncled, the remainder aggregated and
sessile; staminate spike small, wholly sessile; perigynium not inflated,
erect or spreading, twice longer than the blunt scale. (C. rostrata,
_Michx._)--Bogs and lake-borders, mountains of N. H. and N. Y., and
westward to L. Superior; local.

4. C. folliculata, L. Stout, 2--3 deg. high; leaves very broad and flat,
lax; pistillate spikes 3--4, scattered, all but the uppermost
prominently peduncled; staminate spike short-peduncled; perigynium
larger, inflated, the scale awned and nearly as long.--Cold swamps, New
Eng. to N. J. and Penn., and west to Mich.; rather local.

[=][=] _Plant green; perigynium much inflated._

5. C. intumescens, Rudge. Slender, 18--30' high; leaves narrow,
pistillate spikes two, loosely 1--8-flowered, the perigynium
erect-spreading, not prominently many-nerved.--Wet pastures and swamps;
common.

6. C. Grayii, Carey. Larger and stouter; leaves broad and flat, 3--4''
wide; pistillate spikes 1 or 2, the lowest often peduncled, perfectly
globular and compactly 12--30-flowered, the perigynium spreading or
deflexed and prominently many-nerved.--Meadows and copses, Vt. to Ill.,
and south to Ga.; rare eastward.--In var. HISPIDULA, Gray, the
perigynium is sparsely hispidulous.

7. C. lupulina, Muhl. Very stout and leafy; leaves rather broad and
loose; pistillate spikes 2--6, approximate at the top of the culm, all
closely sessile or the lower sometimes short-peduncled, oblong or
short-cylindrical, very heavy and densely flowered; staminate spike
small and sessile; perigynium large and rather soft, erect or but
slightly spreading, giving the spike a hop-like aspect (whence the
name). (C. lurida, _Bailey_.)--Swamps and wet pastures; frequent.

Var. pedunculata, Dewey. Spikes more or less scattered, some or all
prominently peduncled; staminate spike usually conspicuous, often
long-peduncled, very variable in size; perigynium more spreading. (C.
gigantea, _Rudge_.)--With the species, but more common.

Var. polystachya, Schwein. & Torr. Stouter, the leaves very broad (often
{1/2}'); bracts broad and far exceeding the culm; pistillate spikes
4--6, all long (3--4') and cylindrical, more or less short-peduncled,
somewhat scattered, becoming yellow; perigynium very large, ascending.
(C. lupuliformis, _Sartw._)--N. Y. and N. J.; not common.

C. LUPULINA x RETRORSA, Dudley. Distinguished from C. lupulina by its
straw-colored perigynium, which is less inflated and more spreading,
standing at nearly right angles to the axis of the spike; scales acute
to short-awned, rough. (C. lurida x retrorsa, _Bailey_).--Ithaca, N. Y.
(_Dudley_), and Lansing, Mich. (_Bailey_). Resembles n. 16.

8. C. grandis, Bailey. Distinguished from C. lupulina, var. polystachya,
by its much more scattered and mostly shorter slim spikes, which are
comparatively loosely flowered; perigynium swollen below but very
abruptly contracted into a slender beak 3--4 times as long as the body,
spreading at right angles or nearly so, never becoming yellow; scales
narrow, smooth. (C. gigantea of previous editions.)--Swamps, Ky., Del.,
and southward; local.

[*] 1.--[+] 3. _Vesicariae_.

[++] _Spikes very small, globular or short-oblong._

9. C. oligosperma, Michx. Very slender, but stiff, 18--30' high; leaves
and bracts very narrow, becoming involute; staminate spike single,
peduncled; pistillate spikes 1 or 2, sessile or the lowest very
short-peduncled, 3--8-flowered; perigynium turgid, short-ovoid,
gradually contracted into a very short and minutely toothed beak,
prominently few-nerved, yellow, nearly twice longer than the blunt
scale.--Deep swamps and borders of lakes, N. Eng. to Penn. and Minn.;
frequent.

10. C. miliaris, Michx. Culm very slender but erect, 12--18' high,
smooth, or slightly rough above on the angles; leaves almost filiform,
mostly shorter than the culm; staminate spikes 1--2, exceedingly narrow,
elevated an inch or two; pistillate spikes 1--3, the upper one sessile
and the lowest very short stalked, 9'' long or less, the lower subtended
by a short leafy bract; perigynium very small, broad or round-ovate or
ovate-oblong, thin but firm, bearing a nerve on each side but otherwise
nerveless or very nearly so, rounded into a very short terete entire or
somewhat erose beak; scales brown, lance-ovate, white tipped, about as
long as the perigynium. (C. rotundata? of last ed.)--Outlet of Moosehead
Lake, Maine, and northward.

Var. major, Bailey. Culm much stouter (often over 2 deg. high), thick and
very sharply angled; leaves stout and channelled or involute; staminate
spikes short-stalked; the pistillate 1--5, darker, mostly longer and
larger; scale varying from wholly obtuse to acutish.--Outlet of
Moosehead Lake (_Porter_), and northward.

Var. (?) aurea, Bailey. Taller and mostly stouter than the type;
pistillate spikes one or two, often staminate at top, yellow or
stramineous; perigynium longer, gradually produced into a conspicuous
and more or less toothed beak, prominently few-nerved, yellow, broader
and usually longer than the blunt scale. (C. pulla, and var. miliaris,
last ed.)--Outlet of Moosehead Lake (_Smith_), and northward.

[++][++] _Spikes much larger, cylindrical._

[=] _Scales all, or all but the very lowest, smooth._

11. C. utriculata, Boott. Very stout and robust, 3--4 deg. high; leaves
broad (4--6'') and flat, very prominently nodulose, particularly below;
spikes 3--4, 3--6' long, very thick and dense above but usually more or
less attenuate below, erect or nearly so, all but the lowest sessile or
very short-stalked; perigynium ovate, only moderately inflated, rather
abruptly contracted into a short toothed beak, at maturity usually
squarrose, rather prominently few-nerved, the upper longer than the
sharp scale, the lower shorter than or only equalling the sharper or
awned scale. (C. rostrata, _Bailey_, etc.)--Swamps, everywhere; common.
Passes imperceptibly into var. MINOR, Boott, which is distinguished by
its much smaller size, spikes 21/2' long or less, smaller perigynium,
blunt scales, and narrower and little nodulose leaves. With the type.

12. C. monile, Tuckerm. Rather slender but erect, 2--3 deg. high, the culm
sharply angled and usually rough above; pistillate spikes 2--3, the
lowest one or two short-stalked, erect or spreading, 1--3' long,
narrowly cylindrical; perigynium turgid, prominently beaked, about
10-nerved, ascending, longer than the very sharp scale. (C. Vaseyi,
_Dewey_.)--Meadows and swales; common.--In var. MONSTROSA, Bailey, the
plant is very slender throughout, and the terminal spike more or less
pistillate, while the remaining spikes are reduced to one or two which
are very small and loosely flowered and usually on very long filiform
peduncles. E. Mass. (_Swan_).

13. C. Tuckermani, Dewey. Differs from the last chiefly in the
comparatively shorter (1--2' long) spikes, which are much thicker
(usually 1/2' or more); perigynium greatly inflated and very thin and
papery, the body broader than long (about 3'' thick); scale thin and
narrow, acute, all but the very lowest less than half the length of the
perigynium.--Swamps, W. New Eng. to N. J., and west to Minn.; frequent.

14. C. bullata, Schkuhr. (Pl. 6, fig. 15--20.) Slender, 1--2 deg. high; culm
very sharply and roughly angled, thin but stiff; leaves narrow,
rough-edged, stiff; spikes 1 or 2, remote, short and thick (rarely 11/2'
long), sessile or the lower short-peduncled, more or less spreading;
perigynium turgid but very firm, dull straw colored and shining as if
varnished, prominently few-nerved, the long beak usually minutely
roughened; scale membranaceous and blunt, about {1/3} as long as the
perigynium.--Swamps from E. Mass, to N. J. and E. Penn., and southward;
frequent.

C. BULLATA x UTRICULATA, Bailey. Perigynium considerably smaller and
more spreading, less shining; scales longer and sharper. (C. Olneyi,
_Boott_.)--Providence, R. I. (_Olney_).

15. C. retrorsa, Schwein. Stout, 2--3 deg. high; culm obtusely angled and
smooth or nearly so; leaves broad and soft, roughish, much longer than
the culm; spikes 3--5, approximate near the top of the culm or the
lowest remote, all but the lowest 1 or 2 sessile, 1--2' long and very
compactly flowered, erect or spreading; perigynium very thin and papery,
much inflated, prominently nerved, strongly reflexed; scale very short
and small.--Swamps, from Penn. northward; common.--In var. HARTH, Gray,
a common monstrous form, the spikes are more or less scattered and
peduncled, loosely flowered, and the perigynium less reflexed or
spreading.

[=][=] _Scales all rough-awned._

16. C. lurida, Wahl. Variable in size, mostly ranging from 11/2--3 deg. high,
stout; culm rather obtusely angled and smooth; leaves long and loose,
rough; spikes 2--4, variously disposed, the 1 or 2 upper sessile, nearly
erect or often drooping, very densely flowered; perigynium thin and
turgid, often somewhat shining, rather lightly about 10-nerved, very
long and slenderly beaked, ascending; staminate spike single, scales
linear, half as long as the perigynium or more. (C. tentaculata,
_Muhl._)--Swamps, N. Eng. to S. Ill., and southward; abundant eastward.
Very variable.--Var. GRACILIS, Bailey. Plant more slender; spikes 2--3,
very small and narrowly cylindrical (1' long or less, and 3'' broad or
less). Mts. of Vt., Penn., and Tenn.

Var. flaccida, Bailey. Lower, scarcely exceeding 12--15' in height;
spikes 2--4, all sessile and approximate at the top of the culm, small
and straight (1' long or less), dull brown or reddish-brown, loosely
flowered and entirely lacking the dense and comose appearance of the
type; perigynium very thin and much inflated, the body usually larger
than in the type and more gradually contracted into the beak.--N. Y. to
N. J.; apparently scarce.

C. LURIDA x LUPULINA, Bailey. Very like C. lurida, but the spikes
usually all approximate or only the lowest separated, erect or
spreading, all sessile, green or greenish, often curved; perigynium very
long-beaked and ascending; staminate spike one, sessile or very nearly
so, strongly resembling that of C. lupulina. (C. tentaculata, var.
altior, _Boott_.)--Mass., Conn., and N. Y.; little known. C. lupulina x
retrorsa is distinguished from this by its yellow or straw-colored more
scattered spikes which are shorter and always straight, and the loose,
larger and more inflated perigynia.

[*] 1.--[+] 4. _Pseudocyperae._

[++] _Spikes all erect or ascending._

17. C. Schweinitzii, Dewey. Soft but erect, 1--2 deg. high, stoloniferous,
yellowish-green and becoming straw-colored in drying; culm flattish and
smooth; leaves broad (3--4''), the radical longer than the culm, the
others mostly short; spikes 3--4, the lower one or two short-peduncled,
narrowly long-cylindrical (11/2--3' long, 4'' broad); perigynium thin and
somewhat inflated, prominently few-nerved, the long beak short-toothed,
ascending; scale awned and commonly rough at the tip, a little shorter
than the perigynium.--Swamps, W. New Eng. to N. J., and west to Mich.;
local.

[++][++] _Spikes widely spreading or drooping._

18. C. hystricina, Muhl. Slender but erect, 1--2 deg. high; culm very
sharply angled and rough, at least above; leaves rather narrow,
roughish; spikes 1--3, borne near the top of the culm, the upper one
often sessile, the remainder on more or less filiform stalks, short
(rarely 11/2' long) and compactly flowered; perigynium greenish, very
strongly 15--20-nerved, the very slender beak strongly toothed;
scale linear and rough-awned, nearly or quite as long as the
perigynium.--Swales, throughout; frequent. Often confounded with n. 16.

Var. Dudleyi, Bailey. Taller; spikes larger and slimmer (11/2--21/2' long),
light straw-colored, all secund and widely divaricate or nodding;
perigynium stronger toothed; scales usually more prominent.--Swales,
Conn. (_Wright_), Ithaca, N. Y. (_Dudley_), Wisc. (_Lapham_).

19. C. Pseudo-Cyperus, L. Tall and stout, 2--3 deg. high; culm thick and
very sharply triangular, rough throughout; leaves very long,
rough-margined; spikes 3--5, all slenderly peduncled and more or less
drooping, all somewhat contiguous, long (mostly 2--3') and narrowly
cylindrical, very compactly flowered; perigynium elliptic-lanceolate,
more or less 2-edged, many-costate, the beak shorter than the body, with
erect short teeth, strongly reflexed; scale very rough-awned, about the
length of the perigynium.--Swamps and lake-borders, N. Eng. to Penn.,
and Mich.; rare. (Eu.)

Var. Americana, Hochst. Mostly stouter, the leaves broader (about 1/4');
spikes thicker and commonly more drooping; perigynium longer, the beak
mostly longer than the body and the teeth long and prominently
spreading. (C. comosa, _Boott_.)--Swamps; common.

[*] 1.--[+] 5. _Squarrosae._

20. C. stenolepis, Torr. Stout and very leafy, 1--2 deg. high; culm obtusely
angled, very smooth; leaves about 3'' broad, rough on the nerves, the
upper and the bracts very much longer than the culm; terminal spike
often pistillate at top; other spikes 3--5, the uppermost sessile on the
zigzag rhachis, short (1--11/2' or less) and evenly cylindrical, often
staminate at top; perigynium very abruptly contracted into a short but
slender toothed beak, shorter than the long-linear and rough
scale.--Swamps and meadows, central Penn., to N. Ohio, west and
southward; frequent.

21. C. squarrosa, L. Cespitose, 2--3 deg. high; culm sharply angled, more or
less rough above; leaves broad and weak, roughish, exceeding the culm;
bracts much less prominent than in the last; spikes 1--3, thick, the
terminal always two-thirds pistillate or more, the remainder more or
less stalked, erect or slightly nodding, globular or oblong-cylindric,
brown, exceedingly densely flowered; perigynium larger, the beak rough;
scale short and usually invisible.--Bogs, throughout; infrequent.

[*] 2. TRACHYCHLAENAE.--[+] 1. _Shortianae._

22. C. Shortiana, Dewey. Tall and slender but strict, in small clumps,
2--3 deg. high; leaves about 1/4' broad, flat, rough on the nerves; spikes
3--5, somewhat approximate near the top of the culm, the lowest 2 or 3
short-peduncled, erect, small (1' long or less, and 2'' wide), evenly
cylindrical, exceedingly densely flowered; perigynium small, circular or
round-ovate, flat, sharp-edged, nerveless, the orifice entire, perfectly
squarrose; scale thin and blunt, about the length of the
perigynium.--Wet meadows, S. Penn. and Va. to Ill.; rare eastward.

[*] 2.--[+] 2. _Anomalae._

23. C. scabrata, Schwein. Tall and rather stout, very leafy, 1--3 deg. high,
culm sharply and very roughly angled; leaves broad and flat, very rough;
spikes 3--5, scattered, the upper 1 or 2 sessile, the remainder often
long-peduncled and sometimes nodding, 1--2' long, narrowly cylindrical
and compactly flowered; perigynium broadly ovate, prominently
few-nerved, rough, the beak nearly as long as the body and slightly
toothed; scale acute and rough-tipped, green-nerved, about as long as
the body of the perigynium.--Wet meadows and glades, as far west as
Mich.; common eastward.

[*] 2.--[+] 3. _Hirtae._

24. C. vestita, Willd. Stout and stiff, 2--3 deg. high; culm sharply angled,
smooth or somewhat rough; leaves narrow and rather short, roughish;
staminate spike 1, rarely 2, sessile or nearly so; pistillate spikes
2--5, approximate and sessile, or rarely the lowest sub-radical, often
staminate at top, oblong or short-cylindric (rarely 1' long), compactly
flowered; perigynium ovate, nerved, stiffly hairy, short-beaked, the
beak often purple, and white-hyaline at the orifice, which becomes more
or less split with age; scale thin and blunt or acute, shorter than the
perigynium.--Tufted in sandy soils, from N. Eng. to N. Y., and
southward; frequent.

25. C. striata, Michx., var. brevis, Bailey. Stiff, 1{1/2}--2{1/2} deg.
high; culm sharply angled, smooth or slightly rough above, mostly
exceeding the leaves; leaves narrow and stiff, becoming involute; spikes
1--2, mostly closely sessile, considerably separated when two, short
(rarely 1{1/2}' long) and rather thick, erect; perigynium broad-ovate
with impressed nerves, smooth, ascending, short-beaked and very
short-toothed; scale thin, obtuse or acutish, mostly about {1/2} as long
as the perigynium.--Pine-barren swamps, N. J., and southward; local.

26. C. Houghtonii, Torr. Stiff, 1--2 deg. high, extensively creeping; culm
rather sharply angled, rough, exceeding the leaves; leaves flat and very
sharp-pointed; spikes 1--3, sessile or the lowest short-stalked, erect,
varying from nearly globular to cylindric (1{1/2}' long), compact;
perigynium short-ovate, stiffly pubescent, prominently nerved and
toothed; scale thin-margined, acute or awned, shorter than the
perigynium.--Sandy knolls and banks from Maine to Minn. along our
northern borders, and northwestward; rather local.

27. C. filiformis, L. Tall and very slender but erect, 2--3 deg. high; culm
obtuse, smooth; leaves very long, involute-filiform, rough; spikes 1--3,
sessile, somewhat scattered, erect, short and thick (rarely over 1'
long); perigynium very short-ovate, the teeth very short, the few nerves
obscured by the dense stiff hairs; scale thin and blunt, about as long
as the perigynium.--Bogs, throughout, north of Penn.; frequent. (Eu.)

Var. latifolia, Boeckl. Culm mostly rough above; leaves flat, 1--2''
broad; spikes usually somewhat slimmer and scales often sharper and
longer. (C. lanuginosa, _Michx._)--Swales and low meadows, throughout;
common.

C. HIRTA, L. Variable in size ({1/2}--2 deg. high), widely creeping; culm
rather slender but erect, obtuse and smooth or slightly rough above;
leaves soft and flat, generally sparsely hairy and the sheaths very
hirsute, rarely smooth; spikes 2--3, distant, more or less
shortly-peduncled, erect or nearly so, 11/2' long or less and rather
loose; perigynium long-ovate, nerved, soft-hairy, the prominent beak
slenderly toothed; scale thin and green-nerved, awned, mostly a little
shorter.--E. Mass. to central N. Y. and Penn. (Nat. from Eu.)

[*] 2.--[+] 4. _Paludosae._

[++] _Teeth slender, mostly spreading._

28. C. trichocarpa, Muhl. Stout and tall, 2--3 deg. high; culm sharply
angled, rough above; leaves very numerous, flat and very rough, but not
hairy, much exceeding the culm; spikes 2--5, scattered, the lower
stalked and more or less spreading, long and heavy (1--4') but loosely
flowered at base; perigynium long-ovate, many-costate, sparsely
short-hairy, about twice as long as the membranaceous, acute or
acuminate scale.--Marshes; frequent.--Var. IMBERBIS, Gray. Mostly
smaller throughout; perigynium smooth; scales usually sharper and
longer. Drier places, N. Y. to Mo.; infrequent.

Var. Deweyi, Bailey. Leaves narrower, often becoming somewhat involute,
smoother; spikes short (seldom over 11/2' long), all but the lowest one
sessile; perigynium smooth, thick in texture, becoming polished with
age, the nerves impressed; scales sharp, mostly a little shorter than
the perigynium.--Dakota (_Seymour_), and northwestward. Resembles small
forms of n. 29.

Var. aristata, Bailey. Mostly stouter; leaves more or less hairy on the
under surface and sheaths; perigynium usually longer, smooth, the teeth
longer and more spreading. (C. aristata, _R. Br._)--N. Eng. to Minn.;
rare eastward.

[++][++] _Teeth short, erect or very nearly so._

29. C. riparia, W. Curtis. Very large and stout, 2--4 deg. high,
stoloniferous; leaves mostly broad, flat, rough, glaucous, much longer
than the sharply angled culm; spikes 2--4, scattered and all more or
less peduncled, the lowest often very long-stalked, varying from almost
globular in starved plants to 3--4' long, erect or the lower somewhat
drooping, loosely flowered below; perigynium ovate-lanceolate,
coriaceous, rather lightly many-nerved, becoming polished, the beak
short and thick; scale varying from blunt to awned, shorter or longer
than the perigynium.--Swales; common. (Eu.)

C. ACUTIFORMIS, Ehrh. Stout, 2--3 deg. high; culm thick and sharp, mostly
smooth; leaves broad, flat and glaucous, much prolonged; spikes 3--5,
all but the uppermost peduncled, spreading or drooping, narrowly
cylindric (2--3' long), loosely flowered below; perigynium ovate, very
strongly many-nerved, the short beak slightly toothed; scale rough-awned
and longer than the perigynium. (C. paludosa, _Gooden_.)--Swales,
Dorchester, and New Bedford, Mass. (Nat. from Eu.) The former station
has been recently destroyed.

[*] 3. MICRORHYNCHAE.--[+] 1. _Atratae._

[++] _Alpine; plant small._

30. C. alpina, Swartz. Small and slender, 1/2--2 deg. high; culm thin and
obtuse, smooth or roughish, naked above; leaves narrow and flat, shorter
than the culm; spikes commonly 3, sometimes 2 or 4, aggregated, globular
and very small, all closely sessile or rarely the lowest exceedingly
short-stalked; perigynium orbicular or obovate, nerveless or nearly so,
the short beak slightly notched, a little longer than the ovate and
black mostly obtuse scale.--Isle Royale, L. Superior. (Eu.)

31. C. atrata, L., var. ovata, Boott. Very slender but erect, 1--2 deg.
high; culm rather sharp, roughish above; leaves narrow but flat, shorter
than the culm; spikes 3--5, all but the terminal one on slender stalks
1/2--2' long, drooping when mature, 1' long or less, ovate-oblong or
short-cylindric, reddish-brown; perigynium broadly ovate, thin and
puncticulate, very short-beaked, the orifice slightly notched; scale
blunt, thin-margined, about as long as the perigynium. (C. atrata,
_Man._)--White Mountains, N. H., Smugglers' Notch, Vt. (_Brainerd_), and
northward.

[++][++] _Paludose; plant larger._

32. C. fusca, All. Rather slender but stiff, 1--3 deg. high; culm sharp,
roughish above; leaves very narrow, rough, mostly shorter than the culm;
spikes 2--4, the terminal rarely all staminate, all sessile and
approximate or the lowest sometimes very short-stalked, varying from
globular to narrowly cylindric (often becoming 11/2' long), dark brown or
variegated; perigynium elliptic and beakless, whitish and granular,
nearly nerveless, the orifice entire; staminate scales very
long-lanceolate, the pistillate lance-ovate and very sharp,
conspicuously longer than the perigynium. (C. Buxbaumii, _Wahl._)--Bogs,
throughout; frequent. (Eu.)

[*] 3.--[+] 2. _Rigidae._

33. C. vulgaris, Fries. Low and stiff, about 1 deg. or sometimes 18' high;
culm sharp, smooth or rather rough above; leaves narrow and stiff,
shorter than the culm, glaucous blue; staminate spike sessile or nearly
so; spikes 2--4, all sessile or rarely the lowest very short-stalked,
short and erect (1' long or less), very densely flowered or sometimes
becoming loose below, the lowest subtended by a bract 1--3' long;
perigynium appressed, oval or round-ovate, mostly finely striate toward
the base, the beak entire or very nearly so, bright green until
over-mature; scale ovate and very obtuse, purple with a faint white
nerve, conspicuously narrower and shorter than the perigynium, thus
causing the spike in the growing plant to assume a characteristic
green-and-black appearance.--Swales and low meadows along the sea-board,
from Mass. northward; common. (Eu.)

Var. strictiformis, Bailey. Taller (11/2--21/2 deg. high) and looser; culms
slender; leaves long and narrow, lax, scarcely glaucous; staminate spike
longer peduncled; pistillate spikes looser and often longer, mostly
brown or tawny-green. (C. limula, _Man._)--Swales from E. Penn.
northward, near the seaboard; frequent. Often confounded with n. 34, but
easily distinguished by the non-cespitose habit, sheaths not fibrillose,
and the short scales very obtuse.

Var. hyperborea, Boott. Somewhat stoloniferous, low, often smaller than
the type; spikes shorter and mostly loosely flowered, often becoming
very thin; scales generally longer, giving the spikes a darker color;
stigmas often 3. (C. rigida, var. (?) Bigelovii, _Tuckerm._)--Alpine
summits of N. H., Vt., and N. Y. (Eu.)

[*] 3.--[+] 3. _Acutae._

[++] _Stigmas 2; scales not conspicuously acute, or if so, divaricate._

[=] _Spikes erect, or rarely spreading in n. 34._

34. C. stricta, Lam. Tall and slender but erect, 2--4 deg. high, generally
in dense clumps when old, or rarely in small tufts; culm sharp, rough
above; leaves long and narrow, rough on the edges, the lowest sheaths
usually becoming prominently fibrillose; 1 or 2 lowest bracts leafy and
equalling the culm; spikes 3--5, variable in size and shape, scattered,
the lowest usually more or less peduncled and clavate and the others
sessile, erect or spreading, oblong or cylindric (1/2--2' long and 2--3''
broad), all compactly flowered above but often attenuate at base (or
rarely alternate-flowered throughout), the upper mostly staminate at
top, all greenish-purple or pallid; perigynium ovate and small, tawny,
mostly lightly few-nerved and somewhat granular, the beak very short and
commonly entire; scale obtuse to nearly acute, about equalling the
perigynium or a little shorter.--Swales, throughout; abundant and
variable.

Var. angustata. Stricter; spikes longer and narrower (3--4' long about
11/2'' broad), never clavate, more approximate and always erect, the
staminate portion usually much longer (often 1--2'), rust-colored;
scales narrower and sharper, mostly longer than the perigynium. (C.
angustata, _Boott_, in part.)--Same range as the type, but less common.

Var. decora, Bailey. Usually smaller; basal sheaths rarely fibrillose;
spikes shorter (seldom over 1' long), sessile or very nearly so, rarely
attenuate at base, spreading, the terminal staminate flowers few,
rust-colored; bracts more spreading; scales very sharp and spreading,
longer than the perigynium. (C. aperta, _Man._)--N. Eng. to Wisc.;
rather rare.

C. STRICTA x FILIFORMIS. Leaves and culms very slender; spikes short (1'
long or less), sessile and compact, the upper 1 or 2 scarcely bracted,
pallid; perigynium small, smooth.--Keweenaw Co., Mich. (_Farwell_.)
Exactly intermediate between the two species.

35. C. aquatilis, Wahl. Large and stout, glaucous, 2--4 deg. high; culm very
obtuse and smooth; leaves exceedingly long, broader than in the last,
the bracts broad and prolonged far beyond the culm; spikes 3--5, 1--2'
long, very compact or the lowest sometimes attenuate below, erect, thick
(3'' broad or less); perigynium round-ovate or broadly elliptic,
nerveless, greenish, imbricated; scale obtuse and much shorter and
narrower than the perigynium.--Swamps and lake-margins, N. Eng. to
Minn.; not common. (Eu.)

36. C. lenticularis, Michx. Rather slender but erect, pale throughout,
1--2 deg. high; culm sharp, usually slightly rough above; leaves very
narrow, numerous, much surpassing the culm; spikes 3--6, more or less
aggregated or the lowest remote, the terminal androgynous or staminate,
mostly sessile, erect; perigynium ovate, minutely granular,
brown-nerved, the tip empty and entire; scale pale and obtuse, about 1/2
the length of the perigynium.--Gravelly borders of ponds and lakes,
northern N. Eng. to Minn.; mostly local.

[=][=] _Spikes widely spreading or drooping._

37. C. torta, Boott. Slender but erect, 11/2--21/2 deg. high, in clumps, with
exceedingly tough and cord-like roots; culm rather sharp, smooth or
roughish above; leaves flat and rather soft, those of the culm very
short; spikes 3--5, mostly somewhat approximate or the lower remote, the
upper sessile and ascending but the others drooping, long and slender
(often 3' long, 2'' broad or less); perigynium lance-ovate, thin and
green, nerveless, the slim upper half empty and more or less tortuous,
the beak entire or erose; scale purple-margined and very obtuse, shorter
than the perigynium.--Cold banks and swamps, Vt. to N. C.; infrequent.

[++][++] _Stigmas 2; scales long-acute and ascending._

38. C. salina, Wahl., var. cuspidata, Wahl. Rather stout, 1--21/2 deg. high;
culm rather sharp, smooth; leaves narrow but flat; spikes 2--4, somewhat
approximate, the lowest 1 or 2 very short-stalked, erect, short (11/2' or
less) and rather thick, the lower subtended by leaf-like bracts 3--4'
long; perigynium elliptic, somewhat granular, marked with 2 or 3 nerves
or nerveless, the minute beak entire; scale brown-margined, produced
into a lighter and rough awn much exceeding the perigynium. (C. salina,
_Man._)--Salt marshes, Mass., and along the coast northward; rare in the
United States. (Eu.) Anomalous forms, which appear to be hybrids, have
been separated as

C. STRICTA x SALINA, Bailey. Spikes thinner and more scattered, more
inclined to be peduncled; scales blunt or short-awned, little exceeding
the perigynium.--Near Boston, Mass., _W. Boott, Morong_.

[++][++][++] _Stigmas 3._

39. C. prasina, Wahl. Slender, somewhat flexuose, 11/2--21/2 deg. high; culm
rather sharp, smooth; leaves very narrow, soft and flat, rough; spikes
2--3, peduncled and spreading or drooping, somewhat approximate, green,
1--2' long, narrow and loosely flowered; perigynium pale, narrowly
triangular-ovate, thin, nearly nerveless, produced into a short but
slender entire or minutely toothed beak; scale very thin and acute,
nearly colorless, shorter than the perigynium. (C. miliacea,
_Muhl._)--Meadows and bogs, Vt. to Mich., and southward; infrequent.

[*] 3.--[+] 4. _Cryptocarpae._

40. C. maritima, O. F. Mueller. Mostly stout, 1--21/2 deg. high; culm sharp,
smooth or rough above; spikes 2--6, scattered, all or all but the upper
one on very long weak stalks and pendulous, 1--3' long and thick and
bushy, usually staminate at top; perigynium nearly orbicular, pale,
few-nerved or nerveless, the beak very short and entire or nearly so;
scale produced into a greenish rough awn 3--8 times as long as the
perigynium.--Salt marshes of the coast, Mass., Maine, and northward; not
common. Leaves smooth, broad and flat. (Eu.)

41. C. crinita, Lam. Robust and mostly stout, 2--4 deg. high; culm sharp and
rough or sometimes smooth; leaves about 3'' broad, flat, more or less
rough on the nerves and margins; spikes 3--6, somewhat scattered, all
variously peduncled, mostly secund, curved and drooping (or in small
forms rarely nearly erect), 1--4' long, narrowly and evenly cylindric,
compact or attenuate below, often staminate at top; perigynium ovate,
thin and puncticulate, obscurely nerved, the minute point entire; scale
greenish-brown and rough-awned, 2--3 times as long as the perigynium.
(C. gynandra, _Schwein._)--Swales; common.--Var. MINOR, Boott. Much
smaller in all its parts, 10--18' high; leaves narrow; spikes 3--4, 11/2'
long or less, less drooping; scales less prominent.--Maine to N. Y.;
scarce. Somewhat resembles n. 39.

C. CRINITA x TORTA, Bailey. More slender than C. crinita, the leaves
narrower; spikes nearly as slender as those of C. torta; scales blunt or
simply acute and little longer than the perigynium, or sometimes very
short-awned.--Moist meadows near the Glen House, White Mts.
(_Brainerd_). Might be mistaken for drooping spiked forms of n. 34.

[*] 3.--[+] 5. _Pendulinae._

[++] _Spikes narrowly cylindrical._

42. C. littoralis, Schwein. Somewhat slender but erect, 1--2 deg. high;
leaves narrow and rather stiff, flat, glaucous, shorter than the sharp
and nearly smooth culm; staminate spikes 1--3, dark purple, 11/2' long or
less, the scales obtuse; pistillate spikes 2--4, somewhat approximate,
on thread-like peduncles, 1--2' long, usually staminate at top;
perigynium lance-oval, faintly nerved, the minute beak entire, mostly
longer than the obtuse purple scale; bracts prominently purple-auricled.
(C. Barrattii, _Schwein._ & _Torr._)--Marshes near the coast, N. J. and
southward; rare.

[++][++] _Spikes globular or oblong._

[=] _Scales very sharp, prominently longer than the perigynium._

43. C. Magellanica, Lam. Slender but erect, 8--18' high; leaves flat and
lax, somewhat shorter than the culm; lowest bract as wide as the leaves
or nearly so and exceeding the culm; spikes 2--3, approximate, all
slenderly stalked and drooping; perigynium orbicular or broad-ovate,
nerved in the centre, 1/2--{2/3} the length of the scale. (C. irrigua,
_Smith_.)--Deep swamps, throughout, north of Penn.; local. (Eu.)

[=][=] _Scales blunt, little exceeding the perigynium._

44. C. rariflora, Smith. Very small but stiff, 4--10' high, somewhat
stoloniferous; culm obtuse and very smooth; leaves very narrow, becoming
involute, shorter than the culm; spikes 1--2, only 3--10-flowered,
drooping, borne in the axil of a minute awl-like and purple-auricled
bract; perigynium ovate, nearly pointless, obscurely nerved, mostly a
little shorter than the enveloping scale.--Mt. Katahdin, Maine
(_Goodale_). (Eu.)

45. C. limosa, L. Slender but rather stiff, 1--2 deg. high, stoloniferous;
culm sharp, rough above; leaves very narrow, strongly keeled or
involute; spikes 1--2, nodding on short stalks or the upper one erect,
oblong, springing from the axil of a very narrow bract which is nearly
always shorter than the culm; perigynium very short-pointed, about the
length of the broad scale.--Deep swamps, throughout, north of Penn.;
local. (Eu.)

[*] 4. HYMENOCHLAENAE.--[+] 1. _Virescentes._

46. C. virescens, Muhl. Slender, erect or spreading, 1--11/2 deg. high; leaves
very narrow, more or less hairy; spikes 3--5, green, short-oblong, all
somewhat stalked and often spreading, compact (11/2'' thick or less);
perigynium ovate and costate, very hairy, longer than the thin and white
acute scale.--Var. COSTATA, Dewey, usually the commoner form, is taller
(often reaching 21/2 deg.), with spikes long-cylindric, 1/2--2' long, and a
stronger ribbed perigynium.--Banks and copses, N. Eng. to Mich., and
southward; common eastward.

47. C. triceps, Michx., var. hirsuta, Bailey. Usually stiffer; leaves
hairy; spikes 2--4 (usually 3), all contiguous or occasionally the
lowest somewhat removed, sessile, short-oblong or globular, green or
brown (2--3'' thick); perigynium broad-ovate, flattish, very obtuse,
often sparsely hirsute when young but smooth at maturity; staminate
scales very sharp; pistillate scales acute or short-awned, about the
length of or shorter than the perigynium.--Dry copses and fields, N.
Eng. to Mo., and southward; rare northward.--Var. SMITHII, Porter.
Tall, slender, olive-green, the leaves very long, very nearly smooth;
spikes small, globular or short-cylindrical (1/2' long or less), the
lowest often somewhat remote, all more inclined to be peduncled;
perigynium globular and turgid, brown, squarrose, giving the spike a
characteristic plump appearance.--Fields and woodlands, southern N. J.,
E. Penn., and southward; also in Ark.; frequent.

[*] 4.--[+] 2. _Sylvaticae._

48. C. longirostris, Torr. Very slender but erect, 11/2--3 deg. high, growing
in stools; leaves narrow, flat, loose; spikes 3--5, 1--2' long, loosely
flowered, drooping; perigynium thin, slightly inflated, green, nearly
nerveless, spreading, the beak longer than the body, about the length of
the awned scale.--Shady banks from N. Eng. to Neb., and northward;
frequent.--Var. MINOR, Boott. Smaller and slenderer; spikes 9'' long or
less, very narrow and very loosely or even alternately few-flowered;
perigynium smaller. Neb. and westward.

[*] 4.--[+] 3. _Flexiles._

49. C. castanea, Wahl. Slender but erect, 1--21/2 deg. high; leaves broad and
flat, hairy, much shorter than the rough culm; spikes 2--4, approximate,
widely spreading or drooping on filiform stalks, 1' long or less, rather
dense, tawny; perigynium broad lanceolate, gradually narrowed into a
beak 1/2 as long as the body, thin, with a nerve on each side, longer than
the light brown or whitish acute thin scale. (C. flexilis,
_Rudge_.)--Banks, Conn. to Minn.; local.

C. ARCTATA x CASTANEA, Bailey. Leaves mostly narrower, less hairy or
smooth; spikes very slender and loosely flowered (scarcely over 1''
wide), erect or drooping, chestnut color; perigynium thin, long-ovate,
shorter-beaked, lightly nerved, mostly surpassing the pointed whitish
scale. (C. Knieskernii, _Dewey_.)--Oneida Co., N. Y.; Keweenaw Co.,
Mich. (_Farwell_); N. Minn.

50. C. capillaris, L. Very slender but erect, 2--12' high; culm smooth,
longer than the narrow flat or at length involute leaves; spikes 2--4,
either scattered or approximate, all more or less long-peduncled and
drooping, borne in the axils of conspicuous sheathing bracts, very small
(3--12-flowered); perigynium thin, very small, oblong-ovoid, the beak
hyaline-lipped, longer than the very obtuse white scale.--Alpine summits
of the White Mts.; Cortland, N. Y., Alcona Co., Mich., and Point de
Tour, L. Huron. (Eu.)

[*] 4.--[+] 4. _Debiles._

[++] _Perigynium thin, rarely with more than two prominent nerves._

51. C. arctata, Boott. Slender, erect, 1--2 deg. high; radical leaves much
shorter than the culm and very broad (21/2--5''), flat; bracts broad and
short, long-sheathing; spikes 3--5, all widely spreading or drooping on
filiform stalks, 1--3' long and exceedingly slender; perigynium short
(2'' long or less), abruptly and conspicuously stipitate and abruptly
contracted into a beak, 3-cornered, prominently nerved, green, mostly
spreading, scarcely longer than the very sharp or cuspidate
scale.--Woods and copses, N. Eng. to Penn. and Minn.; common.

Var. Faxoni, Bailey. Spikes shorter and usually short-peduncled, erect
or nearly so, much more densely flowered, part of them commonly
contiguous at the top of the culm, rendering the shorter staminate spike
inconspicuous; perigynium usually larger.--Lisbon, N. H. (_Faxon_);
Keweenaw Co., Mich. (_Farwell_); extreme northern Minn. (_Bailey_);
also in Canada.

52. C. debilis, Michx., var. Rudgei, Bailey. Very slender and diffuse,
1--21/2 deg. high (or rarely reduced to 3--4'!); leaves narrow and lax, longer
than the culm; spikes mostly heavier than in the last; perigynium much
longer, very gradually narrowed at each end, scarcely angled and not
prominently nerved, rusty when ripe, erect, twice longer than the obtuse
or acutish scale. (C. debilis, of last ed.)--Copses, N. Eng. to N.
Mich., and southward; frequent east and southward.--Var STRICTIOR,
Bailey. Usually taller, strict; leaves broader (about 2'' wide) and
firmer; spikes stiffer, simply spreading or even erect; perigynium
mostly shorter and greener, often little exceeding the scale. White Mts.
(_Faxon_).--Var PUBERA, Gray. Perigynium usually more slender, more
nerved and minutely pubescent. Center and Lancaster Counties, Penn.
(_Porter, Lumsden_), and Bedford Co., Va. (_Curtiss_).

C. DEBILIS x VIRESCENS, Bailey. Plant slender and very green; leaves
flat, rough, mostly longer than the culm, spikes 2--3, 2' long, thin and
slender, erect or nearly so, the terminal one bearing a few pistillate
flowers at top; perigynium exactly intermediate between the two species,
lance-ovate, nerved and slightly hairy, short-beaked, thin, twice longer
than the scale.--Revere, near Boston, Mass. (_Faxon_).

[++][++] _Perigynium firm, prominently many-nerved._

53. C. venusta, Dewey, var. minor, Boeckl. Slender but strict, 11/2--2 deg.
high; leaves narrow and strict, about as long as the culm; spikes 1--2'
long, scattered, the upper usually ascending, the terminal one sometimes
staminate at top; perigynium ascending, the very short and stout beak
prominently toothed, thrice longer than the rusty narrow scale. (C.
glabra, _Boott_.)--Sphagnous swamps, Oneida Co., N. Y., N. J., and
southward; local.

[*] 4.--[+] 5. _Gracillimae._

[++] _Perigynium small, scarcely turgid._

54. C. aestivalis, M. A. Curtis. Slender but erect, 1--11/2 deg. high; leaves
very narrow, flat, shorter than the culm, the sheaths pubescent; spikes
3--4, erect or spreading, 1--2' long and very loosely flowered, all but
the lowest short-stalked; perigynium very small, ovate, scarcely pointed
and the orifice entire, few-nerved, about twice longer than the obtuse
scale.--Saddle Mountain, W. Mass., and southward in the mountains to
N. C.; rare.

55. C. gracillima, Schwein. Tall and slender, sometimes diffuse, 11/2--3 deg.
high; leaves broad and flat (the radical about 3'' wide), very dark and
bright green; spikes 3--4, scattered, the terminal rarely staminate,
densely flowered except at base, peduncled and drooping, green;
perigynium ovate, thin and slightly swollen, nerved, obtuse, orifice
entire, twice longer than the very obtuse scale.--Woodlands and low
meadows, throughout; common.--In poorer soil and sunny places, it runs
into var. HUMILIS, Bailey, and is then smaller, has much narrower leaves
and very small erect spikes (2--12-flowered), and mostly smaller
perigynia.

C. GRACILLIMA x HIRSUTA, Bailey. In habit like var. humilis; spikes
tawny; perigynium like that of C. triceps, var. hirsuta; plant smooth,
or very minutely pubescent under a strong lens.--Philipstown, N. Y.
(_Barratt_).

C. GRACILLIMA x PUBESCENS, Bailey. Tall and erect; leaves narrower than
in the last, usually slightly hairy; spikes slender, erect or slightly
spreading, often staminate at top; perigynium exactly intermediate
between the two species, ovate, obscurely nerved, sparsely hairy,
beaked, about the length of the ovate ciliate rough-awned scale. (C.
Sullivantii, _Boott_.)--Columbus, Ohio (_Sullivant_); Yonkers, N. Y.
(_E. C. Howe_); Stanton, Del. (_Commons_).

[++][++] _Perigynium large, prominently inflated_.

56. C. formosa, Dewey. Slender, erect, 1--21/2 deg. high; leaves flat, mostly
rather broad, those of the culm very short; spikes 3--5, scattered,
oblong or short-cylindrical (1' long or less), compact, all flexuose or
drooping; perigynium ovate, puncticulate, obscurely nerved, short-beaked
with a slightly notched orifice, all but the lowest one or two twice
longer than the blunt or cuspidate scale.--Woods and copses, Vt. to
Mich.; local.

57. C. Davisii, Schwein. & Torr. Always taller; spikes heavier;
perigynium more inflated, strongly nerved and prominently toothed, no
longer or shorter than the conspicuously awned and spreading scale.--Wet
meadows, W. Mass. to S. Minn., and southward; rare east and northward.

[*] 4.--[+] 6. _Griseae_.

58. C. grisea, Wahl. Stout, 1--2 deg. high; leaves broad (2--3'') and
slightly glaucous; bracts broad and leaf-like, diverging, very much
exceeding the culm; staminate spike small and sessile; pistillate spikes
3--4, short (1' long or less), the highest two usually contiguous to the
staminate spike and sessile, the others somewhat remote and peduncled,
all erect, compact; perigynium oblong, pointless, marked with impressed
nerves, turgid and cylindric, all but the lowest longer than the narrow,
cuspidate or blunt, nerved scale.--Moist grounds, throughout, except
along our northern borders; common.--Var. ANGUSTIFOLIA, Boott. Much more
slender; leaves scarcely half so wide, the bracts, especially, much
narrower and shorter and more erect; spikes slender, perigynium scarcely
inflated, triangular-oblong, bearing a sharp beak-like point, 2-ranked;
scale nerveless, long-awned and spreading. N. J. to S. Ohio, and
southward; common.--Var. GLOBOSA, Bailey. Low, 3--12' high, often
spreading; spikes few-flowered, often with but 2 or 3 perigynia;
perigynium short, inflated, very blunt, nearly globose or obovate; scale
short, not prominently cuspidate or the upper ones wholly blunt. Mo.,
Kan., and southward.

Var. (?) rigida, Bailey. Rigid; leaves rather narrow, long and erect;
staminate spike prominently peduncled; pistillate spikes scattered, all
more or less stalked, conspicuously 2 ranked; perigynium
triangular-oblong, hard, longer than the cuspidate ascending
scale.--Sellersville, Penn., and Del.

59. C. glaucodea, Tuckerm. Lax or somewhat strict (6--18' high), densely
glaucous; leaves flat, variable in width; spikes as in n. 58; perigynium
firm, not inflated, prominently impressed-nerved, glaucous, longer than
the short-cuspidate or blunt thin and appressed scale. (C. flaccosperma,
last ed.)--Meadows and swamps, Mass. to S. Ill., and southward; local.

[*] 5. SPIROSTACHYAE.--[+] 1. _Granulares_.

60. C. granularis, Muhl. Erect or spreading, 8'--2 deg. high, somewhat
glaucous; leaves flat, various; bracts broad and long, much exceeding
the culm; spikes 3--4, scattered, all but the upper peduncled, erect or
ascending, compact, short-oblong to cylindric, never exceeding 1' in
length; staminate spike small and usually sessile; perigynium ovoid,
very strongly nerved, the nearly entire short beak usually bent; scale
thin and pointed, about 1/2 the length of the perigynium.--Moist grassy
places; common.--Var. HALEANA, Porter. Habitually lower and more
slender; radical leaves very broad (3--4'') and more glaucous;
pistillate spikes 1/2' long or less, thinner; perigynium a half smaller,
narrower. Wisc. to Va.; infrequent.

61. C. Crawei, Dewey. Low, strict, stoloniferous (4--12' high); leaves
narrow; bracts scarcely exceeding the culm; spikes 2--4, scattered, the
lowest radical or nearly so, short-peduncled or the upper sessile,
erect, compact, 9'' long or less; staminate spike generally peduncled;
perigynium ovate, usually resinous dotted, obscurely or few-nerved, very
short-pointed, longer than the obtuse or short-pointed scale.--Moist
places, N. Y. to Ill. and Minn.; local, especially eastward.

[*] 5.--[+] 2. _Extensae_.

C. EXTENSA, Gooden. Slender but strict, 1--2 deg. high; leaves involute;
spikes about 3, the lowest remote and short-peduncled, the remainder
approximate and sessile, short (about 1/2' long) and compact; perigynium
ovate, very strongly nerved, ascending, the short stout beak sharply
toothed, longer than the blunt brown-edged scale.--Long Island and Coney
Island, N. Y.; Norfolk, Va., _McMinn._ (Nat. from Eu.)

62. C. flava, L. Very slender but strict and stiff, 1--2 deg. high,
yellowish throughout; leaves flat but narrow, mostly shorter than the
culm; staminate spike sessile or nearly so, usually oblique; pistillate
spikes 2--4, all contiguous or rarely the lowest one remote, all but the
lowest sessile, short-oblong or globular, densely flowered, the lowest
subtended by a long divaricate bract; perigynium ovate, produced into a
deflexed beak as long as the body, strongly nerved, thrice longer than
the blunt scale.--Swales and wet meadows, N. Eng. to L. Superior; rare
westward. (Eu.)--Var. GRAMINIS, Bailey. Smaller and green, 6--12' high;
leaves mostly longer than the culm; bracts erect; perigynium straight or
nearly so, the beak often rough. Grassy places, probably common and
generally distributed.

Var. viridula, Bailey. Small and slender, very strict, green or
greenish-white; leaves narrow, equalling or exceeding the culm; bracts
long and strictly erect, spikes very small or sometimes becoming
cylindric, more closely aggregated; perigynium conspicuously smaller,
the beak very short and straight. (C. OEderi, last ed.)--Cold bogs, N.
Eng. to Penn., and northwestward; local.

[*] 5.--[+] 3. _Pallescentes_.

[++] _Perigynium wholly beakless._

63. C. pallescens, L. Slender, erect, 4'--2 deg. high, tufted; leaves
narrow, flat, the lower slightly pubescent, particularly on the sheaths;
spikes 2--4, 1/2' long or less, densely flowered, all but the upper one
very shortly peduncled, erect or spreading; perigynium globular-oblong,
thin and very nearly nerveless, about the length of the cuspidate
scale.--Glades and meadows, N. Eng. to Penn., Wisc. and L. Superior;
rare westward. (Eu.)

[++][++] _Perigynium very stout-beaked._

64. C. Torreyi, Tuckerm. Stiff, 1--11/2 deg. high; culm and leaves thinly
pubescent; spikes all sessile, very short; perigynium obovate, very
strongly many-nerved, retuse, the beak short and straight, equalling or
exceeding the mostly cuspidate scale.--Supposed to have been collected,
a half-century ago, in N. Y. by Torrey, and in Penn. by Schweinitz. It
occurs in the Rocky Mountain region, and high northward.

[*] 6. DACTYLOSTACHYAE.--[+] 1. _Oligocarpae_.

[++] _Sheaths smooth._

65. C. conoidea, Schkuhr. Slender but strict, 1--11/2 deg. high; staminate
spike long-peduncled or rarely nearly sessile; spikes 2--3, scattered,
short-stalked or the upper one sessile (the lowest frequently very
long-stalked), oblong (rarely 1' long) and rather loosely flowered,
erect; perigynium oblong-conical, impressed-nerved, gradually narrowed
to a point, the orifice entire; scale loosely spreading and rough-awned,
equalling or exceeding the perigynium.--Moist grassy places, N. Eng. to
Ill., and southward; rare westward.

66. C. oligocarpa, Schkuhr. Diffuse, 10--18' high; bracts flat and
spreading; staminate spike sessile or stalked; spikes 2--4, scattered,
stalked or the uppermost sessile, loosely 2--8-flowered, erect;
perigynium small, hard, finely impressed-nerved, abruptly contracted
into a conspicuous mostly oblique beak, the orifice entire; scale very
loosely spreading and rough-awned, longer than the perigynium.--Dry
woods and copses, W. New Eng. to Mo., and southward; rare westward.
Often confounded with small forms of n. 58.

[++][++] _Sheaths pubescent._

67. C. Hitchcockiana, Dewey. Erect, 11/2--2 deg. high; spikes 2--4, all more
or less peduncled, very loosely few-flowered, erect; perigynium
triangular-ovate, many-striate, the strong beak prominently oblique,
shorter than the rough-awned scale.--Rich woods, W. New Eng. to Ill.,
and southward to Penn. and Ky.; frequent.

[*] 6.--[+] 2. _Laxiflorae_.

[++] _Sheaths green._

[=] _Perigynium mostly obscurely triangular, the beak very prominent._

68. C. laxiflora, Lam. Slender but mostly erect, 1--2 deg. high; leaves
rarely over 2'' wide, rather soft; staminate spike peduncled or at least
conspicuous; pistillate spikes 2--4, scattered, peduncled or the upper
one sessile, loosely flowered, cylindric or sometimes reduced to
short-oblong, erect or the lower loosely spreading; perigynium obovate,
conspicuously nerved, the short entire beak much bent or recurved; scale
thin and white, blunt or cuspidate, mostly shorter than the
perigynium.--Grassy places, throughout; common. Exceedingly
variable.--Var. VARIANS, Bailey. Mostly stouter than the type, the
leaves broader; pistillate spikes 1/2--1' long, the two upper more or less
contiguous to the staminate spike and sessile or nearly so; bracts leafy
and prolonged.--Copses and grassy places, throughout; common.
Counterfeits var. patulifolia.--Var. STRIATULA, Carey. Diffuse;
pistillate spikes rarely over 1/2' long, the upper sessile and aggregated
about the inconspicuous staminate spike, the lowest usually
long-exserted. Grassy places, throughout; very common.--Var. LATIFOLIA,
Boott. Rather low; leaves 1/2' broad or more; staminate spike sessile or
very nearly so; pistillate spikes cylindric and loose, the upper one or
two contiguous; bracts very broad. Deep rich woods, E. Mass. (_Deane_)
to Penn. and Mich.; common westward.--Var. PATULIFOLIA, Carey. Glaucous;
leaves 3'' broad or more; staminate spike prominent, mostly stalked;
pistillate spikes long and alternately flowered, scattered and
peduncled; perigynium (as in the following varieties) elliptic,
attenuate at both ends, mostly less prominently nerved, and the beak not
strongly recurved. Open places, N. Eng. to Mich., and southward;
frequent.--Var. DIVARICATA, Bailey. Tall and stout; leaves narrower;
staminate spike large and stalked; pistillate spikes scattered, all but
the upper one prominently peduncled, long; perigynium very large,
divaricate, triangular, contracted into a stipe-like base at least half
as long as the body. Near Washington, _Vasey_.--Var. STYLOFLEXA, Boott.
Very weak and slender; leaves 2'' wide or less; staminate spike usually
peduncled; pistillate 2--3, scattered, few-flowered, lowest drooping;
perigynium very long-pointed. S. E. Penn., and southward; frequent.

[=][=] _Perigynium sharply triangular, short, and mostly not prominently
beaked._

[a.] _Spikes drooping or flexuose._

69. C. digitalis, Willd. Very slender, bright green, tufted, 6--18'
high; leaves very narrow (1--2'' wide); staminate spike short stalked;
pistillate spikes 2--4, all on filiform stalks and all but the upper
widely spreading or drooping, linear, alternately flowered; perigynium
very small, impressed-nerved, longer than the acute whitish
scale.--Dryish woods and glades, N. Eng. to Mich., and southward;
frequent.--Var. COPULATA, Bailey. Leaves much broader, and the culms
weak and reclined; spikes heavier and mostly shorter; perigynium larger,
very sharp. Rich woods, central Mich., and probably elsewhere westward.

70. C. laxiculmis, Schwein. Differs from the variety of n. 69 chiefly in
its more cespitose habit, its densely glaucous-blue covering, very
slender culm, and very long and filiform peduncles. (C. retrocurva,
_Dewey_.)--Glades, N. Eng. to Mich. and Va.; rare westward.

[b.] _Spikes erect._

71. C. ptychocarpa, Steudel. Low, glaucous, 3--10' high; leaves flat and
rather broad (2'' or more), much exceeding the culm; bracts leafy and
much prolonged; staminate spike very small and sessile, mostly
overtopped by the upper pistillate spike; pistillate spikes 2--3,
sessile or short-stalked or rarely the lowest long-peduncled, erect;
perigynium tawny, much as in n. 69, twice longer than the very thin
obtuse scale.--Low grounds or swamps, E. Mass., N. J., Del., and
southward; local.

72. C. platyphylla, Carey. Low, spreading, glaucous, 6--12' high; leaves
1/2' broad or more, mostly shorter than the culms; bracts with thin and
sharp-pointed leaf-like tips 1--2' long; staminate spike stalked;
pistillate spikes 2--3, scattered, all more or less peduncled,
alternately 2--10-flowered; perigynium short, strongly many-striate,
about the length of the acute or cuspidate scale.--Rich shady woods and
banks, N. Eng. to Mich., and southward to Va.; mostly local.

73. C. Careyana, Torr. Tall and slender, mostly erect, 1--2 deg. high;
leaves bright green, firm, 3--4'' wide or more, shorter than the long
culm; bracts leafy, longer than in the last; staminate spike heavy and
stalked; pistillate spikes 2--3 (mostly 2), the upper usually near the
terminal spike, and nearly sessile, the other remote and long-peduncled,
loosely 2--8-flowered; perigynium very large and very sharply angled,
the beak oblique, finely many-nerved, twice longer than the sharp
scale.--Rich woods, N. Eng. to Mich., and southward to Washington; rare.

[++][++] _Sheaths usually purple._

74. C. plantaginea, Lam. Slender but erect, 1--2 deg. high; leaves 1/2--1'
broad, very firm, appearing after the flowers and persisting over
winter, shorter than the culm; staminate spike purple and clavate,
stalked; pistillate spikes 3--4, scattered, loosely few-flowered, erect,
the peduncles included in the leafless sheaths; perigynium smaller than
in n. 73, prominently beaked, about as long as the sharp scale.--Rich
woods, N. Eng. to Wisc., and southward; local.

[*] 6.--[+] 3. _Paniceae_.

[++] _Beak cylindrical and prominent; plant not glaucous._

75. C. Saltuensis, Bailey. Very slender and more or less diffuse,
strongly stoloniferous, 1--11/2 deg. high; leaves narrow and soft, shorter
than the culm; spikes 2--3, scattered, all peduncled and more or less
spreading, loosely 3--10-flowered; perigynium small, nearly nerveless,
thin, the beak straight and sharply toothed; scale loose, acute, shorter
than the perigynium. (C. vaginata, last ed.)--Deep swamps, Vt. to Minn.;
local.

76. C. polymorpha, Muhl. Stout, 1--2 deg. high; leaves rather broad, short;
spikes 1--2, short-stalked, erect, compact or rarely loose, usually
staminate at the apex, 11/2' long or less; perigynium long-ovate,
obscurely nerved; the very long and nearly straight beak oblique or
lipped at the orifice; scale reddish-brown, obtuse, shorter than the
perigynium.--Moist meadows, Mass. to N. C.; local.

[++][++] _Beak short or none; plant often glaucous._

[=] _Plants of ordinary habit._

77. C. tetanica, Schkuhr. Rather slender, rarely glaucous, somewhat
stoloniferous; culm scabrous, at least above; spikes all peduncled, the
upper one very shortly so, pale, all more or less attenuate below, the
lower borne in the axils of bracts 3' long or more; perigynium not
turgid, greenish, prominently many-nerved, the beak strongly bent; scale
obtuse or abruptly mucronate, all except the lowest mostly shorter than
the perigynium.--Meadows and borders of ponds from W. Mass. westward;
common westward.--Var. WOODII, Bailey. Very slender and strongly
stoloniferous; leaves narrow, very long and lax; spikes mostly
alternately flowered throughout; scales often sharper. (C. Woodii,
_Dewey_.) Rich woods, N. Y. to Mich., and south to Washington;
frequent.--Var. MEADII, Bailey. Stiffer; leaves mostly broader and
stricter; spikes thick and densely flowered, not attenuate at base, the
upper one often sessile; perigynium larger. (C. Meadii, _Dewey_.) R. I.
to Neb., and southward; rare eastward.--Var. CANBYI, Porter. Stout and
stiff; leaves still broader (about 2'' wide) and flat; spikes thick,
often 1/4' wide; perigynium long, straight or very nearly so; scale large,
nearly equalling or exceeding the perigynium. E. Penn. (_Canby_); Ill.
and Wisc.; little known.

[C.] PANICEA, L. Strict, often stiff, glaucous-blue 1--2 deg. high; culm
smooth; bracts 1--2' long; spikes 1--3, scattered, colored, peduncled,
erect, rather compact or loose below, seldom 1' long; perigynium ovoid,
yellow or purple, somewhat turgid, scarcely nerved, the point usually
curved, mostly longer than the purple-margined scale.--Fields, E. Mass.
and R. I. (Nat. from Eu.)

[=][=] _Very strict, densely glaucous._

78. C. livida, Willd. Culms 18' high or less; leaves narrow, often
becoming involute; spikes 1 or 2 and aggregated or approximate, or
rarely a third nearly radical, sessile or nearly so, erect, narrow;
perigynium ovoid-oblong, nerved, granular, beakless, the point straight
or nearly so, orifice entire; scale obtuse, mostly a little shorter than
the perigynium.--Pine-barrens of N. J., and sphagnum swamps northward to
N. Eng. and L. Superior; local. (Eu.)

[*] 6.--[+] 4. _Bicolores_.

79. C. aurea, Nutt. Low and slender, 1 deg. high or less; bracts exceeding
the culm; spikes 2--4, all but the lowest usually approximate, peduncled
or the upper one or two sessile, erect, loosely few-flowered or
sometimes becoming 3/4' long, at maturity yellow or brown, the terminal
one frequently pistillate above; perigynium fleshy at maturity, nerved,
longer than the blunt scale.--Wet meadows and springy banks, throughout;
rather common.

[*] 6.--[+] 5. _Digitatae_.

[++] _Spikes two or more._

80. C. eburnea, Boott. Exceedingly slender and capillary, erect, 4--12'
high, stoloniferous; leaves shorter than the culm; staminate spike very
small and very short-peduncled, overtopped by the two upper pistillate
spikes; pistillate spikes 2--4, approximate or the lowest remote, all
stalked, erect, 2--6-flowered; perigynium very small, almost nerveless,
smooth and becoming black and shining at full maturity; scale white and
thin, obtuse, shorter than the perigynium.--Tufted in sandy or light
soils from N. Eng. to Ky. and Neb.; frequent.

81. C. Richardsoni, R. Br. Rather stiff, 4--9' high, stoloniferous;
sheaths short, purple or brown; staminate spike stout and mostly
short-peduncled; pistillate spikes 1--2, approximate, the very short
stalks included, erect, compact, less than 1/2' in length; perigynium
obovoid, firm, hairy, the very short beak entire or erose; scale brown
with a conspicuous white-hyaline margin, obtuse or pointless, and longer
than the perigynium.--Dry ground, western N. Y. to Ill., and
northwestward; rare.

82. C. pedunculata, Muhl. Low and diffuse, 3--10' high, forming mats;
leaves abundant, very green, flat and firm, longer than the weak culms;
staminate spike very small, with the uppermost pistillate spike sessile
at its base; pistillate spikes 2--4 on each culm, scattered and
long-peduncled from green sheaths, erect or spreading, many other spikes
nearly or quite radical and very long-stalked, all 3--8-flowered;
perigynium triangular-obovate, smooth or very slightly pubescent above,
the short and nearly entire beak somewhat oblique; scale green or
purple, truncate and cuspidate, mostly a little longer than the
perigynium.--Dry woods and banks, N. Eng. to Va. (_Kennedy_) and Minn.;
frequent northward.

[++][++] _Spike one or rarely a rudiment of a second; plant dioecious._

83. C. picta, Steudel. Rather weak, 1 deg. high or less; leaves flat and
firm, persisting through the winter, at least twice longer than the
culm; a sheathing purple scale at the base of the spike; staminate spike
about 1' long, clavate in anthesis, the purple scales ending in a very
short and blunt whitish tip; pistillate spike narrower and mostly
longer, the scales more abruptly contracted into a colored cusp and at
length deciduous; perigynium obovate, much contracted below into a
stipe-like base, very strongly nerved, entirely pointless, hairy above,
covered by the scale. (C. Boottiana, _Benth._)--In a wooded ravine with
Hepatica and Epigaea, near Bloomington, Ind. (_Dudley_); also Ala. and
La.

[*] 7. SPHAERIDIOPHORAE.--[+] 1. _Scirpinae_.

84. C. scirpoidea, Michx. Strict, the pistillate plant mostly stiff,
6--18' high; leaves flat, shorter than the culm; spike 1' long or less,
densely cylindrical, very rarely with a rudimentary second spike at its
base; perigynium ovate, short-pointed, very hairy, about the length of
the ciliate purple scale.--Mountains of N. New Eng.; Drummond's Island,
L. Huron. (Norway.)

[*] 7.--[+] 2. _Montanae_.

[++] _Some or all of the culms longer than the leaves (or in the type of
n. 85 frequently shorter)._

[=] _Staminate spike minute, wholly or partially concealed in the head;
leaves always very narrow; radical spikes often present._

85. C. deflexa, Hornem. Diffuse and low, tufted; culms 1--6' high,
setaceous, more or less curved or spreading, little exceeding or shorter
than the leaves; staminate spike exceedingly minute and nearly always
entirely invisible in the head; pistillate spikes 2--3, 2--5-flowered,
green, or green and brown, all aggregated into a head, the lowest one
always more or less short-peduncled and subtended by a leafy bract 1/2'
long or less; radical spikes few; perigynium very small and much
contracted below, sparsely hairy or nearly smooth, the beak flat and
very short, mostly longer than the acutish scale. (C. Novae-Angliae, last
ed., mostly.)--High mountains of N. H. and Vt.

Var. Deanei, Bailey. Taller and lax, the culms 6--12' high and some or
all prominently longer than the longer and loose leaves; staminate spike
much larger (2--3'' long), erect or oblique, sessile; pistillate spikes
larger (4--8-flowered), less aggregated or the lowest usually separated,
though rarely more than 1/4' apart; radical spikes usually numerous; bract
mostly longer.--Swales or dryish places, high or subalpine regions, Mt.
Desert, Maine (_Rand_); Essex, Mass.; N. H., Vt., and N. Y.; scarce. In
aspect like n. 86.

Var. media, Bailey. Rather stiff, 4--12' high, in dense tufts; most of
the spikes equalling or exceeding the leaves, the staminate prominent,
erect (3--5'' long), sessile or very short-peduncled; pistillate spikes
2--3, all scattered, the uppermost at or near the base of the staminate
spike, the lowest usually very prominently peduncled and subtended by a
conspicuous bract which surpasses the culm, all rather compactly
3--8-flowered, green, or brown and green; radical spikes several;
perigynium larger, much like that of short-beaked forms of
n. 90.--Keweenaw Co., Mich. (_Farwell_); also far westward.

86. C. varia, Muhl. Erect, mostly strict, 6--15' high, tufted and
somewhat stoloniferous; culms variable in length, often twice longer
than the leaves; staminate spike 3'' long or less; pistillate spikes
closely aggregated, or rarely somewhat loosely disposed but never
scattered, all strictly sessile, green; radical spikes none; lower bract
usually present; perigynium longer-pointed than in the last, about the
length of the sharp scale. (C. Emmonsii, _Dewey_.)--Banks and dry woods;
frequent.--In var. COLORATA, Bailey, the scales are purple. Mostly
southward.

[=][=] _Staminate spike very prominent (or in the variety of n. 89 very
small, but the leaves broad); radical spikes none._

[a.] _Scales smooth._

87. C. Novae-Angliae, Schwein. Very slender and soft, erect,
stoloniferous, 6--8' high; culms little longer than the very narrow
leaves; staminate spike exceedingly narrow (3--8'' long by about 1/2''
wide), mostly minutely peduncled; pistillate spikes 2, or rarely 3, the
upper one near the base of the staminate spike, the lower very
short-peduncled and removed 1/2--1' and subtended by a leafy bract which
nearly or quite equals the culm, both rather loosely 3--6-flowered;
perigynium very narrow, often nearly oblanceolate, small, very thinly
hairy, the beak sharp and prominent; stigmas often 2.--Mountain swamps
of W. Mass., and Mt. Desert, Maine (_Rand_); rare.

88. C. Pennsylvanica, Lam. A foot high or less, erect, strongly
stoloniferous, forming large patches; leaves narrow and more or less
involute, dark or dull green, mostly nearly as long as the culm;
staminate spike 1/2' (rarely 3/4') long, usually dull brown or brown-purple,
sessile or very nearly so; pistillate spikes 1--3, contiguous or the two
lower rarely 1/2' apart, all sessile and usually dark-colored, the lowest
bract very short or at least rarely prominent; perigynium short- or
round-ovate, hairy.--Dry fields; our commonest species.

89. C. communis, Bailey. Habitually taller and stricter, 8--18' high, in
small tufts, never stoloniferous; leaves proportionately shorter, broad
(about 2''), flat and pale; staminate spike mostly longer, often
short-peduncled and usually paler; pistillate spikes 2--4, scattered on
the upper part of the culm, green or tawny, the lowest one or two
sometimes peduncled and often with prominent leafy bracts. (C. varia,
last ed.)--Dry hill-sides; common.

Var. Wheeleri, Bailey. Mostly greener, 3--14' high; leaves soft and flat
and much shorter than the culm; staminate spike 1/4' long or less, very
narrow, sessile and oblique; pistillate spikes mostly closer
together.--Knolls in woods, Ionia Co., Mich. (_Wheeler_), and Alcona Co.
(_Bailey_); Middletown, Conn. (_Barratt_), and Cheshire Co., N. H. It
has much the aspect of n. 86, but is readily distinguished by the broad
leaves and more scattered spikes.

[b.] _Scales rough-cuspidate._

C. PRAECOX, Jacq. Rather stiff, the culm sometimes curved, 3--10' high;
leaves flat, shorter than the culm; staminate spike prominently clavate,
mostly sessile; pistillate spikes 2--3, all contiguous, sessile or the
lowest very short-peduncled and subtended by a bract scarcely as long as
itself, all oblong or short-cylindric, the lowest about 6'' long;
perigynium triangular-obovoid, the very short beak entire or erose,
thinly hispid-hirsute, about the length of the scale.--Fields, E. Mass.
(Nat. from Eu. early in the century.)

[++][++] _Part or usually all of the culms much shorter than the
leaves._

90. C. umbellata, Schkuhr. (Pl. 6, fig. 11--14.) Low, growing in small
and dense mats (1--3' across); leaves short and often stiff (2--6'long),
flat, the earliest very narrow but the later often 2'' broad; spikes all
on separate scapes which rarely exceed 1--2' in length (or rarely one or
two short true culms), usually densely aggregated at the surface of the
ground and hidden by the leaves, the pistillate spikes green or tawny
and rather loosely few-flowered; perigynium slenderly beaked, toothed,
very lightly pubescent, about the length of the acute and often
rough-tipped scale.--Dry banks and knolls, N. Eng. to N. J. and N. Y.,
and perhaps farther westward; infrequent.--Var. VICINA, Dewey. Tufts
looser and larger; leaves longer (often 1 deg. or more) and laxer, sometimes
broader; some pistillate spikes borne near the base of the staminate on
a true culm which is 3--8' high, one or two on each culm. With the
species and farther westward; infrequent.

91. C. nigro-marginata, Schwein. Leaves mostly stiffer than in n. 90,
often broader, and some of the culms prolonged; perigynium smooth or
nearly so, shorter beaked; scales purple-margined, giving the spikes a
very dark or variegated appearance, considerably larger and longer than
in the last.--Dry hillsides, N. J., and southward; local.

[*] 7.--[+] 3. _Triquetrae._

92. C. pubescens, Muhl. Strict, 1--2 deg. high, pubescent throughout; leaves
flat and soft, shorter than the culm; spikes 2--4, the lower 1 or 2
short-peduncled, and about {1/2}' long, loosely flowered, erect;
perigynium very hairy, conspicuously beaked and minutely toothed,
straight, about the length of the truncate and rough-cuspidate thin
scale.--Copses and moist meadows, N. Eng. to Ky., and westward;
frequent.

[*] 8. PHYLLOSTACHYAE.

93. C. Jamesii, Schwein. (Pl. 5, fig. 17--21.) Diffuse, 6--10' high;
leaves very narrow (1'' or less), much surpassing the culm; spike very
small, the staminate portion inconspicuous, the pistillate flowers 1--3
and loosely disposed; perigynium globular, produced into a very long and
roughened nearly entire beak; scale narrow, the lowest often 1--2' long,
the upper often shorter than the perigynium. (C. Steudelii,
_Kunth._)--Woods, N. Y. to Ill., and southward; frequent.

94. C. Willdenovii, Schkuhr. Lower, stiffer, the leaves broader and
pale; spike larger, the pistillate flowers 3--9, compact; perigynium
bearing a prominent two-edged very rough beak; scales chaffy, nerved, as
broad as and somewhat longer than the perigynium, or the lowest rarely
overtopping the spike.--Copses, Mass. to Mich., and southward; rare.

95. C. Backii, Boott. Forming dense mats; leaves still broader (2'' or
more), very abundant; staminate flowers about 3; pistillate 2--5;
perigynium more gradually beaked, smooth throughout; scales very broad
and leaf-like, all exceeding the culm and entirely enveloping the
spike.--W. Mass. to Ohio, and far westward; local and rare, especially
eastward.

[*] 9. LEPTOCEPHALAE.

96. C. polytrichoides, Muhl. Capillary, erect or slightly diffuse,
6--18' high; leaves mostly shorter than the culm; spike 2--4'' long,
linear, the staminate portion very small; perigynium thin and green,
nerved, about twice longer than the obtuse caducous scale.--Bogs;
common.

[*] 10. PHYSOCEPHALAE.

97. C. Fraseri, Andrews. Cespitose; culm 6--15' high, naked or the lower
portion included in loosely sheathing abortive leaves, smooth and stiff;
leaves 1' broad or more, destitute of midrib, very thick and persistent,
pale, 1--2 deg. long; spike whitish; perigynium ovoid, faintly nerved, much
longer than the scale.--Rich mountain woods, Va. and southward; very
local and rare. A most remarkable plant.

Sec. 2. VIGNEA.--[*] 11. ACROARRHENAE.--[+] 1. _Foetidae_

98. C. chordorhiza, Ehrh. Very extensively stoloniferous; culm mostly
erect, 1--1{1/2} deg. long; leaves involute, shorter than the culm;
perigynium globular, very strongly nerved, short-pointed and entire,
about the length of the acute scale.--Cold bogs and soft lake-borders,
Vt. to Iowa, and northward; infrequent. (Eu.)

99. C. stenophylla, Wahl. Stiff, 3--8' high; leaves involute and shorter
than the culm; perigynium ovate, flat on the inner face, lightly nerved,
gradually contracted into a short and entire rough-edged beak, tightly
enclosing the achene, at maturity longer than the hyaline acutish
scale.--Dry grounds, Thayer Co., Neb. (_Bessey_); Emmet Co., Iowa
(_Cratty_), and westward. (Eu).

[*] 11.--[+] 2. _Vulpinae._

[++] _Beak shorter than or about as long as the body of the perigynium._

100. C. conjuncta, Boott. Strict but rather weak, 1{1/2}--3{1/2} deg. high;
culm soft and sharply triangular or nearly wing-angled, becoming
perfectly flat when pressed; leaves soft, about 3'' broad; head 1--3'
long, interrupted, often nearly green, infrequently bearing a few
setaceous bracts; perigynium lance-ovate, light colored, whitish and
thickened below, the beak lightly notched and roughish, about equalling
or a little exceeding the cuspidate scale.--Swales and glades, N. J.,
Ky., and westward; usually rare.

[++][++] _Beak twice the length of the body of the perigynium or
longer._

101. C. stipata, Muhl. Stout, 1--3 deg. high, in clumps; culm rather soft,
very sharp; head 1--3' long, rarely somewhat compound at base,
interrupted, the lowest spikes often {1/2}' long; perigynium lanceolate,
brown-nerved, the beak toothed and roughish, about twice the length of
the body, and much longer than the scale.--Swales; common and variable.

102. C. crus-corvi, Shuttlew. Stout, glaucous, 2--3 deg. high; culm rough,
at least above; leaves flat and very wide; head much branched and
compound, 3--6' long; perigynium long lanceolate, the short base very
thick and disk-like, the roughish and very slender beak thrice the
length of the body or more, 3--4 times the length of the inconspicuous
scale.--Swamps, S. Minn. to Neb. and Ky., and southward; rare
northward.

[*] 11.--[+] 3. _Multiflorae._

[++] _Spikes conspicuously panicled._

103. C. decomposita, Muhl. Stout, exceedingly deep green, 1{1/2}--3 deg.
high, in stools; culm very obtusely angled, almost terete below; leaves
firm, channelled below, longer than the culm; head 2--4' long, the lower
branches ascending and 1--2' long; perigynium very small, round-obovate,
few-nerved, hard and at maturity shining, the abrupt short beak entire
or very nearly so; scale acute, about the length of the
perigynium.--Swamps, N. Y. to Mich., and southward; local.

[++][++] _Spikes in a simple or nearly simple head._

[=] _Leaves very narrow (1'' broad or less), becoming more or less
involute._

104. C. teretiuscula, Gooden. Slender but mostly erect, 1{1/2}--2{1/2} deg.
high, in loose stools; culm rather obtuse, rough at the top, mostly
longer than the leaves; head 1--2' long, compact or somewhat
interrupted, narrow ({1/4}' wide or less); perigynium very small, ovate
and truncate below, bearing a few inconspicuous short nerves on the
outer side, stipitate, firm and at maturity blackish and shining, the
short beak lighter colored; scale chaffy and acute, about the length of
the perigynium.--Swales, N. Eng. to Penn., and westward; common.
(Eu.)--Var. RAMOSA, Boott. More slender; head mostly longer, the upper
portion often somewhat nodding, the spikes scattered and the lowest ones
often slightly compound. N. Y., and westward; common.

[=][=] _Leaves broader and flat (occasionally involute in n. 106)._

[a.] _Scales very sharp, mostly rough-tipped._

1. _Perigynium large (2'' long or more), nerveless on the inner face._

105. C. alopecoidea, Tuckerm. Stout but rather soft, 2--3 deg. high; culm
rather sharp, thick and soft in texture; leaves 2--3'' wide, about the
length of the culm, very green; head 11/2' long or less, sometimes green,
and occasionally a little compound, the spikes many and compactly or
somewhat loosely disposed or the lowest often separate and all mostly
short-oblong; perigynium ovate, tapering into a rough beak, very
prominently stipitate, with a few brown nerves on the outer face,
ascending, about equalling or a little exceeding the scale.--Open
swales, N. Y., Penn., and Mich.; local. In aspect like n. 101.

Var. sparsispicata, Dewey. Weak, the leaves much narrower and lax; head
1--3' long and linear or nearly so, the spikes smaller and separated or
scattered.--S. E. Mich. (_Cooley, Clark_); little known.

106. C. gravida, Bailey. Lower and the culm thinner and more sharply
angled, 1--2 deg. high; leaves rather narrower and firmer, shorter than the
culm; head short, always simple, globular or short-oblong, the lowest
spikes rarely distinct; spikes few (4--7), globular, or broader than
long; perigynium broadly ovate, nearly twice larger, sessile, plump and
somewhat polished at maturity, prominently spreading.--N. Ill. to Iowa
and Neb.--Var. LAXIFOLIA, Bailey. Much larger, 2--31/2 deg. high; leaves
broader (about 1/4') and lax; head large and dense, ovoid or oblong,
scarcely interrupted. N. Ill. to Dak.

2. _Perigynium very small, mostly nerved on the inner face._

107. C. vulpinoidea, Michx. Mostly rather stiff, 1--21/2 deg. high; culm very
rough, at least above; leaves various, mostly flat and longer than the
culm; head 1--4' long, usually much interrupted and frequently somewhat
compound, varying from dull brown to almost green at maturity, commonly
provided with many very setaceous short bracts; spikes very numerous,
ascending and densely flowered; perigynium ovate or lance-ovate, mostly
ascending.--Low places, variable; very abundant, especially northward.

[b.] _Scales blunt, smooth and hyaline-tipped._

108. C. Sartwellii, Dewey. Stiff and strict, 11/2--21/2 deg. high; leaves
produced into a long slender point, mostly shorter than the culm;
staminate flowers variously disposed, frequently whole spikes being
sterile; head 1--3' long and rather narrow, the individual spikes
usually clearly defined, or occasionally the head interrupted below,
tawny-brown; perigynium elliptic or lance-elliptic, nerved on both
sides, very gradually contracted into a short beak; scale about the
length of the perigynium. (C. disticha, last ed.)--Bogs, central N. Y.,
west and northward; frequent.

[*] 11.--[+] 4. _Arenariae._

C. ARENARIA, Linn. Extensively creeping, 1 deg. high or less; leaves very
narrow and very long-pointed, shorter than the culm; head about 1' long,
dense or sometimes interrupted, ovoid or oblong; spikes few to many,
those at the apex of the head usually staminate, the intermediate ones
staminate at the summit, the lowest entirely pistillate and subtended by
a bract about 1' long; perigynium very strongly nerved on both faces,
wing-margined above, sharply long-toothed, about the length of the
scale.--Sea-beaches near Norfolk, Va. (_McMinn_). (Adv. from Eu.)

[*] 11.--[+] 5. _Muhlenbergianae._

[++] _Heads narrow, the spikes scattered (or often aggregated in_ C.
muricata.)

[=] _Perigynium almost terete._

109. C. tenella, Schkuhr. Exceedingly slender, 6'--2 deg. high, in tufts;
leaves flat, soft, and weak, mostly shorter than the culm; spikes
1--3-flowered, or the terminal 4--6-flowered, all distinct and scattered
on the upper part of the culm, the bracts obsolete or the lowest present
and very short; perigynium elliptic-ovate, very plump, finely nerved,
the minute beak entire, longer than the white scale, usually at length
splitting and exposing the blackish achene.--Cold swamps, N. Eng. to
Penn., and far westward; common. (Eu.)

[=][=] _Perigynium flattish._

110. C. rosea, Schkuhr. Always slender and weak, erect, 1--21/2 deg. high,
exceeding the narrow leaves; spikes 5--8, 6--14-flowered, the upper 3--4
aggregated, the others 3--9'' apart, the lowest usually with a setaceous
bract; perigynium lance-ovate, thin and shining, nerveless, scarcely
margined, rough on the edges above, perfectly squarrose, very green,
about twice longer than the translucent white scale.--Rich woods, N.
Eng. to Minn. and Neb.; frequent.--Var. RADIATA, Dewey. Lower and much
more slender, the culms sometimes almost capillary; spikes 2--5,
scattered, 2--4-flowered; perigynium mostly narrower and more ascending.
Open places and drier woods; common.

Var. Texensis, Torr. Very slender but strict, 1 deg. high or less; spikes
3--4, all contiguous or the lower ones approximate, 2--6-flowered;
perigynium lanceolate, the base prominently spongy, smooth or nearly so,
conspicuously divaricate.--Dry places, S. Ill. (_Schneck_), and
southward.

Var. retroflexa, Torr. Often rather stiff, 1--11/2 deg. high; spikes 4--8, the
upper ones aggregated, the lower 1 or 2 separated and commonly subtended
by a conspicuous bract, often brownish; perigynium ovate, smooth
throughout, very prominently corky and swollen at the base, which is
frequently contracted almost to a stipe, at maturity usually widely
spreading or reflexed; scale brownish and sharp, at length deciduous.
(C. retroflexa, _Muhl._)--Copses, throughout; rare northward.

111. C. sparganioides, Muhl. Stouter, stiff; culm 2--3 deg. high; leaves
very broad (usually 1/4' or more) and flat, their sheaths conspicuously
clothing the base of the culm; spikes 6--10, the 2 or 3 upper ones
contiguous, the remainder entirely separate, very green, oblong or
short-cylindric, the lowest often compound, all truncate at top;
perigynium ovate, wing-margined, rough on the short beak, often
obscurely nerved on the outer face, considerably longer than the
rough-pointed scale.--Rich woods; frequent.

C. MURICATA, L. Culm 1--2 deg. high, rough, longer than the narrow leaves;
spikes 5--10, variously disposed, but usually some of them scattered,
frequently all aggregated, rarely tawny; perigynium heavy, ovate, thin
and shining, nerveless, the long beak minutely rough, spreading, a
little longer than the sharp green or brownish scale.--Dry fields, E.
Mass., where it is common, and sparingly south and westward to Va. and
Ohio. (Nat. from Eu.)

[++][++] _Heads short-oblong or globular, the spikes all aggregated, or
only the lowest one or two separate_.

[=] _Plant very stiff throughout_.

112. C. Muhlenbergii, Schkuhr. Pale, growing in small tufts, 1--2{1/2} deg.
high; culms much prolonged beyond the few narrow and at length involute
leaves; head {3/4}' long or less, the individual spikes clearly defined;
spikes globular, 4--8; perigynium nearly circular, very strongly nerved
on both faces, broader than the rough-cuspidate scale and about as
long.--Open sterile soils; frequent.--Var. ENERVIS, Boott. Perigynium
nearly or entirely nerveless. Southeastern N. Y., and southward; rare.

[=][=] _Plant strict but not stiff._

113. C. cephaloidea, Dewey. Lax, very green, 2--3 deg. high; leaves broad
(2--3'') and thin, shorter than the long culm; head rather loose, 3/4'
long or more, all but the very uppermost spikes clearly defined;
perigynium ovate, entirely nerveless, long rough-pointed, spreading,
twice longer than the very thin scale or more.--Shady banks, W. Mass. to
Mich.; frequent.

114. C. cephalophora, Muhl. Mostly smaller and stricter, pale; leaves
half as wide or less; head small, rarely 1/2' long, globular or very
short-oblong, never interrupted, the lower 1 or 2 spikes usually bearing
a very setaceous short bract; perigynium twice smaller than in the last,
scarcely longer than the rough-cuspidate scale.--Dry and mostly sterile
knolls; common.

Var. angustifolia, Boott. Low, 8' high or less; leaves very narrow; head
smaller, usually tawny; perigynium mostly broader.--West and southward;
rare.

[*] 11.--[+] 6. _Dioicae_.

[++] _Perigynium nerveless or very nearly so_.

115. C. capitata, L. Rigid, 3'--1 deg. high; leaves filiform, shorter than
the culm; head globular, uniformly staminate above, brown, very small;
perigynium broadly ovate, very thin, whitish, prominently beaked, erect
and appressed, longer than the very thin and obtuse scale.--Alpine
summits of the White Mountains. (Eu.)

[++][++] _Perigynium prominently nerved_.

116. C. gynocrates, Wormsk. Stiff but very slender, 3--6' high,
dioecious; leaves filiform and setaceous, about the length of the culm;
spike oblong, 2--4'' long; perigynium elliptic-ovate, nearly terete,
stipitate, widely spreading or reflexed at maturity, 1 or 2 sometimes
borne at the base of the staminate spike.--Cold sphagnum swamps, Penn.,
north and westward; local, particularly southward.

117. C. exilis, Dewey. Very stiff, slender, 1--2 deg. high; leaves
involute-filiform and very stiff, shorter than the culm; spike varying
from almost globular to cylindrical (frequently 1' long), either
unisexual or the sexes variously placed, very rarely a supplementary
spike at base; perigynium elliptic-ovate, flattish, stipitate and
somewhat cordate at base, strongly brown-nerved on the outer face,
rather faintly nerved on the inner, rough-edged above, sharply toothed,
spreading, a little longer than the scale.--Cold swamps and
lake-borders, N. Eng. and eastern N. Y. to N. J.; rare.

[*] 12. HYPARRHENAE.--[+] 1. _Elongatae_.

[++] _Perigynium very sharp-margined, firm, often thickened at base,
spreading in open and at maturity stellate spikes._

118. C. echinata, Murray, var. cephalantha, Bailey. Rather stiff but
slender, 1--2 deg. high; leaves very narrow and involute, about the length
of the culm; spikes 5--8, approximate or even aggregated into a head,
green, compactly 15--30-flowered, short-oblong or nearly globular;
perigynium ovate-lanceolate, rough on the margins above, nerved on both
faces, spreading or reflexed at maturity, the beak long and prominent,
longer than the sharp white scale. (C. stellulata, last ed.)--E. Penn.
(_Porter_) to Mass. (_Morong_), and westward to L. Superior; rare.--Var.
CONFERTA, Bailey. Very stiff; spikes contiguous or scattered, spreading,
short-oblong or globular, dense; perigynium broadly ovate or even nearly
round-ovate, very strongly nerved, reflexed or widely spreading. Near
the sea-coast; uncommon. The perigynia resemble those of n. 112.--Var.
MICROSTACHYS, Boeckl. Mostly very slender; spikes few, 3--10-flowered,
usually tawny; perigynium small, lance-ovate, nerved on the outer face
but usually nerveless on the inner, erect or spreading, the beak rather
long or prominent. (C. scirpoides, _Schkuhr._ C. sterilis, _Willd._)
Swales, throughout; very common and variable.--Var. ANGUSTATA, Bailey.
Exceedingly slender; spikes few and very few-flowered, mostly all
contiguous; perigynium lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, twice the length
of the scale or more. N. Y., Vt., and northward; rare.

[++][++] _Perigynium scarcely sharp-margined, thin in texture, not
thickened at base, mostly in closely flowered and rounded or oblong
spikes._

[=] _Perigynium ovate or nearly so, the beak short or none._

[a.] _Bracts not prolonged._

119. C. canescens, L. Stiff and rather stout, 1--21/2 deg. high, glaucous and
pale throughout, growing in stools; spikes 4--8, globular or oblong,
very densely 20--50-flowered, approximate or somewhat scattered on the
upper part of the culm, usually prominently contracted below with the
staminate flowers; perigynium short-ovate, silvery-white and minutely
puncticulate, never thickened at base, faintly few-nerved, smooth
throughout, ascending, the beak very short and entire; scale obtuse or
acutish, about the length of the perigynium.--Cool swamps and bogs, N.
Eng. to Penn., west and northward; frequent northward. (Eu.)

Var. vulgaris, Bailey. Very slender, lower, not glaucous, in small and
loose tufts; spikes smaller and usually fewer, loosely flowered;
perigynium mostly more beaked, prominently spreading.--Mostly in drier
places; very common. Perigynium much shorter than in any form of n. 118.

Var. alpicola, Wahl. Low and stiff, or at lower altitudes becoming
somewhat slender, seldom much over 1 deg. in height; spikes small, globular
or nearly so, dense, well defined and brown or tawny; perigynium as in
the type, ascending. (C. vitilis, _Fries._)--Mountains from N. Eng. to
Ga., sparingly along our northern boundary, and far westward. (Eu.)

Var. polystachya, Boott. Erect and mostly strict, not glaucous, 11/2--21/2 deg.
high, scarcely tufted; leaves very lax and exceeding the culm; spikes
oblong, more or less aggregated in an oblong interrupted head, the
lowest 1 or 2 subtended by short scale-like bracts; perigynium somewhat
spreading. (C. arcta, _Boott_.) Low woods, N. New Eng. to N. Minn.;
rare. Resembles C. echinata, var. cephalantha.

120. C. Norvegica, Willd. Low and stiff, but rather slender, 1 deg. high or
less; leaves very narrow, mostly shorter than the culm; spikes 3--5,
somewhat scattered, brown, globular or oblong, compactly many-flowered,
the terminal one long-contracted below with the staminate flowers;
perigynium very short-ovate, thick, the beak rough, a little longer than
the very obtuse scale.--Salt marshes, Maine, and northward, rare. (Eu.)

121. C. tenuiflora, Wahl. Very slender and diffuse, 1--11/2 deg. high, in
tufts; leaves very narrow and lax, shorter than the filiform culm;
spikes 2--4, all loosely few-flowered and silvery-green, and aggregated
into a small globular head; perigynium elliptic, obscurely nerved,
smooth, beakless, spreading, about the length of the white thin
scale.--Bogs, N. New Eng. to N. Minn.; local. (Eu.)

[b.] _Bracts much prolonged, the lowest 2--3' long._

122. C. trisperma, Dewey. (Pl. 6, fig. 1--5.) Exceedingly slender, in
small and loose tufts, the weak reclining culms 1--2 deg. long; leaves soft
and narrow, shorter than the culm; spikes 2--3, 1--3' apart,
silvery-green, 2--3-flowered; perigynium very thin, finely nerved, the
beak entire or nearly so; scale acute, very thin, usually shorter than
the perigynium.--Cold bogs, throughout; common northward.

[=][=] _Perigynium ovate-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate._

123. C. Deweyana, Schwein. Weak, 1--11/2 deg. high; leaves flat and soft,
shorter than the culm, yellowish-green; spikes 3--6, mostly oblong or
sometimes but 2--3-flowered, loose, the upper ones contiguous but the
lower 1 or 2 usually considerably separated on the zigzag rhachis and
mostly subtended by a bract, all silvery-green; perigynium
ovate-lanceolate or narrower, very thin in texture, nerveless, somewhat
thickened below on the outer face, the long beak rough; scale very thin,
acute or cuspidate, about the length of the perigynium.--Dry woods;
common.

124. C. bromoides, Schkuhr. Lax, 1--2 deg. high, in dense stools; leaves
very narrow, about as long as the culm; staminate flowers variously
situated in the head, sometimes a few spikes wholly sterile, rarely the
plants dioecious; spikes 3--6, oblong or short-cylindric, erect,
silvery-tawny or brown; perigynium linear-lanceolate, firm especially at
the base, prominently nerved, the long and roughened beak toothed; scale
sharp, shorter than the perigynium.--Open bogs; common.

[*] 12.--[+] 2. _Ovales._

[++] _Perigynium ovate-lanceolate, with winged margins._

125. C. siccata, Dewey. Extensively creeping, 1--2 deg. high, erect; leaves
firm, narrow, about the length of the culm; staminate flowers variously
situated, usually some of the spikes wholly sterile; spikes 3--5,
aggregated or separated, ovoid or short-oblong, silvery-brown;
perigynium firm, nerved on both faces, the long beak rough and toothed,
the margins prominent or sometimes very narrow; scale acute, about the
length of the perigynium.--Sandy fields and banks, N. Eng. to Ohio, west
and northward; frequent.

[++][++] _Perigynium ovate-lanceolate or narrower, scale-like, with
little distinction between body and margin._

126. C. Muskingumensis, Schwein. Robust, erect, 2--3 deg. high; leaves many
and lax, loosely sheathing, those on the sterile shoots crowded near the
top, all flat and long-pointed; spikes 6--12, contiguous, erect,
narrowly cylindric (often 1' long), becoming light brown and presenting
a dried appearance, very densely flowered; perigynium linear-lanceolate
(3'' long), prominently nerved, ciliate on the white margins above,
appressed, twice the length of the scale or more. (C. arida, _Schwein. &
Torr._)--Woods and copses, Mich. and Ohio to Ill. and Wisc.; local.

127. C. tribuloides, Wahl. Stout and erect, 2--3 deg. high; leaves narrower
than in the last, loosely sheathing; spikes 6--15, aggregated into an
oblong or somewhat interrupted heavy head, short-oblong or sometimes
nearly globular, green or tawny-green, compact, not narrowed above;
perigynium linear-lanceolate (3'' long), obscurely nerved, erect but the
points conspicuous, rough-margined, nearly twice the length of the
scale. (C. lagopodioides, _Schkuhr_.)--Open swales; frequent.--Var.
TURBATA, Bailey. Culm softer and often lax; the leaves broader; spikes
more loosely disposed, forming a head 1--2' long, which is slender and
more or less interrupted but always erect, green, becoming tawny, if at
all, only when the perigynia begin to fall, obovate-oblong (1/4 to rarely
1/2' long), contracted below; perigynium ascending and more appressed, the
points therefore not conspicuous. Woods, throughout; rare.--Var.
REDUCTA, Bailey. Very slender, 1--2 deg. high, the culm projecting beyond
the leaves; spikes 2--10, small and nearly globular (usually less than
3'' broad), all usually distinct, the lowest separated, brown,
especially at maturity, the head often flexuose; perigynium small, the
points spreading and conspicuous. Copses, N. Eng. to Dak.; infrequent.

Var. Bebbii, Bailey. Stiff or rather slender, erect, 1--21/2 deg. high; head
dense, ovoid or oblong (1/4--3/4' or very seldom 1' long), the lowest spike
only rarely distinct, straw-colored; spikes small (3'' long or less),
their axes ascending; bracts at the base of the head small or none;
points of the small perigynium conspicuous. (C. Bebbii, _Olney_.)--Dry
low grounds, throughout; common.

Var. cristata, Bailey. Stout and stiff, 11/2--3 deg. high; head more or less
open or at least the lower 1 or 2 spikes commonly distinct, 1' long or
more, green; spikes larger than in the last and almost exactly globular,
their axes more divergent or fully horizontal; bracts usually
conspicuous, sometimes one of them foliaceous; perigynium spreading, the
points more conspicuous. (C. cristata, _Schwein_.)--Moist ground,
throughout from Penn. northward; common.

128. C. scoparia, Schkuhr. Rather slender but erect, 1--21/2 deg. high; leaves
very narrow, shorter than the culm; head short and comparatively thick,
always tawny or brown, bractless or nearly so; spikes 3--8, all
contiguous or bunched, ovate-oblong, always prominently narrowed or
cone-shaped above, ascending; perigynium as in n. 127, but erect or
ascending.--Open swales, throughout; common eastward.

Var. minor, Boott. Much smaller, 6--10' high, the leaves very narrow;
head very small and darker brown; spikes very small (2--4''
long).--Rocky and sterile places, northward; frequent.

[++][++][++] _Perigynium ovate or broader, thickened in the middle,
wing-margined (in n. 129 marginless)._

[=] _Head silvery-brown, silvery-green, or silvery-whitish._

129. C. adusta, Boott. Very stiff and stout, 11/2--21/2 deg. high, in dense
tufts; head very heavy, erect, varying from globular to oblong,
silvery-brown; spikes 5--10, globular and heavy, all aggregated or
sometimes distinct, the lowest 1 or 2 subtended by a short and very
broad-based, nerved and pointed bract; perigynium broadly ovate,
wingless or very nearly so, plump, shining, nerved on the outer face but
nerveless on the inner, filled by the large achene; scale acute, about
the length of the perigynium. (C. pinguis, _Bailey_.)--Dry and mostly
hard soils, Mt. Desert, Maine (_Greenleaf_), and northward, and Crawford
Co., Mich. (_Bailey_), to N. Minn., and far northwestward; local.

130. C. foenea, Willd. Slender, erect or the top of the culm flexuose,
1--2 deg. high; head long and weak, often nodding; spikes 5--8, small,
nearly globular and much contracted below, silvery-green, alternately
disposed; perigynium varying from ovate to long-ovate, very thin, much
longer than the small achene, prominently rough-margined, strongly
many-nerved on both faces, especially on the small inner face; bracts
entirely wanting or inconspicuous. (C. adusta, last ed.)--Dryish
copses, N. Eng. to Penn. and Minn.; not common.--Var. PERPLEXA, Bailey.
Mostly taller and stouter; spikes larger and less attenuated or even
truncate below, approximate or even aggregated, the head erect or nearly
so and the lowest bract occasionally prominent; perigynium thicker and
firmer in texture. N. Eng. to Minn.; infrequent.

131. C. silicea, Olney. Stiff, 1--2 deg. high, in clumps; leaves very
narrow, becoming involute, not exceeding the culm; head 1--3' long,
usually flexuose or nodding above the middle at maturity; spikes 5--8,
silvery-white or silvery-tawny at full maturity, all more or less
separated, ovate, conspicuously contracted below and cone-shaped above,
erect on the culm; perigynium very broad-ovate and very thin, obscurely
nerved, appressed, about as long as the acute colorless scale. (C.
foenea, var. sabulonum, last ed.; C. straminea, var. moniliformis,
_Tuckerm_.)--Sands of the sea-shore, Maine to N. J.; frequent.

[=][=] _Head dull brown or green (usually somewhat silvery in_ var.
foenea _of n. 132)._

132. C. straminea, Willd. Very slender, erect, but the top of the culm
often flexuose, 1--3 deg. high; leaves narrow and long-pointed, stiff,
shorter than the culm; spikes 3--8, tawny, very small (2--3'' broad),
globular or sometimes a little tapering below from the presence of many
staminate flowers, usually all entirely distinct on the very slender,
often zigzag or flexuose rhachis; bracts none, or only the lowest
conspicuous; perigynium small and ovate, nerved on both faces but never
unusually prominently nerved on the inner face (as is the perigynium of
n. 130), the points spreading and rather conspicuous; scale acute, about
the length of the perigynium. (C. straminea, var. tenera, last
ed.)--Dryish copses and fields; common. Immensely variable.

Var. mirabilis, Tuckerm. Culm long and mostly weak, often 4 deg. high, much
longer than the loose leaves; spikes 4--8, larger, usually all
contiguous or occasionally the lowest 1 or 2 separate, spreading,
loosely flowered, tawny or frequently greenish; perigynium narrowly
ovate, thin, longer than the scale, the points much spreading and very
conspicuous. (C. mirabilis, _Dewey_.)--Shady places, throughout;
frequent.

Var. brevior, Dewey. (Pl. 6, fig. 6--10.) Culm always stiff, 11/2--21/2 deg.
high, longer than the stiff long-pointed leaves; spikes 3--8, all
distinct, contiguous or more or less separated, large (3--5'' broad),
globular, the head always short and erect; perigynium orbicular or
ovate-orbicular, often cordate at base, mostly very broadly winged. (C.
straminea, and vars. typica, hyalina, and Meadii, last ed.)--Dry soils,
throughout; common.

Var. aperta, Boott. Culm slender but strict below the head, 1--2 deg. high,
growing in dense tufts; leaves very narrow, usually much shorter than
the culm; spikes 4--6, large, heavy, much contracted below, usually all
separated, becoming rusty, disposed in a weak or nodding head;
perigynium narrowly ovate.--Bogs, throughout; rare westward. Transition
to n. 128, from which the ovate perigynia distinguish it.

Var. invisa, W. Boott. Culm very slender, weak above; leaves very narrow
with exceedingly long thin points, about the length of the culm; spikes
small (3'' broad or less), ovate, variously disposed in dense or open
heads or sometimes the lowest remote or even subradical, rusty, the
lower ones subtended by filiform bracts 2--5' long.--Swales near the
sea-board, Maine to Del.; infrequent. Apt to be confounded with n. 128.

Var. alata, Bailey. Culm very stiff, 11/2--3 deg. high, longer than the stiff
leaves; spikes very large, oblong or conical, always pointed, usually
all contiguous, green or sometimes becoming tawny; perigynium orbicular
or orbicular-obovate, very abruptly contracted into a short beak which
is prominent in the spike. (C. alata, _Torr._)--Swales, Mass. to Ill.,
and southward; rare and uncharacteristic far inland.

Var. cumulata, Bailey. Culm very stiff, 2--3 deg. high, greatly exceeding
the firm leaves; spikes 5--30, all aggregated or densely capitate,
green, widely divergent, pointed above, very abruptly contracted or even
truncate at base, very densely flowered; perigynium small, broad, very
obscurely nerved, the points inconspicuous.--Dry grounds, Penn. to N.
Eng., and northward; rare.

Var. foenea, Torr. Culm very stiff, longer than the leaves, 1--2 deg. high;
spikes 4--8, contiguous or separated, never densely aggregated,
prominently contracted both above and below, very densely flowered,
green, or often silvery-green. (C. foenea, last ed., excl. vars.; not
_Willd._)--Near the sea-coast; frequent.

C. LEPORINA, L. Distinguished from C. straminea, var. brevior, as
follows:--Usually lower; spikes rusty-brown, ovoid or oblong, erect or
appressed, more or less contracted both above and below, contiguous in
an interrupted head 1' long or less; perigynium lance-ovate, thin, very
narrowly margined, erect and appressed, obscurely nerved.--About Boston
(_W. Boott, Morong_). (Adv. from Eu.)

[*] 12.--[+] 3. _Cyperoideae_.

133. C. sychnocephala, Carey. Erect, 3--18' high, leafy; head 1/2--1'
long; perigynium very slender, faintly nerved, 5--6 times longer than
the exceedingly small achene, mostly a little longer than the sharp
scale.--Glades, central N. Y. to Minn., and far westward; rare.


ORDER 129. GRAMINEAE. (GRASS FAMILY.)

_Grasses, with usually hollow stems_ (culms) _closed at the joints,
alternate 2-ranked leaves, their sheaths split or open on the side
opposite the blade; the hypogynous flowers solitary in the axils of
imbricated 2-ranked glumes_, forming a 1--many-flowered _spikelet_; the
lower glumes (1 or usually 2) empty, the succeeding _flowering glumes_
enclosing each a somewhat smaller and usually thinner scale (called the
_palet_) and 2 or 3 very minute hyaline scales (_lodicules_) at the base
of the flower. Stamens 1--6, commonly 3; anthers versatile, 2-celled,
the cells distinct. Styles mostly 2 or 2-parted; stigmas hairy or
feathery. Ovary 1-celled, 1-ovuled, forming a seed-like grain
(_caryopsis_) in fruit. Embryo small, on the outside and at the base of
the floury albumen.--Roots fibrous. Sheath of the leaves usually more or
less extended above the base of the blade into a scarious appendage
(_ligule_). Spikelets panicled or spiked. Palet usually 2-nerved or
2-keeled, enclosed or partly covered by the glume. Grain sometimes free
from, sometimes permanently adherent to, the palet.--A vast and most
important family, as it furnishes the cereal grains, and the principal
food of cattle, etc. The terms _flowering glume_ and _palet_ are now
adopted in place of the _outer_ and _inner palets_ of previous editions,
while for convenience the term flower is often retained for the flower
proper together with the enclosing flowering glume. (See Plates 7--15.)

SERIES A. Spikelets jointed upon the pedicel below the glumes, of one
terminal perfect flower (sometimes a lower staminate or neutral flower
in n. 5), or some or all of the 1-flowered spikelets unisexual in
n. 10--12. Glumes 4 (rarely only 2 or 3).

Tribe I. PANICEAE. Spikelets of one perfect flower, in spikes or
panicles. Flowering glume awnless, in fruit more rigid than the empty
glumes.

[*] Spikelets in 2--4 ranks on a more or less flattened rhachis.--See
also n. 5 (Sec. Digitaria).

[+] Rhachis produced beyond the upper spikelet; glumes 3.

1. Spartina. Spikelets much flattened laterally in 2 close ranks.

[+][+] Rhachis not produced above the upper spikelet (rarely in n. 3).

2. Beckmannia. Spikelets obovate, in 2 close rows. Glumes 3 (or 4),
strongly concave, carinate.

3. Paspalum. Spikelets plano-convex, sessile or nearly so. Glumes 3
(rarely 2).

4. Eriochloa. Spikelets plano-convex, lanceolate, with a basal callus,
short-pedicelled.

[*][*] Spikelets irregularly paniculate or spicate.

5. Panicum. Spikelets ovate, not involucrate nor the pedicels bristly.
Glumes 4, the lowest usually small or minute.

6. Setaria. Spikelets in dense cylindrical spikes or panicles, the
pedicels bristle-bearing.

7. Cenchrus. Spikelets (1--5) enclosed in a globular spiny bur-like
involucre.

8. Amphicarpum. Spikelets of 2 kinds, one in a terminal panicle, the
other subterranean on radical peduncles.

Tribe II. ORYZEAE. Spikelets unisexual or perfect, in loose panicles,
with only 2 glumes (in our genera) and palet none. Stamens often 6.

9. Leersia. Flowers perfect. Spikelets much flattened. Glumes carinate.

10. Zizania. Spikelets unisexual. Glumes convex, narrow.

Tribe III. MAYDEAE. Spikelets of a single perfect or unisexual or
rudimentary flower, in jointed spikes, in pairs at each joint, mostly
imbedded in the thick rhachis.

11. Tripsacum. Spikelets monoecious, the staminate above in the spike.

12. Rottboellia. One spikelet of each pair sterile and shortly
pedicelled, the other fertile, sessile and sunk in the rhachis.

Tribe IV. ANDROPOGONEAE. Spikelets in pairs or threes on the (usually
jointed and bearded) rhachis of a spike or branches of a panicle, one
sessile and fertile, the lateral pedicelled and often sterile or
rudimentary; 2 upper glumes smaller and hyaline, that of the fertile
flower mostly awned.

13. Erianthus. Spikelets in pairs, spicate, all alike fertile,
involucrate with a silky tuft.

14. Andropogon. Spikelets spicate, in pairs, the pedicellate sterile or
rudimentary; rhachis bearded.

15. Chrysopogon. Spikelets in open panicles, in pairs or threes, only
the sessile fertile.

SERIES B. Rhachis of the spikelet usually jointed above the persistent
lower glumes (jointed below the glumes only in n. 19, 31, and 36).
Spikelets 1--many-flowered, the uppermost flowers often imperfect or
rudimentary.

Tribe V. PHALARIDEAE. Glumes 5, only the uppermost fertile, the 2 middle
ones rudimentary or empty or staminate; palet 1-nerved. Panicle mostly
contracted and spike-like.

16. Phalaris. Middle glumes mere rudiments each side of the shining
triandrous flower.

17. Anthoxanthum. Middle glumes empty, awned on the back. Stamens 2.

18. Hierochloe. Middle glumes triandrous. Fertile flower diandrous.

Tribe VI. AGROSTIDEAE. Glumes 3; flower solitary, perfect (rarely a
rudimentary or perfect second flower in n. 23 and 32--34), palet
2-nerved.

[*] Flowering glume with a terminal awn (none in n. 22), closely
embracing the grain in fruit; spikelets in panicles or loose spikes, the
rhachis not produced beyond the flower (except in n. 24 and a single
species of n. 23).--STIPEAE.

[+] Fruiting glume firm and indurated, with a callus at base (none in
n. 22).

19. Aristida. Awn 3-fid, the branches divaricate. Callus acute.

20. Stipa. Awn simple, twisted. Callus mostly acute.

21. Oryzopsis. Awn simple, straight, deciduous. Flower oblong; callus
short, obtuse.

22. Milium. Awn none. Flower small, ovoid, without callus.

[+][+] Fruiting glume thin and membranous; outer glume smaller or
minute.

23. Muhlenbergia. Flower mostly hairy at base, the glume mucronate or
awned.

24. Brachyelytrum. Rhachis produced into a bristle above. Outer glumes
very small, the flowering one long-awned. Stamens 2.

[*][*] Flowering glume awnless or short-awned, loosely embracing the
grain, thin, the lower glumes complicate carinate; spikelets in dense
spike-like panicles, the rhachis not produced.--PHLEOIDEAE.

25. Heleochloa. Awns none. Spikes short and scarcely exserted.

26. Phleum. Glumes somewhat truncate, mucronate or short awned. Spike
cylindric.

27. Alopecurus. Lower glumes united at base, the flowering awned on the
back. Palet none. Spike cylindric.

[*][*][*] Glumes membranous, the lower rarely strongly complicate, the
flowering with a dorsal awn or awnless; spikelets variously
panicled.--AGROSTEAE.

[+] Flowering glume 1- (rarely 3-) nerved, awnless; grain loosely
enclosed or naked.

28. Sporobolus. Culms wiry or rigid. Leaves involute.

[+][+] Flowering glume 3--5 nerved, mostly awned; grain enclosed.

[++] Rhachis not reduced above the single flower.

29. Agrostis. Spikelets in an open panicle.

30. Polypogon. Empty glumes long-awned. Panicle spike-like.

31. Cinna. Spikelets flattened, in a loose panicle. Palet 1-nerved.
Stamen 1

[++][++] Rhachis bearing a rudimentary second flower or short bristle
(except in species of n. 33).

32. Apera. Flowering glume bifid, awned. Panicle very loose and
delicate.

33. Calamagrostis. Flowers hairy-tufted at base. Glumes membranaceous.
Palet thin.

34. Ammophila. Spikelets large. Flowers hairy tufted at base. Glumes and
palet chartaceous.

Tribe VII. AVENEAE. Spikelets 2--several-flowered, panicled, the rhachis
or base of the flowers often bearded; upper flower imperfect or
rudimentary (except in n. 37). Flowering glume bearing a twisted, bent
or straight awn on its back or below the apex.

[*] One of the flowers staminate only.

35. Arrhenatherum. Lower flower staminate, long awned; middle flower
perfect, nearly awnless; the upper rudimentary.

36. Holcus. Flowers 2, the lower perfect, awnless, the upper staminate,
awned.

[*][*] Flowers all perfect or the uppermost usually rudimentary.

37. Aira. Spikelets very small, in a diffuse panicle. Flowers 2,
perfect, awned toward the base.

38. Deschampsia. Spikelets 2-flowered, with a hairy rudiment. Glumes
thin-scarious, the flowering one erose-truncate awned near the middle.

39. Trisetum. Spikelets 2--several-flowered. Flowering glume thin,
compressed, carinate, 2-toothed, awned above by the excurrent mid nerve.

40. Avena. Spikelets 2--several-flowered. Flowering glume hard and firm,
rounded on the back, 5--9 nerved, the mid-nerve long-excurrent at or
below the 2-toothed apex.

41. Danthonia. As Avena, but the 3 middle nerves of the flowering glume
running into a flattish twisted awn from between the teeth.

Tribe VIII. CHLORIDEAE. Spikelets 2--several-flowered with one or more of
the upper flowers imperfect (flower 1 and perfect in n. 45) arranged in
2 rows upon the rhachis of a 1-sided spike.

[*] Spikelets with one perfect flower.

42. Cynodon. Spikes 3--5, slender, digitate. Flower and the rudiment
awnless.

43. Ctenium. Spike solitary, terminal. Flowers 4--6, the middle one
perfect.

44. Gymnopogon. Spikes filiform, racemose. Spikelets remote, of a
perfect flower and an awned rudiment.

45. Schedonnardus. Spikes 3--9, slender, scattered, distant. Spikelets
small, 1-flowered awnless.

46. Bouteloua. Spikes scattered (rarely 1 and terminal), dense. Glume of
perfect flower 3-toothed. Rudimentary flowers 1--3 awned.

[*][*] Spikelets with two or more perfect flowers; awns none.

47. Eleusine. Spikes digitate, dense.

48. Leptochloa. Spikes racemose, slender. Spikelets small, alternate.

[*][*][*] Spikelets dioecious; spikes small, very dissimilar.

49. Buchloe. Pistillate spikes capitate, sessile, the spikelets
1-flowered; staminate spikes (2 or 3) on a peduncle, the spikelets
2--3-flowered.

Tribe IX. FESTUCEAE. Spikelets few--many-flowered, panicled, the
uppermost flowers often imperfect or abortive. Glumes pointless or the
flowering ones tipped with a straight awn or bristle.

[*] Flowering glume 1--3 nerved, 2--3-toothed. Rhachis short-bearded or
glabrous.

50. Triodia. Rhachis of the spikelet bearded. Nerves of the flowering
glume 3, villous, at least the middle one more or less excurrent.

51. Diplachne. Rhachis glabrous. Glume 1--3-nerved, with 2 small teeth,
and a short awn in the cleft.

[*][*] Glume 3-nerved, entire or 2-toothed and mucronate between the
teeth. Rhachis and flowers long-villous. Tall reeds with ample panicles.

52. Phragmites. Spikelets 3--7-flowered, lowest flower naked, staminate
or neutral. Glume entire.

53. Arundo. As n. 52, but flowers all perfect. Glume bifid.

[*][*][*] Glume 3-nerved, the nerves (at least the mid-nerve) excurrent;
spikelets few, in the axils of floral leaves.

54. Munroa. Low or prostrate much-branched annual.

[*][*][*][*] Glume 3- (rarely 1-) nerved, obtuse or acute, awnless;
rhachis and flower naked.

55. Koeleria. Panicle contracted. Spikelets 2--4-flowered. Glumes
compressed-keeled, acute or mucronate.

56. Eatonia. Panicle slender, more or less dense. Spikelets 2-flowered.
Glumes very dissimilar, usually obtuse, the upper empty one enclosing
the flowers.

57. Eragrostis. Spikelets flattened, 2--many-flowered. Glumes acute or
acutish. Palet persistent.

[*][*][*][*][*] Glume 3--5-nerved, obtuse or abrupt-cuspidate; spikelet
3--5-flowered; upper sterile flowers convolute around each other.

58. Melica. Glumes 5-nerved or more, scarious, obtuse. Panicle simple or
nearly so.

59. Diarrhena. Glumes 3-nerved, coriaceous, the flowering one abruptly
cuspidate. Panicle loosely few-flowered.

[*][*][*][*][*][*] Flowering glume 5-nerved or more (sometimes obscurely
so). Only the terminal flower abortive, or none.

[+] Glumes more or less strongly compressed and carinate (ventricose in
n. 63).

60. Uniola. Spikelets broad, flat and 2-edged, in usually loose
panicles. Glumes coriaceous, acute, the 3--6 lower ones empty.

61. Distichlis. Dioecious. Spikelets large, flattened, in a close
panicle. Empty glumes 2, acute.

62. Dactylis. Panicle contracted in 1-sided clusters. Glumes herbaceous,
awn-pointed, rough-ciliate on the keel.

63. Briza. Spikelets heart-shaped, in lax panicles. Glumes roundish,
ventricose, scarious-margined.

64. Poa. Spikelets small, flattened, ovate to lance-ovate, in a loose
panicle. Flowering glumes membranous and scarious-margined, pointless,
usually webby or pubescent toward the base.

65. Graphephorum. Spikelets compressed, in a loose panicle, the hairy
jointed rhachis produced into a hairy pedicel. Glumes thin-membranous,
faintly nerved, entire.

[+][+] Glumes convex on the back, not carinate (or somewhat so in
n. 70).

66. Scolochloa. Spikelets subterete, in a lax panicle, the rhachis
villous at the base of the flowers, ending in a naked pedicel. Glumes
coriaceous, prominently 7-nerved, toothed at the apex. In water.

67. Glyceria. Spikelets terete or flattish. Flowering glumes scarious at
the usually blunt summit, prominently 5--7-nerved.

68. Puccinellia. Mainly as Glyceria, but the glumes obsoletely 5-nerved.

69. Festuca. Spikelets terete or flattish. Flowering glume acute,
pointed or awned at the tip, few-nerved. Styles terminal.

70. Bromus. Glume rounded or keeled on the back, mostly awned below the
2-cleft tip, 5--9-nerved. Styles scarcely terminal.

Tribe X. HORDEAE. Spikelets 1--several-flowered, sessile on opposite
sides of a zigzag jointed channelled rhachis, forming a spike. Empty
glumes sometimes abortive or wanting. Uppermost flower imperfect or
abortive.

[*] Spikelets single at each joint of the solitary spike.

71. Lolium. Spikelets many-flowered, placed edgewise on the rhachis of
the spike, with one empty glume.

72. Agropyrum. Spikelets 3--several-flowered, placed flatwise on the
rhachis. Empty glumes 2, right and left.

73. Lepturus. Spikelets small, 1--2-flowered; empty glumes 1 or 2. Spike
very slender.

[*][*] Spikelets 2 or more at each joint of the solitary spike; the
empty glumes side by side in front of the spikelets (none or rudimentary
in n. 76.)

74. Hordeum. Spikelets 1-flowered, 3 at each joint, the lateral ones
usually sterile.

75. Elymus. Spikelets 1--several-flowered, all perfect and similar.

76. Asprella. Spikelets few-flowered, somewhat pedicelled, 1--3 at each
joint. Glumes none or small and deciduous.

Tribe XI. BAMBUSEAE. Tall woody reeds, the flat leaves with a short
petiole jointed upon the sheath. Spikelets few--many-flowered,
flattened, in panicles or racemes.

77. Arundinaria. Flowering glumes rounded on the back, many-nerved,
acuminate or bristle-pointed; empty glumes very small.


1. SPARTINA, Schreber. CORD or MARSH GRASS. (Pl. 9.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, very much flattened laterally, jointed and sessile
in 2 ranks on the outer side of a triangular rhachis. Glumes 3, unequal,
lanceolate, strongly compressed-keeled, acute or bristle-pointed, mostly
rough-bristly on the keel; palet thin, equalling or longer
than the flowering glume. Stamens 3. Styles long, more or less
united.--Perennials, with simple and rigid often reed-like culms, from
extensively creeping scaly rootstocks, racemed spikes, very smooth
sheaths, and long tough leaves (whence the name, from [Greek:
sparti/ne], _a cord_, such as was made from the bark of the _Spartium_
or Broom).

[*] _Spikelets compactly imbricated, very rough-hispid on the keels;
spikes (2--4' long) more or less peduncled; culm and elongated leaves
rigid._

1. S. cynosuroides, Willd. (FRESH-WATER CORD-GRASS.) _Culm rather
slender_ (2--6 deg. high); _leaves narrow_ (2--4 deg. long, 1/2' wide below or
less), tapering to a very slender point, keeled, flat, but quickly
involute in drying, smooth except the margins; _spikes_ 5--20,
scattered, spreading; rhachis rough on the margins; _glumes
awn-pointed_, especially the middle one (its awn about 1/4' long),
strongly serrulate-hispid on the keel, _the lower equalling the upper_,
whose strong midrib abruptly terminates below the membranous
apex.--Banks of rivers and lakes, or in rich soil, especially northward.
Aug.

2. S. polystachya, Willd. (SALT REED-GRASS.) _Culm tall and stout_
(4--9 deg. high, often 1' in diameter near the base); _leaves broad (1/2--1'),
roughish underneath_, as well as the margins; _spikes 20--50, forming a
dense oblong raceme_ (purplish); _glumes barely mucronate, the lower
half the length of the flowering one_, of which the rough-hispid midrib
reaches to the apex.--Salt or brackish marshes, within tide-water,
especially southward.

3. S. juncea, Willd. (RUSH SALT-GRASS.) _Culms low_ (1--2 deg. high) _and
slender; leaves narrow and rush-like, strongly involute, very smooth;
spikes_ 1--5, on very short peduncles, the rhachis smooth; _glumes
acute_, the lower scarcely half the length of the middle one, not half
the length of the upper.--Salt marshes and sea-beaches. Aug. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Spikelets loosely imbricated, or somewhat remote and alternate,
the keels only slightly hairy or roughish under a lens; spikes sessile
and erect, soft; leaves, rhachis, etc., very smooth; culm rather
succulent._

4. S. stricta, Roth. (SALT MARSH-GRASS.) (Pl. 9, fig. 1--3.) Culm 1--4 deg.
high, leafy to the top; leaves soon convolute, narrow; spikes few
(2--4), the rhachis slightly projecting beyond the crowded or imbricated
spikelets; glumes acute, very unequal, the larger 1-nerved, a little
longer than the flower.--Salt marshes, Penn., etc.--Odor strong and
rancid. (Eu.)

Var. glabra, Gray. Culm and leaves longer; spikes 5--12 (2--3' long);
Spikelets imbricate-crowded.--Common on the coast.

Var. alterniflora, Gray. Spikes more slender (3--5' long), and the
spikelets remotish, barely overlapping, the rhachis continued into a
more conspicuous bract-like appendage; larger glume indistinctly
5-nerved; otherwise as in the preceding form, into which it
passes.--Common with the last; also Onondaga Lake, _J. A. Paine_.


2. BECKMANNIA, Host. (Pl. 16.)

Spikelets jointed upon the pedicels, 1--2-flowered (only one fertile),
obovate and laterally compressed, imbricated in 2 rows upon one side of
the angled rhachis of a spike. Glumes 3 or 4, the 2 lower strongly
concave and carinate, obtuse or acutish, the 1 or 2 flowering glumes
narrower, lanceolate, acute or acuminate and a little exserted, becoming
rather rigid and with the thin palet enclosing the oblong grain.--A
stout erect subaquatic perennial, with the short spikes erect and simply
spicate or in a strict narrow panicle. (Named for _John Beckmann_,
professor of botany at Goettingen.)

1. B. erucaeformis, Host, var. uniflora, Scribn. Glumes 3 and spikelets
1-flowered; spikes (6'' long or less) panicled.--N. W. Iowa, W. Minn.,
and westward. The Old World form, which also is found in the far
northwest, has 2-flowered spikelets.


3. PASPALUM, L. (Pl. 13.)

Spikelets spiked or somewhat racemed, in 2--4 rows on one side of a
flattened or filiform continuous rhachis, jointed upon very short
pedicels, plano-convex, awnless, 1-flowered. Glumes 3 (rarely only 2),
the terminal one flowering. Flower coriaceous, mostly orbicular or
ovate, flat on the inner side, convex on the outer. Stamens 3. Spikes
one or more, at or toward the summit of an elongated peduncle. ([Greek:
Paspa/los], a Greek name for Millet.)

[*] _Spikes with a (1'') broad and thin membranaceous or foliaceous and
keeled rhachis, the incurved margins partly enclosing the small
two-rowed spikelets. (Smooth, aquatic, or nearly so, decumbent or
floating.)_

1. P. fluitans, Kunth. Annual; _leaves lanceolate, flat_ (3--8''),
broad; _spikes numerous in a raceme_, the rhachis somewhat projecting
beyond the minute and slightly pubescent spikelets into a tapering
point, scabrous on the back.--River-swamps, Va. to S. Ill., Mo., and
southward. Sept., Oct.

2. P. Walterianum, Schultes. Perennial; _leaves linear, short; spikes_
3--7, the lowest partly included in the sheath of the uppermost leaf,
the rhachis blunt; spikelets glabrous.--Low or wet grounds, N. J. (Cape
May, _Nuttall_), Del., and southward.

[*][*] _Spikes with a narrow wingless rhachis; perennials, or mostly
so._

[+] _Spikelets very obtuse, orbicular; spikes one terminal and often
1--5 lateral._

3. P. setaceum, Michx. Culm ascending or decumbent (1--2 deg. long),
slender; leaves (2'' wide, flat) and sheaths clothed with soft spreading
hairs; _spikes very slender_ (2--4' long), smooth, _mostly solitary on a
long peduncle, and usually one from the sheaths of each of the upper
leaves on short peduncles or included_; _spikelets_ (1/2'' wide) _narrowly
2-rowed_.--Sandy fields; common from E. Mass. to Ill., and southward.
Aug.

4. P. laeve, Michx. (Pl. 13, fig. 1--3.) Bright green, sparingly villous,
rather stout; stems somewhat decumbent; leaves and spikes widely
spreading; spikes (2--4) approximate, 2--4' long, smooth or nearly so;
spikelets about 1'' wide, 2-rowed.--Moist soil, S. New Eng. to Ky., and
southward.

5. P. Floridanum, Michx. Stout, erect, 3--6 deg. high, glaucous; sheaths and
leaves more or less villous, the latter and the spikes erect or
ascending; spikes (2--5) broader, 2--5' long, the smooth spikelets
nearly 2'' broad, in 2 rows.--Moist soil; Del. to Fla., Ark., and Tex.

[+][+] _Spikelets acute; spikes several, racemose._

6. P. dilatatum, Poir. Stout, erect, 2--5 deg. high, villous at the top of
the sheath; spikes few on a naked peduncle, erect, 2--3' long; spikelets
1'' long or more, the lower glume soft-villous on the margin.--Va. to
Tex.

[+][+][+] _Spikelets acute; spikes always a pair at the summit of the
naked peduncle._

7. P. distichum, L. (JOINT-GRASS.) Nearly glabrous, rather glaucous;
culms ascending (about 1 deg. high) from a long creeping base; leaves
linear-lanceolate (2--3' long); peduncle usually short; _spikes short_
and closely-flowered (9''--2' long), often slightly separated; rhachis
flat on the back; _spikelets ovate, slightly pointed_ (barely 11/2''
long), _approximate on one side of the rhachis_.--Wet fields, Va. and
southward. July--Sept.

8. P. Elliottii, Watson. Culms ascending (1--21/2 deg. high) from a creeping
base; leaves lanceolate (3--6' long, 4--6'' wide); _spikes slender_,
rather sparsely flowered (1--4' long), _both sessile_ upon the long
slender peduncle; _spikelets ovate-lanceolate_ (2'' long), _on nearly
opposite sides of the rhachis_. (Milium paspalodes, _Ell._ P. Digitaria,
_Chapm._; not _Poir._)--Va. and southward.


4. ERIOCHLOA, HBK. (Pl. 16.)

Spikelets ovate, subsessile or shortly pedicelled upon one side of the
rhachis of a spike, with a callus at base and jointed on the pedicel,
1-flowered. Glumes 3, the 2 empty ones slightly unequal, membranaceous,
acute, the flowering one shorter, indurated, obtuse, enclosing the free
grain.--Coarse tufted grasses, with flat leaves, the spikes more or less
scattered along a common peduncle, and the pedicels and rhachis of the
spike usually pubescent or hairy (hence the name, from [Greek: e)/rion],
_wool_, and [Greek: chlo/a], _grass_).

1. E. polystachya, HBK. Culms erect or decumbent, 2 deg. high; spikes 6--12,
erect or ascending, 1--2' long, forming a compound spike 3--6' long;
spikelets glabrous, very shortly pedicelled, oblong-lanceolate, nearly
2'' long.--S. Kan. to Tex. and Mex.


5. PANICUM, L. PANIC-GRASS. (Pl. 13.)

Spikelets jointed upon the pedicels, ovate, panicled, racemed, or
sometimes spiked, not involucrate, with one perfect and sometimes a
second lower rudimentary or staminate flower. Glumes 4, but the lower
one usually short or minute (rarely even wanting), and the third empty
or sterile, membranaceo-herbaceous. Upper flower perfect, closed,
coriaceous or cartilaginous, usually flattish parallel with the glumes,
awnless (except in Sec. 3), enclosing the free and grooveless grain.
Stamens 3. Stigmas plumose, usually purple. (An ancient Latin name of
the Italian Millet, P. Italicum (now Setaria Italica), of uncertain
origin and meaning.)

Sec. 1. DIGITARIA. _Spikelets crowded 2--3 together in simple and mostly
1-sided clustered spikes or spike-like racemes, wholly awnless and
pointless, 1-flowered; lower glume minute or obsolete or wanting;
annual, often purplish._

[*] _Spikes erect; the rhachis filiform and nearly terete._

1. P. filiforme, L. Culms very slender (1--2 deg. high), upright; lower
sheaths hairy; spikes 2--8, alternate, approximate, filiform; spikelets
oblong, acute (1/2'' long); lower glume almost wanting.--Dry sandy soil,
Mass. to N. J. along the coast, to Iowa, Neb., and southward. Aug.

[*][*] _Spikes spreading; the rhachis flat and thin._

P. GLABRUM, Gaudin. Culms spreading, prostrate, or sometimes erect
(5--12' long), glabrous; _spikes 2--6, widely diverging_, nearly
digitate; spikelets ovoid (about 1'' long); _upper empty glume equalling
the flower, the lower almost wanting_.--Cultivated grounds and waste
places; common, especially southward; sometimes appearing indigenous.
Aug., Sept. (Nat. from Eu.)

P. SANGUINALE, L. (COMMON CRAB- or FINGER-GRASS.) (Pl. 13, fig. 1--3.)
Culms erect or spreading (1--2 deg. high); leaves and sheaths glabrous or
hairy; _spikes 4--15, spreading_, digitate; spikelets oblong (11/2''
long); _second glume half the length of the flower, the lower one
small_.--Cultivated and waste grounds. Aug.--Oct. (Nat. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. PANICUM proper. _Spikelets scattered, in panicles, awnless._

[*] _Panicle elongated and racemose, wand-like or pyramidal; the
numerous and usually pointed spikelets short-pedicelled, excepting n. 3
and 4._

[+] _Sterile flower none; lower glume short; spikelets 1/2--11/2'' long;
annuals except_ n. 4; _leaves flat; sheaths flattened._

[++] _Glabrous and smooth throughout; spikelets appressed,
short-pedicelled._

2. P. proliferum, Lam. Culms usually thickish and rather succulent,
branched, geniculate and ascending from a procumbent base; sheaths
flattened; ligule ciliate; panicles terminal and lateral, compound,
pyramidal, the slender primary branches at length spreading; spikelets
pale green, rarely purplish; lower glume broad, {1/3} to 1/4 the length of
the upper, which is little longer than the flowering one.--Marshy
river-banks and shores, especially if brackish, but also in the
interior, from Mass. to Iowa, and southward. Aug.

[++][++] _Hispid or hairy on the sheaths, at least the lower; spikelets
mostly scattered on slender pedicels in an ample, loose, at length very
effuse panicle; culms mostly branched from the base, erect or ascending
(10--20' high)._

3. P. capillare, L. (OLD-WITCH GRASS.) (Pl. 13, fig. 4, 5.) All the
sheaths and usually the leaves _copiously hairy or hispid_; panicle
mostly very compound, the branches divaricate when old; spikelets from
ovoid to narrowly oblong, pointed; _lower glume half the length of the
upper empty one_, which is longer than the _elliptical obtuse
perfect flower_.--Sandy soil and cultivated fields everywhere.
Aug.--Oct.--Varies extremely in size and appearance, the culms erect and
simple, or decumbent, geniculate and branched; in depauperate forms the
spikelets only 3/4'', in the larger forms 11/2'' in length.

4. P. autumnale, Bosc. Root perennial (?), lower sheaths and margins of
the small narrow leaves more or less hairy, _otherwise glabrous_, except
some _bristly hairs in the main axils of the very effuse capillary
panicle_, its much elongated divisions sparingly branched, or even
simple and terminated with solitary _spindle_-shaped spikelets; _lower
glume minute; perfect flower lanceolate-oblong and pointed_, nearly
equalling the lance-oblong obtusish empty glumes.--Sand-hills, Ill. to
Minn., Mo., and southward.

[+][+] _Sterile flower rudimentary (staminate in n. 7), its glume fully
twice the length of the lower glume; spikelets small (1 or 11/2'' long);
root perennial._

5. P. anceps, Michx. _Culms flat, upright_ (2--4 deg. high); leaves rather
broadly linear (1--2 deg. long, 4--5'' wide), smooth; panicle
contracted-pyramidal; _spikelets ovate-lanceolate, pointed_, a little
curved; _second glume 5--7-nerved_; neutral flower one third longer than
the perfect one.--Wet sandy soil, N. J. and Penn. to S. Ill., and
southward. Aug.--Spikelets larger and branches of the panicle longer and
narrower than in the next.

6. P. agrostoides, Muhl. _Culms flattened, upright_ (2--4 deg. high); leaves
long, and with the sheaths smooth; panicles terminal and often lateral,
pyramidal (4--8' long); _spikelets_ racemose, crowded and one-sided on
the spreading branches, _ovate-oblong, acute_ (purplish); _second glume
5-nerved_, longer than the neutral flower; perfect flower shorter,
bearded at the apex.--Wet meadows and shores, E. Mass. to Minn., Neb.,
and common southward. Aug.

7. P. Curtisii, Chapm. Culms stout, 3--4 deg. high, often rooting below;
mostly glabrous; panicle slender, simple, spike-like (6--8' long), the
spikes appressed; spikelets lanceolate, acute; lower glume half the
length of the 5-nerved second one.--Ponds, Del. to Fl. and Tex.

[+][+][+] _Sterile flower staminate; lower glume more than half the
length of the next; spikelets large (2--21/2'' long), ovate, pointed, as
are the glumes, etc.; perennials, glabrous, with tall or stout and rigid
upright culms._

8. P. virgatum, L. (Pl. 13, fig. 8, 9.) Tall (3--5 deg. high); _leaves very
long, flat_; ligule silky-bearded; _branches of the compound loose and
large panicle_ (9'--2 deg. long) _at length spreading or drooping_;
spikelets scattered, usually purplish.--Moist sandy soil; common. Aug.

9. P. amarum, Ell. Culms (11/2 deg. high or more) sheathed to the top; _leaves
involute, glaucous, coriaceous, the uppermost exceeding the contracted
panicle_, the simple racemose branches of which are appressed; spikelets
pale.--Sandy shores, Conn., Va., and southward. Aug., Sept.--The
northern form (var. MINUS, Vasey & Scribn.) somewhat smaller than the
southern.

[*][*] _Panicle short or small, loosely spreading or diffuse;
perennials._

[+] _Sterile flower none; spikelets warty roughened._

10. P. verrucosum, Muhl. Smooth; culms branching and spreading, very
slender (1--2 deg. long), naked above; leaves linear-lanceolate (2--3''
wide), shining; branches of the diffuse panicle capillary, few-flowered;
spikelets dark green, oval, acute, 3/4'' long; lower glume 1/4 as long as
the faintly nerved second.--Sandy swamps, N. Eng. to Va., near the
coast, and southward.

[+][+] _Lower (sterile) flower neutral, or in n. 12 and sometimes in
n. 11 staminate, the palet scarious and sometimes small and
inconspicuous._

[++] _Culm-leaves broadly lanceolate or wider, with 9--15 principal
nerves (obscure or none in n. 17)._

[=] _Spikelets 1--11/2'' long._

11. P. xanthophysum, Gray. Culm simple, or at length branched near the
base (9--15' high); _sheaths hairy; leaves lanceolate, very acute_
(4--6' long by 1/2' wide), _not dilated at the ciliate-bearded clasping
base, smooth_ except the margins, _strongly 9--11-nerved; panicle
long-peduncled, very simple_, the appressed branches bearing a few
_roundish-obovate spikelets_ (about 11/2'' long); lower glume ovate,
acutish, {1/3}--1/2 the length of the 9-nerved second.--Dry sandy
soil, Maine to Penn., Wisc., Iowa, and northward; rare.
June.--Yellowish-green; spikelets minutely downy; sterile flower
sometimes staminate.

12. P. latifolium, L. Culm (1--2 deg. high) smooth; the joints and the
throat or margins of the otherwise _smooth sheaths often bearded with
soft woolly hairs; leaves broadly oblong-lanceolate from a
heart-clasping base_ (often 1' wide), taper-pointed, 11--15-nerved,
smooth, or sparingly downy-hairy; panicle more or less exserted (2--3'
long), usually long-peduncled, the branches spreading; _spikelets
obovate, 11/2'' long_, downy; lower glume ovate, not half the length of
the many-nerved second; sterile flower often (not always) with 3
stamens.--Moist thickets; common. June--Aug.

13. P. clandestinum, L. (Pl. 13, fig. 6, 7.) Culm rigid (1--3 deg. high),
very leafy to the top, at length producing appressed branches, the
_joints naked_; _sheaths rough with papillae bearing very stiff and
spreading bristly hairs_; leaves oblong-lanceolate from a heart-clasping
base, very taper-pointed; lateral and usually also the terminal _panicle
more or less enclosed in the sheaths_, or with the terminal one at
length long-peduncled;--otherwise resembling n. 12; but _the spikelets
more ovoid_, often smooth; the lower flower (always?) neutral.--Low
thickets and river-banks, N. Eng. to Mich., Mo., and southward.
June--Sept.

14. P. viscidum, Ell. Culms stout, upright or ascending, at length much
branched, leafy to the top, _densely velvety-downy all over_, as also
the sheaths, with reflexed soft and often clammy hairs, except a ring
below each joint; leaves likewise velvety, lanceolate (1/2' wide),
11--13-nerved; panicle spreading, the lateral ones included; _spikelets
obovate_, 1 or 11/2'' _long_, downy; the roundish lower glume scarcely one
fourth the length of the 7-nerved second one.--Damp soil, N. J. to Va.,
and southward. Aug.

15. P. scoparium, Lam. _Culms_ upright, at length much branched and
reclining (1--2 deg. long), _roughish; leaves lanceolate_ (3--5' long by
{1/3}--1/2' wide), _rather faintly 9-nerved_, hairy or smooth, _fringed_
on the whole margin or next the base _with long and stiff spreading
hairs, the sheaths bristly throughout_ with similar hairs; _panicle
open, nearly simple, bearing few_ tumid-obovate hairy or smoothish
_spikelets about 11/2'' long_; lower glume roundish, about half or a
quarter of the length of the upper one. (P. pauciflorum, _Ell._)--Wet
meadows and copses, E. Mass. to Minn., west and southward. June, July.

16. P. commutatum, Schultes. Rather slender, erect, 1--2 deg. high, _nearly
glabrous_; leaves lanceolate, acuminate (3--6' long), the margins toward
the base and the sheaths sparsely ciliate; panicle spreading, often
short-peduncled; _spikelets_ scattered, glabrous, _oblong, acutish_,
little more than 1'' long; _lower glume ovate_, often acute.--N. Y. to
Fla.--A frequent variety with smaller spikelets (not 1'' long)
approaches the next, and has also been confused with P.
dichotomum.--Ont. to Va. and southward.

[=][=] _Spikelets less than 1'' long._

17. P. nitidum, Michx. (Lam.?) Resembles the last; leaves rather thick
and the principal nerves very obscure or none except at the base;
panicle broad, more slender; spikelets smaller ({2/3}'' long), broadly
ovate and very obtuse; lower glume very obtuse. (P. sphaerocarpon,
_Ell._)--N. Y. to Ga., and westward.

18. P. microcarpon, Muhl. Like the last; the broadly lanceolate leaves
nearly similar, but usually longer (8' long or less), distinctly nerved;
panicle soon exserted on a slender peduncle, rather narrower, with
numerous slender branches and very many-flowered (3--7' long); spikelets
about {1/2}'' long, ovoid, smooth or smoothish; lower glume orbicular
and very small.--Dry or moist thickets, Penn. to Mich., Neb., and
southward. July--Sept.

[++][++] _Culm-leaves linear or sometimes narrowly lanceolate (basal
often lanceolate); primary nerves often indistinct or none; spikelets
small._

19. P. depauperatum, Muhl. Culms simple or branched from the base,
forming close tufts (6--12' high), terminated by a simple and
few-flowered contracted panicle, often much overtopped by the narrowly
linear and elongated (4--7') upper leaves; spikelets 3/4--11/2'' long,
oval-obovate, commonly pointed when young; lower glume ovate.--Varies,
with the leaves involute, at least when dry (P. involutum, _Torr._), and
with the sheaths either beset with long hairs or nearly smooth; the
panicle either partly included, or on a long and slender peduncle.--Dry
woods and hills; rather common. June.

20. P. consanguineum, Kunth. Culms slender, 1--2 deg. high, often decumbent
and rooting below; nearly glabrous or the sheaths and leaves somewhat
pubescent or villous; panicle small, with rather few spreading
few-flowered branches; _spikelets_ 1--11/2'' long, _oblong-obovate,
acutish_.--Dry woods, Norfolk, Va., and south to Fl. and Tex.

21. P. dichotomum, L.! Culms (8'--2 deg. high) at first mostly simple,
bearing a more or less exserted spreading compound panicle (1--3' long),
and linear to linear-lanceolate flat leaves (those tufted at the root
usually ovate-lanceolate and very short, thickish); but commonly
branching later in the season, the branches often clustered, and bearing
nearly simple and included small panicles; _spikelets_ 1/2--{2/3}'' long,
_elliptical, obtuse_, downy or smooth; lower glume roundish.--Common
everywhere. Very variable both in habit and in the amount of villosity
(depending upon the soil, exposure, season, etc.), so that it is
difficult to specify any well defined varieties. The more conspicuous
forms are (_a_) _commune_, with simple culms erect or ascending, and
leaves suberect, usually pale green--(_b_) _fasciculatum_, with
clustered leafy branches and short peduncles, a common autumnal
state--and (_c_) _gracile_, the culms lax, very slender and elongated,
with rather distant spreading leaves (usually bright green), and mostly
long-pedunculate panicles.

22. P. laxiflorum, Lam.! Closely resembling the last species, in its
several forms; distinguished by the larger acutish spikelets (nearly or
quite 1'' long).--Common.

Sec. 3. ECHINOCHLOA. _Spikelets imbricated-spiked on the branches of the
simple or compound raceme or panicle, usually rough with appressed stiff
hairs; lower palet of the sterile flower awl-pointed or awned._

P. CRUS-GALLI, L. (BARNYARD-GRASS.) Root annual; culms stout, branching
from the base (1--4 deg. high); leaves lanceolate (1/2' wide or more),
rough-margined, otherwise with the sheaths smooth; spikes alternate
(1--3' long), crowded in a dense panicle; glumes ovate, abruptly
pointed; glume of the neutral flower bearing a rough awn of variable
length.--Varies greatly; sometimes awnless or nearly so; sometimes
_long-awned_, especially in the var. HISPIDUM, a very large and coarse
form with the sheaths of the leaves very bristly.--Moist, chiefly
manured soil; the variety in ditches, especially of brackish water;
possibly indigenous. Aug.--Oct. (Nat. from Eu.)


6. SETARIA, Beauv. BRISTLY FOXTAIL GRASS. (Pl. 13)

Spikelets altogether as in Panicum proper, and awnless, but with the
short peduncles bearing below the joint of the spikelet solitary or
clustered bristles resembling awns (but not forming an involucre).
Inflorescence a dense spiked panicle, or apparently a cylindrical
spike.--Annuals, in cultivated or manured grounds, with linear or
lanceolate flat leaves. (Name from _seta_, a bristle.)

[*] _Bristles single or in pairs, roughened or barbed downward._

S. VERTICILLATA, Beauv. Spike cylindrical (2--3' long, pale green),
composed of apparently whorled short clusters; bristles short,
adhesive.--Near dwellings. (Adv. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Bristles in clusters, roughened or barbed upward._

S. GLAUCA, Beauv. (FOXTAIL. PIGEON-GRASS.) (Pl. 13, fig. 1, 2.) _Spike
cylindrical, dense, tawny yellow_ (2--4' long); _bristles 6--11 in a
cluster_, much longer than the spikelets; _perfect flower transversely
wrinkled_.--Very common, in stubble, etc. (Adv. from Eu.)

S. VIRIDIS, Beauv. (GREEN FOXTAIL. BOTTLE-GRASS.) _Spike nearly
cylindrical, more or less compound, green; bristles few_, longer than
the spikelets; _flower striate lengthwise and dotted_.--Cultivated
grounds. (Adv. from Eu.)

S. ITALICA, Kunth. _Spike compound_, interrupted at base, thick,
_nodding_ (6--9' long), _yellowish or purplish; bristles 2 or
3 in a cluster_, either much longer or else shorter than the
spikelets.--Cultivated under the name of MILLET, or HUNGARIAN or BENGAL
GRASS; rarely spontaneous. (Adv. from Eu.)


7. CENCHRUS, L. HEDGEHOG- or BUR-GRASS. (Pl. 14.)

Spikelets as in Panicum, awnless, but enclosed 1 to 5 together in a
globular and bristly or spiny involucre, which becomes coriaceous and
forms a deciduous hard and rigid bur; the involucres sessile in a
terminal spike. Styles united below. (An ancient Greek name of Setaria
Italica.)

1. C. tribuloides, L. Annual; culms branched and ascending (1 deg. high or
less); leaves flat; spike oblong, of 8--20 spherical heads; involucre
prickly all over with spreading and barbed short spines, more or less
downy, enclosing 2 or 3 spikelets.--Sandy soil, on river banks, etc.
Aug.--A vile weed.


8. AMPHICARPUM, Kunth. (Pl. 13.)

Spikelets jointed upon the pedicels, 1-flowered, oblong or ovoid, of two
kinds; one kind in a terminal panicle, deciduous from the joint without
fruit, although the flower is perfect; the other kind solitary at the
extremity of slender runner-like radical peduncles (more or less
sheathed toward the base), much larger than the others, perfect and
fertile, subterranean, fertilized in the bud. Glumes 3, nearly equal,
5-nerved in the panicle, many nerved in the fertile spikelets; palet a
little shorter; all becoming indurated and enclosing the very large
grain. Stamens 3 (small in the radical flowers). Stigmas plumose, deep
purple. (Name from [Greek: a)mphi/karpos], _doubly fruit-bearing_.)

1. A. Purshii, Kunth. Annual or biennial(?), erect, 1--4 deg. high; leaves
lanceolate, copious on the lower part of the culm, hispid, especially on
the sheaths; panicle strict, naked; grain ovoid or oblong (2--3'' long),
terete.--Moist sandy pine-barrens, N. J. to Fla. Sept.


9. LEERSIA, Swartz. WHITE GRASS. (Pl. 7.)

Flowers crowded in one-sided panicled spikes or racemes, perfect, but
those in the open panicles usually sterile by the abortion of the ovary,
those enclosed in the sheaths of the leaves close-fertilized in the bud
and prolific. Spikelets 1-flowered, flat, more or less imbricated over
each other, jointed upon the short pedicels. Glumes 2, chartaceous,
strongly flattened laterally or conduplicate, awnless, bristly-ciliate
on the keels, closed, nearly equal in length, but the lower much
broader, enclosing the flat grain. Palet none. Stamens 1--6. Stigmas
feathery, the hairs branching.--Perennial marsh grasses; the flat
leaves, sheaths, etc., rough upward, being clothed with very minute
hooked prickles. (Named after _John Daniel Leers_, a German botanist.)

[*] _Spikelets narrowly oblong, rather loosely crowded._

1. L. Virginica, Willd. (WHITE GRASS.) _Panicle simple; the spikelets
closely appressed_ on the slender branches, around which they are partly
curved (11/2'' long); stamens 2 (a third imperfect or wanting); glumes
sparingly ciliate (greenish-white).--Wet woods; Maine to Minn., and
southward. Aug.

2. L. oryzoides, Swartz. (RICE CUT-GRASS.) (Pl. 7, fig. 1--3.) _Panicle
diffusely branched; spikelets flat, rather spreading_ (21/2--3'' long);
_stamens_ 3; glumes strongly bristly-ciliate (whitish).--Very wet
places; Mass, to Minn., and southward; common. Aug. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Spikelets broadly oval, imbricately covering each other (21/2--3''
long)._

3. L. lenticularis, Michx. (CATCH-FLY GRASS.) Smoothish; panicle simple;
glumes very flat, strongly bristly-ciliate (said to close and catch
flies); stamens 2; otherwise like the preceding.--Low grounds, Va.,
Ill., and southward.


10. ZIZANIA, Gronov. WATER or INDIAN RICE. (Pl. 7.)

Flowers monoecious; the staminate and pistillate both in 1-flowered
spikelets in the same panicle. Glumes 2, subtended by a small
cartilaginous ring, herbaceo-membranaceous, convex, awnless in the
sterile, the lower one tipped with a straight awn in the fertile
spikelets. Palet none. Stamens 6. Stigmas pencil-form.--Large, often
reed-like water-grasses. Spikelets jointed upon the club-shaped
pedicels, very deciduous. (Adopted from [Greek: ziza/nion], the ancient
name of some wild grain.)

1. Z. aquatica, L. (INDIAN RICE. WATER OATS.) (Pl. 7, fig. 1--4.)
Annual; culms 3--9 deg. high; leaves flat, 2--3 deg. long, linear-lanceolate;
_lower branches of the_ ample pyramidal _panicle staminate, spreading;
the upper erect, pistillate; lower glume long-awned_, rough; styles
distinct; grain linear, slender, 6'' long.--Swampy borders of streams
and in shallow water; common, especially northwestward. Aug.

2. Z. miliacea, Michx. Perennial; panicle diffuse, ample, the _staminate
and pistillate flowers intermixed; awns short_; styles united; grain
ovate.--Penn. (?), Ohio, and southward. Aug.--Leaves involute.


11. TRIPSACUM, L. GAMA-GRASS. SESAME-GRASS. (Pl. 14.)

Spikelets monoecious, in jointed unilateral spikes, staminate above and
fertile below. Staminate spikelets in pairs, sessile at each triangular
joint of the narrow rhachis, both alike, 2-flowered, longer than the
joints; glumes 4, coriaceous, the lower (outer) one nerved, the second
boat-shaped, the upper with the palets very thin and membranaceous,
awnless; anthers opening by 2 pores at the apex. Pistillate spikelets
2-flowered (the lower flower neutral), single and deeply imbedded in
each oblong joint of the cartilaginous thickened rhachis, occupying a
boat-shaped recess which is closed by the polished and cartilaginous
ovate outer glume, the inner glume much thinner and pointed, the upper
with the palets very thin and scarious, pointless. Styles united;
stigmas very long (purple), hispid. Grain ovoid, free.--Culms stout and
tall, solid, from very thick creeping rootstocks. Leaves broad and flat.
Spikes axillary and terminal, separating spontaneously into joints at
maturity. (Name from [Greek: tri/bo], _to rub_, perhaps in allusion to
the polished fertile spike.)

1. T. dactyloides, L. Spikes (4--8' long) 2--3 together at the summit
(when their contiguous sides are more or less flattened), and also
solitary from some of the upper sheaths (when the fertile part is
cylindrical); in var. MONOSTACHYUM, the terminal spike also
solitary.--Moist soil, from Conn. to Penn. and Fla., near the coast, and
from Ill. southward. Aug.--Culm 4--7 deg. high; leaves like those of Indian
Corn. This is one of our largest and most remarkable Grasses; sometimes
used for fodder at the South.


12. ROTTBOELLIA, L. f. (Pl. 16.)

Spikelets in pairs at each joint of a terete slender spike, awnless; one
imperfect or rudimentary on a short and thick appressed pedicel; the
other sessile and imbedded in an excavation of the joint of the rhachis,
1-flowered or rarely with a second staminate flower. Glumes 4, obtuse,
the outer hard and cartilaginous, with a transverse depression next the
base, the inner one boat-shaped and membranaceous, the 2 upper thin and
delicate. Stamens 3. Styles 2.--Tall or coarse perennials, with rigid
stems, and single cartilaginous spikes terminating the stem and axillary
branches, chiefly subtropical. (Named for _Prof. C. F. Rottboell_, an
excellent Danish botanist, who wrote much upon Gramineae, Cyperaceae,
etc.)

1. R. rugosa, Nutt. Culm flattish, 2--4 deg. high; leaves linear; spikes
1--2' long, the lateral ones on short clustered branches in the axils,
often partly included in the sheaths of the leaves; sterile flower
neutral; lower glume transversely rugose.--Low pine-barrens, from
S. Del. (_W. M. Canby_) southward near the coast. Sept.--Oct.


13. ERIANTHUS, Michx. WOOLLY BEARD-GRASS. (Pl. 14.)

Spikelets spiked, in pairs upon each joint of the slender rhachis, one
sessile, the other pedicelled, both 1-flowered, alike. Glumes 4, the 2
lower nearly equal, one 4--5-nerved, the other many-nerved; the 2 upper
hyaline, one empty, the upper awned from the tip. Stamens 3. Grain
free.--Tall and stout reed-like perennials, with the spikes crowded in a
panicle, and clothed with long silky hairs, especially in a tuft around
the base of each spikelet (whence the name, from [Greek: e)/rion],
_wool_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_).

1. E. saccharoides, Michx. (Pl. 14, fig. 1, 2.) Culm (4--6 deg. high)
woolly-bearded at the joints; _panicle contracted; the silky hairs
longer than the spikelets_, shorter than the awn; stamens 2. (E.
alopecuroides, _Ell._)--Wet pine-barrens, from N. J. and Ill. southward;
rare. Sept., Oct.

2. E. brevibarbis, Michx. Culm (2--5 deg. high), somewhat bearded at the
upper joints; _panicle rather open_; silky hairs shorter than the
spikelets.--Low grounds, Va., and southward.


14. ANDROPOGON, Royen. BEARD-GRASS. (Pl. 14.)

Spikelets in pairs upon each joint of the slender rhachis, spiked or
racemed, one of them pedicelled and sterile (staminate, pistillate or
neutral), often a mere vestige, the other sessile, 1-flowered and
fertile; lower glume the larger, coriaceous and nerved, blunt, the
second carinate and acute, the 2 upper hyaline, the flowering glume
awned from the tip. Stamens 1--3. Grain free.--Coarse, mostly rigid
perennials, mostly in sterile or sandy soil; with lateral or terminal
spikes commonly clustered or digitate; the rhachis hairy or
plumose-bearded, and often the sterile or staminate flowers also (whence
the name, composed of [Greek: a)ne/r], _man_, and [Greek: po/gon],
_beard_).

[*] _Spikes digitate, thickish, short-bearded, the sterile spikelet
staminate; stamens 3._

1. A. furcatus, Muhl. (Pl. 14, fig. 1--3.) Tall, 3--4 deg. high, rigid, the
naked summit of the culm (and usually some lateral branches) terminated
by 2--5 rigid spikes; spikelets approximate, appressed; hairs at the
base of the fertile spikelet, on the rhachis and on the stout pedicel of
the awnless staminate spikelet short and rather sparse; awn of fertile
flower long and bent; leaves flat, roughish, the lower ones long. ("A.
provincialis, _Lam._")--Common in dry sterile soil. Aug.--Oct.

[*][*] _Spikes with slender often zigzag rhachis, silky-villous._

[+] _Single and scattered along the branches, with the silky hairs
shorter than the flowers; sterile spikelet conspicuous but mostly
neutral; the fertile triandrous._

2. A. scoparius, Michx. Culms slender (1--3 deg. high), with numerous
paniculate branches; lower sheaths and narrow leaves hairy; spikes
slender, scattered, mostly peduncled (1--2' long), very loose, often
purplish, silky with lax dull-white hairs; sterile spikelet awn-pointed
or awnless; the fertile about half the length of its twisted or bent
awn.--Dry ground. July--Sept.

3. A. maritimus, Chapm. Smooth and glaucous; culms ascending from
creeping rootstocks, 1--11/2 deg. high; leaves rather rigid, divaricate, their
compressed sheaths imbricated; panicle short; peduncles included within
the conspicuous bracts; rhachis and pedicels copiously ciliate with
spreading hairs; glumes larger, 3--4'' long.--Sandy sea-coast; Cape May,
and south to Fla.

[+][+] _In pairs or clustered; the copious soft-silky hairs much longer
than the flowers; sterile spikelet a small neutral rudiment (in n. 4 and
5), or altogether wanting on the very plumose-hairy pedicel; fertile
flower monandrous, its awn capillary; leaves narrow, the lower or their
sheaths often rather hairy._

4. A. argenteus, Ell. Smooth; culms rather slender (1--3 deg. high);
_spikes_ in pairs (rarely in fours) on short mostly exserted _and
loosely paniculate peduncles, densely flowered_ (1--2' long), _very
silky with long bright white hairs_. (A. argyraeus, _Schultes._)--Md. to
Va., near the coast, and southward.

5. A. Elliottii, Chapm. Closely resembling the last; sheaths and leaves
villous; upper nodes of the branches densely bearded.--Md. to Fla. and
Tex.

6. A. Virginicus, L. Culm flattish below, slender (2--3 deg. high)
_sparingly short-branched above_, sheaths smooth; _spikes 2 or 3
together in distant appressed clusters, shorter than their sheathing
bracts_, weak (1' long), the spikelets loose on the filiform rhachis,
the soft _hairs dull white_. (A. dissitiflorus, _Michx._ A. vaginatus,
_Ell._, a form with larger and inflated sheaths.)--Sandy soil, E. Mass.
to Va., Ill., and southward. Sept., Oct.

7. A. macrourus, Michx. Culm stout (2--3 deg. high), _bushy-branched at the
summit_, loaded with very numerous _spikes forming thick leafy
clusters_; sheaths rough, the uppermost hairy; flowers nearly as in the
preceding; the sterile spikelet of each pair wholly wanting, its pedicel
slender and very plumose.--Low and sandy grounds, N. Y. to Va., near the
coast, and southward.

8. A. laguroides, DC. Culms slender, tall, the elongated peduncle
bearing numerous sessile spikes in a spike-like panicle 2--4' long;
spikes slender, 1' long or more, very silky; spikelets glabrous, the
sterile a narrow convolute empty glume.--Central Kan. to Tex. and Mex.

[+][+][+] _Spikes digitate-clustered, very silky; sterile spikelet
larger than the fertile one._

9. A. Hallii, Hackel. Culm stout, 2--3 deg. high; lateral peduncles few,
scarcely exserted from the sheaths; spikes 2--5, 1--3' long, dense;
spikelets 3--4'' long.--Central Kan. to Dak., and westward.


15. CHRYSOPOGON, Trin. (Pl. 14.)

Spikelets in pairs on the ramifications of an open panicle (those at the
ends of the branches in threes), the lateral ones pedicellate, sterile
or often reduced merely to their pedicels; only the sessile middle or
terminal one fertile, its glumes coriaceous or indurated, sometimes
awnless; otherwise nearly as in Andropogon. Stamens 3. (Name composed of
[Greek: chryso/s], _gold_, and [Greek: po/gon], _beard_.)

1. C. nutans, Benth. (INDIAN GRASS. WOOD-GRASS.) Root perennial; culm
simple (3--5 deg. high), terete; leaves linear-lanceolate, glaucous; sheaths
smooth; panicle narrowly oblong, crowded or loose (6--12' long); the
perfect spikelets at length drooping (yellowish or russet-brown and
shining), clothed especially toward the base with fawn-colored hairs,
lanceolate, shorter than the twisted awn; sterile spikelets small and
imperfect, deciduous, or reduced to a mere plumose-hairy pedicel.
(Andropogon avenaceus, _Michx._ Sorghum nutans, _Gray_.)--Dry soil;
common, especially southward.


16. PHALARIS, L. CANARY-GRASS. (Pl. 13.)

Spikelets crowded in a clustered or spiked panicle, 1-flowered. Glumes
5, the third and fourth reduced to mere rudiments (a scale or a
pedicel), one on each side, at the base of the flowering glume and
palet, which are flattish, awnless and shining, shorter than the equal
boat-shaped and keeled persistent empty glumes, finally coriaceous or
cartilaginous, and closely enclosing the flattened free and smooth
grain. Stamens 3.--Leaves broad, mostly flat. (The ancient name, from
[Greek: phalo/s], _shining_, alluding to the shining seed.)

Sec. 1. PHALARIS proper. _Panicle very dense, spike-like; glumes
wing-keeled._

P. CANARIENSIS, L. (CANARY-GRASS.) Annual, 1--2 deg. high; spike oval; empty
glumes white with green veins, the rudimentary ones small lanceolate
scales.--Waste places and roadsides; rare. (Adv. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. DIGRAPHIS. _Panicle branched, the clusters open in anthesis; glumes
not winged on the back._

1. P. arundinacea, L. (REED C.) (Pl. 13, fig. 1, 2.) Perennial, 2--4 deg.
high; leaves flat (3--5'' wide); glumes open at flowering, 3-nerved,
thrice the length of the fertile flower; rudimentary glumes reduced to a
minute hairy scale or pedicel.--Wet grounds; common, especially
northward. June, July.--Var. PICTA, the leaves striped with white, is
the familiar RIBBON-GRASS of the gardens. (Eu.)


17. ANTHOXANTHUM, L. SWEET VERNAL-GRASS. (Pl. 13.)

Spikelets spiked-panicled, 1-flowered. Glumes 5, the third and fourth
empty, hairy, 2-lobed and awned on the hack, the flowering glume and
palet small, hyaline and obtuse; basal glumes persistent, very thin,
acute, keeled, the lower half as long as the upper. Squamulae none.
Stamens 2. Grain ovate, adherent. (Name compounded of [Greek: a)/nthos],
_flower_, and [Greek: a)/nthon], _of flowers_. _L._)

A. ODORATUM, L. Spikelets (brownish or tinged with green) spreading at
flowering-time; one middle glume bearing a bent awn from near its base,
the other short-awned below the tip.--Meadows, pastures, etc. Low
slender perennial; very sweet-scented in drying. May--July. (Nat. from
Eu.)


18. HIEROCHLOE, Gmelin. HOLY GRASS. (Pl. 13.)

Spikelets 3-flowered, open-panicled, the two lower (lateral) flowers
staminate only, 3-androus, sessile, the carinate glumes often awned on
the middle of the back or near the tip, the uppermost flower perfect,
short-pedicelled, scarcely as long as the others, 2-androus, awnless.
Basal glumes persistent, carinate, acute, somewhat 3-nerved, equalling
or exceeding the spikelet.--Perennials; leaves flat. (Name composed of
[Greek: i(ero/s], _sacred_, and [Greek: chlo/e], _grass_; these
sweet-scented grasses being strewn before the church-doors on saints'
days, in the North of Europe.)

1. H. borealis, Roem. & Schultes. (VANILLA or SENECA GRASS.) (Pl. 13,
fig. 1, 2.) Panicle somewhat one-sided, pyramidal (2--5' long);
peduncles smooth; staminate flowers with the glume mucronate or
bristle-pointed at or near the tip; rootstock creeping.--Moist meadows,
chiefly northward near the coast and along the Great Lakes. May.--Culm
1--2 deg. high, with short, lanceolate leaves. Spikelets chestnut-color; the
staminate flowers strongly hairy-fringed on the margins, and the fertile
one at the tip. (Eu.)

2. H. alpina, Roem. & Schultes. Panicle contracted (1--2' long); one of
the staminate flowers with its glume barely pointed or short-awned near
the tip, the other long-awned from below the middle; lowest leaves very
narrow.--Alpine mountain-tops, N. Eng., N. Y., and northward. July.
(Eu.)


19. ARISTIDA, L. TRIPLE-AWNED GRASS. (Pl. 8.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, not jointed on the pedicels. Outer glumes unequal,
often bristle-pointed; the flowering glume tipped with three awns; the
palet much smaller. Otherwise much as in Stipa.--Culms branching; leaves
narrow, often involute. Spikelets in simple or panicled racemes or
spikes. Grain linear. All grow in sterile, dry soil, and all ours have
the awns naked and persistent, and flower late. (Name from _arista_, a
beard or awn.)

[*] _Awns separate to the base, not jointed with the glume._

[+] _Awns very unequal; the much shorter or minute lateral ones erect,
the elongated middle one horizontal or turned downward; low (5--18'
high) and branching, mostly tufted annuals, and the spikelets in nearly
simple spikes._

[++] _Middle awn more or less coiled._

1. A. ramosissima, Engelm. Culms much branched; spikes loose, usually
exserted; lower glumes 6--10'' long, exceeding the upper, usually rather
strongly 3--5-nerved; middle awn 1' long, soon abruptly hooked-recurved,
the lateral ones 1--3'' long.--Dry prairies of Ill., Ky., and Mo.--Also
var. UNIARISTATA, Engelm., with the lateral awns wanting.

2. A. basiramea, Engelm. Spikes closer, mostly enclosed at base, at all
the lower nodes (even to the base of the culm) very short and sessile;
lower glumes 4--8'' long, mostly thin and 1-nerved or rather faintly
3-nerved; middle awn very slender, 6'' long, the lateral 2'' long.--Ill.
to Neb. and Minn.

3. A. dichotoma, Michx. (POVERTY GRASS.) Culms low, very slender, much
branched throughout, ascending; spikelets in narrow strict simple or
compound spikes; lower glumes nearly equal (3--4'' long), longer than
the flowering glume and fully equalling its minute lateral awns (or
unequal and shorter, in var. CURTISSII, Gray), the soon reflexed middle
awn about as long.--Dry, sandy or gravelly fields; common, Maine to
Ill., and southward.

[++][++] _Middle awn nearly straight (not coiled)._

4. A. gracilis, Ell. Culms slender, erect (6--18' high), naked above and
terminating in a slender raceme- or spike-like virgate panicle; lower
glumes 1-nerved, about the length of the upper, the exserted lateral
awns varying from one third to fully half the length of the horizontally
bent middle one: or in var. DEPAUPERATA, from one fifth to one third its
length.--Sandy soil, coast of Mass., and from Ill. southward.--Middle
awn 3--9'' long in the ordinary forms, but not rarely shorter, and very
variable often on the same plant.

[+][+] _Awns all diverging and alike, or the lateral ones moderately
shorter, rarely at all coiled._

[++] _Glumes equal or the middle one longer._

5. A. stricta, Michx. Culms (2--3 deg. high) densely tufted from a
_perennial_ root, bearing a (1 deg.) long _spiked panicle_; leaves
involute-thread-form, long, rigid, sometimes downy; awns about the
length of the glumes (6'') or the lateral one third shorter.--Va. and
southward.

6. A. oligantha, Michx. Culms (6--20' high) tufted from an _annual_
root, bearing a _loosely few-flowered raceme_; leaves short, somewhat
involute when dry; lower glume 3--5-nerved (nearly 1' long); _awns
capillary_, 11/2--3' long, much exceeding the slender spikelet.--Va. to
Ill., and common southwestward.

7. A. purpurea, Nutt. Perennial; culms (1 deg. high or less) densely tufted,
spreading; leaves revolute and filiform, short; panicle loose, of rather
few slender-pedicellate spikelets; lower glumes thin, 1-nerved, loose,
the outer about half the length of the inner, which is 8--10'' long;
awns 2--4'' long.--Minn. and Dak. to Tex.--Very variable.

[++][++] _Middle glume shorter than the lower; perennials,
simple-stemmed, 2--4 deg. high._

8. A. purpurascens, Poir. (Pl. 8.) _Glabrous_; leaves long, rather
involute; spikelets in a (10--18') long spiked panicle; lower glumes
1-nerved; _awns much longer than the spikelet_, the middle one about 1'
long.--Mass. to Mich., Minn., and southward; common.

9. A. lanata, Poir. Tall and stout; _leaves_ tardily involute, _rough_
above, rigid; _sheaths woolly_; panicle (1--2 deg. long) spike-like or more
compound and open; glumes 1-nerved, 6--8'' long; middle awn 1'
long.--Del. to Fla.

[*][*] _Awns united below into one, jointed with the apex of the glume;
root annual._

10. A. tuberculosa, Nutt. Culm branched below (6--18' high), tumid at
the joints; panicles rigid, loose, the branches in pairs, one of them
short and about 2-flowered, the other elongated and several-flowered;
lower glumes (1' long, including their slender-awned tips) longer than
the upper, which is tipped with the common stalk (about its own length)
of the 3 equal divergently-bent awns (11/2--2' long) twisting together at
the base.--Sandy soil, E. Mass. to N. J.; also Wisc., Minn., and
southward.


20. STIPA, L. FEATHER-GRASS. (Pl. 8.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, terete; the flower falling away at maturity (with
the conspicuous obconical bearded and often sharp-pointed callus) from
the membranaceous persistent lower glumes. Fertile glumes coriaceous,
cylindrical-involute and closely embracing the smaller palet and the
cylindrical grain, having a long and twisted or tortuous simple awn
jointed with its apex. Stamens mostly 3. Stigmas plumose.--Perennials,
with narrow involute leaves and a loose panicle. (Name from [Greek:
sty/pe], _tow_, in allusion to the flaxen appearance of the feathery
awns of the original species. In our species the awn is naked.)

[*] _Callus or base of the flower short and blunt; lower glumes
pointless._

1. S. Richardsonii, Link. Culm (11/2--2 deg. high) and leaves slender; panicle
loose (4--5' long), with slender few-flowered branches; lower glumes
nearly equal, oblong, acutish (21/2--4'' long), about equalling the
pubescent linear-oblong fertile one, which bears a tortuous awn 6--9''
long.--Pleasant Mountain, near Sebago Lake, Maine, Mt. Marcy, N. Y.,
north shore of L. Superior, Mont., and northward.

[*][*] _Callus pungently pointed, at maturity villous-bearded; flowering
glume slender and minutely bearded at the tip; empty glumes
taper-pointed._

2. S. avenacea, L. (BLACK OAT-GRASS.) (Pl. 8.) Culm slender (1--2 deg.
high); leaves almost bristle-form; _panicle open; fertile glume
blackish, nearly as long as the lower ones_ (about 4'' long); the awn
bent above, twisted below (2--3' long).--Dry woods, S. New Eng. to
Wisc., and southward.

3. S. spartea, Trin. (PORCUPINE GRASS.) Culm rather stout (11/2--3 deg. high);
_panicle contracted; fertile glume linear_, 3/4--1' long (including the
long callus), pubescent below, _shorter than the_ lanceolate slender
subulate pointed greenish _lower glumes_; the twisted strong awn (31/2--7'
long), pubescent below, rough above.--Plains and prairies, from Ill. and
N. Mich. northwestward.

4. S. viridula, Trin. Culms clustered, 1--3 deg. high or more; panicle
narrow and usually dense, 6--18' long; glumes very thin, 3--4'' long;
fertile glume usually somewhat silky, with a short callus; awn 1' long,
slender, glabrous or a little pubescent below.--W. Minn., Dak., and
southwestward.


21. ORYZOPSIS, Michx. MOUNTAIN RICE. (Pl. 8.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, nearly terete. Lower glumes herbaceous or
thin-membranaceous, several-nerved, nearly equal, commonly rather longer
than the oblong flower, which is deciduous at maturity, and with a very
short obtuse callus or scar-like base. Flowering glume coriaceous, at
length involute so as closely to enclose the equal palet and the oblong
grain; a simple untwisted and deciduous awn jointed on its apex. Stamens
3. Squamulae 2 or 3, conspicuous. Stigmas plumose.--Perennials, with
rigid leaves and a narrow raceme or panicle. Spikelets greenish, rather
large. (Name composed of [Greek: o)/ryza], _rice_, and [Greek: o)/psis],
_likeness_, from a fancied resemblance to that grain.)

[*] _Styles distinct, short; culm leafy to the summit; leaves broad and
flat._

1. O. melanocarpa, Muhl. Leaves lanceolate, taper-pointed; sheaths
bearded in the throat; panicle simple or sparingly branched; awn thrice
the length of the blackish glume (nearly 1' long).--Rocky woods, N. Eng.
to Penn., Minn., Mo., and westward. Aug.--Culm 2--3 deg. high.

[*][*] _Styles united below, slender; culms tufted, naked; leaves
concave or involute._

2. O. asperifolia, Michx. (Pl. 8, fig. 1, 2.) Culms (9--18' high), with
sheaths bearing a mere rudimentary blade, overtopped by the _long and
rigid linear leaf from the base_; very simple panicle or raceme
few-flowered; _awn 2--3 times the length of the rather hairy whitish
glume_.--Hillsides, etc., in rich woods; common, N. Eng. to Minn., and
northward. May.--Leaves without keels, rough-edged, pale beneath,
lasting through the winter. Squamulae lanceolate, almost as long as the
palet!

3. O. Canadensis, Torr. Culms slender (6--15' high), the lowest sheaths
leaf-bearing; _leaves involute-thread-shaped_; panicle contracted (1--2'
long), the branches usually in pairs; glume pubescent, whitish; _awn
short and very deciduous, or wanting_.--Rocky hills and dry plains,
Maine to W. New Eng., the mountains of Penn., Wisc., Minn., and
northward; rare. May.--Glumes 1--2'' long, sometimes purplish.


22. MILIUM, Tourn. MILLET-GRASS. (Pl. 13.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, diffusely panicled, not jointed with their
pedicels, consisting of 2 equal membranaceous convex and awnless
persistent glumes, with a coriaceous awnless flowering glume and narrow
palet. Stamens 3. Stigmas branched-plumose. Grain not grooved, enclosed
in its glume and palet, all deciduous together. (The ancient Latin name
of the Millet, which however belongs to a different genus, of uncertain
meaning.)

1. M. effusum, L. Smooth perennial, 3--6 deg. high; leaves broad and flat,
thin; panicle spreading (6--9' long); flower ovoid-oblong.--Cold damp
woods and mountain meadows, N. Eng. to Ill., and northward. June. (Eu.)


23. MUHLENBERGIA, Schreber. DROP-SEED G. (Pl. 8.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, in contracted or rarely in open panicles. Empty
glumes mostly acute or bristle-pointed, persistent, usually thin; the
lower rather smaller or minute. Flower very short-stalked or sessile,
the glume and palet usually minutely bearded at base, herbaceous,
deciduous with the enclosed grain, often equal, the glume 3-nerved,
mucronate or awned at the apex. Stamens 3. (Dedicated to the _Rev. Dr.
Henry Muhlenberg_, a distinguished American botanist of the early part
of this century.)

Sec. 1. MUHLENBERGIA proper. _Panicles contracted or glomerate, on
branching rigid culms from scaly creeping rootstocks; leaves short and
narrow._

[*] _Flowering glume barely mucronate or sharp-pointed._

1. M. sobolifera, Trin. Culms ascending (1--2 deg. high), rarely branching;
the _simple contracted panicle very slender_ or filiform; lower _glumes
barely pointed, almost equal, one third shorter than the flower_;
flowering glume abruptly short-mucronate, equalling the palet.--Open
rocky woods, Mass. to Mich., Minn., and southward. Aug.--Spikelets less
than 1'' long.

2. M. glomerata, Trin. Culms upright (1--3 deg. high), sparingly branched or
simple; _panicle_ (2--3' long) _oblong-linear, contracted into an
interrupted glomerate spike_, long-peduncled, the branches sessile;
_glumes awned_, nearly equal, and (with the bristle-like awn) about
twice the length of the unequal very acute flowering glume and
palet.--Bogs and wet rocks, common, especially northward. Aug.--Var.
RAMOSA, Vasey. A stout strict much-branched leafy form, the lower glumes
but little longer than the flower. Ill. to Dak.

3. M. Mexicana, Trin. Culms ascending, much branched (2--3 deg. high);
_panicles_ lateral and terminal, often included at the base,
_contracted, the branches densely spiked-clustered_, linear (green and
purplish); lower _glumes awnless, sharp-pointed_, unequal, the upper
about the length of the very acute flowering one.--Low grounds; common.
Aug. Varies with more slender panicles.

[*][*] _Flowering glume bristle-awned from the tip; flowers
short-pedicelled._

[+] _Lower glumes long and bristle-pointed._

4. M. sylvatica, Torr. & Gray. (Pl. 8, fig. 1, 2.) Culms ascending, much
branched and diffusely spreading (2--4 deg. long); contracted _panicles
densely many-flowered; lower glumes almost equal, bristle-pointed,
nearly as long as the flowering one_, which bears an awn twice or thrice
the length of the spikelet.--Low or rocky woods; common. Aug., Sept.

5. M. ambigua, Torr. Culms ascending, clustered and branching, 1 deg. high;
panicles contracted, densely many-flowered; _spikelet 2-flowered_, the
upper flower like the lower and perfect, or more frequently reduced to a
mere awn at the base of the lower flower; lower glumes nearly equal,
long-pointed; _flowering glume villous_, as long as the lower and
equalling the palet, its awn nearly twice longer.--Minn. (shore of
Elysian Lake, Waseca Co., _Geyer_).--A remarkable species, approaching
Brachyelytrum in the structure of the spikelet, but with wholly the
habit of Muhlenbergia.

[+][+] _Lower glumes short or minute, not or scarcely pointed._

6. M. Willdenovii, Trin. Culms upright (3 deg. high), slender, simple or
sparingly branched; contracted _panicle slender, loosely flowered; lower
glumes slightly unequal, short-pointed, half the length of the flowering
one_, which bears an awn 3--4 times the length of the spikelet.--Rocky
woods; rather common. Aug.

7. M. diffusa, Schreber. (DROP-SEED. NIMBLE WILL.) (Pl. 8, fig. 3--5.)
Culms diffusely much branched (8--18' high); contracted _panicles
slender_, rather loosely many-flowered, terminal and lateral; _empty
glumes extremely minute, the lower obsolete_, the upper truncate; awn
once or twice longer than the flowering glume.--Dry hills and woods,
from S. New Eng. to Mich., Iowa, and southward. Aug., Sept.--Spikelets
only 1'' long.

Sec. 2. TRICHOCHLOA. _Panicle very loose and open, the long branches and
pedicels capillary; leaves narrow, often convolute-bristle-form._

8. M. capillaris, Kunth. (HAIR-GRASS.) Culm simple, upright (2 deg. high)
from a fibrous root; panicle capillary, expanding (6--20' long, purple);
empty glumes unequal, the lower mostly pointless, the upper more or less
bristle-pointed, one third or half the length of the long-awned
flowering glume.--Sandy soil, W. New Eng. to N. J., Ky., Mo., and
southward. Sept.--Pedicels 1--2' long, scarcely thicker than the awns,
which are about 1' long.


24. BRACHYELYTRUM, Beauv. (Pl. 8.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, with a conspicuous filiform pedicel of an abortive
second flower about half its length, nearly terete, few, in a simple
appressed racemed panicle. Lower glumes unequal, persistent, usually
minute, or the lower one almost obsolete. Flowering glume and palet
chartaceo-herbaceous, involute, enclosing the linear-oblong grain,
somewhat equal, rough with scattered short bristles, the first 5-nerved,
extended into a long straight awn, the palet 2-pointed; the awn-like
sterile pedicel partly lodged in the groove on its back. Stamens 2;
anthers and stigmas very long.--Perennial, with simple culms (1--3 deg.
high) from creeping rootstocks, downy sheaths, broad and flat lanceolate
pointed leaves, and spikelets 1/2' long without the awn. (Name composed of
[Greek: brachy/s], _short_, and [Greek: e)/lytron], _husk_, from the
minute glumes.)

1. B. aristatum, Beauv. Rocky woods; common. June.--Var. ENGELMANNI,
Gray, is a western form, with the second glume awn-pointed, nearly half
the length of the flowering one.


25. HELEOCHLOA, Host. (Pl. 7.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, crowded in a dense spike or spike-like panicle.
Lower glumes persistent, membranaceous, acute, ciliate-carinate,
awnless; flowering glume similar, a little longer, and a little
exceeding the palet. Stamens 3.--Low cespitose annuals; spike often
scarcely exserted from the upper sheath. (Name from [Greek: e(/los], _a
meadow_, and [Greek: chlo/a], _grass_.)

H. SCHOENOIDES, Host. Usually nearly prostrate and tufted; leaves rather
rigid, tapering to a sharp point; spike oblong, thick, 7--20'' long.
(Crypsis schoenoides, _Lam._)--Waste places, N. J. to Del. (Nat. from
Eu.)


26. PHLEUM, L. CAT'S-TAIL GRASS. (Pl. 7.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, in a very dense cylindrical spike-like panicle.
Lower glumes persistent, membranaceous, folded-carinate, subtruncate,
mucronate or short-awned; flowering glume hyaline, shorter, truncate.
Stamens 3. Styles distinct.--Perennials. (From [Greek: phle/os], a Greek
name for a kind of reed.)

P. PRATENSE, L. (TIMOTHY. HERD'S-GRASS in New Eng. and N. Y.) Tall;
_spike long-cylindrical_; lower glumes ciliate on the back, tipped with
_a short bristle_.--Meadows, commonly cultivated for hay. (Nat. from
Eu.)

1. P. alpinum, L. Low; _spike ovate-oblong_; lower glumes strongly
ciliate on the back, tipped with a rough _awn about their own
length_.--Alpine tops of the White Mountains, N. H., and high northward.
(Eu.)


27. ALOPECURUS, L. FOXTAIL GRASS. (Pl. 7.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, jointed on the pedicel. Lower glumes boat-shaped,
strongly compressed and keeled, nearly equal, united at base, equalling
or exceeding the flowering glume, which is awned on the back below the
middle; palet mostly wanting! Stamens 3. Styles mostly united. Stigmas
long and feathered.--Clusters contracted into a cylindrical and soft
dense spike; perennial. (Name from [Greek: a)lo/pex], _fox_, and
[Greek: ou)ra/], _tail_, from the shape of the spike.)

A. PRATENSIS, L. (MEADOW FOXTAIL.) Culm upright, smooth (2 deg. high); the
upper leaf much shorter than its inflated sheath; spike stout, 11/2--21/2'
long; _flowering glume equalling the acute lower glumes; awn exserted
more than half its length, twisted_.--Meadows and pastures, eastward.
May. (Nat. from Eu.)

A. GENICULATUS, L. (FLOATING F.) (Pl. 7, fig. 1--4.) Culm ascending,
often bent at the lower joints; upper leaf as long as its sheath; spike
slender, 1--2' long; _flowering glume rather shorter than the obtuse
lower glumes, the awn from near its base and projecting front half to
twice its length beyond it_.--Moist meadows, eastward. June--Aug. (Nat.
from Eu.)

Var. aristulatus, Torr. The awn very slender and scarcely exserted. (A.
aristulatus, _Michx._)--In water and wet places; common. June--Aug.


28. SPOROBOLUS, R. Br. DROP-SEED GRASS. RUSH-GRASS. (Pl. 7.)

Spikelets small, 1- (rarely 2-) flowered, in an open or contracted or
spiked panicle. Lower glumes persistent, 1--3-nerved, not awned or
pointed, the lower smaller; flowering glume of the same texture as the
lower ones (membranaceo-chartaceous) and usually longer than they,
naked, awnless and mostly pointless, 1-nerved (rarely somewhat
3-nerved); palet similar, 2-nerved. Stamens chiefly 3. Stigmas simply
feathery. Grain globular to oblong or cylindrical, deciduous, often very
thin, containing the loose seed.--Culms wiry or rigid. Leaves involute,
the throat usually bearded, and sheaths often enclosing the panicles.
(Name from [Greek: spora/], _seed_, and [Greek: ba/llo], _to cast
forth_.)

[*] _Panicle contracted, often simple; grain oval or oblong; perennial,
except n. 2._

1. S. asper, Kunth. Culms tufted (2--4 deg. high); lowest leaves very long,
rigid, rough on the edges, tapering to a long involute and thread-like
point, the upper short, involute; sheaths partly or at first wholly
enclosing the contracted panicle; _flower much longer than the unequal
lower glumes_; grain oval or oblong. (Vilfa aspera, _Beauv._)--Sandy
fields and dry hills, especially southward. Sept.--Spikelets 2--3''
long. Flowering glume and palet rough above, smooth or hairy below, the
palet tapering upward, acute, and one half to twice longer than the
glume, or else obtuse and equalled or even considerably exceeded by the
glume!

2. S. vaginaeflorus, Vasey. (Pl. 7, fig. 4, 5.) Culms slender (6--12'
high), ascending; leaves involute-awl-shaped (1--4' long); panicles
simple and spiked, the lateral and often the terminal concealed in the
sheaths; _flowering glume and palet somewhat equal, acute, about the
length of the nearly equal lower glumes_, only {1/3} longer than the
oval grain. (Vilfa vaginaeflora, _Torr._)--Barren and sandy dry fields;
common, especially southward. Sept.

3. S. cuspidatus, Torr. Erect culms and appressed leaves more slender
than in the preceding; _panicle exserted_, very simple and narrow;
spikelets smaller, the lower _glumes acuminate_, little shorter than the
cuspidate upper one. (Vilfa cuspidata, _Torr._)--Maine (on the St.
John's River, _G. L. Goodale_); also Iowa, Minn., and common westward.

4. S. depauperatus, Vasey. Resembling n. 3, but the culms decumbent at
base and matted, the leaves short and usually widely spreading, and the
lower glumes barely acute, not half the length of the upper one.--W.
Minn. to Kan., and southwestward.

5. S. Virginicus, Kunth. _Culms_ tufted, slender (5--12' long), often
procumbent, _branched_; leaves convolute, rigid; palets rather shorter
than the nearly equal acute glumes. (Vilfa Virginica, _Beauv._)--Sandy
seashore, Virginia (_Clayton_) and southward.--Spikelets much smaller
and more numerous than in the others.

6. S. minor, Vasey. Culms tufted, very slender, geniculate and
ascending, simple, 1 deg. high; leaves short and narrow; peduncles little
exserted from the sheaths; spikelets (11/2--2'' long) in a very narrow
simple compressed panicle (1--2' long), not crowded; glumes and palet
nearly equal, acute or somewhat acuminate.--Va. to N. C., Tenn. and Tex.

S. INDICUS, R. Br. Culms stout, erect, 2--3 deg. high; leaves elongated,
attenuate; panicle very narrow, 6--18' long, the densely crowded
spikelets 1/2'' long.--On ballast, and naturalized southward. (From Trop.
Am.)

[*][*] _Panicle pyramidal, open; glumes very unequal; grain globose,
utricular; perennials._

7. S. junceus, Kunth. _Leaves involute_, narrow, rigid, the lowest
elongated; culm (1--2 deg. high) naked above, bearing a narrow loose
panicle; empty _glumes ovate, rather obtuse_, the lower one half as long
as, _the upper equalling, the nearly equal flowering glume and
palet_.--Dry soil, Penn. to Wisc. and Minn., and (chiefly) south to Fla.
Aug.--Spikelets 1--2'' long, shining.

8. S. heterolepis, Gray. _Leaves involute-thread-form_, rigid, the
lowest as long as the culm (1--2 deg.) which is naked above; panicle very
loose; empty _glumes very unequal; the lower awl-shaped_ (or
bristle-pointed from a broad base) and somewhat shorter, _the upper
ovate-oblong and taper-pointed and longer, than the equal flowering
glume and palet_.--Dry soil, Conn. and N. Y. to Minn., Neb., and Mo.
Aug.--Plant exhaling an unpleasant scent (_Sullivant_), stouter than the
last, the spikelets thrice larger. Utricle 1'' in diameter, shining,
thick and coriaceous!

9. S. cryptandrus, Gray. (Pl. 7, fig. 1--3.) Culm 2--3 deg. high; _leaves
flat_, pale (2'' wide); the pyramidal lead-colored _panicle bursting
from the upper sheath_ which usually encloses its base, its spreading
branches hairy in the axils; spikelets 1'' long; _upper empty glume
lanceolate, rather acute, twice the length of the lower one_, as long as
the nearly equal flowering glume and palet; sheaths strongly bearded at
the throat.--Sandy shores, coast of New Eng. and of the Great Lakes,
Minn. to Kan., and westward. Aug., Sept.

10. S. airoides, Torr. Culm tufted, often stout, erect, 1/2--3 deg. high;
leaves strongly revolute and attenuate, rather rigid; panicle open and
diffuse, broadly pyramidal, glabrous; spikelets solitary on slender
pedicels, 1'' long; lower glumes unequal, rather obtuse.--Neb. to Tex.,
and westward.

S. ASPERIFOLUS, Thurb., a similar but smaller species, with thinner and
shorter leaves very rough on the margin, the inflorescence scabrous, and
spikelets smaller, with the glumes nearly equal, is very common
westward, and probably occurs within our limits--as also S. CONFUSUS,
Vasey (S. ramulosus of authors, not _Kunth_), a low slender annual, with
very short culms and a delicate diffuse panicle, the very small
spikelets (1/2'' long) on filiform-clavate pedicels.

[*][*][*] _Empty glumes almost equal; panicle racemose-elongated, open,
the pedicels capillary; sheaths naked at the throat; spikelets not
unfrequently two-flowered; perennial._

11. S. compressus, Kunth. Very smooth, _leafy to the top; culms tufted,
stout, very flat_; sheaths flattened, much longer than the internodes;
_leaves erect_, narrow, conduplicate-channelled; empty glumes acutish,
about one third shorter than the obtuse flowering one.--Bogs, on Long
Island and in the pine-barrens of N. J. Sept.--Forming strong tussocks,
1--2 deg. high. Panicle 8--12' long; spikelets 1'' long, purplish.

12. S. serotinus, Gray. Smooth; _culms very slender, flattish_ (8--15'
high), _few-leaved_; leaves very slender, channelled; _panicle soon much
exserted_, the diffuse capillary branches scattered; glumes ovate,
obtuse, about half the length of the flower.--Sandy wet places, Maine to
N. J. and Mich. Sept.--A very delicate grass; the spikelets half a line
long.


29. AGROSTIS, L. BENT-GRASS. (Pl. 7.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, in an open panicle. Empty glumes somewhat equal,
or the lower rather longer, usually longer than the flowering one,
pointless. Flowering glume and palet very thin, pointless, naked; the
first 3--5-nerved, frequently awned on the back; the palet often minute
or none. Stamens chiefly 3. Grain (caryopsis) free.--Culms usually
tufted, slender; root commonly perennial. (Name from [Greek: a)gro/s],
_a field_, the place of growth.)

Sec. 1. AGROSTIS proper. _Palet manifest, but shorter than the glume._

A. ALBA, L. (FIORIN or WHITE BENT-GRASS.) Rootstocks creeping or
stoloniferous; culms 1--2 deg. high, often decumbent at base; leaves short,
flat, the ligule long and acute; panicle contracted after flowering,
greenish, purplish or brownish, the branches slightly rough; flowering
glume nearly equalling the empty ones, 3-nerved, rarely short-awned, the
palet about half as long.--Meadows and fields, a valuable grass;
naturalized from Eu. and cultivated, and perhaps native north and
westward.

Var. VULGARIS, Thurb. (RED TOP. HERD'S-GRASS of Penn., etc.) (Pl. 7,
fig. 1, 2.) Panicle more or less spreading after flowering; ligule short
and truncate. (A. vulgaris, _With._)--Low meadows and pastures; nat.
from Eu. and cultivated, also perhaps indigenous.

1. A. arachnoides, Ell. Culms (1 deg. high) and leaves very slender; panicle
open, weak and drooping; glumes nearly equal, roughish on the keel and
margins, the flowering glume shorter, with 2 minute bristles at the
truncate apex and a long exceedingly delicate awn on the back above the
middle; palet minute.--Mo. to Ky., Tenn., and S. Car.

2. A. exarata, Trin. Culms erect, 1--2 deg. high; leaves mostly erect;
panicle narrow, crowded, greenish, the rays mostly flower-bearing to the
base; spikelets 11/2--2'' long; glumes nearly equal, acute, the flowering
ones shorter, sometimes awned above the middle.--Wisc. (_Vasey_) to
Sask., and far westward.

Sec. 2. TRICHODIUM. _Palet abortive, minute, or none._

3. A. elata, Trin. _Culms firm or stout_ (2--3 deg. high); leaves flat
(1--2'' wide); upper ligules elongated (2--3'' long); _spikelets crowded
on the branches of the spreading panicle above the middle_ (11/2'' long);
flowering glume awnless, slightly shorter than the rather unequal lower
ones; the palet wanting.--Swamps, N. J. and southward. Oct.

4. A. perennans, Tuckerm. (THIN-GRASS.) _Culms slender_, erect from a
decumbent base (1--2 deg. high); leaves flat (the upper 4--6' long, 1--2''
wide); _panicle at length diffusely spreading, pale green; the branches
short, divided and flower-bearing from or below the middle; flowering
glume awnless_ (rarely short-awned), shorter than the unequal lower
ones; the palet minute or obsolete.--Damp shaded places. July,
Aug.--Spikelets, etc., as in n. 5, into which it seems to vary.

5. A. scabra, Willd. (HAIR-GRASS.) (Pl. 7, fig. 3.) _Culms very
slender_, erect (1--2 deg. high); leaves short and narrow, the lower soon
involute (the upper 1--3' long, less than 1'' wide); _panicle very loose
and divergent, purplish, the long capillary branches flower-bearing at
and near the apex; flowering glume awnless or occasionally short-awned_
on the back, shorter than the rather unequal very acute empty ones; the
palet minute or obsolete; root biennial?--Exsiccated places; common.
June--Aug.--Remarkable for the long and divergent capillary branches of
the extremely loose panicle; these are whorled, rough with very minute
bristles (under a lens), as also the keel of the glumes. Spikelets 1''
long. A dwarf mountain form occurs, growing in tufts in hollows of
rocks, etc.--A variety (?) from about the White Mountains, etc. (var.
montana, _Tuckerm_.), has a more or less exserted awn.

6. A. canina, L. (BROWN BENT-GRASS.) Culms 8'--2 deg. high; root-leaves
involute-bristle-form, those of the culm flat and broader; panicle
loose; lower glumes slightly unequal, ovate-lanceolate, very acute, the
flowering one _exsertly awned on the back_ at or below the middle;
spikelets brownish or purplish, rarely pale or greenish (1--11/2''
long).--Meadows, sparingly naturalized eastward. A mountain form with
shorter and more spreading panicle (A. Pickeringii & A. concinna,
_Tuckerm_., A. canina, var. alpina, _Oakes_, & Ed. 2, and essentially A.
rubra, _L_. ex _Wahl_., and A. borealis, _Hartm._) is indigenous on
mountain-tops, Maine to N. Y.; also an ampler form in the Alleghanies of
Penn. and southward (A. rupestris, _Chapman_, etc.). July--Aug. (Eu.)


30. POLYPOGON, Desf. BEARD-GRASS. (Pl. 8.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, in a contracted, mostly spike-like panicle. Empty
glumes nearly equal, long-awned, much longer than the membranaceous
flowering one which is commonly short-awned below the apex. Stamens 3.
Grain free. (Name composed of [Greek: poly/], _much_, and [Greek:
pogo/n], _beard_.)

P. MONSPELIENSIS, Desf. Panicle interrupted; lower glumes oblong, the
awn from a notch at the summit, the flowering one also awned; root
annual.--Isles of Shoals (_Robbins_), ballast heaps, and southward.
(Nat. from Eu.)


31. CINNA, L. WOOD REED-GRASS. (Pl. 8.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, much flattened, crowded in an open flaccid
panicle. Empty glumes persistent, lanceolate, acute, strongly keeled,
rough-serrulate on the keel; the lower rather smaller, the upper a
little exceeding the flower, which is manifestly stalked, smooth and
naked; flowering glume much like the lower, longer than the palet,
usually short awned or mucronate on the back below the pointless apex.
Stamen one, opposite the 1-nerved palet! Grain linear-oblong, free.--A
perennial, rather sweet-scented grass, with simple and upright somewhat
reed-like culms (2--7 deg. high), bearing an ample compound terminal
panicle, its branches in fours or fives; the broadly linear-lanceolate
flat leaves (4--6'' wide) with conspicuous ligules. Spikelets green,
often purplish-tinged. (From [Greek: ki/nna], a name in Dioscorides for
a kind of grass.)

1. C. arundinacea, L. (Pl. 8, fig. 1, 2.) Panicle 6--15' long, rather
dense, the branches and pedicels spreading in flower, afterward erect;
spikelets 21/2--3'' long.; awn of the glume either obsolete or
manifest.--Moist woods and shaded swamps; rather common. July, Aug.

2. C. pendula, Trin. Panicle loose and more slender, the branches nearly
capillary and drooping in flower; pedicels very rough; glumes thinner,
the lower less unequal; spikelets 11/2--2'' long; palet obtuse. (C.
arundinacea, var. pendula, _Gray_.)--Deep damp woods, N. New Eng. to
Lake Superior and northward, and on mountains southward. (Eu.)


32. APERA, Adans.

With the characters of Agrostis; distinguished by the presence of a
second rudimentary flower in the form of a short bristle, and by the
2-toothed palet little shorter than the flowering bifid glume, which is
dorsally awned.--A rather late annual, with narrow flat leaves, and a
contracted or spreading panicle with numerous filiform branches and very
numerous small shining spikelets. (Name from [Greek: a)/peros],
_unmaimed_; application obscure.)

A. SPICA-VENTI, Beauv. Spikelets 1/2--1'' long.--Sparingly naturalized.
(Nat. from Eu.)


33. CALAMAGROSTIS, Adans. REED BENT-G. (Pl. 8.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, and (in our species) often with a pedicel or
rudiment of a second abortive flower (rarely 2-flowered), in an open or
spiked panicle. Lower glumes mostly membranaceous, keeled or
boat-shaped, often acute, commonly nearly equal, and exceeding the
flower, which bears at the base copious white bristly hairs; flowering
glume thin, bearing a slender awn on the back or below the tip, or
sometimes awnless; the palet mostly shorter. Stamens 3. Grain
free.--Perennials, with running rootstocks, and mostly tall and simple
rigid culms. (Name compounded of [Greek: ka/lamos], _a reed_, and
[Greek: a)gro/stis], _a grass_.)

Sec. 1. DEYEUXIA. _Rudiment of a second flower present in the form of a
plumose or hairy small pedicel behind the palet (very rarely more
developed and having a glume or even stamens); glumes membranaceous, or
the flowering one thin and delicate, the latter 3--5-nerved and
awn-bearing._

[*] _Panicle loose and open, even after flowering; the mostly
purple-tinged or lead-colored strigose-scabrous glumes not closing in
fruit; copious hairs of the rhachis about equalling the flowering glume,
not surpassed by those of the rudiment; awn delicate, straight._

1. C. Canadensis, Beauv. (BLUE-JOINT GRASS.) (Pl. 8, fig. 1, 2.) Culm
tall (3--5 deg. high); leaves flat when fresh, glaucous; panicle oblong;
_glumes ovate-lanceolate_, acute, 11/4--11/2'' long; _awn_ from near the
middle of the upper glume, not exceeding and _scarcely stouter than the
basal hairs_. (Deyeuxia Canadensis, _Hook. f._)--Wet grounds; common
northward. July.

2. C. Langsdorffii, Trin. Spikelets larger, 21/2--3'' long; _glumes
lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate and gradually taper-pointed_; awn
stouter; otherwise like the preceding, (Deyeuxia Langsdorffii,
_Kunth._)--Mountains of N. New Eng., L. Superior, and northward. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Panicle strict, its short branches appressed or erect after
flowering, and the glumes mostly closed; flowering glume less delicate,
roughish, sometimes of as firm texture as the lower; awn stouter._

[+] _Leaves narrow, inclined to be involute; awn straight._

3. C. stricta, Trin. Panicle glomerate and lobed, strict, 2--4' long;
glumes 11/2--2'' long, ovate-oblong, not acuminate; hairs scarcely or
little shorter than the flower, and as long as those of the rudiment;
awn from the middle of the thin flowering glume or lower, and barely
exceeding it. (Deyeuxia neglecta, _Kunth_?)--Mountains of N. New Eng.,
Lake Superior, and north and westward. (Eu.)

4. C. Lapponica, Trin. Culm and rootstocks stouter than in C. stricta;
the narrow panicle less dense, and purplish spikelets larger; glumes
fully 2'' long, tapering to a point; awn from much below the middle of
the glume, stout. (Deyeuxia Lapponica, _Kunth._)--Isle Royale, Lake
Superior, to Lab., north and westward. Aug. (Eu.)

[+][+] _Leaves broader, flat; awn stouter, bent, divergent, or twisted
when dry._

5. C. confinis, Nutt. Tall; _panicle_ elongated (4--6'), its rather
slender branches _spreading at flowering-time_, afterward appressed;
glumes lance-oblong, very acute, 2'' long, pale; _hairs of the flower
copious, equal_, slightly or one third shorter than the thin flowering
glume and than those of the rudiment; awn borne much below the middle of
the glume, somewhat surpassing it; grain glabrous. (Deyeuxia confinis,
_Kunth._)--Swamps, N. and W. New York (especially Penn Yan, _Sartwell_)
and Penn.; Minn., and westward. July.

6. C. Nuttalliana, Steud. Culm stout (3--5 deg. high); _panicle contracted
and spike-like_; glumes lanceolate and tapering into slender awl-shaped
tips, 3'' long; _hairs on the lower side scanty and barely half the
length of the firm and keeled flowering glume_, on the other side longer
and equalling the copious tuft on the summit of the rudiment; awn borne
half-way between the middle and the tapering tip of the glume, stout,
not twisted; grain bearded at the top. (Deyeuxia Nuttalliana,
_Vasey._)--Moist grounds, E. New Eng. to Penn., Va., and southward. Aug.

7. C. Porteri, Gray. Culm slender (2--4 deg. high); a woolly-bearded ring at
the junction of the broadly linear leaves with the sheath; _panicle long
and narrow_, with the branches appressed; glumes lanceolate, acute,
pale, 2--21/2'' long; _hairs of the flower and of the short rudiment
scanty_, and both reaching about to the middle of the flower behind the
palet, but _very short or none at the base of the firm-membranaceous
flowering glume_, which bears near its base _a twisted awn_ of its own
length. (Deyeuxia Porteri, _Vasey_.)--Dry woods, Pulpit Rocks and
vicinity, Huntingdon Co., Penn., _Prof. T. C. Porter_.

8. C. Pickeringii, Gray. Culm 1--11/2 deg. high; _leaves short; panicle
pyramidal_, purplish; glumes ovate-oblong, bluntish or bluntly pointed
(11/2--2'' long); _hairs both of the flower and of the rudiment very
short_ and scanty, one fourth or fifth the length of the flower, none
behind the obtuse flowering glume, which bears between its middle and
base a short stout (straight or bent, not twisted) awn. (Deyeuxia
Pickeringii, _Vasey_.)--White Mts., in the alpine region of Mt.
Washington, and a more luxuriant form with smaller spikelets at Echo
Lake, Franconia; Andover, Mass. (_J. Robinson_); Cape Breton.

Sec. 2. CALAMOVILFA. _Rudiment of second flower wanting; glumes and palet
rather chartaceous, compressed-keeled; flowering glume 1-nerved,
entirely awnless; palet strongly 2-keeled; panicle at length open and
loose._

9. C. brevipilis, Gray. Branches of the diffuse pyramidal panicle
capillary (purplish); empty _glumes orate_, mucronate; the upper
slightly, the lower nearly one half shorter than the _flowering glume
and palet_, which are _more than twice the length of the hairs and
bristly-bearded along the keels_. (Ammophila brevipilis,
_Benth._)--Sandy swamps, pine-barrens of N. J.; rare. Sept.--Culm 2--4 deg.
high; leaves nearly flat; spikelets 2'' long.

10. C. longifolia, Hook. Culm (1--4 deg. high) stout, from thick running
rootstocks; _leaves rigid, elongated, involute_ above and tapering into
a long thread-like point; panicle at first close, becoming open and
pyramidal, the branches smooth; _glumes lanceolate_, the upper as long
as the flower, the lower 1/4 shorter; _the copious hairs more than half
the length of the naked flower_. (Ammophila longifolia,
_Benth._)--Sands, along the upper Great Lakes, from Ill. and Mich. to
Dak., Kan., and westward. Aug.--Spikelets 21/2--3'' long.


34. AMMOPHILA, Host. (Pl. 16.)

Spikelets large, in a contracted spike-like panicle, 1-flowered, with a
pedicel-like rudiment of a second flower (plumose above), the flower
hairy-tufted at base. Empty glumes scarious-chartaceous, lanceolate,
compressed-keeled, nearly equal; flowering glume and palet similar, a
little shorter, the glume 5-nerved, slightly mucronate or obscurely
awned near the tip, the palet 2-keeled.--A coarse perennial maritime
species, with running rootstocks. (Name from [Greek: a)/mmos], _sand_,
and [Greek: phile/o], _to love_.)

1. A. arundinacea, Host. (SEA SAND-REED.) Culm stout and rigid (2--3 deg.
high) from firm running rootstocks; leaves long, soon involute; panicle
contracted into a dense cylindrical spike (5--9' long); spikelets 5--6''
long; hairs only one third of the length of the flower. (Calamagrostis
arenaria, _Roth_.)--Sandy beaches, N. J. to Maine and northward, and on
the Great Lakes. Aug. (Eu.)


35. ARRHENATHERUM, Beauv. OAT-GRASS. (Pl. 12.)

Spikelets open-panicled, 2-flowered, with the rudiment of a third
flower; the middle flower perfect, its glume barely bristle-pointed from
near the tip; the lowest flower staminate only, bearing a long bent awn
below the middle of the back (whence the name, from [Greek: a)/r)r(en],
_masculine_, and [Greek: a)the/r], _awn_);--otherwise as in Avena, of
which it is only a peculiar modification.

A. AVENACEUM, Beauv. Root perennial; culm 2--4 deg. high; leaves broad,
flat; panicle elongated; glumes scarious, very unequal.--Meadows and
lots; absurdly called _Grass of the Andes_. May--July. (Nat from Eu.)


36. HOLCUS, L. (partly). MEADOW SOFT-GRASS. (Pl. 12.)

Spikelets crowded in an open panicle, 2-flowered; the boat-shaped
membranaceous glumes enclosing and much exceeding the remotish flowers.
Lower flower perfect, its papery or thin-coriaceous glume awnless and
pointless; the upper flower staminate, otherwise similar, but bearing a
stout bent awn below the apex. Stamens 3. Styles plumose to the base.
Grain free. (A name in Pliny for a kind of grass, from [Greek: o(lko/s],
_attractive_, of obscure application.)

H. LANATUS, L. (VELVET-GRASS.) Perennial, soft-downy and pale; panicle
oblong; upper empty glume mucronate-awned under the apex; awn of the
staminate flower curved.--Moist meadows. June. (Nat. from Eu.)


37. AIRA, L. HAIR-GRASS.

Spikelets very small, in an open diffuse panicle, of 2 perfect
contiguous flowers. Glumes thin-membranaceous, the two lower
persistent, nearly equal, acute, keeled; the flowering ones obscurely
nerved, acutely 2-cleft at the apex, bearing a slender twisted awn below
the middle. Stamens 3. Styles plumose to the base. Grain oblong,
adnate.--Low annuals, with short setaceous leaves. (An ancient Greek
name for Darnel.)

A. CARYOPHYLLEA, L. Culms 5--10' high, bearing _a very diffuse panicle_
of purplish and at length _silvery scarious spikelets_.--Dry fields,
Nantucket; also Newcastle, Del., _W. M. Canby_. (Nat. from Eu.)

A. PRAECOX, L. Culms tufted, 3--4' high; branches of the _small and dense
panicle_ appressed; awn from below the middle of the glume.--Sandy
fields, N. J. to Va.; rare. (Nat. from Eu.)


38. DESCHAMPSIA, Beauv. (Pl. 12.)

Spikelets small, panicled, of 2 perfect flowers and the hairy pedicel or
rudiment of a third (rarely staminate); rhachis hairy. Empty glumes
persistent, membranaceous and shining, carinate, acute, nearly equal;
flowering glumes toothed or erose-denticulate at the truncate summit,
usually delicately 3--5-nerved, with a slender twisted awn near or below
the middle. Grain oblong, free.--Root perennial. (Named for
Loiseleur-_Deslongchamps_, a French botanist.)

[*] _Empty glumes somewhat shorter than the flowers._

1. D. flexuosa, Trin. (COMMON HAIR-GRASS.) (Pl. 12, fig. 1--3.) Culms
slender, nearly naked (1--3 deg. high) above the small tufts of _involute
bristle-form root-leaves_ (1--6' long); branches of the small spreading
panicle capillary; _awn longer than the palet, at length bent and
twisted_. (Aira flexuosa, _L._)--Dry places; common. June. (Eu.)

2. D. caespitosa, Beauv. Culm tufted (2--4 deg. high); _leaves flat, linear_;
panicle pyramidal or oblong (6' long); _awn straight, barely equalling
the glume_. (Aira caespitosa, _L._)--Shores of lakes and streams;
N. Eng. to Penn., Mich., and northward. June, July. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Empty glumes longer than the flowers, 2--21/2'' long._

3. D. atropurpurea, Scheele. Culms 8--15' high, weak; leaves flat,
rather wide; panicle of few spreading branches; awn stout, twice longer
than the nerveless truncate ciliolate-denticulate glume. (Aira
atropurpurea, _Wahl._)--Alpine summits of N. H. and N. Y., to Lab. and
northward. Aug. (Eu.)


39. TRISETUM, Persoon. (Pl. 12.)

Spikelets 2--several-flowered, often in a contracted panicle; the
flowering glume compressed-keeled, of about the same thin-membranaceous
texture as the empty glumes, bearing a bent or flexuous (rarely twisted)
awn at or below the sharply 2-toothed or 2-pointed apex (whence the
name, from _tris_, three, and _seta_, a bristle); otherwise nearly as in
Avena. Ours are perennials.

1. T. subspicatum, Beauv., var. molle, Gray. (Pl. 12, fig. 1, 2.)
_Minutely soft-downy; panicle dense, much contracted_, oblong or linear
(2--3' long); glumes about the length of the 2--3 smooth flowers; awn
dorsal, diverging, much exserted.--Mountains and rocky river-banks,
N. New Eng. to L. Superior, and northward. July.--About 1 deg. high; leaves
flat, short. (Eu.) (Addendum)--Trisetum subspicatum, var. molle, is
reported from Roan Mt., N. C. (_Scribner_), and probably occurs on the
higher Alleghanies northward.

2. T. palustre, Torr. _Smooth; panicle_ rather long and narrow (5'
long), _loose, the branches capillary; spikelets flat_ (3'' long); lower
glumes shorter than the two smooth lanceolate flowers; the upper flower
on a slightly hairy joint of the rhachis, with a slender spreading or
bent awn next the short 2-pointed tip, the _lower commonly awnless_ or
only mucronate-pointed.--Low grounds, southern N. Y. to Ill., and
southward. June.--Culm slender, 2--3 deg. high; leases flat, short;
spikelets yellowish-white, tinged with green.


40. AVENA, Tourn. OAT. (Pl. 12.)

Spikelets 2--many-flowered, panicled; the flowers herbaceo-chartaceous,
or becoming harder, of firmer texture than the large and mostly unequal
empty glumes; the uppermost flower imperfect; rhachis and base of the
flower often bearded. Flowering glume rounded on the back, mostly
5--11-nerved, bearing a long usually bent or twisted awn on the back or
between the two acute teeth at the apex, proceeding from the mid-nerve
only. Stamens 3. Grain oblong-linear, grooved on one side, usually hairy
at least at the top, free, but invested by the palet. (The classical
Latin name.)

[*] _Spikelets large (1' long); annual._

A. FATUA, L. Resembling the common oat (_A. sativa_), the few spikelets
in a loose panicle, mostly pendulous; flowering glumes covered with long
brownish hairs and bearing a bent awn 1--2' long.--Wisc., Minn. (Nat.
from Eu.)

[*][*] _Smaller-flowered perennials._

1. A. striata, Michx. (Pl. 12, fig. 1, 2.) _Glabrous and smooth_
throughout, slender (1--2 deg. high); leaves narrow; ligule short, truncate;
panicle simple, loose; spikelets (6'' long) on capillary pedicels,
3--6-flowered, much exceeding the scarious-margined purple acute empty
glumes; _lower glume 1-, upper 3-nerved_; rhachis smooth; _flowers
short-bearded at base_; flowering glume 7-nerved, much longer than the
ciliate-fringed palet (4'' long), mostly shorter than its soon bent or
divergent awn, which rises just below the tapering very sharply
cuspidate 2-cleft tip.--Rocky, shaded hills, N. New Eng., N. Y., and
northwestward. June.

2. A. Smithii, Porter. Taller (21/2--41/2 deg. high), rather stout; leaves
broadly linear (3--6'' wide) and taper-pointed, flat, and with the
sheaths and culm _retrorsely scabrous_; ligule elongated, acute; panicle
larger (6--12' long), the few branches at length spreading; empty glumes
slightly purplish, the lower 3-nerved, the upper 5-nerved, scabrous on
the nerves; rhachis minutely hispid; _flowers (3--5) naked_ at base; awn
straight, {1/3}--1/2 the length of the 7-nerved glume.--N. Mich. and Isle
Royale, L. Superior. April, May.


41. DANTHONIA, DC. WILD OAT-GRASS. (Pl. 12.)

Flowering glume (oblong or ovate, rounded-cylindraceous, 7--9-nerved)
bearing between the sharp-pointed or awn-like teeth of the tip an awn
usually composed of the 3 middle nerves, which is flattish and spirally
twisting at base; otherwise nearly as in Avena. Empty glumes longer than
the imbricated flowers. Ours perennials, 1--2 deg. high, with narrow and
soon involute leaves, hairy sheaths bearded at the throat, and a small
simple panicle or raceme of about 7-flowered spikelets. (Named for
_Danthoine_, a French botanist.)

1. D. spicata, Beauv. (Pl. 12, fig. 1--3.) Culms tufted, low; leaves
short, very narrow; spikelets few, 3--5'' long, _subspicate; flowering
glume loosely hairy, its teeth short and pointless_.--Dry and sterile or
rocky soil.

2. D. sericea, Nutt. Culms taller and not tufted (1--3 deg. high), _terete_;
leaves larger, _at least the sheaths silky-villous_; spikelets more
numerous and panicled, 6--9'' long; _flowering glume very silky-villous,
tipped with slender awn-pointed teeth_.--Dry or moist sandy soil,
southern Mass., N. J., and southward; rare. June.

3. D. compressa, Aust. Culms slender, 2 deg. high, somewhat compressed,
paler and subcaniculate on the narrower side; leaves elongated, very
narrow, villous only at the summit of the sheath; spikelets 6--12,
loosely panicled, 5'' long; flowering glume loosely hairy or pubescent,
the teeth very long-awned.--Dry banks; Vt. (_Pringle_); E. Mass., N. Y.,
Penn., and mountains of N. C.


42. CYNODON, Richard. BERMUDA or SCUTCH-GRASS. (Pl. 9.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, with a mere naked short-pedicelled rudiment of a
second flower, imbricate-spiked on one side of a flattish rhachis; the
spikes usually digitate at the naked summit of the flowering culms.
Empty glumes keeled, pointless, rather unequal; flowering glume and
palet pointless and awnless, the glume larger, boat-shaped. Stamens
3.--Low diffusely branched and extensively creeping perennials, with
short flattish leaves. (Name composed of [Greek: ky/on], _a dog_, and
[Greek: o)doy/s], _a tooth_.)

C. DACTYLON, Pers. Spikes 3--5; flowering glume smooth, longer than the
blunt rudiment.--Penn., and southward, where it is cultivated for
pasturage. (Nat. from Eu.)


43. CTENIUM, Panzer. TOOTHACHE-GRASS. (Pl. 9.)

Spikelets densely imbricated in two rows on one side of the flat curved
rhachis of the solitary terminal spike. Glumes persistent; the lower
(interior) much smaller; the other concave below, bearing a stout
recurved awn, like a horn, on the middle of the back. Flowers 4--6, all
but one neutral; the one or two lower consisting of empty awned glumes,
and the one or two uppermost of empty awnless glumes; the perfect flower
intermediate, its glume membranaceous, awned or mucronate below the apex
and densely ciliate toward the base, 3-nerved. Stamens 3. Stigmas
plumose. (Name [Greek: kteni/on], _a small comb_, from the pectinate
appearance of the spike.)

1. C. Americanum, Spreng. Culm (3--4 deg. high from a perennial root)
simple, pubescent or roughish; larger glume warty-glandular outside,
conspicuously awned.--Wet pine-barrens, S. Va. and southward.--Taste
very pungent.


44. GYMNOPOGON, Beauv. (Pl. 9.)

Spikelets of one perfect flower, and the rudiment of a second
(consisting of an awn-like pedicel mostly bearing a naked bristle),
sessile and remotely alternate on long filiform rays or spikes, which
form a crowded naked raceme. Glumes lance-awl-shaped, keeled, almost
equal, rather longer than the membranaceous flowering glume, which is
cylindrical-involute, with the midrib produced from just below the
2-cleft apex into a straight and slender bristle-like awn; palet nearly
as long, with the abortive rudiment at its base. Stamens 3. Stigmas
pencil-form, purple.--Root perennial. Leaves short and flat, thickish,
1--3' long. (Name composed of [Greek: gymno/s], _naked_, and [Greek:
po/gon], a _beard_, alluding to the reduction of the abortive flower to
a bare awn.)

1. G. racemosus, Beauv. (Pl. 9, fig. 1, 2.) Culms clustered from a short
rootstock (1 deg. high), wiry, leafy; leaves oblong-lanceolate; _spikes
flower-bearing to the base_ (5--8' long), soon divergent; awn of the
abortive flower shorter than its stalk, equalling the _pointed glumes_,
not more than half the length of the awn of the fertile flower.--Sandy
pine-barrens, N. J. to Va., and southward. Aug., Sept.

2. G. brevifolius, Trin. Filiform _spikes long-peduncled, i.e.
flower-bearing_ only above the middle; flowering glume ciliate near the
base, short-awned; _awn of the abortive flower obsolete or minute;
glumes acute_.--Sussex Co., Del., and southward.


45. SCHEDONNARDUS, Steud. (Pl. 11.)

Spikelets small, acuminate, 1-flowered, appressed-sessile and scattered
along one side of the slender rhachis of the distant sessile and
divaricately spreading spikes. Empty glumes persistent, narrow,
acuminate, more or less unequal, the longer usually a little shorter
than the rather rigid acuminate flowering one. Stamens 3. Styles
distinct. Grain linear.--A low slender annual, branching from the base,
with short narrow leaves. (Name from [Greek: schedo/n], _near_, and
_Nardus_, from its resemblance to that genus.)

1. S. Texanus, Steud. Stem (6--20' long) naked and curved above, bearing
3--9 racemosely disposed thread-like and triangular spikes 1--3' long;
spikelets 11/2'' long. (Lepturus paniculatus, _Nutt._)--Open grounds and
salt-licks, Ill. to Mont., Col., and Tex. Aug.


46. BOUTELOUA, Lagasca. MUSKIT-GRASS. (Pl. 9.)

Spikelets crowded and closely sessile in 2 rows on one side of a
flattened rhachis, comprising one perfect flower below and one or more
sterile (mostly neutral) or rudimentary flowers. Glumes convex-keeled,
the lower one shorter. Perfect flower with the 3-nerved glume 3-toothed
or cleft at the apex, the 2-nerved palet 2-toothed; the teeth, at least
of the former, pointed or subulate-awned. Stamens 3; anthers
orange-colored or red.--Rudimentary flowers mostly 1--3-awned. Spikes
solitary, racemed or spiked; the rhachis somewhat extended beyond the
spikelets. (Named for _Claudius Boutelou_, a Spanish writer upon
floriculture and agriculture.)

Sec. 1. CHONDROSIUM. _Spikes pectinate, of very many spikelets, oblong or
linear, very dense, solitary and terminal or few in a raceme; sterile
flowers 1--3 on a short pedicel, neutral, consisting of 1--3 scales and
awns._

1. B. oligostachya, Torr. Glabrous, perennial (6--12' high); _leaves
very narrow_; spikes 1--5, the rhachis glabrous; _glumes all sparingly
soft-hairy_, the lobes awl-pointed; _sterile flower copiously
villous-tufted_ at the summit of the naked pedicel, its 3 awns equalling
the larger glume.--N. W. Wisc. to Dak., and south to Tex. and
Mex.--Glumes obscurely if at all papillose along the keel, the middle
lobe of the flowering one 2-cleft at the tip. Sterile flowers often 2,
the second mostly a large awnless scale, becoming hood-like and
coriaceous.

2. _B. hirsuta_, Lag. Tufted (8--20' high), perennial; _leaves flat,
lance-linear_, papillose-hairy or glabrous; spikes 1--4; _upper empty
glume hispid_ with strong bristles _from dark warty glands; flowering
glume pubescent_, 3-cleft into awl-pointed lobes; _sterile flower and
its pedicel glabrous, the 3 awns longer than the glumes_ and fertile
flower.--Sandy plains, Ill., Wisc., Minn., and southwestward to Mex.

Sec. 2. ATHEROPOGON. _Spikes short, numerous in a long and virgate
one-sided spike or raceme, spreading or reflexed, each of few (4--12)
spikelets; sterile flowers neutral, rudimentary._

3. B. racemosa, Lag. (Pl. 9, fig. 1, 2.) Culms tufted from perennial
rootstocks (1--3 deg. high); sheaths often hairy; leaves narrow; spikes 1/2'
or less in length, nearly sessile, 20--60 in number in a loose general
spike (8--15' long); flowers scabrous; glume of the fertile with 3 short
awl pointed teeth; sterile flower reduced to a single small awn, or
mostly to 3 awns shorter than the fertile flower, and 1 or 2 small or
minute scales. (B. curtipendula, _Gray_.)--Dry hills and plains,
southern N. Y. to Minn., and south to Tex. and Mex. July--Sept.--Passes
by transitions into var. ARISTOSA, with spikes shorter; sterile flower
of a large saccate glume, awned at the 2-cleft tip and from the lateral
nerves, the middle awn exserted, and with a rudiment of a palet.--Ill.
(_Geyer_), and southward.


47. ELEUSINE, Gaertn. CRAB-GRASS. YARD-GRASS. (Pl. 9.)

Spikelets 2--6-flowered, with a terminal imperfect flower or naked
rudiment, closely imbricate-spiked on one side of a flattish rhachis;
the spikes digitate. Glumes membranaceous, shorter than the flowers;
flowering glume and palet awnless, the glume ovate, keeled, larger than
the palet. Stamens 3. Pericarp (utricle) containing a loose wrinkled
seed.--Low annuals, with flat leaves, and flowers much as in Poa. (Name
from [Greek: E)leusi/n], the town where Ceres, the goddess of harvests,
was worshipped.)

E. INDICA, Gaertn. (DOG'S-TAIL or WIRE GRASS.) (Pl. 9, fig. 1--6.) Culms
ascending, flattened; spikes 2--5 (about 2' long, greenish); glumes
pointless; terminal flower a mere rudiment.--Yards, etc., chiefly
southward. (Nat. from Ind.?)

E. AEGYPTIACA, Pers. (Pl. 9, fig. 1--4, as Dactyloctenium.) Culms often
creeping at base; leaves ciliate at base; spikes 4--5; lower glume awned
and the flowering one pointed. (Dactyloctenium AEgyptiacum,
_Willd._)--Cultivated fields and yards, Va., Ill., and southward. (Adv.
from Afr.?)


48. LEPTOCHLOA, Beauv. (Pl. 16.)

Spikelets 3--many-flowered (the uppermost flower imperfect), loosely
spiked on one side of a long filiform rhachis; the spikes racemed.
Glumes menbranaceous, keeled, rarely awned, nearly equal; flowering
glume 3-nerved, sometimes simply awned, larger than the palet. Stamens 2
or 3. Seed closely enclosed.--Ours annuals. Leaves flat. (Name composed
of [Greek: lepto/s], _slender_, and [Greek: chlo/a], _grass_, from the
long attenuated spikes.)

1. L. mucronata, Kunth. Sheaths hairy; spikes numerous (20--40, 2--4' in
length), in a long panicle-like raceme; spikelets small; glumes more or
less mucronate, nearly equalling or exceeding the 3--4 awnless
flowers.--Fields, Va. to Ill., Mo., and southward. Aug.


49. BUCHLOE, Engelm. BUFFALO GRASS. (Pl. 16.)

Spikelets dioecious (rarely monoecious), very unlike; the staminate
2--3-flowered, sessile in 2 rows in short 1-sided spikes, the empty
glumes blunt, 1-nerved, very unequal, the flowering larger, 3-nerved, a
little exceeding the 2-nerved palet; fertile spikelets 1-flowered, in a
contracted, capitate, 1-sided spike, the large outer glumes indurated,
3-fid at the apex, united at base and resembling an involucre, the inner
(lower) much smaller and membranaceous, or in the lowest spikelet
resembling the outer; flowering glume narrow, hyaline, bifid or nearly
entire, enclosing the 2-nerved palet. Styles distinct. Grain ovate,
free.--A perennial, creeping or stoloniferous, with narrow flat leaves;
staminate spikes (2--3) in a pedunculate spike, the pistillate pair
sessile in the broad sheaths of the upper leaves. (Name a contraction of
_Bubalochloe_, from [Greek: bou/balos], _buffalo_, and [Greek: chlo/e],
_grass_.)

1. B. dactyloides, Engelm. Low (3--8' high) and broadly tufted; sterile
spikes 3--6'' long, the fertile heads 3'' long.--Plains of the Sask. to
Minn., Kan., and Tex. One of the most valuable grasses of the plains.


50. TRIODIA, R. Br. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets 3--12-flowered, somewhat terete, the rhachis with bearded
joints; terminal flower abortive. Empty glumes unequal; flowering glumes
membranaceous or somewhat chartaceous, much larger than the 2-toothed
palet, convex, 2--3-toothed or cleft at the apex, conspicuously
hairy-bearded or villous on the 3 strong nerves, of which the lateral
are marginal or nearly so and usually excurrent, as is the mid-nerve
especially, into a short cusp or awn. Stamens 3. Stigmas dark purple,
plumose. Grain oblong, nearly gibbous.--Leaves taper-pointed; sheaths
bearded at the throat. Panicle simple or compound; the spikelets often
racemose, purplish. (Name from [Greek: tri]-, _three_, and [Greek:
o)dou/s], _a tooth_, alluding to the flowering glume.)

Sec. 1. TRIODIA proper. _Glumes shorter than the crowded flowers, the
flowering one 3-cuspidate by the projection of the nerves, and usually
with intermediate membranaceous teeth; palet naked._

1. T. cuprea, Jacq. (TALL RED-TOP.) Perennial; culm upright (3--5 deg.
high), very smooth, as are the flat leaves; panicle large and compound,
the rigid capillary branches spreading, naked below; spikelets very
numerous, 5--7-flowered, shining, purple (4'' long); the flowering
glumes hairy toward the base, their points almost equal, scarcely
exceeding the intermediate teeth, thus appearing 5-toothed. (Tricuspis
seslerioides, _Torr._)--Dry or sandy fields, southern N. Y. to Mo., and
southward. Aug.--A showy grass, with the spreading panicle sometimes 1 deg.
wide.

Sec. 2. TRIPLASIS. _Glumes much shorter than the somewhat remote flowers;
flowering glume and palet strongly fringe-bearded, the glume 2-cleft at
the summit, its mid-nerve produced into an awn between the truncate or
awn-pointed divisions._

2. T. purpurea, Hack. (SAND-GRASS.) Culms many in a tuft from the same
annual root, ascending (6--12' high), with numerous bearded joints;
leaves involute-awl-shaped, mostly short; panicles very simple, bearing
few 2--5-flowered spikelets, the terminal one usually exserted, the
axillary ones included in the commonly hairy sheaths; _awn much shorter
than the glume, seldom exceeding its eroded-truncate or obtuse lateral
lobes_. (Tricuspis purpurea, _Gray_.)--In sand, Mass. to Va. along the
coast, and southward; also L. Erie, near Buffalo, and Ill. Aug.,
Sept.--Plant acid to the taste.


51. DIPLACHNE, Beauv. (Pl. 9.)

Spikelets several-flowered, narrow, erect and scattered along the
slender rhachis of the long spicate spikes; flowers all perfect or the
uppermost staminate. Empty glumes membranaceous, carinate, acute,
unequal; flowering glume slightly longer, 1--3-nerved, 2-toothed, and
mucronate or shortly awned between the teeth. Stamens 3. Styles
distinct. Grain free.--Coarse grasses, with narrow flat leaves, and
several or many slender spikes sessile upon an elongated peduncle. (Name
from [Greek: diplo/os], _double_, and [Greek: a)/chne], in the sense of
_chaff_, with reference to the 2-lobed glume.)

1. D. fascicularis, Beauv. Smooth; leaves longer than the
geniculate-decumbent and branching culms, the upper sheathing the base
of the panicle-like spike, which is composed of many strict spikes
(3--5' long); spikelets slightly pedicelled, 7--11-flowered, much longer
than the lanceolate glumes; flowers hairy-margined toward the base, the
glume with 2 small lateral teeth and a short awn in the cleft of the
apex. (Leptochloa fascicularis, _Gray_.)--Brackish meadows, from R. I.
southward along the coast, and from Ill. southward on the Mississippi.
Aug.--Sept.


52. PHRAGMITES, Trin. REED. (Pl. 11.)

Spikelets 3--7-flowered; the flowers rather distant, silky-villous at
base, and with a conspicuous silky-bearded rhachis, all perfect and
3-androus, except the lowest, which is either neutral or with 1--3
stamens, and naked. Glumes membranaceous, shorter than the flowers,
lanceolate, keeled, sharp-pointed, very unequal; flowering glume and
palet membranaceous, slender, the glume narrowly awl-shaped, thrice the
length of the palet. Squamulae 2, large. Styles long. Grain free.--Tall
and stout perennials, with long running root-stocks, numerous broad
leaves, and a large terminal panicle. ([Greek: Phragmi/tes], _growing in
hedges_, which this aquatic grass does not.)

1. P. communis, Trin. Panicle loose, nodding; spikelets 3--5-flowered;
flowers equalling the beard.--Edges of ponds. Sept.--Looks like
Broom-Corn at a distance, 5--12 deg. high; leaves 2' wide. (Eu.)


53. ARUNDO, L.

Flowers all perfect; flowering glume bifid, short-awned between the
teeth. Otherwise as Phragmites. (The Latin name of the species.)

A. DONAX, L. Very tall (10--18 deg.); spikelets 3--4-flowered.--Closely
resembling Phragmites communis. Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized
in Bedford Co., Va. (_A. H. Curtiss._) (Nat. from Eu.)


54. MUNROA, Torr. (Pl. 16.)

Spikelets usually 3-flowered, few (2--4) and nearly sessile in the axils
of floral leaves; flowers perfect, or the uppermost abortive. Empty
glumes lanceolate, acute, hyaline and 1-nerved; flowering glumes larger,
3-nerved, rather rigid, the mid-nerve stout, excurrent, the lateral ones
scarcely so.--Low or prostrate many-stemmed annuals, fasciculately
branched, with crowded short flat rigid or pungent leaves, the short
sheaths strongly striate. (Named for the English agrostologist,
Maj.-Gen. _William Munro_.)

1. M. squarrosa, Torr. Glaucous, somewhat pubescent and villous at the
nodes or glabrous; leaves 3--12'' long.--Dry plains, central Kan. to
Dak., west to Mont., Utah, and New Mex.


55. KOELERIA, Pers. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets 3--7-flowered, crowded in a dense and narrow spike-like
panicle. Glumes membranaceous, compressed-keeled, obscurely 3-nerved,
barely acute, or the flowering glume often mucronate or bristle-pointed;
the empty ones moderately unequal, nearly as long as the spikelet.
Stamens 3. Grain free.--Tufted with simple upright culms, the sheaths
often downy; allied to Dactylis and Poa. (Named for Prof. _G. L.
Koeler_, an early writer on Grasses.)

1. K. cristata, Pers. Culms 1--2 deg. high; leaves flat, the lower sparingly
hairy or ciliate; panicle narrowly spiked, interrupted or lobed at base;
spikelets 2--4-flowered; flowering glume acute or mucronate.--Var.
GRACILIS, Gray, with a long and narrow spike, the flowers usually barely
acute.--Dry hills, Penn. to Ill. and Kan., thence north and westward.
(Eu.)


56. EATONIA, Raf. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets usually 2-flowered, with an abortive rudiment or pedicel,
numerous, in a contracted or slender panicle, very smooth. Empty glumes
somewhat equal in length, but very dissimilar, a little shorter than the
flowers; the lower narrowly linear, keeled, 1-nerved; the upper broadly
obovate, folded round the flowers, 3-nerved on the back, not
keeled, scarious-margined. Flowering glume oblong, obtuse,
compressed-boat-shaped, naked, chartaceous; the palet very thin and
hyaline. Stamens 3. Grain linear-oblong, not grooved.--Perennial, tall
and slender grasses, with simple tufted culms, and often sparsely downy
sheaths, flat lower leaves, and small greenish (rarely purplish)
spikelets. (Named for Prof. _Amos Eaton_, author of a popular Manual of
the Botany of the United States, which was for a long time the only
general work available for students in this country, and of other
popular treatises.)

[*] _Upper empty glume rounded-obovate and very obtuse; panicle usually
dense._

1. E. obtusata, Gray. (Pl. 10.) Panicle dense and contracted, somewhat
interrupted, rarely slender; the spikelets crowded on the short erect
branches; upper glume rough on the back; flowers lance-oblong.--Dry
soil, N. Penn. to Fla., Mich., and far westward. June, July.

[*][*] _Glume narrower, sometimes acutish; panicle more loose and
slender._

2. E. Pennsylvanica, Gray. Leaves mostly 3--6' long; panicle long and
slender, loose, the racemose branches lax and somewhat elongated; glumes
thin and broadly scarious, the lowest half the length of the flower,
very narrow, the upper obtuse or bluntly somewhat pointed; the 2 (rarely
3) flowers lanceolate, with pointed glumes.--Varies, with a fuller
panicle, 6--8' long, with the aspect of Cinna (var. MAJOR, _Torr._);
and, rarely, with the lower palet minutely mucronate-pointed!--Moist
woods and meadows; common.

3. E. Dudleyi, Vasey. Culms very slender; leaves shorter, 1--2' long;
panicle very slender, the branches few, short and mostly appressed;
empty glumes nearly equal, the lower oblong, the upper broadly
elliptical, apiculate; flowering glumes shorter than in n. 2,
acutish.--Long Island to central N. Y., south to S. C.


57. ERAGROSTIS, Beauv. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets 2--70-flowered, nearly as in Poa, except that the flowering
glume is but 3- (rarely 1-) nerved, not webby-haired at the base, and is
deciduous; palet persistent on the rhachis after the rest of the flower
has fallen.--Culms often branching. Leaves linear, frequently involute,
and the ligule or throat of the sheath bearded with long villous hairs.
Panicle various. (Name from [Greek: e)~r], _spring_, and [Greek:
a)/grostis], _a grass_.)

[*] _Prostrate and creeping, much branched; root annual; spikelets flat,
imperfectly dioecious, clustered, almost sessile, in the more fertile
plant almost capitate._

1. E. reptans, Nees. Spikelets linear-lanceolate, 10--30-flowered;
flowers lance-ovate, acute; leaves short, almost awl-shaped.--Gravelly
river-borders; common. Aug.--Flowering branches 2--5' high.

[*][*] _Diffusely spreading, or the flowering culms ascending, low
(6--15' high), annual; spikelets often large, flat, forming a narrow
crowded panicle._

E. MINOR, Host. Sheaths often hairy; leaves flat, smooth; spikelets
short-pedicelled, lance- or oblong-linear, 8--20-flowered, lead-colored
(2--5'' long); flowers ovate, obtuse, the lateral nerves becoming
evident, and keel smooth. (E. poaeoides, _Beauv._)--Sandy waste places,
eastward; rare. (Nat. from Eu.)

E. MAJOR, Host. Sheaths mostly glabrous; spikelets larger (3--10''
long), becoming linear, whitish when old, 10--50-flowered; flowers more
spreading, their glumes larger, with very strong lateral nerves and
rough on the keel. (E. poaeoides, var. megastachya, _Gray_.)--Similar
situations, and more common. Aug.--Emits a sharp, unpleasant odor.
(Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Erect, or in group [+] diffusely spreading and ascending;
panicle open, its branches capillary; spikelets proportionally small,
sometimes minute. (Number of flowers in the spikelet very variable,
according to age, etc.)_

[+] _Annual; culms slender, branching and decumbent or spreading at
base; leaves narrow, flat, soft; branches of the narrow panicle rather
short and thickly-flowered, not bearded in the axils, or sometimes the
lowest sparingly._

E. PILOSA, Beauv. (Pl. 10, fig. 1--4.) Panicle elongated-oblong, with
rather erect branches (except at flowering-time); _spikelets_
5--12-flowered (2--4'' long, purplish-lead-color), becoming linear,
_about equalling their pedicels; empty glumes_ (small) _and flowering
ones obtuse_, the latter broadly ovate, _1-nerved_ (lateral nerves
obsolete).--Sandy or gravelly waste places, S. New Eng. to Ill., and
southward. Aug.--Plant 6--12' high. (Nat. from Eu.)

2. E. Frankii, Meyer. Much branched and diffuse (3--8' high); panicle
ovate-oblong, rather dense, spreading; _spikelets 2--5-flowered_
(1--11/2'' long), _on slender pedicels; glumes very acute; the flowering
one ovate, acute_, rather obscurely _3-nerved_.--Low or sandy ground, S.
Penn. to Kan., and southwestward. Aug.

3. E. Purshii, Schrader. Sparingly branched at the decumbent base, then
erect (1/2--2 deg. high); panicle elongated, the branches widely spreading,
very loose; _spikelets 5--18-flowered_, oblong-lanceolate, at length
linear (2--41/2'' long), _mostly much shorter than their capillary
pedicels; glumes all ovate and acute, or the flowering ones acutish,
3-nerved_.--Sandy or sterile open grounds, Penn. to Mo., and
southwestward; also introduced northward.

[++] _Culms simple, or branching only at the very base, firm, erect,
mostly forming thick tufts; leaves very long; panicle very large,
compound, often longer than the culm, with elongated loosely-flowered
branches, their axils often bearded. (Doubtful perennials, or n. 5
annual.)_

4. E. tenuis, Gray. _Panicle virgately elongated_ (1--21/2 deg. long), very
loose, the spreading branches bearded in some of the lower axils, their
remote divisions and long _diverging pedicels_ capillary; spikelets
2--6- (sometimes 7--12-) flowered, pale or greenish; _lower glumes
lanceolate or awl-shaped, very acute_ (11/2--2'' long), membranaceous, as
are the _oblong-lanceolate acute flowers; flowering glume distinctly
3-nerved_; the upper ciliate-scabrous.--Sandy soil, Ohio to Ill., Kan.,
and southward. Aug.--Oct.--Leaves rather rigid, 11/2--2 deg. long, glabrous or
sparingly hairy; the sheaths hairy or glabrous; the throat strongly
bearded; flowers much larger than in the next, fully 11/2'' long.

5. E. capillaris, Nees. _Panicle widely expanding_, usually much longer
than the culm, its spreading branches (mostly naked in the axils) and
long _diverging pedicels_ capillary; _spikelets rather terete_, very
small, 2--4-flowered, greenish or purplish; _glumes and flowers ovate,
acute_ (less than 1'' long); _flowering glume obscurely 3-nerved_,
scarcely keeled; the palet rough-ciliate.--Sandy dry soil and fields;
common, especially southward. Aug., Sept.--Leaves and sheaths very
hairy, or nearly glabrous; the former about 1 deg. long, not rigid; panicle
1--2 deg. long, soon diffuse.

6. E. pectinacea, Gray. _Panicle widely diffuse_, its rigid divergent
main branches _bearded in the axils; the capillary pedicels more or less
appressed_ on the secondary branches; _spikelets flat_, 5--15-flowered,
becoming linear, purple or purplish; glumes and flowers ovate or
oblong-ovate, acutish; _flowering glume strongly 3-nerved; palet
hirsute-ciliate_.--Leaves long, rigid, mostly hairy, the sheaths
especially so; plant 1--3 deg. high; spikelets 2--3'' long, 1'' wide,
closely flowered.--Var. SPECTABILIS, Gray. Leaves and sheaths mostly
glabrous; branches of the panicle (the lower reflexed with age) and
pedicels shorter; spikelets rather larger.--Sandy dry ground, from E.
Mass. near the coast, and from Ohio and Ill., southward. Aug.--Oct.

7. E. campestris, Trin. Glabrous or the sheaths villous at the throat;
culm short, bearing an elongated and very open panicle with divaricate
branches bearded at base; _spikelets_ linear, flat, 8--12-flowered,
_sessile or nearly so_ along the branchlets; _glumes very acute or
acuminate_, 3-nerved, roughish on the keel; palet minutely ciliate. (E.
pectinacea, var. refracta, _Chapm._ Poa refracta, _Ell._)--Del. and Md.
to Fla. and Ala.


58. MELICA, L. MELIC-GRASS. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets 2--8-flowered; the 1--3 upper flowers imperfect and
dissimilar, convolute around each other, and enwrapped by the upper
fertile flower. Empty glumes usually large, scarious-margined, convex,
obtuse; the upper 7--9-nerved. Flowering glume papery-membranaceous,
dry and sometimes indurating with age, rounded or flattish on the back,
5--many-nerved, scarious at the entire blunt summit. Stamens
3.--Perennials with soft flat leaves. Panicle simple or sparingly
branched; the rather large spikelets racemose-one-sided. (An old
Italian name for Sorghum, from _mel_, honey.)

1. M. mutica, Walt. (Pl. 10.) Slender, with usually narrow leaves, the
panicle often reduced to a simple raceme; lower glumes nearly equal and
almost equalling the spikelet; fertile flowers usually 2; flowering
glumes broad, smooth, obtuse.--Rich soil, Penn. to Fla., west to Wisc.,
Iowa, and Tex.

2. M. diffusa, Pursh. Taller, 21/2--4 deg. high, with mostly broader leaves
and a more usually compound and many-flowered panicle; lower glumes more
unequal, the outer very broad; fertile flowers usually 3; flowering
glumes somewhat scabrous and more acute. (M. mutica, var. diffusa,
_Gray_.)--Penn. to Ill., and southward.

(Addendum) 3. M. Porteri, Scribn. Tall and slender; panicle very narrow,
the slender branches erect or the lower slightly divergent; pedicels
flexuous or recurved, pubescent; glumes very unequal and shorter than
the spikelet; fertile flowers 3--5, the glumes scabrous.--Mountains of
Col. and southward; reported from Cass Co., Neb. (_J. G. Smith_).


59. DIARRHENA, Raf. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets several-flowered, smooth and shining, one or two of the
uppermost flowers sterile. Empty glumes ovate, much shorter than the
flowers, coriaceous; the lower much smaller; flowering glume ovate,
convex on the back, rigidly coriaceous, its 3 nerves terminating in a
strong and abrupt cuspidate or awl-shaped tip. Squamulae ovate, ciliate.
Stamens 2. Grain very large, obliquely ovoid, obtusely pointed, rather
longer than the glume, the cartilaginous shining pericarp not adherent
to the seed.--A nearly smooth perennial, with running rootstocks,
producing simple culms (2--3 deg. high) with long linear-lanceolate flat
leaves toward the base, naked above, bearing a few short-pedicelled
spikelets (2--3'' long) in a very simple panicle. (Name composed of
[Greek: di/s], _two_, and [Greek: a)/r)r(en], _man_, from the two
stamens.)

1. D. Americana, Beauv. Shaded river-banks and woods, Ohio to Ill., and
southward. Aug.


60. UNIOLA, L. SPIKE-GRASS. (Pl. 11.)

Spikelets closely many-flowered, very flat and 2-edged; 3--6 of the
lowest glumes empty, lanceolate, compressed-keeled; flowering glume
coriaceo-membranaceous, strongly laterally compressed and keeled,
striate-nerved, usually acute or pointed, entire, enclosing the much
smaller compressed 2-keeled palet and the free laterally flattened
smooth grain. Stamen 1 (or in U. paniculata 3).--Upright smooth
perennials, growing in tufts from strong creeping rootstocks, with broad
leaves and large spikelets in an open or spiked panicle. (Ancient name
of some plant, a diminutive of _unio_, unity.)

[*] _Spikelets large (1/2--2' long), ovate or oblong, 9--30-flowered;
panicle open._

1. U. paniculata, L. (SEA OATS.) Culm and panicle elongated (4--8 deg.
high); _leaves narrow_, when dry convolute; _spikelets ovate,
short-pedicelled_; glumes glabrous, bluntish, several of the lower
sterile; stamens 3.--Sand-hills on the sea shore, S. Va. and southward.

2. U. latifolia, Michx. (Pl. 11, fig. 1--3) Culm 2--4 deg. high; panicle
loose; _leaves broad_ and flat (nearly 1' wide); _spikelets_ at length
_oblong, hanging on long pedicels_; glumes acute, ciliate on the keel,
all but the lowest with perfect monandrous flowers.--Shaded slopes, S.
Penn. to Ill., and southward.

[*][*] _Spikelets small; panicle contracted, wand-like; perfect flowers
long-pointed._

3. U. gracilis, Michx. Culm 3 deg. high, slender; _spikelets
short-pedicelled_ (2--3'' long), broadly wedge-shaped, acute at base,
_4--8-flowered_; glumes ovate and divergently beaked, long, the 3 lowest
empty.--Sandy soil, from Long Island to Va., near the coast, and
southward. Aug.


61. DISTICHLIS, Raf. SPIKE-GRASS. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets and numerous flowers compressed, crowded in a densely spiked
or capitate panicle. Glumes herbaceous or membranaceous, the lower
faintly many-nerved; flowering glumes rather coriaceous, laterally much
flattened, faintly many-nerved, acute. Ovary stalked.--Flowers
dioecious, rather large. Leaves crowded, involute, usually rigid. (Name
from [Greek: di/stichos], _two-ranked_.)

1. D. maritima, Raf. Culms tufted from creeping rootstocks (9--18'
high); spike oblong, flattened (1' long); spikelets ovate or oblong,
5--10-flowered; glumes smooth and naked; grain pointed. (Brizopyrum
spicatum, _Hook_.)--Salt marshes and shores. Aug.--Glumes of the
pistillate flowers more rigid and almost keeled; stigmas very long,
plumose; the staminate glumes smaller and somewhat rounded on the back.
(Addendum)--Distichlis maritima. On alkaline soil in Neb., and very
common in similar localities west and southwestward; chiefly the var.
STRICTA, Thurb., with setaceously convolute leaves, the many- (10--20-)
flowered spikelets in a loose panicle.


62. DACTYLIS, L. ORCHARD GRASS. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets several-flowered, crowded in one-sided clusters, forming a
branching dense panicle. Glumes all herbaceous, keeled, awn-pointed,
rough-ciliate on the keel; the flowering one 5-nerved, the upper most
commonly smaller and thinner. Stamens 3. Grain lance-oblong, acute,
free.--Stout tufted perennial; leaves keeled. (_Dactylos_, a name in
Pliny for a grass with digitate spikes, from [Greek: da/ktylos], _a
finger_.)

D. GLOMERATA, L. Rough, rather glaucous (3 deg. high); leaves broadly
linear; branches of the panicle naked at base; spikelets
3--4-flowered.--Fields and yards, especially in shade. June. (Nat. from
Eu.)


63. BRIZA, L. QUAKING GRASS. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets many-flowered, ovate or heart-shaped, flattish-tumid; the
flowers closely imbricated. Glumes roundish, unequal, purplish, very
concave or ventricose, 3--5-nerved; the flowering ventricose on the
back, heart-shaped at the base, papery-membranaceous and becoming dry,
scarious-margined, obscurely many-nerved; the palet much smaller, ovate,
flat. Stamens 3. Stigmas branched-plumose. Grain flattened parallel with
the glumes, adhering to the palet.--Leaves flat; panicle loose, diffuse,
with large showy spikelets often drooping on delicate pedicels. ([Greek:
Bri/za], the Greek name of a kind of grain.)

B. MEDIA, L. Panicle erect, the branches spreading; spikelets
5--9-flowered (3'' long); lower glumes shorter than the first flowering
one; root perennial.--Pastures; sparingly eastward. June. (Adv. from
Eu.)


64. POA, L. MEADOW-GRASS. SPEAR-GRASS. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets ovate or lance-ovate, laterally compressed, several- (2--10-)
flowered, in an open panicle. Empty glumes mostly shorter than the
flowers, the lower smaller; flowering glume membranaceo-herbaceous, with
a delicate scarious margin, compressed-keeled, pointless, 5-nerved (the
intermediate nerves more obscure or obsolete), the principal nerves
commonly clothed with soft hairs at and toward the often cobwebby base;
palet membranaceous, 2-toothed. Stamens 2 or 3. Stigmas simply plumose.
Grain oblong, free.--Culms tufted, from perennial roots, except n. 1.
Leaves smooth, usually flat and soft. ([Greek: Po/a], an ancient Greek
name for grass or fodder.)

[*] _Low and spreading (3--6' high) from an annual or biennial root,
flaccid; branches of the short panicle single or in pairs._

P. ANNUA, L. (LOW SPEAR-GRASS.) Culms flattened; panicle often 1-sided,
usually short and pyramidal, sometimes more slender (P.
cristata, _Chapm._); spikelets crowded, very short-pedicelled,
3--7-flowered.--Cultivated and waste grounds, everywhere. April--Oct.
(Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Low; the culms (6--20' long) geniculate-ascending from a running
rootstock, rigid, very much flattened; panicle simple and contracted._

P. COMPRESSA, L. (WIRE-GRASS. ENGLISH BLUE-GRASS.) (Pl. 10, fig. 1--4.)
Pale, as if glaucous; leaves short; panicle dense and narrow, somewhat
one-sided (1--3' long), the short branches mostly in pairs; spikelets
almost sessile, 3--10-flowered, flat.--Dry, mostly sterile soil, in
waste places; rarely in woods. (Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Low alpine or alpestrine species, erect, in perennial tufts._

[+] _Soft and flaccid, smooth or nearly so, even to the branches of the
panicle; leaves short and flat, short-pointed; ligule elongated._

1. P. alpina, L. Culms rather stout (8--14' high); _leaves broadly
linear_, especially those of the culm (11/2--2' long, 11/2--3'' wide);
_panicle short and broad_; spikelets broadly ovate, 3--9-flowered (about
3'' long); flowering glume villous on the midrib and margins.--N. Maine
(?), Isle Royale and north shore of Lake Superior, and northward. (Eu.)

2. P. laxa, Haenke. Culms slender (4--9' high); _leaves narrow; panicle
somewhat raceme-like, narrow_, often one-sided and nodding; spikelets
2--4-flowered, one half smaller.--Alpine mountain-tops of Maine, N. H.,
and N. New York, and high northward (Eu.)

[+][+] _More strict and rigid, roughish, especially the panicle; ligule
short._

3. P. nemoralis, L. Culms 6--20' high; leaves narrow, short, soon
involute; branches of the panicle 2--5 together, very scabrous;
spikelets purplish (or sometimes pale), 2--5-flowered; lower _glumes
ovate-lanceolate and taper-pointed_, the flowering lanceolate, somewhat
webby at base, villous on the keel and margins below the middle, its
nerves obscure. (P. caesia, _Smith._)--The more common form has a usually
narrow somewhat nodding panicle, with short ascending branches, the
small pale or purplish spikelets 2-flowered. Lab. to N. Maine and N.
Vt.; Lake Champlain (_Pringle_); N. shore of L. Superior to N. Iowa, and
westward.--A form with somewhat stouter and stricter habit, the darker
or often pale spikelets 3--5-flowered (P. caesia, var. strictior,
_Gray_), corresponds nearly to the European P. caesia. High mountains of
N. H. and Vt., and Gardner's Island, L. Champlain (_C. E. Faxon_), Isle
Royale and N. shore of L. Superior, and westward.--Also a form with the
branches of the short panicle broadly divaricate; N. Wisc. (_Lapham_).
(Eu.)

[*][*][*][*] _Taller (1--3 deg.) meadow or woodland grasses; panicle open._

[+] _Spikelets mostly very numerous and crowded on the rather short
rough branches (usually in fives) of the oblong or pyramidal panicle,
green, or sometimes violet-tinged; flowers acute, crowded, more or less
webbed at base._

4. P. serotina, Ehrhart. (FALSE RED-TOP. FOWL MEADOW-GRASS.) Culms
tufted without running rootstocks; leaves narrowly linear, soft and
smooth; _ligules elongated; spikelets_ 2--4- (rarely 5-) flowered
(1--2'' long), _all short-pedicelled_ in an elongated panicle, often
tinged with dull purple; flowers and glumes narrow; _flowering glume
very obscurely nerved_.--Wet meadows and low banks of streams; common,
especially northward. July, Aug.--A good grass for moist meadows. (Eu.)

5. P. pratensis, L. (JUNE GRASS. SPEAR GRASS. KENTUCKY BLUEGRASS.) Culms
sending off copious _running rootstocks_ from the base, and the _sheaths
smooth; ligule short and blunt_; panicle short-pyramidal; _spikelets_
3--5-flowered, _crowded_, and mostly _almost sessile_ on the branches,
ovate-lanceolate or ovate; _flowering glume 5-nerved, hairy on the
margins_ as well as keel.--Common in dry soil; imported for pastures and
meadows. Indigenous in mountain regions from N. Penn. to New Eng., and
northward. May--July. (Eu.)

P. TRIVIALIS, L. (ROUGHISH MEADOW-GRASS.) Culms erect from a somewhat
decumbent base, but no distinct running rootstocks; _sheaths and leaves
more or less rough; ligule oblong, acute_; panicle longer or with the
branches more distant; spikelets mostly 3-flowered, broader upward;
_flowering glume prominently 5-nerved, naked at the margins_; otherwise
nearly as in the preceding.--Moist meadows, etc. July. (Nat. from Eu.)

[+][+] _Spikelets fewer and more scattered, on slender pedicels; plants
soft and smooth, flowering early. (No running rootstocks, except in
n. 10.)_

[++] _Spikelets small (1--2'' long), pale green, rather loosely
2--4-flowered; flowers oblong, obtuse; flowering glume scarcely
scarious-tipped; culm-leaves lance-linear, acute, 1--3' long._

6. P. sylvestris, Gray. _Culm flattish_, erect; branches of the
oblong-pyramidal panicle short, numerous, in fives or more; _flowering
glumes villous on the keel its whole length, and on the margins below
the middle_, sparingly webbed at base.--Rocky woods and meadows, western
N. Y. to Wisc., Kan., and southward. June.

7. P. debilis, Torr. _Culms terete_, weak; branches of the small panicle
few and slender (the lower l1/2--2' long to the few spikelets), in pairs
and threes; _flowers very obtuse, smooth and glabrous_, except a sparing
web at base.--Rocky woodlands, R. I. to Penn. and Wisc. May.

[++][++] _Spikelets 2'' long, light green; oblong-lanceolate flowers and
glumes acute._

8. P. alsodes, Gray. Leaves rather narrowly linear, acute, the uppermost
(21/2--4' long) often sheathing the base of the narrow and loose panicle,
the capillary branches appressed when young, mostly in threes or fours;
flowering glume very obscurely nerved, villous on the keel below, and
with a narrow cobwebby tuft at base, otherwise glabrous.--Woods, on
hillsides, N. Eng. to Penn. and Va., west to Wisc. May, June.

[++][++][++] _Spikelets larger (3--4'' long), pale green, rarely
purple-tinged, few and scattered at the ends of the long capillary
branches (mostly in pairs or threes) of the very diffuse panicle;
flowers 3--6, loose, oblong and obtuse, as is the larger glume;
flowering glume conspicuously scarious at the apex, villous below the
middle on the keel and margins; culms flattish, smooth._

9. P. flexuosa, Muhl. (not of Wahl.) Culms 1--3 deg. high, tufted, its
_leaves all linear (2--5' long), gradually taper-pointed; panicle very
effuse_ (its branches 2--4' long to the 4--6-flowered spikelets or first
ramification); _flowering glume prominently nerved, no web_ at the
base.--Dry woods, Penn. and Del. to Ky., and southward. Feb.--May.--Near
the last.

10. P. brevifolia, Muhl. Culms 1--11/2 deg. high from _running rootstocks_,
2--3-leaved, the _upper leaves very short (1/2--2' long), lanceolate, all
abruptly cuspidate-tipped_; branches of the short panicle mostly in
pairs; spikelets 3--4-flowered; _flowering glume rather obscurely
nerved, cobwebby at base_.--Rocky or hilly woodlands, Penn., Va., and
sparingly westward to Ky. and Ill. April, May.--Culm scarcely surpassing
the long root-leaves.


65. GRAPHEPHORUM, Desv. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets 2--4-flowered, compressed, the rhachis pilose on one side,
jointed, produced above the flowers into a hairy pedicel. Empty glumes
thin-membranaceous, acute, carinate, mostly nearly equalling the remote
flowers; flowering glume thin and membranaceous or scarious, convex,
scarcely keeled, faintly nerved, entire, pointless and awnless. Stamens
3. Stigmas plumose. Ovary glabrous.--Perennial, with linear flat leaves,
their sheaths closed at base, the spikelets in a loose panicle. (Named
from [Greek: graphi/s], _a pencil_, and [Greek: phe/ro], _to bear_, from
the terminal hairy pedicel.)

1. G. melicoideum, Desv. Culm 1--2 deg. high; leaves roughish; panicle open;
glumes unequal, lanceolate, their midrib and the pedicels rough.--N.
Maine, N. Vt., Upper Mich., and northward; rare.--Var. MAJUS, Gray, is a
luxuriant form, 2--3 deg. high, with ampler panicle; borders of a swamp,
Macomb Co., Mich. Aug.


66. SCOLOCHLOA, Link.

Spikelets 2--4-flowered, subterete. Rhachis hairy at the base of the
flowers, ending in a naked pedicel. Empty glumes concave, membranaceous,
unequal, the outer 3-nerved, acute, the inner 5-nerved, toothed at the
apex, nearly equalling the flowers; flowering glume more rigid,
prominently 7-nerved, toothed at the apex; nerves all parallel. Stamens
3. Stigmas plumose. Ovary hairy.--Tall perennials, growing in water,
with loosely sheathing leaves, and spikelets in a lax panicle. (Name
probably from [Greek: sko~los], _a prickle_, and [Greek: chlo/a],
_grass_.)

1. S. festucacea, Link. Stout, 3--4 deg. high, smooth; leaves rough on the
margins; panicle suberect; spikelets 3--4'' long. (Festuca borealis,
_Hook_.)--Emmet Co., Iowa (_Cratty_), and northward.


67. GLYCERIA, R. Br. MANNA-GRASS. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets terete or flattish, several--many-flowered; the flowers mostly
early deciduous by the breaking up of the rhachis into joints, leaving
the short and unequal 1--3-nerved membranaceous lower glumes behind.
Flowering glume and palet naked, of a rather firm texture, nearly equal;
the glume rounded on the back, scarious (and sometimes obscurely
toothed) at the blunt or rarely acute summit, glabrous, prominently
5--7-nerved, the nerves parallel and separate. Squamulae fleshy and
truncate, or none. Stamens commonly 2. Styles present; stigmas
compoundly plumose. Ovary smooth. Grain oblong, free, the furrow very
narrow or none.--Perennial smooth marsh grasses, mostly with creeping
bases or rootstocks; spikelets panicled. (Name from [Greek: glykero/s],
_sweet_, in allusion to the taste of the grain.)

[*] _Spikelets ovate, oblong, or linear-oblong, 1--3'' in length_,

[+] _At length nodding in an open panicle, flattish laterally but
turgid._

1. G. Canadensis, Trin. (RATTLESNAKE-GRASS.) Culm stout, 2--3 deg. high;
leaves long, roughish; panicle oblong-pyramidal, at length drooping;
spikelets ovate, at length very broad and tumid, Briza-like, 2'' long,
pale, with purplish glumes; flowering glume acute or blunt-pointed,
firm, with not very prominent nerves, longer than the rounded
palet.--Bogs and wet places; common from Penn. to E. Kan., and
northward. July.

[+][+] _Erect in a narrow contracted panicle, somewhat flattened and
turgid._

2. G. obtusa, Trin. Culm stout, 1--2 deg. high, very leafy; leaves long,
smooth; _panicle narrowly oblong, dense_ (3--5' long); spikelets
3--7-flowered, 2--3'' long; flowering glume obtuse.--Bogs, E. New Eng.
to Penn. and southward, near the coast.

3. G. elongata, Trin. Leaves very long (1 deg. or more), rough; _panicle
narrowly racemose, elongated_ (1 deg. long), _recurving_; the branches and
3--4-flowered spikelets _appressed_; flowering glume obtuse.--Wet woods,
N. Eng. to Mich., Minn., and northward; Roan Mt., N. C. (_Scribner_).
July--Aug.

[+][+][+] _Diffuse; flower-glume truncate-obtuse, strongly 7-nerved;
palet 2-toothed._

4. G. nervata, Trin. (FOWL MEADOW-GRASS.) (Pl. 10, fig. 1--3.) Culm
erect, 1--3 deg. high; leaves rather long; branches of the loose _panicle_
capillary, _at length drooping, the numerous small spikelets_ (1--2''
long, commonly purplish) _ovate-oblong_, 3--7-flowered.--Moist meadows;
common. June.

5. G. pallida, Trin. Culms slender, 1--3 deg. long, ascending from a
creeping base; leaves short, sharp-pointed, pale; _branches of the
rather simple panicle slender, erect-spreading_, rough; the _spikelets
usually few, somewhat appressed, oblong-linear_, 5--9-flowered (pale,
2--3'' long); _flowering glume minutely 5-toothed_; the palet
lanceolate, conspicuously 2-toothed.--Shallow water; Maine to Va., west
to Ky., Ind., and Mich.; common, especially northward. July.

6. G. grandis, Watson. (REED MEADOW-GRASS.) Culm stout, upright, 3--5 deg.
high; leaves large (1--2 deg. long, {1/3}--1/2' wide); _panicle much branched,
ample_ (8--15' long), _the numerous branches ascending, spreading with
age; spikelets oblong or linear-oblong_, 3--6-flowered (usually
purplish, 2--3'' long); _flowering glume entire_. (G. aquatica of Amer.
authors.)--Wet grounds; N. Eng. to western N. Y., Mich., Minn., and
westward.

[*][*] _Spikelets linear (1/2--1' long), pale, appressed on the branches
of the long narrow racemose panicle, terete except during anthesis;
palets minutely roughish, the upper 2-toothed; squamulae unilateral or
united; ligule long; culm flattened (1--5 deg. high), ascending from a
rooting base._ (Glyceria, _R. Br._)

7. G. fluitans, R. Br. Panicle 1 deg. long; the simple branches appressed,
finally spreading below; leaves short and rather broad, very smooth;
spikelets 7--13-flowered; _flowering glume oblong, obtuse_, or the
scarious tip acutish, entire or obscurely 3-lobed, usually rather longer
than the blunt palet.--Shallow water; common. June--Aug.

8. G. acutiflora, Torr. Spikelets 5--12-flowered, few and scattered;
_flowering glume oblong-lanceolate, acute, shorter than the long
tapering point of the palet_.--Wet places, Penn. to Maine; rather rare.
June.--Resembles the last; but the erect leaves smaller, the separate
flowers twice the length (4'' long), and less nerved.


68. PUCCINELLIA, Parl. (Pl. 16.)

Characters as in Glyceria, but the flowering glumes inconspicuously or
obsoletely 5-nerved; squamulae thin and distinct; stigmas sessile and
simply plumose; grain compressed, often broadly furrowed.--Mostly saline
species; perennial. (Named for Prof. _Benedetto Puccinelli_, an Italian
botanist.)

1. P. maritima, Parl. (GOOSE-GRASS. SEA SPEAR-GRASS.) _Root
stoloniferous_; culms erect, 1--11/2 deg. high; _leaves involute, acute or
pungent_; lower _branches of the narrow panicle often solitary or in
pairs, appressed_ or more or less spreading; spikelets 3--6'' long,
oblong or linear, 4--9-flowered; flowering glumes rounded at the summit,
11/2'' long. (Glyceria maritima, _Wahl._ Atropis maritima,
_Griseb._)--Marshes along the coast; not rare, and somewhat variable in
the form of the panicle and size of the glumes. (Eu.)

Var. (?) minor, Watson. Culms low and slender, from very slender
creeping rootstocks; leaves very narrow and involute; ligule long;
panicle short and very narrow; spikelets 2--4-flowered, the flowers 1''
long or less.--Shore of Mt. Desert Island (_E. L. Rand_); Labrador
(_J. A. Allen_).--Probably rather a form of the western P. airoides (Poa
airoides, _Nutt._).

2. P. distans, Parl. _Not stoloniferous_; culms rather stout, geniculate
below; _leaves mostly flat, short_; ligule short; _lower branches of the
panicle in fours or fives_, usually more or less naked at base, soon
_spreading_ and at length deflexed; spikelets 2--3'' long,
3--6-flowered; flowering glume truncate-obtuse, 1/2--1'' long. (Glyceria
distans, _Wahl._ Atropis distans, _Griseb._)--Salt marshes along the
coast and on ballast; apparently much rarer than the last, and perhaps
not native. (Eu.)


69. FESTUCA, L. _Fescue-grass_. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets 3--many-flowered, panicled or racemose; the flowers not webby
at base. Lower glumes unequal, mostly keeled. Flowering glumes
chartaceous or almost coriaceous, roundish (not keeled) on the back,
more or less 3--5-nerved, acute, pointed, or often bristle-awned from
the tip, rarely blunt; the palet mostly adhering at maturity to the
enclosed grain. Stamens 1--3.--Flowers, and often the leaves, rather dry
and harsh. (An ancient Latin name of some kind of grass, of uncertain
meaning.)

[*] _Flowers awl-shaped, bristle-pointed or awned from the tip; panicle
contracted._

[+] _Annuals or biennials, slender, 5--18' high; leaves
convolute-bristle-form._

F. MYURUS, L. Panicle spike-like, one-sided; spikelets about 5-flowered;
lower glumes very unequal; _awn much longer than the flowering glume_,
fully 6'' in length; stamen 1.--Dry fields, Nantucket, Mass., to Del.,
and southward. July. (Nat. from Eu.)

1. F. tenella, Willd. Panicle spike-like, one-sided, or more compound
and open; spikelets 7--13-flowered; _awn 1--3'' long or more, usually
shorter than or about equalling the glume_; stamens 2.--Dry sterile
soil, especially southward. June, July.

[+][+] _Perennial, tufted, 6--24' high; stamens 3._

2. F. ovina, L. (SHEEP'S FESCUE.) Glaucous, 1/2--2 deg. high; leaves mostly
radical, very narrow and convolute; panicle somewhat one-sided, short,
usually more or less compound, open in flowering; spikelets
3--8-flowered; awn not more than half the length of the flower, often
much shorter or almost wanting.--Indigenous in northern New Eng., about
Lake Superior, and northward; naturalized farther south as a pasture
grass. June.--Varies greatly.--Var. VIVIPARA, L. (which with us has
running rootstocks), a state with the spikelets partially converted into
leafy shoots, is found on the alpine summits of the White Mts., and high
northward.--Var. DURIUSCULA, Koch, is a tall form, with spikelets rather
larger, usually in a more compound panicle; culm-leaves often flat or
less convolute, and the lower with their sheaths either smooth or hairy.
New Eng. to Va., and westward, as a naturalized plant, and indigenous
northward. A native form of this variety with a lax panicle,
2--4-flowered spikelets, and slender awns nearly as long as the glume
(var. rubra, of last ed.), is found on Keweenaw Peninsula (_Robbins_)
and Isle Royale, L. Superior (_Gilman_). (Eu.)

[*][*] _Flowers oblong or lanceolate, awnless or nearly so (11/2--4''
long); grain often free! (Root perennial; culms mostly tall; leaves
flat.)_

3. F. nutans, Willd. Culm 2--4 deg. high, naked above; leaves broadly
linear, taper-pointed, dark green, often rather hairy; _panicle of
several long and slender spreading branches_, mostly in pairs,
_drooping_ when old, rough, naked below, bearing near their extremity a
few ovate 3--5-flowered spikelets (3'' long) on pretty long pedicels;
_flowers ovate-oblong, rather obtuse, close together_, coriaceous,
smooth, very obscurely 5-nerved.--Rocky woods and copses. July.--A
common form with the panicle more or less contracted and somewhat erect
has been distinguished as F. Shortii.

F. ELATIOR, L. (TALLER or MEADOW FESCUE.) (Pl. 10, fig. 1--3.) _Panicle
narrow_, contracted before and after flowering, _erect, with short
branches_; spikelets crowded, 5--10-flowered; _flowers rather remote,
oblong-lanceolate_; flowering glume 5-nerved, scarious-margined, blunt,
acute, or rarely with a distinct but very short awn.--The type is large,
3--4 deg. high; spikelets about 6'' long, in an ample and compound panicle.
Rich grass-land.--Var. PRATENSIS, Gray (F. pratensis, _Huds._), is lower
(1--3 deg. high), with a simpler or close panicle of smaller or narrower
spikelets, and abounds in grass-lands. June--Aug. (Nat. from Eu.)

F. GIGANTEA, Vill. Erect, glabrous, 3--4 deg. high; leaves bright green,
3--6'' broad; panicle very loose, nodding; spikelets 3--6-flowered;
flowering glumes 3'' long, with a slender awn of twice the length.--Of
rare occurrence near the coast. (Nat. from Eu.)


70. BROMUS, L. BROME-GRASS. (Pl. 10.)

Spikelets 5--many-flowered, panicled. Glumes unequal, membranaceous; the
lower 1--5-, the upper 3--9-nerved. Flowering glume either convex on the
back or compressed-keeled, 5--9-nerved, awned or bristle-pointed from
below the mostly 2-cleft tip; palet at length adhering to the groove of
the oblong or linear grain. Stamens 3. Styles attached below the apex of
the ovary.--Coarse grasses, with large spikelets, at length drooping, on
pedicels thickened at the apex. (An ancient name for the Oat, from
[Greek: bro/mos], _food_.)

Sec. 1. _Flowering glume oblong, turgid, and convex on the back; the
flowers imbricated over one another before expansion; lower empty glume
distinctly 3--5-nerved, the upper 5--9-nerved._

[*] _Perennial; indigenous. Lower glume strongly 3-nerved, the upper
5-nerved._

1. B. Kalmii, Gray. (WILD CHESS.) Culm slender (11/2--3 deg. high); leaves and
sheaths conspicuously or sparingly hairy; panicle simple, small (3--4'
long); spikelets drooping on capillary peduncles, closely
7--12-flowered, densely silky all over; awn only one third the length of
the lance-oblong flower; flowering glume 7--9-nerved, much longer and
larger than the palet.--Dry ground, N. Eng. to Penn., Mo., Minn., and
northward. June, July.

[*][*] _Annuals or biennials, introduced into grain-fields, or rarely in
waste grounds._

B. SECALINUS, L. (CHEAT or CHESS.) (Pl. 10, fig. 1, 2.) _Panicle
spreading, even in fruit_, the drooping peduncles little branched;
_spikelets oblong-ovate, turgid, smooth_, of 8--10 rather distant
flowers; glume rather longer than the palet, short-awned or awnless;
sheaths nearly glabrous.--Too common in wheat-fields. June, July. (Adv.
from Eu.)

B. MOLLIS, L. (SOFT CHESS.) _Whole plant downy; panicle more erect,
contracted in fruit; spikelets conical-ovate_, somewhat flattened;
flowers closely imbricated; _glume acute_, equalling the
awn.--Wheat-fields, N. Y. to Va.; scarce. June. (Adv. from Eu.)

B. RACEMOSUS, L. (UPRIGHT CHESS.) Very similar to the last, but nearly
glabrous or the sheaths sometimes hairy; glumes glabrous and shining.
(Adv. from Eu.)

Sec. 2. _Flowering glume somewhat convex, but keeled and laterally more or
less compressed, at least above; flowers soon separating from each
other; lower empty glume 1-nerved, the upper 3-nerved, or with an
obscure additional pair._

[*] _Perennial, tall (3--5 deg. high); flowers oblong or lanceolate._

2. B. ciliatus, L. Panicle compound, very loose, the elongated branches
at length divergent, drooping; spikelets 7--12-flowered; flowering glume
tipped with an awn 1/2--3/4 its length, silky with appressed hairs near the
margins, at least below (or rarely naked), smooth or smoothish on the
back;--or, in var. PURGANS, Gray, clothed all over with short and fine
appressed hairs.--River-banks and moist woodlands; common. July,
Aug.--Culm and large leaves (3--6'' wide) smooth or somewhat hairy; the
sheaths in the larger forms often hairy or densely downy near the top.
Variable, comprising several forms.

B. ASPER, L. Culm slender and panicle smaller; spikelets 5--9-flowered;
glume linear-lanceolate, scarcely keeled, hairy near the margins, rather
longer than the awn; sheaths and lower leaves hairy or downy.--N.
Brunswick to Mich. and Ky. (Nat. from Eu.)

[*][*] _Annual or biennial; flowers slender; palet pectinate-ciliate on
the nerves._

B. STERILIS, L. Culm glabrous; leaves rather downy; panicle open;
spikelets on elongated nearly straight simple peduncles, of 5--9 rather
distant 7-nerved roughish linear-awl-shaped long-awned flowers (awn 1'
long).--Waste places and river-banks, E. Mass. to Penn.; rare. June.
(Nat. from Eu.)

B. TECTORUM, L. Leaves short; panicle lax, somewhat 1-sided, the more
numerous pubescent spikelets on very slender curving pedicels.--More
common, N. Eng. to Penn. and N. Y. (Adv. from Eu.)


71. LOLIUM, L. DARNEL. (Pl. 11.)

Spikelets many-flowered, solitary on each joint of the continuous
rhachis, placed edgewise; empty glumes, except in the terminal spikelet,
only one (the upper) and external. Otherwise nearly as in Agropyrum.
(Ancient Latin name.)

L. PERENNE, L. (COMMON DARNEL, RAY- or RYE-GRASS.) Root perennial;
_glume shorter than the spikelet; flowers 8--15_, awnless or sometimes
short-awned.--Fields and lots; eastward. June. (Nat. from Eu.)

L. TEMULENTUM, L. (BEARDED DARNEL.) Root annual; culm taller; _outer
glume fully equalling the_ 5--7-flowered _spikelet; awn longer than the
flower_ (1/2' long).--Grain-fields; rare. (Adv. from Eu.)


72. AGROPYRUM, Gaertn. (Pl. 11.)

Spikelets 3--many-flowered, compressed, 2-ranked, alternate on opposite
sides of a solitary terminal spike, single at each joint (the lowermost,
or all, rarely in pairs) and sessile with the side against the axis.
Glumes transverse (i.e. right and left), nearly equal and opposite,
lanceolate, herbaceous, nerved. Flowering glumes rigid, convex on the
back, 5--7-nerved, pointed or awned from the tip; palet flattened,
bristly-ciliate on the nerves, adherent to the groove of the grain.
Stamens 3.--Our species rather coarse perennials, of difficult
definition. (Name from [Greek: a)gro/s] _a field_, and [Greek: pyro/s],
_wheat_.)

[*] _Multiplying by long running rootstocks; awn shorter than the flower
or none._

1. A. repens, Beauv. (COUCH-, QUITCH-, or QUICK-GRASS.) _Spikelets
4--8-flowered, glabrous_ or nearly so; glumes 3--7-nerved; rhachis
glabrous, but rough on the edges; awns when present straight; leaves
flat and often roughish or pubescent above. (Triticum repens,
_L._)--Nat. from Europe in cultivated grounds, fields, etc., and very
troublesome; indigenous in some of its forms northwestward and on the
coast.--Varies greatly. The ordinary form has a narrow spike, with
3--5-flowered spikelets, the glumes merely acute and rigid-cuspidate, or
acuminate, or short-awned. A tall form, rather bright green, bears awns
nearly as long as the glumes. Other forms abound, especially on or near
the coast. A maritime variety, much resembling var. glaucum, _Boiss._
(A. glaucum, _R. & S._), with large crowded 5--10-flowered spikelets and
glumes very blunt or mucronate, glaucous and the leaves rather rigid and
pungent, occurs on the coast of Maine (Cape Elizabeth, _Tuckerman_). In
the more usual form of this variety, with the large spikes often
elongated (3--9') and the leaves less rigid, the glumes are acuminate or
rarely short-awned. The rhachis or the whole inflorescence and the lower
sheaths are sometimes very pubescent. The glabrous state, or a very
similar glabrous variety, is also abundant in the western region, from
Kan. and Neb. to Dak., and westward, where it is known as _Blue-joint_
or _Blue-stem_. (Eu.)

2. A. dasystachyum, Vasey. Resembling the last; glaucous; leaves narrow
and often involute; the 5--9-flowered _spikelets densely downy-hairy_
all over; glumes thinner with scarious margins, mostly long-acuminate.
(Triticum dasystachyum, _Gray_.)--Sandy shores of Lake Huron and
Superior, and northward. Aug.

[*][*] _No obvious running rootstocks, glabrous, or the flat and
roughish leaves sometimes hairy above; glumes as well as flowers mostly
awned or awn-pointed._

3. A. violaceum, Lange. _Spike short, dense, strict and rigid_, usually
tinged with violet or purple; spikelets 3--5-flowered; _glumes_
conspicuously 5-nerved, _rather abruptly narrowed into a cusp or short
awn_. (Triticum violaceum, _Hornem._)--Alpine region of the White Mts.,
L. Superior, north and westward. (Eu.)--Passing into a variety with
longer usually pale narrow spikes and attenuate often long-awned glumes,
which sometimes approaches A. caninum. N. Brunswick, White Mts., N. H.,
Penn. (_Porter_), L. Superior, and westward.

4. A. caninum, R. & S. (AWNED WHEAT-GRASS.) _Spike usually more or less
nodding_, at least in fruit, rather dense (3--6' long); spikelets
3--5-flowered; _glumes 3--5-nerved; awns straight or somewhat bent or
spreading, fully twice the length of the palet_. (Triticum caninum,
_L._)--Sparingly naturalized in cultivated ground and meadows.
Indigenous along our northern borders, and westward. (Eu.)

5. A. tenerum, Vasey. Culms 1--3 deg. high; leaves narrow; spike
very narrow, 2--7' long; spikelets 3--5-flowered; glumes
short-acuminate.--Minn. to Kan., and very common westward.


73. LEPTURUS, R. Br.

Spikelets 1--2-flowered, solitary and alternate upon the opposite sides
of a narrow spike, sessile and appressed in the concave joints. Empty
glumes transverse, narrow, rigid, 5-nerved, the flowering much shorter,
thin and hyaline.--Low annuals, branching at the base, with narrow
leaves and rigid often curved spikes. (Name from [Greek: lepto/s],
_narrow_, and [Greek: ou)ra/], _tail_, or spike.)

L. INCURVATUS, Trin. Much branched, decumbent, 6' high or less; spikes
terminal and lateral, 1--4' long, the base included in the broad
sheath.--Borders of brackish marshes, Md. to S. Va., and on ballast
northward. (Nat. from Eu.)


74. HORDEUM, Tourn. BARLEY. (Pl. 11.)

Spikelets 1-flowered, with an awl-shaped rudiment on the inner side,
three at each joint of the rhachis of a terminal spike, but the lateral
ones usually imperfect or abortive, and short-stalked. Empty glumes side
by side in front of the spikelets, 6 in number, forming a kind of
involucre, slender and awn-pointed or bristle-form. Flowering glume and
palet herbaceous, the former (anterior) convex, long-awned from the
apex. Stamens 3. Grain oblong, commonly adherent.--Spike often
separating into joints. Ours annuals or biennials, or scarcely
perennial. (The ancient Latin name.)

1. H. jubatum, L. (SQUIRREL-TAIL GRASS.) (Pl. 11, fig. 1, 2.) Low;
lateral flowers abortive, on a short pedicel, short-awned; the perfect
flower bearing a capillary awn (2' long) about equalling the similar
capillary glumes, all spreading.--Sandy sea-shore, upper Great Lakes,
and westward. June.

2. H. pratense, Huds. Low (6--18' high); lateral flowers imperfect or
neutral, awnless or merely pointed; perfect flower with awn as long as
those of the glumes (3--6''); spike linear, 1--2' long.--Plains,
especially in saline soil, Ohio to Ill. and westward; also sparingly
introduced, Va., and southward along the coast. May, June. (Eu.)


75. ELYMUS, L. LYME-GRASS. WILD RYE. (Pl. 11.)

Spikelets 2--4 at each joint of the rhachis of a terminal spike, all
fertile and alike, sessile, each 1--7-flowered. Glumes conspicuous,
nearly side by side in front of the spikelets, 2 for each spikelet,
forming an involucre to the cluster. Flower coriaceous; the glume
rounded on the back, acute or awned at the apex. Grain adherent to the
involving glume (whence the name, an ancient one for some grain, from
[Greek: e)lyo], _to roll up_).

[*] _Glumes and flowers firm or rigid, all or only the latter awned;
spikelets 1--5-flowered; slender perennials, with rather harsh and broad
flat leaves._

[+] _Spike large and stout._

1. E. Virginicus, L. (Pl. 11, fig. 1--3.) Culm stout, 2--3 deg. high; _spike
rigidly upright, dense_ (2--3' long, 6'' thick), the short _peduncle
usually included in the sheath_; spikelets 2--3 together, 2--3-flowered,
smooth, rather short-awned, about the length of the thickened
strongly-nerved and bristle-pointed _lanceolate glumes_.--River-banks;
common. Aug.

2. E. Canadensis, L. _Spike soon nodding_ (5--9' long), on an exserted
peduncle; spikelets mostly in pairs, of 3--5 long-awned rough or
rough-hairy flowers; the _awl-shaped glumes tipped with shorter
awns_.--Var. GLAUCIFOLIUS, Gray, is pale or glaucous throughout, the
flowers with more spreading awns (11/2' long).--Var. INTERMEDIUS, Vasey,
has the awns scarcely longer than the glumes.--River-banks; common.

[+][+] _Spike and culm more slender._

3. E. striatus, Willd. More or less _pubescent; spike dense and
thickish_ (2--4' long), upright or slightly nodding; spikelets mostly in
pairs, 1--2- (or rarely 3-) flowered, minutely bristly-hairy; _glumes
awl-shaped, bristle-awned_, 1--3-nerved, _about thrice the length of the
flowers_, which are only 3'' long exclusive of the capillary awn (1'
long).--Var. VILLOSUS, Gray, has very hairy flowers and glumes, and
villous sheaths.--Rocky woods and banks. July, Aug.

4. E. Sibiricus, L., var. Americanus. _Glabrous; spike wand-like_ (2--6'
long, 2--3'' thick), often somewhat nodding; spikelets in pairs,
3--6-flowered; _glumes linear-lanceolate_, 3--5-nerved, acuminate and
smooth or often scabrous on the nerves, _short-awned, shorter than the
flowers_, which bear an erect awn of once or twice their
length.--Marquette, Mich. (_Porter_), N. Minn., and westward.

[*][*] _Glumes and palet awnless and soft in texture; reed-like
perennials_.

5. E. mollis, Trin. Culm (3 deg. high) velvety at top; spike thick, erect
(8' long); spikelets 2 or 3 at each joint, 5--8-flowered; the lanceolate
pointed 5--7-nerved glumes (1' long) and the pointed flowers
soft-villous; rhachis of the spikelets separating into joints.--Shore of
the Great Lakes, Maine, and northward. (Near E. arenarius.)

[*][*][*] _Empty glumes very narrow, and all very long-awned; spike
disarticulating at maturity._

6. E. Sitanion, Schultes. Low (1/2--2 deg. high), stout; spike 1--4' long, the
peduncle slightly exserted; the spreading scabrous awns 2--3'
long.--Central Minn. to Kan., and westward.


76. ASPRELLA, Willd. BOTTLE-BRUSH GRASS. (Pl. 11.)

Spikelets 2--3 or sometimes solitary on each joint of the rhachis of a
terminal spike, raised on a very short callous pedicel, loosely
2--4-flowered (when solitary flatwise on the rhachis). Glumes none! or
small, awn-like, and deciduous. Otherwise nearly as in Elymus. (Name a
diminutive of _asper_, rough or prickly.)

1. A. Hystrix, Willd. Perennial; culms 3--4 deg. high; leaves and sheaths
smoothish; spike loose (3--6' long); the spreading spikelets 2--3
together, early deciduous; flowers smoothish or often rough-hairy,
tipped with an awn thrice their length (1' long). (Gymnostichum Hystrix,
_Schreb._)--Moist woodlands. July, Aug.


77. ARUNDINARIA, Michx. CANE. (Pl. 11.)

Spikelets flattened, 5--14-flowered; the flowers somewhat separated on
the jointed rhachis. Empty glumes very small, membranaceous, the upper
one larger. Flowering glumes and palet herbaceous or somewhat
membranaceous, the glume convex on the back, many-nerved, tapering into
a mucronate point or bristle. Squamulae 3, longer than the ovary. Stamens
3. Grain oblong, free.--Arborescent or shrubby grasses, simple or with
fascicled branches, and with large spikelets in panicles or racemes;
blade of the leaf jointed upon the sheath; flowers polygamous. (Name
from _arundo_, a reed.)

1. A. macrosperma, Michx. (LARGE CANE.) (Pl. 11, fig. 1, 2.) Culms
arborescent, 10--40 deg. high and {1/2}--3' thick at base, rigid, simple the
first year, branching the second, afterwards at indefinite periods
fruiting, and soon after decaying; leaves lanceolate (1--2' wide),
smoothish or pubescent, the sheath ciliate on one margin, stoutly
fimbriate each side of the base of the leaf; panicle lateral, composed
of few simple racemes; spikelets 1--3' long, purplish or pale, erect;
flowering glume lanceolate, acute or acuminate, glabrous or pubescent,
fringed (5--12'' long).--River-banks, S. Va.(?), Ky., and southward,
forming cane-brakes. April.

Var. suffruticosa, Munro. (SWITCH CANE. SMALL CANE.) Lower and more
slender (2--10 deg. high), often growing in water; leaves 4''--1' broad;
spikelets solitary or in a simple raceme at the summit of the branches,
or frequently on leafless radical culms. (A. tecta, _Muhl._)--Swamps and
moist soil, Md., S. Ind. to S. E. Mo., and southward. Sometimes fruiting
several years in succession.




SERIES II.


CRYPTOGAMOUS OR FLOWERLESS PLANTS.

Vegetables destitute of proper flowers (i.e. having no stamens nor
pistils), and producing instead of seeds minute one-celled germinating
bodies called _spores_, in which there is no embryo or rudimentary
plantlet.


CLASS III. ACROGENS.

Cryptogamous plants with a distinct axis or stem, growing from the apex,
and commonly not with later increase in diameter, usually furnished with
distinct leaves; reproduction by antheridia and archegonia, sometimes
also by gemmation.


SUBCLASS I. VASCULAR ACROGENS, OR PTERIDOPHYTES.[1]

[Footnote 1: The orders of this Subclass have been elaborated anew for
this edition by Prof. DANIEL C. EATON of Yale University.]

Stems containing woody fibre and vessels (especially scalariform or
spiral ducts). Antheridia or archegonia, or both, formed on a minute
prothallus which is developed from the spore on germination, the
archegonium containing a nucleus, which after fertilization becomes an
oospore and at length grows into the conspicuous spore-bearing plant.


ORDER 130. EQUISETACEAE. (HORSETAIL FAMILY.)

_Rush-like, often branching plants, with jointed and mostly hollow stems
from running rootstocks, having sheaths at the joints, and, when
fertile, terminated by the conical or spike-like fructification composed
of shield-shaped stalked scales bearing the spore-cases beneath._--A
single genus.


1. EQUISETUM, L. HORSETAIL. SCOURING RUSH. (Pl. 21)

Spore-cases (_sporangia, thecae_) 6 or 7, adhering to the under side of
the angled shield-shaped scales of the spike, 1-celled, opening down the
inner side and discharging the numerous loose spores. To the base of
each spore are attached 4 thread-like and club-shaped elastic filaments,
which roll up closely around the spore when moist, and uncoil when
dry.--Rootstocks perennial, wide-creeping, hard and blackish, jointed,
often branched and sometimes bearing small tubers. Stems erect,
cylindrical, hollow, jointed; the surface striated or grooved with
alternate ridges and furrows, the cuticle in most species containing
silica in the form of minute granules, rosettes, or tubercles; the
joints containing besides the central air-cavity a circle of smaller
hollows beneath the furrows and a set of still smaller ones beneath the
ridges; the nodes closed and solid, each bearing instead of leaves a
sheath which is divided into teeth corresponding in number and position
to the principal ridges of the stem; stomata in the furrows, each with
two pairs of guard-cells, of which the outer pair is marked with
radiating lines of silica. Branches, when present, in whorls from the
base of the sheath, like the stem, but without the central air-cavity.
Prothallus green, formed upon the ground, often variously lobed, usually
dioecious. (The ancient name, from _equus_, horse, and _seta_, bristle.)

Sec. 1. _Annual-stemmed, not surviving the winter._

[*] _Fruiting in spring from soft and rather succulent pale or brownish
fertile stems, the sterile stems or branches appearing later, herbaceous
and very different._

[+] _Fertile stems unbranched, destitute of chlorophyll and soon
perishing; the sterile branching copiously._

1. E. arvense, L. (COMMON H.) Fertile stems (4--10' high) with loose and
usually distant about 8--12-toothed sheaths; the sterile slender (at
length 1--2 deg. high), 10--14-furrowed, producing long and simple or
sparingly branched 4-angular branches, their teeth 4, herbaceous,
lanceolate.--Moist, especially gravelly soil; very common. March--May.
Rootstocks often bearing little tubers.--Var. CAMPESTRE, Milde, is a not
uncommon state, in which the sterile stem bears a small fruiting spike
at the summit. (Eu.)

[+][+] _Fertile stems when older producing herbaceous 3-sided branches,
and lasting through the summer, except the naked top which perishes
after fructification._

2. E. pratense, Ehrh. Sterile and finally also the fertile stems
producing _simple straight branches_; sheaths of the stem with
ovate-lanceolate short teeth, those of the branches 3-toothed; stems
more slender and the branches shorter than in the last.--Mich. to Minn.,
and northward. April, May. (Eu.)

3. E. sylvaticum, L. Sterile and fertile stems (about 12-furrowed)
producing _compound racemed branches_; sheaths loose, with 8--14 rather
blunt teeth, those of the branches bearing 4 or 5, of the branchlets 3,
lance-pointed divergent teeth.--Wet shady places; common northward. May.
(Eu.)

[*][*] _Fruiting in summer; stems all of one kind, or the fertile
contemporaneous with and like the sterile, equally herbaceous, producing
mostly simple branches, or sometimes nearly naked._

4. E. palustre, L. Stems (10--18' high) slender, very deeply
5--9-grooved, _the ridges narrow and acute_, roughish, the lance-awl
shaped teeth whitish-margined; branches always hollow, 4--7-angled,
rather few in a whorl.--Wet places, Niagara River (_Clinton_), Wisc.
(_Austin_), and northward. June. (Eu.)

5. E. littorale, Kuehlewein. Stems (8--18' high) slender, deeply
6--16-grooved, _the ridges rounded_, the teeth shorter than in the last,
narrowly white-margined; branches often solid, 3--4-angled, 2--6 in a
whorl.--Wet sandy shores, Vt. and N. Y., and northward.--Spores always
abortive, whence the plant has been considered a hybrid, perhaps of E.
arvense and E. limosum. July. (Eu.)

6. E. limosum, L. (Pl. 21, fig. 1--5.) Stems (2--5 deg. high) _slightly
many-furrowed_, smooth, sometimes continuing unbranched, but usually
producing ascending branches after fructification; sheaths appressed,
with 10--22 (commonly about 18) dark-brown and acute rigid short
teeth.--In shallow water; rather common.--Air-cavities none under the
grooves, but small ones under the ridges. A form in which the branches
bear numerous small spikes is var. POLYSTACHYUM, Brueckner. June, July.
(Eu.)

Sec. 2. _Stems all alike, evergreen, unbranched, or producing a few slender
erect branches; fruiting in summer. Central air-cavity of the stem very
large._

[*] _Stems tall and stout (1{1/2}--4 deg. or even 6 deg. high), simple, or
casually branched, evenly many-grooved; sheaths appressed._

7. E. hyemale, L. (SCOURING-RUSH. SHAVE-GRASS.) Stems 1{1/2}--4 deg. high,
8--34 grooved, the _ridges_ roughened by two more or less distinct lines
of _tubercles; sheaths elongated_, with a black girdle above the base
and a black limb; ridges of the sheaths obscurely 4-carinate, the teeth
blackish, membranaceous, soon falling off.--Wet banks; common northward.
Formerly in common use for polishing wood and metal. (Eu.)

8. E. robustum, Braun. Stems tall and stout (sometimes 8--10 deg. high and
nearly an inch thick), 20--48-grooved, the _ridges_ roughened _with one
line of transversely oblong tubercles; sheaths rather short_, with a
black girdle at base and a black limb; ridges of the sheaths
tricarinate, the blackish teeth soon falling off.--River-banks, Ohio and
westward.

9. E. laevigatum, Braun. Stems 1--4 deg. high, rather slender, pale green,
14--30-grooved, the ridges almost smooth; sheath slightly enlarged
upward, with a black girdle at the base of the mostly deciduous
white-margined teeth, and rarely also at the base of the sheath; ridges
of the sheath with one keel, or sometimes obscurely tricarinate.--By
streams and in clayey places, Ohio to Minn., and westward.

[*][*] _Stems slender, in tufts, 5--10-grooved; sheaths looser._

10. E. variegatum, Schleicher. _Stems ascending_ (6--18' long), usually
simple from a branched base, _5--10-grooved_; sheaths green variegated
with black above, the 5--10 teeth tipped with a deciduous
bristle.--Shores or river-banks, N. H. (Bellows Falls, _Carey_) and
Niagara to Minn., and northward; rare. (Eu.)

11. E. scirpoides, Michx. _Stems very numerous in a tuft, filiform_
(3--6' high), _flexuous and curving, mostly 6-grooved_, with acute
ridges; _sheaths 3-toothed_, the bristle-pointed teeth more persistent;
central air-cavity wanting.--Wooded hillsides, N. Eng. to Penn., Minn.,
and northward. (Eu.)


ORDER 131. FILICES. (FERNS.)

_Leafy plants, with the leaves_ (fronds) _usually raised on a stalk or
petiole_ (stipe), _rising from a_ (sometimes greatly elongated)
_rootstock, separately rolled up_ (circinate) _in the bud, and bearing
on the under surface or along the margin small reticulated sporangia,
which at length split open and discharge the numerous minute spores.
Prothallus green, above ground, normally monoecious._

SUBORDER I. Polypodiaceae. Sporangia collected in dots, lines, or
variously shaped clusters (_sori_ or _fruit-dots_) on the back or
margins of the frond or its divisions, cellular-reticulated, stalked,
the stalk running into a vertical incomplete many-jointed ring, which by
straightening at maturity ruptures the sporangium transversely on the
inner side, discharging the spores. Fruit dots often covered (at least
when young) by a membrane called the _indusium_ (or less properly the
_involucre_), growing either from the back or the margin of the frond.
(Plates 16--19.)

Tribe I. POLYPODIEAE. Fructification on the back of the frond, in round
or roundish fruit-dots (_sori_) placed on the veins or at the ends of
the veins, without indusium of any kind. Stipes articulated to the
rootstock, leaving a distinct scar when separated. Veins free (not
reticulated) in our species.

1. Polypodium. Sori round, in one or more rows, on each side of the
midrib or of the segments of the frond.

Tribe II. GRAMMITIDEAE. Sori more or less elongated, without indusium,
placed on the back of the frond, usually along the veins or near their
extremities. Veins free in our species.

2. Notholaena. Sori short, of few rather large sporangia, placed near the
tips of the veins; under surface of the frond usually either chaffy,
woolly, or powdery.

Tribe III. PTERIDEAE. Fructification marginal or intramarginal, provided
with a general indusium formed of the (either altered or unchanged)
margin of the frond. Stipes not articulated to the rootstock. Veins free
in all our species.

[*] Sporangia at the ends of the veins, on a reflexed portion of the
margin of the frond.

3. Adiantum. Midrib of the pinnules marginal or none. Stipe black and
polished.

[*][*] Sporangia borne on a continuous marginal vein-like receptacle,
connecting the apices of the veins, and covered by a delicate whitish
indusium formed of the reflexed margin.

4. Pteris. Midrib of the pinnules central. Stipe light colored.

[*][*][*] Sporangia at or near the ends of the unconnected veins, borne
on the under surface of the frond; indusium various.

5. Cheilanthes. Sori minute, at the ends of the veins; indusium
continuous or interrupted. Fronds mostly chaffy, woolly, or
pulverulent, rarely smooth.

6. Pellaea. Sori on the upper part of the veins, distinct, or mostly
forming a confluent submarginal band of sporangia. Indusium
membranaceous, continuous, rarely wanting. Sterile and fertile fronds
not very unlike; stipes dark colored; fronds smooth.

7. Cryptogramme. Sori roundish or elongated and extending far down the
free veins, at first covered by the very broad continuous indusium, at
length exposed and confluent. Sterile and fertile fronds very
different; stipes light colored; fronds smooth.

Tribe IV. BLECHNEAE. Sori oblong or linear, borne on a veinlet parallel
to the midrib, and covered with a special usually concave or arched
indusium attached to the fruiting veinlet, and opening along the inner
side.

8. Woodwardia. Sori forming a chain-like row each side of the midrib or
central vein. Veins reticulated.

Tribe V. ASPLENIEAE. Sori more or less elongated, occupying one or both
sides of oblique veins, covered by a special indusium which is attached
by one side to the fertile vein, and is free on the other. Stipes not
articulated.

9. Asplenium. Sori on the upper side or rarely on both sides of a
veinlet. Veins free in all our species.

10. Scolopendrium. Sori linear, confluent in pairs, each pair appearing
like a single sorus with a double indusium opening down the middle.
Veins free.

11. Camptosorus. Sori oblong, variously curved, or some of them in
opposite pairs. Veins reticulated.

Tribe VI. ASPIDIEAE. Sori round or roundish, on the back or rarely at the
apex of the vein, with a special indusium, rarely naked. Stipes not
articulated to the rootstock.

[*] Indusium obsolete or none.

12. Phegopteris. Sori round, rather small. Veins free in our species.

[*][*] Indusium evident, round or roundish, covering the sporangia, at
least when young. Sterile and fertile fronds not very unlike. Veins
free in our species.

13. Aspidium. Indusium flat or slightly convex, orbicular or
round-reniform, fixed by the centre, opening all round the margin.

14. Cystopteris. Indusium convex, fixed by a broad base partly under the
sorus, commonly reflexed as the sporangia ripen.

[*][*][*] Indusium obscure, irregularly semicircular. Fertile fronds
much contracted and very unlike the sterile ones.

15. Onoclea. Sporangia on an elevated receptacle; divisions of the
fertile frond pod-like or berry-like.

Tribe VII. WOODSIEAE. Sori round, borne on the veins; indusium fixed
under the sorus, divided into segments or into slender filaments.

16. Woodsia. Small ferns with free veins. Indusium very delicate.

Tribe VIII. DICKSONIEAE. Sori roundish, marginal or submarginal. Indusium
cup-shaped or two-valved, the outer portion composed of a reflexed
lobule of the frond, or more or less united to it.

17. Dicksonia. Indusium in our species small, membranaceous, nearly
globular. Frond elongated, decompound.

SUBORDER II. Hymenophyllaceae. Sporangia sessile on a bristle-like
receptacle within a cup-shaped or bivalvular involucre, the ring
transverse and complete. Fronds delicately membranaceous.

18. Trichomanes. Involucres funnel-form or cup-shaped.

SUBORDER III. Schizaeaceae. Sporangia ovate, sessile, having a complete
transverse articulated ring at the apex, and opening by a longitudinal
slit. (Pl. 19.)

19. Schizaea. Sporangia naked, fixed in a double row to the midrib of the
narrow fertile segments. Sterile fronds rigid, simple or dichotomously
branched.

20. Lygodium. Sporangia borne in a double row on narrow fertile
segments, each sporangium seated on a separate veinlet, and provided
with a special scale-like indusium. Fronds leafy, climbing.

SUBORDER IV. Osmundaceae. Sporangia naked, globose, mostly pedicelled,
reticulated, with no ring or mere traces of one near the apex, opening
into two valves by a longitudinal slit. Stipes winged at base and almost
stipulate! (Pl. 19.)

21. Osmunda. Fertile pinnae or fronds very much contracted, bearing the
abundant and large sporangia upon the margins of the very narrow
segments. Veins free.


1. POLYPODIUM, L. POLYPODY. (Pl. 16.)

Fruit-dots round, naked, arranged on the back of the frond in one or
more rows each side of the midrib or central vein, or irregularly
scattered, each borne in our species on the end of a free veinlet.
Rootstocks creeping, branched, often covered with chaffy scales, bearing
scattered roundish knobs, to which the stipes are attached by a distinct
articulation. (Name from [Greek: poly/s], _many_, and [Greek: pou~s],
_foot_, alluding to the branching rootstock.)

1. P. vulgare, L. (Pl. 16, fig. 1--3.) Fronds evergreen, oblong, _smooth
both sides_, 4--10' high, simple and deeply pinnatifid; the divisions
linear-oblong, obtuse or somewhat acute, remotely and obscurely toothed;
veins once or twice forked; _fruit-dots large, midway between the midrib
and the margin_.--Rocks; common. July. (Eu.)

2. P. incanum, Swartz. Fronds evergreen and coriaceous, oblong, 2--6'
high, _grayish and very scurfy underneath with peltate scales_, simply
pinnatifid; the divisions oblong-linear, obtuse; _fruit-dots rather
small, near the margin_; veins forking, free in the N. American
plant!--Rocks and trunks of trees, Va. and Ohio to Ill., and southward.
Aug.


2. NOTHOLAENA, R. Brown. CLOAK-FERN.

Fruit-dots roundish or oblong, placed near the ends of the veins, soon
more or less confluent into an irregular marginal band, with no proper
involucre. Veins always free. Fronds of small size, 1--4-pinnate, the
lower surface almost always either hairy, tomentose, chaffy, or covered
with a fine waxy white or yellow powder. (Name from [Greek: no/thos],
_spurious_, and [Greek: lai~na], _a cloak_, the woolly coating of the
original species forming a spurious covering to the sporangia.)

1. N. dealbata, Kunze. Fronds triangular-ovate, 1--3' long,
3--4-pinnate; rhachis and branches straight, black and shining; ultimate
pinnules scarcely a line long, white and powdery on the lower
surface.--Clefts of calcareous rocks, Mo., Kan., and southwestward.
July--Aug.


3. ADIANTUM, L. MAIDENHAIR. (Pl. 17.)

Fruit-dots marginal, short, borne on the under side of a transversely
oblong, crescent-shaped or roundish, more or less altered margin or
summit of a lobe or tooth of the frond reflexed to form an indusium; the
sporangia attached to the approximated tips of the free forking
veins.--Main rib (costa) of the pinnules none (in our species), or at
the lower margin. Stipes black and polished. (The ancient name, from
[Greek: a] privative and [Greek: diai/no], meaning _unwetted_, the
smooth foliage repelling rain-drops.)

1. A. pedatum, L. (Pl. 17, fig. 1--3.) _Frond forked at the summit of
the upright slender stalk_ (9--15' high), the recurved branches bearing
on one side several slender spreading pinnate divisions; pinnules
numerous, short-stalked and obliquely triangular-oblong, entire on the
lower margin, from which the veins all proceed, and cleft and
fruit-bearing on the other.--Rich, moist woods. July.--A delicate and
most graceful Fern.

2. A. Capillus-Veneris, L. _Fronds with a continuous main rhachis,
ovate-lanceolate_, 9--18' long, often pendent, 2--3-pinnate at the base,
the upper third or half simply pinnate; pinnules wedge-obovate or
rhomboid, 6--12'' long, deeply and irregularly incised; veinlets
flabellately forking from the base; involucres lunulate or transversely
oblong.--Moist rocky places, Va. to Mo., and southward. (Eu.)


4. PTERIS, L. BRAKE or BRACKEN. (Pl. 17.)

Sporangia in a continuous slender line of fructification, occupying the
entire margin of the fertile frond, and covered by its reflexed narrow
edge which forms a continuous membranaceous indusium, attached to an
uninterrupted transverse vein-like receptacle connecting the tips of the
forked free veins.--Fronds 1--3-pinnate or decompound. (The ancient
Greek name of Ferns, from [Greek: ptero/n], _a wing_, on account of the
prevalent pinnate or feathery fronds.)

1. P. aquilina, L. (COMMON BRAKE.) Frond dull green (2--3 deg. wide),
ternate at the summit of an erect stout stalk (1--2 deg. high), the widely
spreading branches twice pinnate; pinnules oblong-lanceolate; the upper
undivided; the lower more or less pinnatifid, with oblong obtuse lobes,
margined all round with the indusium, which is really double in this
species.--Var. CAUDATA, with the lobes very narrow and revolute, the
terminal ones much elongated, is a southern form, which extends in a
modified condition as far north as New Jersey.--Thickets and hillsides,
common. Aug. (Eu.)


5. CHEILANTHES, Swartz. LIP-FERN. (Pl. 17.)

Sporangia borne on the thickened ends of free veinlets, forming small
and roundish distinct or nearly contiguous marginal fruit-dots, covered
by a mostly whitish and membranaceous, sometimes herbaceous, common
indusium, formed of the reflexed margin of separate lobes or of the
whole pinnule.--Low, mostly with 2--3-pinnate and hairy or chaffy,
rarely smooth fronds, the sterile and fertile nearly alike, the
divisions with the principal vein central. Some species with continuous
indusium connect this genus very closely with the next. (Name composed
of [Greek: chei~los], _a lip_, and [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_, from the
shape of the indusium.)

[*] _Fronds smooth, or at most hairy._

1. C. Alabamensis, Kunze. _Fronds smooth_, chartaceous (2--8' long),
ovate-lanceolate, bipinnate; pinnae numerous, oblong-lanceolate; pinnules
triangular-oblong, rather acute, often auriculate or lobed; _indusium
continuous, rather broad, pale, and of firm consistence_.--On rocks,
mountains of Va. to Ky., and southward.

2. C. vestita, Swartz. (Pl. 17, fig. 1, 2.) Fronds (6--15' high),
lanceolate-oblong, hirsute, as are the brown and shining stipes, with
_straightish prominently articulated rusty hairs_, twice pinnate; pinnae
rather distant, triangular-ovate; pinnules oblong, crowded (2--4''
long), more or less incised, _the ends of the roundish or oblong lobes
reflexed and forming separate herbaceous involucres_, which are pushed
back by the ripened sporangia.--Clefts of rocks, Manhattan Island
(_W. W. Denslow_) and N. J. to Ill., and southward.

[*][*] _Fronds woolly or tomentose._

3. C. tomentosa, Link. Fronds (12--20' high) lanceolate-oblong, densely
tomentose with _slender and entangled whitish obscurely articulated
hairs_, thrice pinnate; primary and secondary pinnae oblong or
ovate-oblong; _pinnules distinct_, minute (1/2--1'' long),
roundish-obovate, sessile or adnate-decurrent, the upper surface less
woolly, _the reflexed narrow margin forming a continuous somewhat
membranaceous indusium_.--Mountains of Va. and Ky.; thence west and
southward.--Stipe and rhachis rather stout, brown, covered with narrow
chaffy scales and whitish hairs.

4. C. lanuginosa, Nutt. Stipes slender, at first hairy, black or brown,
shining; fronds (3--6' high) ovate-lanceolate, woolly with _soft whitish
distinctly articulated flattened hairs_, becoming smoother above, twice
or thrice pinnate; pinnae (5--6'' long) ovate, the lowest distant, the
others contiguous; _pinnules crenately pinnatifid_, or mostly divided
into minute and roundish densely crowded segments (1/2--1'' long), _the
herbaceous margin recurved forming an almost continuous indusium_.--In
dense tufts, on dry rocks and cliffs, Ill. to Minn., thence west and
southward.


6. PELLAEA, Link. CLIFF-BRAKE. (Pl. 16.)

Sporangia in roundish or elongated clusters on the upper part of the
free veins, distinct, or confluent laterally so as to imitate the
marginal continuous line of fructification of Pteris, commonly covered
by a broad membranaceous and continuous (rarely interrupted) general
indusium, which consists of the reflexed and altered margin of the
fertile pinnule or division. Small ferns, with 1--3-pinnate fronds, the
fertile ones with narrower divisions than the sterile, but otherwise
similar. Stipes generally dark-colored, smooth and shining. (Name from
[Greek: pello/s], _dusky_, alluding to the stipe.)

1. P. gracilis, Hook. (Pl. 16.) Fronds smooth (3--6' high), _delicately
membranaceous and slender_, of few pinnae, the lower ones once or twice
pinnately parted into 3--5 decurrent divisions, those of the fertile
frond oblong or linear-oblong, entire or sparingly incised; of the
sterile ovate or obovate, crenate or incised; veins of the fertile
fronds mostly only once forked.--Shaded calcareous rocks, Mass. to
Minn., and northward; rare. July.--Rootstock very slender, creeping;
stipes polished, brownish, darker and sparingly chaffy at base.

2. P. atropurpurea, Link. Smooth, except some bristly-chaffy hairs on
the midribs and especially on the _dark purple and polished stalk_ and
rhachis, 6--15' high; _frond coriaceous_, pale, once or below twice
pinnate; the divisions broadly linear or oblong, or the sterile
sometimes oval, chiefly entire, somewhat heart-shaped or else truncate
at the stalked base; veins about twice forked.--Dry calcareous rocks;
not common, but of wide range. July.--Rootstock short and stout; stipes
clustered.


7. CRYPTOGRAMME, R. Brown. ROCK-BRAKE.

Fruit-dots roundish or elongated and extending far down on the free
forking veins. True involucre or indusium none, the herbaceous margins
of the fertile segments at first reflexed and meeting at the midrib, at
length opening out flat and exposing the confluent sporangia.--Low
ferns, with smooth, 2--3-pinnate fronds, the fertile ones taller than
the sterile, and with much narrower divisions. (Name from [Greek:
krypto/s], _hidden_, and [Greek: gramme/], _a line_, alluding to the
lines of sporangia at first concealed by the reflexed margin.)

1. C. acrostichoides, R. Brown. Stipes densely tufted, straw-colored;
fronds 2--3-pinnate (6--10' high); fertile segments stalked, linear or
linear-oblong (3--5'' long), the sporangia in lines extending down the
veins almost to the midrib, confluent when ripe and covering the under
surface of the now fully opened segments; sterile fronds on much shorter
stipes, with ovate or obovate decurrent and crenately toothed or incised
segments. (Allosorus acrostichoides, _Sprengel_.)--On rocks, from
L. Superior westward and northward.--Very near C. crispa of Eu.


8. WOODWARDIA, Smith. CHAIN-FERN. (Pl. 17.)

Fruit-dots oblong or linear, arranged in one or more chain-like rows on
transverse anastomosing veinlets parallel and near to the midrib.
Indusium fixed by its outer margin to the fruitful veinlet, free and
opening on the side next the midrib. Veins more or less reticulated,
free toward the margin of the frond.--Large ferns, with pinnatifid or
pinnate fronds. (Named for _Thomas J. Woodward_, an English botanist.)

Sec. 1. ANCHISTEA. _Sterile and fertile fronds alike; veins forming only
one row of meshes (areoles)._

1. W. Virginica, Smith. (Pl. 17, fig. 4, 5.) Fronds (2--3 deg. high)
pinnate, with numerous lanceolate pinnatifid pinnae; segments oblong;
veins forming a row of narrow areoles along the midrib both of the pinnae
and of the lobes, the outer veinlets free; fruit-dots oblong, one to
each areole, confluent when ripe.--Wet swamps, Maine to Ark., and
southward. Rootstocks creeping, often 6--8 deg. long! July.

Sec. 2. LORINSERIA. _Sterile and fertile fronds unlike; veins of the
sterile fronds forming many rows of meshes._

2. W. angustifolia, Smith. (Pl. 17, fig. 1--3.) Fronds pinnatifid;
sterile ones (12--18' high) with lanceolate serrulate divisions united
by a broad wing; fertile fronds taller, with narrowly linear almost
disconnected divisions, the areoles and fruit-dots (4--5'' long) in a
single row each side of the secondary midribs; rootstocks creeping.--Wet
woods, New Eng., near the coast, to Ark., and southward; rare. Aug.,
Sept.


9. ASPLENIUM, L. SPLEENWORT. (Pl. 18.)

Fruit-dots oblong or linear, oblique, separate; the straight, or rarely
curved, indusium fixed lengthwise by one edge to the upper (inner) side
of the fertile vein;--in some species a part of the fruit-dots are
double, the fertile vein bearing two indusia placed back to back. Veins
free in all our species. (Name from [Greek: a]- privative and [Greek:
sple/n], _the spleen_, for supposed remedial properties.)

Sec. 1. ASPLENIUM proper. _Indusium straight or slightly curved, attached
to the upper side of the vein, rarely double._

[*] _Small evergreen ferns; fronds pinnatifid, or pinnate only near the
base._

1. A. pinnatifidum, Nutt. _Fronds_ (3--6' long) lanceolate, _pinnatifid,
or pinnate below, tapering above into a slender prolongation_, "the apex
sometimes rooting"; _lobes roundish-ovate, obtuse, or the lowest pair
long-acuminate_; fruit-dots irregular, those next the midrib often
double, even the slender prolongation fertile.--On cliffs and rocks,
Penn. to Mo., and southward; very rare. July.--Resembles the
Walking-Leaf (Camptosorus), but the veins are free. _Stipes brownish,
becoming green above, and so passing into the broad pale green midrib._

2. A. ebenoides, R. R. Scott. _Fronds_ (4--9' long) broadly lanceolate
_pinnatifid, below pinnate, the apex prolonged and slender; divisions
lanceolate from a broad base, the lower ones shorter_, often
proliferous, as is the apex of the frond; fruit-dots much as in the
last; _stipes black and polished, as is the lower part of the midrib,
especially beneath_.--Limestone cliffs, Conn. and Penn., and southward;
very rare, usually growing with Camptosorus and Asplenium ebeneum, of
which _Rev. M. G. Berkeley_ considered it a probable hybrid.

[*][*] _Small evergreen ferns; the narrow fronds simply pinnate with
numerous pinnae._

[+] _Pinnae not auricled._

3. A. viride, Hudson. _Fronds_ (2--5' long) tufted, _linear in outline,
pale green, softly herbaceous; pinnae roundish-ovate or ovate-rhomboid_,
short-stalked, crenately toothed (2--4'' long), the midvein indistinct
and forking; _the slender stipe brownish and passing into a green
herbaceous rhachis_.--Shaded cliffs; northern New Eng., west and
northward; rare. (Eu.)

4. A. Trichomanes, L. _Fronds_ (3--8' long) in dense spreading tufts,
_linear in outline, dark green and more rigid; pinnae roundish-oblong or
oval_ (3--4'' long), entire or crenulate, rarely incised, unequal-sided,
obliquely wedge-truncate at base, attached by a narrow point, the
midvein forking and evanescent; _the thread-like stipe and rhachis
purple-brown and shining_.--Shaded cliffs; common. July. (Eu.)

[+][+] _Pinnae more or less auricled._

5. A. parvulum, Mart. & Gal. Fronds upright (4--10' high), narrowly
linear-oblanceolate; _pinnae_ (2--6'' long) _rigid and thickish, mostly
opposite_, nearly sessile, somewhat deflexed, oblong, obtuse, _entire or
crenulate_, auricled on the upper or both sides; sori rather few, as
near the margin as the continuous midvein; stipe and rhachis black and
shining.--Mountains of Va. to Mo., and southward.--Nearly intermediate
between the last and the next.

6. A. ebeneum, Ait. Fronds upright (9--18' high), linear-oblanceolate in
outline, fertile ones much the taller; _pinnae_ (6--18'' long) _firmly
membranaceous, mostly alternate_, sessile, spreading, oblong or
oblong-linear, _finely serrate or even incised_, the base auricled on
the upper or both sides; sori many, nearer the elongated midvein than
the margin; stipe and rhachis blackish-purple and shining.--Rocky, open
woods; rather common.

[*][*][*] _Small evergreen ferns; the broader fronds 1--3-pinnate; pinnae
incised._

7. A. Bradleyi, D. C. Eaton. _Fronds oblong-lanceolate_, 4--7' long,
besides the blackish and somewhat shining stipe, membranaceous, pinnate;
pinnae rather numerous, _the lower ones no larger than the middle ones_,
all short-stalked, oblong-ovate, obtuse, incised or pinnatifid into
oblong toothed lobes.--On rocks, Ky. and southward; rare. A single plant
has been gathered near Newburg, N. Y.--Intermediate between A. ebeneum
and A. montanum.

8. A. montanum, Willd. _Fronds ovate-lanceolate from a broad base_
(2--5' long), subcoriaceous, pinnate; pinnae ovate-oblong, the lowest
pinnately cleft into oblong or ovate cut-toothed lobes, the upper
gradually simpler; _rhachis green, broad and flat; stipe brown at
base_.--Cliffs and rocks, from Conn. and Penn. to Ky., and southward.
July.

9. A. Ruta-muraria, L. _Fronds deltoid-ovate_ (1--21/2' long),
subcoriaceous, laxly 2--3-pinnate at base, the pinnae alternate;
_ultimate segments few_, stalked (2--5'' long), _from narrowly cuneate
to roundish-obovate_, toothed or incised at the apex; veins forking;
sori 2--4 on a segment.--Limestone cliffs, Vt. to Mich., and southward;
scarce. July. (Eu.)

[*][*][*][*] _Tall ferns (2--4 deg. high), not evergreen; fronds pinnate or
sub-bipinnate._

10. A. angustifolium, Michx. _Fronds_ thin, _simply pinnate; pinnae_
numerous, short-stalked, _linear-lanceolate, acuminate_, entire or
crenulate (3--4' long), _those of the fertile frond narrower_;
fruit-dots linear, 20--40 each side of the midvein; indusia slightly
convex.--Rich woods, W. New Eng. to Wisc., and southward along the
mountains. Sept.

11. A. thelypteroides, Michx. (Pl. 18, fig. 1, 2.) _Fronds_ (2--3 deg. high)
_pinnate; pinnae deeply pinnatifid_, linear-lanceolate (3--5' long); the
lobes oblong, obtuse, minutely toothed, crowded, each bearing 3--6 pairs
of _oblong fruit-dots_, some of them double.--Rich woods; not rare.
July--Sept.

Sec. 2. ATHYRIUM. _Indusium delicate, curved, often crossing the vein, and
attached to both sides of it, thus becoming reniform, or shaped like a
horseshoe._

12. A. Filix-foemina, Bernh. Fronds (1--3 deg. high) ovate-oblong or broadly
lanceolate, twice pinnate; pinnae lanceolate, numerous; pinnules
confluent on the secondary rhachis by a narrow margin, oblong and doubly
serrate, or elongated and pinnately incised with cut-toothed segments;
fruit-dots short, variously curved, at length confluent.--Moist woods;
common and presenting many varying forms. July. (Eu.)


10. SCOLOPENDRIUM, Smith. HART'S-TONGUE. (Pl. 18.)

Fruit-dots linear, elongated, almost at right angles to the midrib,
contiguous by twos, one on the upper side of one veinlet, and the next
on the lower side of the next superior veinlet, thus appearing to have a
double indusium opening along the middle. (The ancient Greek name, so
called because the numerous parallel lines of fruit resemble the feet of
the centipede, or _Scolopendra_.)

1. S. vulgare, Smith. Frond oblong-lanceolate from an
auricled-heart-shaped base, entire or wavy-margined (7--18' long, 1--2'
wide), bright green.--Shaded ravines and under limestone cliffs; central
N. Y.; also in Canada and Tenn.; very rare. Aug. (Eu.)


11. CAMPTOSORUS, Link. WALKING-LEAF. (Pl. 18.)

Fruit-dots oblong or linear, as in Asplenium, but irregularly scattered
on either side of the _reticulated veins_ of the simple frond, those
next the midrib single, the outer ones inclined to approximate in pairs
(so that their two indusia open face to face), or to become confluent at
their ends, thus forming crooked lines (whence the name, from [Greek:
kampto/s], _bent_, and [Greek: soro/s], for _fruit-dot_.)

1. C. rhizophyllus, Link. Fronds evergreen, sub-coriaceous, growing in
tufts, spreading or procumbent (4--12' long), gradually narrowed from a
cordate or auricled base to a long and slender acumination, which often
roots at the end and forms a new plant.--Shaded rocks, especially
calcareous rocks, N. Eng. to Minn., and southward to Kan. and Ala.--The
auricles are sometimes greatly elongated, and even rooting; in another
form they are lacking, as in the thinner leaved C. Sibiricus. July.


12. PHEGOPTERIS, Fee. BEECH FERN.

Fruit-dots small, round, naked (no indusium), borne on the back of the
veins below the apex. Stipe continuous with the rootstock.--Our species
have free veins and bright green membranaceous fronds, decaying in early
autumn. (Name composed of [Greek: phego/s], an _oak_ or _beech_, and
[Greek: pteri/s], _fern_.)

[*] _Fronds twice pinnatifid; pinnae all sessile, adnate to the winged
rhachis._

1. P. polypodioides, Fee. Fronds triangular, _longer than broad_ (4--9'
long), hairy on the veins, especially beneath; pinnae linear-lanceolate,
_the lowest pair deflexed and standing forward_; their divisions oblong,
obtuse, entire, the basal decurrent upon the main rhachis; fruit-dots
all near the margin.--Damp woods; common northward. July.--Rootstock
slender, creeping, bearing a few distant slender stalks, rather longer
than the fronds. (Eu.)

2. P. hexagonoptera, Fee. Fronds triangular, _usually broader than long_
(7--12' broad), slightly pubescent and often finely glandular beneath;
pinnae lanceolate; upper segments oblong, obtuse, toothed or entire,
_those of the very large lowest pinnae elongated and pinnately lobed_,
basal ones very much decurrent and forming a continuous many-angled wing
along the main rhachis; fruit-dots near the margin; some also between
the sinus and the midrib.--Rather open woods, New Eng. to Minn., and
southward; common. July.--Larger and broader than the last, which it
often closely resembles.

[*][*] _Fronds ternate, the three divisions petioled; rhachis wingless._

3. P. Dryopteris, Fee. _Fronds smooth_, broadly triangular (4--6' wide);
the three triangular primary divisions _all widely spreading_,
1--2-pinnate; segments oblong, obtuse, entire or toothed; fruit-dots
near the margin.--Rocky woods; common northward. July. (Eu.)

4. P. calcarea, Fee. _Fronds minutely glandular_ and somewhat rigid,
_the lateral divisions ascending_; lowest inferior pinnae of the lateral
divisions smaller in proportion than in the last species, which it
otherwise closely resembles.--Iowa and Minn.; rare. July. (Eu.)


13. ASPIDIUM, Swartz. SHIELD FERN. WOOD FERN. (Pl. 19.)

Fruit-dots round, borne on the back or rarely at the apex of the veins.
Indusium covering the sporangia, flat or flattish, scarious, orbicular
and peltate at the centre, or round-kidney-shaped and fixed either
centrally or by the sinus, opening all round the margin. Stipe
continuous (not articulated) with the rootstock.--Our species have free
veins and 1--3-pinnate fronds. (Name, [Greek: a)spi/dion], _a small
shield_, from the shape of the indusium.)

Sec. 1. DRYOPTERIS. _Indusium reniform, or orbicular with a narrow sinus._

[*] _Veins simple or simply forked and straight; fronds annual, decaying
in autumn, the stalks and slender creeping rootstocks nearly naked._

1. A. Thelypteris, Swartz. Fronds pinnate, lanceolate in outline; pinnae
horizontal or slightly recurved, linear-lanceolate, deeply pinnatifid,
_the lowest pairs scarcely smaller_; lobes oblong, entire, obtuse or
appearing acute when in fruit from the _strongly revolute margins; veins
mostly forked_, bearing the (soon confluent) fruit-dots near their
middle; indusium minute, smooth and naked.--Marshes; common. Aug.--Stalk
1 deg. long or more, usually longer than the frond, which is of thicker
texture than the next, and slightly downy. (Eu.)

2. A. Noveboracense, Swartz. Fronds pinnate, lanceolate in outline,
_tapering both ways from the middle_; pinnae lanceolate, _the lowest 2 or
more pairs gradually shorter and deflexed_; lobes flat, oblong, basal
ones often enlarged and incised; _veins simple_, or forked in the basal
lobes; fruit-dots distinct, near the margin; indusium minute, the margin
glanduliferous.--Swamps and moist thickets; common. July.--Frond pale
green, delicate and membranaceous, hairy beneath along the midribs and
veins.

[*][*] _Veins, at least the lowest, more than once forked or somewhat
pinnately branching; fruit-bearing veinlets often obscure or vanishing
above the fruit-dot; fronds, at least the sterile ones, often evergreen;
stalks and apex of the thickened rootstock scaly or chaffy, and often
the main rhachis also._

[+] _Fronds small, pinnate; pinnae pinnatifid; indusia very large,
persistent._

3. A. fragrans, Swartz. Fronds (4--12' high) glandular and aromatic,
narrowly lanceolate, with linear-oblong pinnately-parted pinnae; their
crowded divisions (2'' long) oblong, obtuse, toothed or nearly entire,
nearly covered beneath with the very large thin imbricated indusia,
which are orbicular with a narrow sinus, the margin sparingly
glanduliferous and often ragged.--On rocks, especially near waterfalls,
mountains of northern New Eng., west and northward.--Rootstock stout,
nearly erect, densely chaffy, as are the crowded stipes and rhachis.
(Asia, and barely reaching S. E. Eu.)

[+][+] _Large (1--21/2 deg. high), the fronds mostly twice pinnate with
variously toothed and incised pinnules; indusia rather small, shrivelled
in age, or deciduous._

4. A. spinulosum, Swartz. Stipes with a few _pale-brown deciduous
scales_; frond ovate-lanceolate, twice pinnate; _pinnae oblique to the
rhachis, elongated-triangular_, the lower pairs broadly triangular;
pinnules set obliquely on the midribs, connected by a very narrow wing,
oblong, acute, incisely serrate or pinnatifid with spinulosely-toothed
lobes; _indusium_ smooth and _without marginal glands_.--In damp woods,
New Eng. to Ky., and northward. July.--The common European type, rare in
North America. (Eu.)

Var. intermedium, D. C. Eaton. _Scales_ of the stipe few, _brown with a
darker centre_; frond broadly oblong-ovate, twice or often thrice
pinnate; _pinnae spreading, oblong-lanceolate_, the lower unequally
triangular-ovate; pinnules crowded, ovate-oblong, spreading, pinnately
divided; the oblong lobes spinulose-toothed at the apex; _margin of the
indusium denticulate and beset with minute stalked glands_.--Woods,
everywhere.

Var. dilatatum, Hook. _Scales_ of the stipe large, _brown with a dark
centre_; _frond broader, ovate or triangular-ovate_ in outline, oftenest
thrice pinnate; pinnules lance-oblong, the lowest often much elongated;
_indusium_ (in the North American plant) _smooth and naked_.--A dwarf
state, fruiting when only 5--8' high, answers to var. dumetorum.--N. New
Eng. to Minn., chiefly in mountain woods, and northward. (Eu.)

5. A. Boottii, Tuckerman. _Scales_ of the stipe _pale-brown_; fronds
(1--21/2 deg. long) elongated-lanceolate in outline, somewhat narrowed at
base; lowest pinnae triangular-ovate, the upper longer and narrower;
pinnules oblong-ovate, sharply spinulose-serrate or the lower
pinnatifid; _indusium minutely glandular_. (A. spinulosum, var.
Boottii, of last ed. A. cristatum, var. uliginosum, _Milde_.)--Wet
thickets and about ponds, New Eng. to Del. and Minn. July.--Sterile
fronds much smaller and simpler than the fertile. (Eu.)

[+][+][+] _Large (2--4 deg. high); fronds once pinnate and the pinnae deeply
pinnatifid, or nearly twice pinnate; fruit-dots not very near the
margin; the indusium large, thinnish and flat, persistent._

6. A. cristatum, Swartz. _Frond linear-oblong or lanceolate in outline_
(1--2 deg. long); _pinnae short_ (2--3' long), _triangular-oblong_, or the
lowest nearly triangular-ovate, from a somewhat heart-shaped base,
acute, deeply pinnatifid; the _divisions (6--10 pairs) oblong_, very
obtuse, finely serrate or cut-toothed, the lowest pinnatifid-lobed;
_fruit-dots as near the midvein as the margin_; indusium round-reniform,
the sinus mostly shallow, smooth and naked.--Swamps, etc.; common.
July.--Stipes and the stout creeping rootstock bearing broad and
deciduous chaffy scales. (Eu.)

Var. Clintonianum. _Frond in every way much larger_ (21/2--4 deg. long);
_pinnae_ oblong-lanceolate, _broadest at base_ (4--6' long, 1--2' broad),
deeply pinnatifid; the _divisions (8--16 pairs)_ crowded or distant,
_linear-oblong_, obtuse, obscurely serrate or cut-toothed, the basal
sometimes pinnately lobed; veins pinnately forking, the lowest anterior
veinlets bearing the _fruit-dots near the midvein_; indusium orbicular
with a shallow sinus, smooth and naked.--Swampy woods, New Eng. to
N. J., N. Y. (_G. W. Clinton_, etc.), and westward. July.--Rootstock
stout, creeping, chaffy (like the stipes) with large bright-brown
scales. A showy fern, unlike any European form of A. cristatum, and
often mistaken for A. Goldianum.

7. A. Goldianum, Hook. _Frond broadly ovate_, or the fertile
ovate-oblong in outline (2--3 deg. long); _pinnae_ (6--9' long),
oblong-lanceolate, _broadest in the middle_, pinnately parted; the
_divisions (about 20 pairs) oblong-linear, slightly scythe-shaped_
(9--15'' long), serrate with appressed teeth; veins pinnately forking
and bearing the _fruit-dots very near the midvein_; indusium very large,
orbicular with a deep narrow sinus, smooth and without marginal
glands.--Rich and moist woods, from Conn. to Ky., and northward.
July.--A stately fern, often 4 deg. high, the fronds growing in a circle
from a stout ascending chaffy rootstock, and decaying in autumn.
Indusium with the sides of the sinus often overlapping, thus appearing
to be round and entire as in Sec. Polystichum.

[+][+][+][+] _Large (1--3 deg. high); stipes very chaffy at base; fronds
twice pinnate, but the upper pinnules confluent, some of the lower
pinnatifid-toothed; fruit-dots rather large; indusium convex, without
marginal glands, persistent._

8. A. Filix-mas, Swartz. Frond lanceolate in outline (1--3 deg. high); pinnae
linear-lanceolate, tapering from base to apex; pinnules oblong, very
obtuse, serrate at the apex and obscurely so at the sides, the basal
incisely lobed, distinct, the upper confluent; fruit-dots nearer the
midvein than the margin, and usually confined to the lower half of each
fertile pinnule.--Rocky woods, N. Mich. to Dak. and Col.--Frond thickish
but not surviving the winter. (Eu.)

9. A. marginale, Swartz. (Pl. 19, fig. 1, 2.) Frond evergreen, smooth,
thickish and almost coriaceous, ovate-oblong in outline (1--2 deg. long);
pinnae lanceolate, acuminate, slightly broadest above the base; pinnules
oblong or oblong-scythe-shaped, crowded, obtuse or pointed, entire or
crenately-toothed; fruit-dots close to the margin.--Rocky hillsides in
rich woods; common, especially northward. Aug.

Sec. 2. POLYSTICHUM. _Indusium orbicular and entire, peltate, fixed by the
depressed centre; fronds rigid and coriaceous, evergreen, very chaffy on
the rhachis, etc.; pinnae or pinnules auricled at base on the upper side,
crowded, the teeth or lobes bristle-tipped._

[*] _Fronds simply pinnate._

10. A. acrostichoides, Swartz. (CHRISTMAS FERN.) (Pl. 19, fig. 3, 4.)
Frond lanceolate (1--21/2 deg. high), _stalked; pinnae linear-lanceolate_,
somewhat scythe-shaped, half-halberd-shaped at the slightly stalked
base, serrulate with appressed bristly teeth; _the fertile_ (upper)
_contracted and smaller_, bearing contiguous fruit-dots near the midrib,
which are confluent with age, covering the surface.--Var. INCISUM is a
state with cut-lobed pinnae, a not unfrequent case in the sterile fronds;
sometimes with all the tips fertile.--Common in rocky woods, especially
northward. July.

11. A. Lonchitis, Swartz. Frond linear-lanceolate (9--20' high),
_scarcely stalked, very rigid; pinnae broadly lanceolate-scythe-shaped,
or the lowest triangular_, strongly auricled on the upper side, and
wedge-truncate on the lower, densely spinulose-toothed (1' or less in
length), copiously fruit-bearing; fruit-dots contiguous and near the
margins.--Woods, southern shore of Lake Superior, and northward. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Fronds bipinnate._

12. A. aculeatum, Swartz, var. Braunii, Koch. _Fronds spreading_ (11/2--2 deg.
long), oblong-lanceolate in outline, with a tapering base, the lower of
the many pairs of oblong-lanceolate pinnae gradually reduced in size and
obtuse; pinnules ovate or oblong, obtuse, truncate and almost
rectangular at base, short-stalked, or the upper confluent, sharply
toothed, beset with long and soft as well as chaffy hairs.--Deep woods,
mountains of New Eng., N. Y., and Penn., and northward. (Eu.)


14. CYSTOPTERIS, Bernhardi. BLADDER FERN. (Pl. 19.)

Fruit-dots roundish, borne on the back of a straight fork of the free
veins; the delicate indusium hood-like or arched, attached by a broad
base on the inner side (toward the midrib) partly under the fruit-dot,
early opening free at the other side, which looks toward the apex of the
lobe, and is somewhat jagged, soon thrown back or withering
away.--Tufted ferns with slender and delicate 2--3-pinnate fronds; the
lobes cut-toothed. (Name composed of [Greek: ky/stis], _a bladder_, and
[Greek: pteri/s], _fern_, from the inflated indusium.)

1. C. bulbifera, Bernh. (Pl. 19, fig. 1--3.) _Frond lanceolate,
elongated_ (1--2 deg. long), 2-pinnate; the pinnae lanceolate-oblong,
pointed, horizontal (1--2' long); the _rhachis and pinnae often bearing
bulblets underneath, wingless_; pinnules crowded, oblong, obtuse,
toothed or pinnatifid; indusium short, truncate on the free
side.--Shaded ravines, not rare from N. Eng. to Ark., commoner on
calcareous rocks. July.--Specimens from Tenn. and Ark. have sometimes
shorter fronds and few or no bulblets, indicating an approach to the
next species.

2. C. fragilis, Bernh. _Frond oblong-lanceolate_ (4--8' long, besides
the brittle stalk which is fully as long), 2--3-pinnate; the pinnae and
_pinnules_ ovate or lanceolate in outline, irregularly pinnatifid or
cut-toothed, mostly acute, _decurrent on the margined or winged
rhachis_; indusium tapering or acute at the free end.--Shaded cliffs and
rocky woods; common and greatly varying in the shape and cutting of the
pinnules. July. (Eu.)


15. ONOCLEA, L. (Pl. 16 and 19.)

Sporangia borne on elevated receptacles, forming roundish sori
imperfectly covered by very delicate hood-shaped indusia attached to the
base of the receptacles. Fertile fronds erect, rigid, with contracted
pod-like or berry-like divisions at first completely concealing the
sporangia, and at last, when dry and indurated, cracking open and
allowing the spores to escape. Sterile fronds foliaceous. Rootstocks
creeping and constantly forming new plants. (Name apparently from
[Greek: o)/nos], _a vessel_, and [Greek: klei/o], _to close_, from the
singularly rolled up fructification.)

Sec. 1. ONOCLEA proper. _Sterile frond with anastomosing veins._

1. O. sensibilis, L. (SENSITIVE FERN.) (Pl. 19, fig. 1, 2.) Fronds
scattered; the sterile ones long-stalked (2--15' long),
triangular-ovate, pinnatifid into a few oblong-lanceolate sinuately
lobed or nearly entire segments; veins reticulated with fine meshes;
fertile fronds contracted, closely bipinnate, the pinnules rolled up
into berry-like bodies.--Moist meadows and thickets, very common and
variable. July.--Imperfectly fertile fronds sometimes occur, with the
still foliaceous pinnae cut into obovate segments with free veins and
abortive sori; the so-called var. OBTUSILOBATA.

Sec. 2. STRUTHIOPTERIS. _Sterile frond with free veins._

2. O. Struthiopteris, Hoffmann. (Pl. 16, fig. 1--5.) Fronds growing in a
crown; sterile ones short-stalked (2--10 deg. high), broadly lanceolate,
narrowed toward the base, pinnate with many linear-lanceolate,
pinnatifid pinnae; veins free, the veinlets simple; fertile frond
shorter, pinnate with pod-like or somewhat necklace-shaped pinnae.
(Struthiopteris Germanica, _Willd._)--Alluvial soil, common northward.
July.--The rootstock sends out slender underground stolons, which bear
fronds the next year. (Eu.)

16. WOODSIA, R. Brown. (Pl. 19.)

Fruit-dots round, borne on the back of simply-forked free veins; the
very thin and often evanescent indusium attached by its base all around
the receptacle, _under_ the sporangia, either small and open, or else
early bursting at the top into irregular pieces or lobes.--Small and
tufted pinnately-divided ferns. (Dedicated to _Joseph Woods_, an
English botanist.)

[*] _Stalks obscurely articulated some distance from the base; fronds
chaffy or smooth, never glandular; indusium divided nearly to the centre
into slender hairs which are curled over the sporangia._

1. W. Ilvensis, R. Brown. _Frond oblong-lanceolate_ (2--6' long by
12--18'' wide), smoothish and green above, _thickly clothed underneath
as well as the stalk with rusty bristle-like chaff_, pinnate; the pinnae
crowded, oblong, obtuse, sessile, pinnately parted, _the numerous
crowded segments oblong_, obtuse, obscurely crenate; the fruit-dots near
the margin, somewhat confluent when old.--Exposed rocks; common,
especially northward, and southward in the Alleghanies. June. (Eu.)

2. W. hyperborea, R. Brown. Frond narrowly oblong-lanceolate (2--6' long
by 8--12'' wide), smooth above, sparingly paleaceous-hirsute beneath,
pinnate; the pinnae triangular-ovate, obtuse, pinnately lobed, the lobes
few and nearly entire; fruit-dots rarely confluent.--Mountain ravines,
northern Vt. and N. Y., and northward; rare. (Eu.)

3. W. glabella, R. Brown. (Pl. 19, fig. 1--3.) _Smooth and naked
throughout; frond linear_ and very delicate (2--5' high), pinnate;
_pinnae roundish-ovate_, the lower ones rather remote (2--4'' long),
obtuse, crenately lobed; fruit-dots scanty; the hairs of the indusium
fewer than in the last two species.--On moist mossy rocks, mountains of
northern New Eng., north and westward. First found at Little Falls,
N. Y., by _Dr. Vasey_. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Stalks not articulated; fronds never chaffy, often
glandular-pubescent._

[+] _Indusium of a few broad segments, at first covering the sorus
completely._

4. W. obtusa, Torr. (Pl. 19, fig. 4, 5.) Frond broadly lanceolate,
minutely glandular-hairy (6--12' high), pinnate, or nearly twice
pinnate; pinnae rather remote, triangular-ovate or oblong (1--2' long),
bluntish, pinnately parted; segments oblong, obtuse, crenately toothed,
the lower pinnatifid with toothed lobes; veins forked, and bearing the
fruit-dots on or below the minutely toothed lobes; indusium at length
splitting into several spreading jagged lobes.--Rocky banks and cliffs;
not rare.

[+][+] _Indusium entirely concealed beneath the sorus, divided into very
narrow segments or reduced to minute hairs._

5. W. Oregana, D. C. Eaton. Smooth, with fronds (2--8' high, 8--12''
wide) elliptical-lanceolate, pinnate, the fertile ones tallest; pinnae
triangular-oblong, obtuse, pinnatifid; segments oblong or ovate, obtuse,
finely toothed, and in larger fronds incised; fruit-dots near the
margin; indusium very small, divided almost to the centre into a few
necklace-like-jointed cilia.--Crevices of rocks, south shore of Lake
Superior (_Robbins_), and westward.

6. W. scopulina, D. C. Eaton. Much like the last, but the rather larger
fronds puberulent beneath with minute jointed hairs and stalked glands;
indusium deeply cleft into narrow segments ending in jointed
hairs.--Rocky places, Minn., southward and westward.


17. DICKSONIA, L'Her. (Pl. 17.)

Fruit-dots small, globular, marginal, each placed on the apex of a free
vein or fork; the sporangia borne on an elevated globular receptacle,
enclosed in a membranaceous cup-shaped indusium which is open at the
top, and on the outer side partly adherent to a reflexed toothlet of the
frond. (Named for _James Dickson_, an English Cryptogamic botanist.)

1. D. pilosiuscula, Willd. Fronds minutely glandular and hairy (2--3 deg.
high), ovate-lanceolate and acuminate in outline, pale green, very thin,
with strong chaffless stalks rising from slender extensively creeping
naked root-stocks, mostly bipinnate; primary pinnae lanceolate, pointed,
the secondary pinnatifid into oblong and obtuse cut-toothed lobes;
fruit-dots minute, each on a recurved toothlet, usually one at the upper
margin of each lobe. (D. punctilobula, _Kunze_.)--Common in moist and
shady places, from New Eng. to Minn.--Frond sweet-scented in drying.


18. TRICHOMANES, L. FILMY FERN.

Sporangia with a transverse entire ring, sessile on a cylindrical
receptacle which is produced from the end of a vein and enclosed in a
funnel-form or cup-shaped involucre of the same substance with the
frond. Fronds very thin and pellucid, often consisting of a single layer
of cells. (An ancient Greek name for some fern.)

1. T. radicans, Swartz. Fronds very delicate, oblong-lanceolate in
outline (4--8' long, 6--18'' wide), bipinnatifid; rhachis narrowly
winged; pinnae triangular-ovate, the divisions toothed or again lobed;
involucres tubular-funnel-shaped, margined, the mouth truncate;
receptacle often much exserted.--On moist and dripping sandstone cliffs,
Ky., and southward; rare.--Though the fronds are so very delicate, yet
they survive for several years; they begin to fruit the second or third
year, and thereafter the receptacle continues to grow and to produce new
sporangia at its base. (Eu.)


19. SCHIZAEA, Smith. (Pl. 20.)

Sporangia large, ovoid, striate-rayed at the apex, opening by a
longitudinal cleft, naked, vertically sessile in a double row along the
single vein of the narrow divisions of the pinnate (or radiate) fertile
appendages to the slender and simply linear, or (in foreign species)
fan-shaped or dichotomously many-cleft fronds (whence the name, from
[Greek: schi/zo], _to split_).

1. S. pusilla, Pursh. Sterile fronds linear, very slender, flattened and
tortuous; the fertile ones equally slender (1/4'' wide), but taller (3--4'
high), and bearing at the top the fertile appendage, consisting of about
5 pairs of crowded pinnae (each 1--11/2'' long).--Low grounds, pine barrens
of N. J.; very local. Sept. (Also in Nova Scotia and Newf.)


20. LYGODIUM, Swartz. CLIMBING FERN. (Pl. 20.)

Fronds twining or climbing, bearing stalked and variously lobed (or
compound) divisions in pairs, with mostly free veins; the fructification
on separate contracted divisions or spike-like lobes, one side of which
is covered with a double row of imbricated hooded scale-like indusia,
fixed by a broad base to short oblique veinlets. Sporangia much as in
Schizaea, but oblique, fixed to the veinlet by the inner side next the
base, one or rarely two covered by each indusium. (Name from [Greek:
lygo/des], _flexible_.)

1. L. palmatum, Swartz. Very smooth; stalks slender, flexile and twining
(1--3 deg. long), from slender running rootstocks; the short alternate
branches or petioles 2-forked; each fork bearing a round-heart-shaped
palmately 4--7-lobed frondlet; fertile frondlets above, contracted and
several times forked, forming a terminal panicle.--Low moist thickets
and open woods, Mass. to Va., Ky., and sparingly southward; rare. Sept.


21. OSMUNDA, L. FLOWERING FERN. (Pl. 20.)

Fertile fronds or fertile portions of the frond destitute of
chlorophyll, very much contracted, and bearing on the margins of the
narrow rhachis-like divisions short-pedicelled and naked sporangia;
these are globular, thin and reticulated, large, opening by a
longitudinal cleft into two valves, and bearing near the apex a small
patch of thickened oblong cells, the rudiment of a transverse
ring.--Fronds tall and upright, growing in large crowns from thickened
rootstocks, once or twice pinnate; veins forking and free. Spores green.
(_Osmunder_, a Saxon name of the Celtic divinity, Thor.)

[*] _Sterile fronds truly bipinnate._

1. O. regalis, L. (FLOWERING FERN.) Very smooth, pale green (2--5 deg.
high); sterile pinnules 13--25, varying from oblong-oval to
lance-oblong, finely serrulate, especially toward the apex, otherwise
entire, or crenately lobed toward the rounded, oblique and truncate, or
even cordate and semi-auriculate base, sessile or short-stalked (1--2'
long); the fertile racemose-panicled at the summit of the frond.--Swamps
and wet woods; common. The cordate pinnules sometimes found here are
commoner in Europe. May, June. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Sterile fronds once pinnate; pinnae deeply pinnatifid; the lobes
entire._

2. O. Claytoniana, L. (Pl. 20, fig. 1--3.) Clothed with loose wool when
young, soon smooth; _fertile fronds taller than the sterile_ (2--4 deg.
high); pinnae oblong-lanceolate, with oblong obtuse divisions; _some
(2--5 pairs) of the middle pinnae fertile_, these entirely pinnate;
sporangia greenish, turning brown.--Low grounds, common. May.--Fruiting
as it unfolds.

3. O. cinnamomea, L. (CINNAMON FERN.) Clothed with rusty wool when
young; _sterile fronds tallest_ (at length 3--5 deg. high), smooth when full
grown, the lanceolate pinnae pinnatifid into broadly oblong obtuse
divisions; _fertile fronds separate_, appearing earlier from the same
rootstock and soon withering (1--2 deg. high), contracted, twice pinnate,
covered with the cinnamon-colored sporangia.--Var. FRONDOSA is a rare
occasional state, in which some of the fronds are sterile below and more
sparsely fertile at their summit, or rarely in the middle.--Swamps and
low copses, everywhere. May.


ORDER 132. OPHIOGLOSSACEAE. (ADDER'S-TONGUE FAMILY.)

Leafy and often somewhat fleshy plants; the leaves (_fronds_) simple or
branched, often fern-like in appearance, erect in vernation, developed
from underground buds formed either inside the base of the old stalk or
by the side of it, and bearing in special spikes or panicles rather
large subcoriaceous bivalvular sporangia formed from the main tissue of
the fruiting branches. Prothallus underground, not green, monoecious.--A
small order, separated from Ferns on account of the different nature of
the sporangia, the erect vernation, etc.

1. Botrychium. Sporangia in pinnate or compound spikes, distinct. Veins
free.

2. Ophioglossum. Sporangia cohering in a simple spike. Veins
reticulated.


1. BOTRYCHIUM, Swartz. MOONWORT. (Pl. 20.)

Rootstock very short, erect, with clustered fleshy roots (which are full
of starch, in very minute, irregular granules!); the base of the naked
stalk containing the bud for the next year's frond; frond with an
anterior fertile and a posterior sterile segment; the former mostly
1--3-pinnate, the contracted divisions bearing a double row of sessile
naked sporangia; these are distinct, rather coriaceous, not reticulated,
globular, without a ring, and open transversely into two valves. Sterile
segment of the frond ternately or pinnately divided or compound; veins
all free. Spores copious, sulphur-color. (Name a diminutive of [Greek:
bo/trys], _a cluster of grapes_, from the appearance of the
fructification.)

Sec. 1. BOTRYCHIUM proper. _Base of the stalk containing the bud completely
closed; sterile segment more or less fleshy; the cells of the epidermis
straight._

[*] _Sterile portion of the frond sessile or nearly so at or above the
middle of the plant. Plants small._

1. B. Lunaria, Swartz. _Sterile segment_ nearly sessile, borne near the
middle of the plant, _oblong, simply pinnate with 5--15 lunate or
fan-shaped_ very obtuse crenate, incised or nearly entire, _fleshy
divisions_, more or less excised at the base on the lower or on both
sides, the veins radiating from the base and repeatedly forking; fertile
segment panicled, 2--3-pinnate.--N. Eng. to Lake Superior, and
northward; rare.--Very fleshy, 4--10' high. (Eu.)

2. B. simplex, Hitchcock. Fronds small (2--4', rarely 5--6' high), _the
sterile segment short-petioled from near the middle of the plant,
thickish_ and fleshy, simple and roundish, or _pinnately 3--7-lobed_;
the lobes roundish-obovate, nearly entire, decurrent on the broad and
flat indeterminate rhachis; _the veins all forking from the base_;
fertile segment simple or 1--2-pinnate.--Maine to N. Y., Minn., and
northward; rare. (Eu.)

3. B. lanceolatum, Angstroem. Fronds small (3--10' high); _the sterile
segment closely sessile at the top of the_ long and slender common
_stalk_, scarcely fleshy, _triangular, ternately twice pinnatifid; the
acute lobes_ lanceolate, incised or toothed; veinlets forking from a
_continuous midvein_; fertile part 2--3-pinnate.--N. Eng. and N. J. to
Ohio and Lake Superior. July--Aug. (Eu.)

4. B. matricariaefolium, Braun. Fronds small (3--10' high); _the sterile
segment nearly sessile at the top of the_ long and slender _common
stalk_, moderately fleshy, _ovate or triangular_, varying from pinnate
to bipinnatifid; _the lobes oblong-ovate and obtuse; midvein dissipated_
into forking veinlets; fertile part 2--3-pinnate.--Same range as the
last. June, July. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Sterile portion of the frond long-stalked; the common stalk
short in proportion to the size of the plant. Plants usually larger._

5. B. ternatum, Swartz. (Pl. 20.) _Plant very fleshy_ (4--16' high),
sparsely hairy; _sterile segment long-petioled_ from near the base of
the plant, broadly triangular, _ternate and variously decompound with
stalked divisions_; ultimate segments varying from roundish-reniform and
sub-entire to ovate-lanceolate and doubly incised; fertile segment
erect, 2--4-pinnate.--The following varieties pass into each
other:--Var. AUSTRALE; frond ample; ultimate segments rhomboid-ovate
with a denticulate margin.--Var. INTERMEDIUM; frond of moderate size;
ultimate segments as in var. australe. (B. lunarioides, of last
ed.)--Var. RUTAEFOLIUM; frond small; ultimate segments few, ovate and
semicordate.--Var. LUNARIOIDES; frond small; ultimate segments
roundish-reniform.--Var. OBLIQUUM; frond moderate; ultimate segments
obliquely lanceolate, denticulate or toothed.--Var. DISSECTUM; segments
dissected into innumerable narrow lobes or teeth.--Pastures and
hillsides, sometimes in dry woods, rather common, especially vars.
intermedium and obliquum.--Var. rutaefolium occurs in Europe.

Sec. 2. OSMUNDOPTERIS. _Base of the stalk containing the bud open along one
side; sterile segment membranaceous; the cells of the epidermis
flexuous._

6. B. Virginianum, Swartz. _Fronds tall and ample; sterile segment
sessile above the middle of the plant_, broadly triangular, thin and
membranaceous, _ternate_; the short-stalked _primary divisions once or
twice pinnate_, and then once or twice pinnatifid; the oblong lobes
cut-toothed toward the apex; _veins forking from a midvein_; fertile
part 2--3-pinnate.--Rich woods; common.--Plant 1--2 deg. high, or often
reduced to a few inches, in which case it is B. gracile, _Pursh._ June,
July. (Eu.)


2. OPHIOGLOSSUM, L. ADDER'S-TONGUE. (Pl. 20.)

Rootstock erect, fleshy and sometimes tuberous, with slender fleshy
roots which are sometimes proliferous; bud placed by the side of the
base of the stalk; fronds with anterior and posterior segments as in
Botrychium, but the coriaceous sporangia connate and coherent in two
ranks on the edges of a simple spike. Sterile segment fleshy, simple in
our species; the veins reticulated. Spores copious, sulphur-yellow.
(Name from [Greek: o)/phis], _a serpent_, and [Greek: glo~ssa],
_tongue_.)

1. O. vulgatum, L. Fronds from a slender rootstock (2--12' high), mostly
solitary; sterile segment sessile near the middle of the plant, ovate or
elliptical (1--3' long); midvein indistinct or none; veins forming small
meshes enclosed in larger ones.--Bogs and pastures; not common. July.
(Eu.)


ORDER 133. LYCOPODIACEAE. (CLUB-MOSS FAMILY.)

Low plants, usually of moss-like aspect, with elongated and often much
branched stems covered with small lanceolate or subulate, rarely oblong
or rounded, persistent entire leaves; the sporangia 1--3-celled,
solitary in the axils of the leaves, or on their upper surface, when
ripe opening into two or three valves, and shedding the numerous yellow
spores, which are all of one kind.--The Order, as here defined, consists
mainly of the large genus


1. LYCOPODIUM, L. CLUB-MOSS. (Pl. 21.)

Spore-cases coriaceous, flattened, usually kidney-shaped, 1-celled,
2-valved, mostly by a transverse line round the margin, discharging the
subtile spores in the form of a copious sulphur-colored inflammable
powder.--Perennials, with evergreen one-nerved leaves, imbricated or
crowded in 4--16 ranks. (Name compounded of [Greek: ly/kos], _a wolf_,
and [Greek: pou~s], _foot_, from no obvious resemblance.)

Sec. 1. _Spore-cases in the axils of the ordinary (dark green and shining,
rigid, lanceolate, about 8-ranked) leaves._

1. L. Selago, L. Stems erect and rigid, dichotomous, forming a
level-topped cluster (3--6' high); _leaves uniform_, crowded, ascending,
glossy, pointed, entire or denticulate; sporangia in the axils of
unaltered leaves.--Mountain-tops, Maine to Lake Superior, and
northward.--The leaves of this and the next species often bear little
gemmae, with the lower bracts pointed, and the 2--3 uppermost broadly
obovate and fleshy, as figured in 1768 by Dillenius. These gemmae fall to
the ground and their axis grows into the stem of a new plant, as
specimens collected in 1854 show very plainly. (For their true nature
see Sachs' Lehrbuch, Engl. trans., p. 411.)

2. L. lucidulum, Michx. Stems assurgent, less rigid, dichotomous (6--12'
long); leaves pointed, toothed, at first spreading, then deflexed,
arranged, in alternate zones of shorter and longer leaves, the shorter
leaves more frequently bearing sporangia in their axils; proliferous
gemmae usually abundant.--Cold, damp woods; common northward. Aug.

Sec. 2. _Spore-cases only in the axils of the upper (bracteal) leaves, thus
forming a spike._

[*] _Leaves of the creeping sterile and of the upright fertile stems or
branches and those of the simple spike nearly alike, many-ranked._

3. L. inundatum, L. _Dwarf_; creeping sterile stems forking, flaccid;
the fertile solitary (1--4' high), bearing a short thick spike; _leaves
lanceolate or lance-awl-shaped, acute_, soft, spreading, _mostly
entire_, those of the prostrate stems curving upward.--Var. BIGELOVII,
Tuckerm., has fertile stems 5--7' high, its leaves more awl-shaped and
pointed, sparser and more upright, often somewhat teeth-bearing.--Sandy
bogs, northward, not common; the var., eastern New Eng. to N. J., and
southward. Aug. (Eu.)

4. L. alopecuroides, L. _Stems stout_, very densely leafy throughout;
the sterile branches recurved-procumbent and creeping; the fertile of
the same thickness, 6--20' high; _leaves narrowly linear-awl-shaped,
spinulose-pointed, spreading, conspicuously bristle-toothed below the
middle; those of the cylindrical spike with long setaceous
tips_.--Pine-barren swamps, N. J. to Va., and southward. Aug.,
Sept.--Stems, including the dense leaves, 1/2' thick; the comose spike,
with its longer spreading leaves, 3/4--1' thick.

[*][*] _Leaves (bracts) of the catkin-like spike scale-like, imbricated,
yellowish, ovate or heart-shaped, very different from those of the
sterile stems and branches._

[+] _Spikes sessile (i.e. branches equally leafy to the top), single._

5. L. annotinum, L. Much branched; _stems prostrate and creeping_ (1--4 deg.
long); _the ascending branches similar_ (5--8' high), sparingly forked,
the sterile ones making yearly growths from the summit; _leaves equal,
spreading_, in about 5 ranks, rigid, lanceolate, pointed, minutely
serrulate (pale green); spike solitary, oblong-cylindrical, thick.--Var.
PUNGENS, Spring, is a reduced sub-alpine or mountain form, with shorter
and more rigid pointed erectish leaves.--Woods; common northward; the
var. on the White Mountains, with intermediate forms around the base.
July. (Eu.)

6. L. obscurum, L. Rootstock cord-like, subterranean, bearing scattered,
erect, tree-like stems dividing at the summit into several densely
dichotomous spreading branches; leaves linear-lanceolate, decurrent,
entire, acute, 6-ranked, those of the two upper and two lower ranks
smaller and appressed, the lateral ones incurved spreading; spikes
1--10, erect, mostly sessile; bracts scarious-margined, broadly ovate,
abruptly apiculate.--Var. DENDROIDEUM (L. deudroideum, _Michx._) has all
the leaves alike and incurved spreading.--Moist woods. Aug.--Remarkable
for its tree-like appearance.

L. ALPINUM, L., or its var. SABINAEFOLIUM, occurs from Labrador to
Washington Territory, and is to be expected in northern Maine and Minn.
It has slender branches with rigid nearly appressed leaves.

[+][+] _Spikes peduncled, i.e. the leaves minute on the fertile
branches._

[++] _Leaves homogeneous and equal, many-ranked; stems terete._

7. L. clavatum, L. (COMMON CLUB-MOSS.) Stems creeping extensively, with
similar ascending short and very leafy branches; the fertile terminated
by a slender peduncle (4--6' long), bearing about 2--3 (rarely 1 or 4)
linear-cylindrical spikes; leaves linear-awl-shaped, incurved spreading
(light green), tipped, as also the bracts, with a fine bristle.--Dry
woods; common, especially northward. July. (Eu.)

[++][++] _Leaves of two forms, few-ranked; stems or branches flattened._

8. L. Carolinianum, L. (Pl. 21.) Sterile stems and their few short
branches _entirely creeping_ (leafless and rooting on the under side),
thickly clothed with broadly lanceolate acute and somewhat oblique
1-nerved _lateral leaves widely spreading in 2 ranks_, and a shorter
intermediate row appressed on the upper side; also sending up a slender
simple peduncle (2--4' high, clothed merely with small bract-like and
appressed awl-shaped leaves), _bearing a single cylindrical spike_.--Wet
pine-barrens, N. J. to Va., and southward.

9. L. complanatum, L. (GROUND-PINE.) Stems extensively creeping (often
subterranean), the erect or _ascending branches several times forked
above_; bushy _branchlets crowded, flattened_, fan-like and spreading,
_all clothed with minute imbricated-appressed awl-shaped leaves in 4
ranks_, with decurrent-united bases, the lateral rows with somewhat
spreading tooth-like tips, those of the upper and under rows smaller,
narrower, wholly appressed; peduncle slender, _bearing 2--4 cylindrical
spikes_.--Var. CHAMAECYPARISSUS has narrower, more erect and bushy
branches, and the leaves less distinctly dimorphous.--Woods and
thickets; common, especially northward. (Eu.)


ORDER 134. SELAGINELLACEAE.

Leafy plants, terrestrial or rooted in mud, never very large; the stems
branching or short and corm-like; the leaves small and 4--6-rowed, or
subulate and elongated; sporangia one-celled, solitary, axillary or
borne on the upper surface of the leaf at its base and enwrapped in its
margins, some containing large spores (_macrospores_) and others small
spores (_microspores_). The macrospores are in the shape of a low
triangular pyramid with a hemispherical base, and marked with elevated
ribs along the angles. In germination they develop a minute prothallus
which bears archegonia to be fertilized by antherozoids developed from
the microspores.

1. Selaginella. Terrestrial; stems slender; leaves small; sporangia
minute and axillary.

2. Isoetes. Aquatic or growing in mud; stems corm-like: leaves elongated
and rush-like; sporangia very large, enwrapped by the dilated bases of
the leaves.


1. SELAGINELLA, Beauv. (Pl. 21.)

Fructification of two kinds, namely, of minute and oblong or globular
spore-cases, containing reddish or orange-colored powdery microspores;
and of mostly 2-valved tumid larger ones, filled by 3 or 4 (rarely 1--6)
much larger globose-angular macrospores; the former usually in the upper
and the latter in the lower axils of the leafy 4-ranked sessile spike,
but sometimes the two kinds are on opposite sides all along the spike.
(Name a diminutive of _Selago_ an ancient name of a Lycopodium, from
which this genus is separated, and which the plants greatly resemble in
habit and foliage.)

[*] _Leaves all alike and uniformly imbricated; those of the spike
similar._

1. S. spinosa, Beauv. _Sterile stems prostrate_ or creeping, small and
slender; _the fertile thicker, ascending, simple_ (1--3' high); _leaves
lanceolate, acute, spreading, sparsely spinulose-ciliate_. (S.
selaginoides, _Link._)--Wet places, N. H. (_Pursh_), Mich., Lake
Superior, Colorado, and northward; rare.--Leaves larger on the fertile
stems, yellowish-green. (Eu.)

2. S. rupestris, Spring. (Pl. 21, fig. 1--4.) _Much branched in close
tufts_ (1--3' high); _leaves densely appressed-imbricated,
linear-lanceolate_, convex and with a grooved keel, _minutely ciliate,
bristle-tipped_; those of the strongly quadrangular spike rather
broader.--Dry and exposed rocks; very common.--Grayish-green in aspect,
resembling a rigid Moss. Very variable farther west and south. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Leaves shorter above and below, stipule-like; the lateral
larger, 2-ranked._

3. S. apus, Spring. Stems tufted and prostrate, creeping, much branched,
flaccid; leaves pellucid-membranaceous, the larger spreading
horizontally, ovate, oblique, mostly obtuse, the smaller appressed,
taper-pointed; those of the short spikes nearly similar; larger spore
cases copious at the lower part of the spike.--Low, shady places; not
rare, especially southward.--A delicate little plant, resembling a Moss
or Jungermannia.


2. ISOETES, L. QUILLWORT. (Pl. 21.)

Stem or trunk a fleshy more or less depressed corm, rooting just above
its 2-lobed (or in many foreign species 3-lobed) base, above covered
with the dilated and imbricated bases of the awl-shaped or linear
somewhat quadrangular leaves, which include four air-tubes, intercepted
by cross partitions. Sporangia pretty large, orbicular or ovoid,
plano-convex, very thin, sessile in the axils of the leaves, and united
at the back with their excavated bases (the thin edges of the excavation
folding round partly cover them, forming the _velum_), traversed
internally by transverse threads; those of the outer leaves filled with
large spherical macrospores, their whitish crustaceous integument marked
by one circular, and on the upper surface by three radiating elevated
lines (circumscribing a lower hemisphere, and three upper segments which
open valve-like in germination); those of the inner leaves filled with
very minute and powdery grayish microspores; these are always obliquely
oblong and triangular.--Mostly small aquatics, grass-like or rush-like
in aspect, some always submerged, others amphibious, a few living in
merely moist soil, maturing their fruit in late summer and early autumn,
except n. 7 and some forms of n. 6.

This genus is left essentially as it was elaborated for the 5th edition
by the late Dr. GEORGE ENGELMANN. The present editor has added to the
range of a few species, and given var. robusta of n. 3.

[*] _Growing under water, only accidentally or in very dry seasons out
of water; leaves without stomata (except in forms of n. 3) and
peripherical bast-bundles._

1. I. lacustris, L. (Pl. 21, fig. 1--5.) Leaves (10--25 in number, 2--6'
long) dark green, rigid; sporangium ovoid or circular, the upper third,
or less, covered by the velum, the free part pale and unspotted; both
kinds of spores the largest of our species; macrospores (0.32--0.38''
wide) covered with short and twisted crested ridges, which often
anastomose; microspores (0.017--0.020'' long) smooth.--Mountain lakes,
Penn., N. Y., and New Eng. to Lake Superior, and northward, often with
n. 3. (Eu.)

2. I. Tuckermani, Braun. Leaves (10--30, 2--3' long) very slender, awl
shaped, olive-green, the outer recurved; sporangium ovoid or circular,
the upper third covered by the velum, the free part sometimes
brownish-spotted; macrospores (0.22--0.28'' wide) on the upper segments
covered with parallel and anastomosing ridges, the lower half
reticulated; microspores (0.013--0.015'' long) smooth or very delicately
papillose.--Mystic and other ponds near Boston, together with the next
(_Tuckerman, W. Boott_).

3. I. echinospora, Durieu. Leaves slender, awl-shaped; sporangium ovoid
or circular; macrospores (0.20--0.25'' wide) beset all over with small
entire and obtuse or slightly forked spinules. (Eu.)--In this European
form, the leaves are very slenderly attenuated (3--4' long), the upper
margin of the sporangium only is covered with the narrow velum, the free
part is unspotted, and the slightly papillose microspores are larger
(0.015--0.016'' long).

Var. Braunii, Engelm. Leaves (15--30 in number, 3--6' long) dark and
often olive-green, straight or commonly recurved, half or two thirds of
the sporangium covered by the velum, the free part often with light
brown spots; macrospores as in the type; microspores smaller
(0.013--0.014'' long), smooth. (I. Braunii, _Durieu._)--Ponds and
lakes, New Eng. to N. Y., Penn., Mich., and northward, often with the
two preceding.--Frequently with a few stomata, especially in Niagara
specimens.

Var. robusta, Engelm. Stouter; leaves (25--70, 5--8' long) with abundant
stomata all over their surface; velum covering about one half of the
large spotted sporangium; macrospores 0.18--0.27'' wide.--Lake
Champlain, north end of Isle La Motte (_Pringle_).

Var. muricata, Engelm. Leaves (15--30, 6--10' long) straight or flaccid,
bright green; about one half of the almost circular sporangium covered
by the velum, unspotted; macrospores (0.22--0.27'' wide) with shorter
and blunter spinules; microspores as in the last variety, or rarely
spinulose. (I. muricata, _Durieu._)--In some ponds north of Boston (_W.
Boott_).

Var. Boottii, Engelm. Leaves (12--20, 4--5' high) awl shaped, stiffly
erect, bright green, with stomata; sporangium as in the last;
macrospores as in the type, but a little smaller and with very slender
spinules. (I. Boottii, _Braun_, in litt.)--Pond in Woburn, near Boston,
partly out of water (_W. Boott_).

[*][*] _Growing partly out of water, either by the pond drying up or by
the receding of the ebb tide; leaves with stomata, and in n. 6 and 7
with four or more peripherical bast-bundles._

4. I. saccharata, Engelm. Leaves (10--15, 2--3' long) slender,
olive-green, curved; sporangium small, ovoid, only the upper edge
covered by the velum, nearly unspotted; macrospores (0.20--0.22'' wide)
minutely tuberculate; microspores (0.012'' long) papillose.--On Wicomico
and Nanticoke Rivers, eastern shore of Maryland, between high and low
tide (_Canby_).

5. I. riparia, Engelm. Leaves (15--30, 4--8' long) slender, deep green,
erect; sporangium mostly oblong, upper margin to one third covered by
the velum, the free part spotted; macrospores very variable in size
(0.22--0.30'' wide), the upper segments covered by short crested ridges,
which on the lower hemisphere run together forming a network;
microspores larger than in any other species except n. 1 (0.013--0.016''
long), mostly somewhat tuberculated.--Gravelly banks of the Delaware,
from above Philadelphia to Wilmington, between flood and ebb tide;
margins of ponds, Lake Saltonstall, Conn. (_Setchell_), and
northward.--Distinguished from the nearly allied I. lacustris by the
stomata of the leaves, the spotted sporangium, the smaller size of the
macrospores and their reticulation on the lower half.

6. I. Engelmanni, Braun. Leaves long (25--100, 9--20' long), light
green, erect or at last prostrate, flat on the upper side; sporangium
mostly oblong, unspotted, the velum very narrow; macrospores
(0.19--0.24'' wide) covered all over with a coarse honeycomb-like
network; microspores (0.012--0.014'' long) mostly smooth.--Shallow ponds
and ditches, from Mass. (near Boston, _W. Boott, H. Mann_) and Meriden,
Conn. (_F. W. Hall_), to Penn. and Del. and (probably through the Middle
States) to Mo.--By far the largest of our species, often mature in July.

Var. gracilis, Engelm. Leaves few (8--12 only, 9--12' long) and very
slender; both kinds of spores nearly as in the type.--Southern New Eng.
(Westville, Conn., _Setchell_) and N. J. (_Ennis_); entirely submersed!

Var. valida, Engelm. Trunk large and stout (often 1--2' wide); leaves
(50--100, even 200, 18--25' long) with an elevated ridge on the upper
side; sporangium oblong or linear-oblong (4--9'' long), {1/3}--1/2 or more
covered by the velum; spores very small; macrospores 0.16--0.22'' wide;
microspores 0.011--0.013'' long, spinulose.--Del. (_Canby_) and Penn.
(_Porter_). Sept.

7. I. melanopoda, J. Gay. Leaves (15--50, 6--10' long) very slender,
keeled on the back, straight, bright green, usually with dark brown or
black shining bases; sporangium mostly oblong, with a very narrow velum,
brown or spotted; macrospores very small (0.14--0.18'' wide), smoothish,
or with faint tubercles or ridges; microspores (0.010--0.012'' long)
spinulose.--Shallow ponds, and wet prairies and fields, central and
northern Ill. (_E. Hall, Vasey_), and westward. June, and sometimes
again in Nov.--Trunk more spherical and more deeply 2-lobed, and both
kinds of spores smaller than in any other of our species; leaves
disappearing during the summer heat. Closely approaching the completely
terrestrial species of the Mediterranean region.


ORDER 135. MARSILIACEAE.

Perennial plants rooted in mud, having a slender creeping rhizome and
either filiform or 4-parted long-petioled leaves; the somewhat
crustaceous several-celled sporocarps borne on peduncles which rise from
the rhizome near the leaf-stalks, or are more or less consolidated with
the latter, and contain both macrospores and microspores.


1. MARSILIA, L. (Pl. 25.)

Submersed or emersed aquatic plants, with slender creeping rootstocks,
sending up elongated petioles, which bear at the apex a whorl of four
nervose-veined leaflets, and at or near their base, or sometimes on the
rootstock, one or more ovoid sporocarps. These sporocarps or fruit
usually have two teeth near the base, and are 2-celled vertically, with
many transverse partitions, and split or burst into 2 valves at
maturity. The sporocarps have a ring along the edges of the valves,
which at length swells up and bears the sausage-shaped compartments from
their places. The compartments contain macrosporangia and microsporangia
intermixed. (Named for _Aloysius Marsili_, an early Italian naturalist.)

1. M. quadrifolia, L. Leaflets broadly obovate-cuneate, glabrous;
sporocarps usually 2 or 3 on a short peduncle from near the base of the
petioles, pedicelled, glabrous or somewhat hairy, the basal teeth small,
obtuse, or the upper one acute.--In water, the leaflets commonly
floating on the surface; Bantam Lake, Litchfield, Conn., and now
introduced in many places. (Eu.)

2. M. vestita, Hook. & Grev. Leaflets broadly cuneate, usually hairy,
entire (2--7'' long and broad); petioles 1--4' long; peduncles free from
the petiole; sporocarps solitary, short-peduncled (about 2'' long), very
hairy when young; upper basal tooth of sporocarp longest, acute,
straight or curved, lower tooth acute, the sinus between them rounded.
(M. mucronata, _Braun_.)--In swamps which become dry in summer; Iowa and
southwestward.


ORDER 136. SALVINIACEAE.

Floating plants of small size, having a more or less elongated and
sometimes branching axis, bearing apparently distichous leaves;
sporocarps or conceptacles very soft and thin-walled, two or more on a
common stalk, one-celled and having a central, often branched receptacle
which bears either macrosporangia containing solitary macrospores, or
microsporangia with numerous microspores.


1. AZOLLA, Lam. (Pl. 21.)

Small moss-like plants, the stems pinnately branched, covered with
minute 2-lobed imbricated leaves, and emitting rootlets on the under
side. Conceptacles in pairs beneath the stem; the smaller ones
acorn-shaped, containing at the base a single macrospore with a few
corpuscles of unknown character above it; the larger ones globose, and
having a basal placenta which bears many pedicellate microsporangia
which contain masses of microspores.

1. A. Caroliniana, Willd. Plants somewhat deltoid in outline (4--12''
broad), much branched; leaves with ovate lobes, the lower lobe reddish,
the upper one green with a reddish border; macrospores with three
attendant corpuscles, its surface minutely granulate; masses of
microspores glochidiate.--Floating on quiet waters, from Lake Ontario
westward and southward,--appearing like a reddish hepatic moss.

       *        *       *       *       *

SALVINIA NATANS, L., was said by Pursh to grow floating on the surface
of small lakes in Western New York, and has more recently been said to
occur in Missouri. It has oblong-oval floating leaves 4--6'' long,
closely pinnately-veined, which bear conceptacles and branching plumose
fibres on their under surface.


SUBCLASS II. CELLULAR ACROGENS, OR BRYOPHYTES.

Plants composed of cellular tissue only. Antheridia or archegonia, or
both, formed upon the stem or branches of the plant itself, which is
developed from the germinating spore usually with the intervention of a
filiform or conferva-like prothallus.--Divided into the _Musci_, or
Mosses, and the _Hepaticae_.


DIVISION I. HEPATICAE.[1] (LIVERWORTS.)

[Footnote 1: Elaborated for this edition by Prof. L. M. UNDERWOOD, of
Syracuse, N. Y.]

Plants usually procumbent, consisting of a simple thallus, a thalloid
stem, or a leafy axis; leaves when present 2-ranked, with uniform
leaf-cells and no midvein; thalloid forms with or without a midvein,
smooth or scurfy or scaly beneath and usually with numerous rootlets.
Sexual reproduction by antheridia and archegonia, which are immersed in
the thallus, or sessile or pedicelled upon it, or borne on a peduncled
receptacle. The fertilized archegonium develops into a capsule
(_sporogonium_) closely invested by a calyptra, which ruptures above as
the ripened capsule (containing numerous spores and usually elaters)
pushes upward. It is also commonly surrounded by a usually double
involucre, the inner (often called _perianth_) more or less tubular, the
outer tubular or more often foliaceous, sometimes wholly wanting.
Propagation is also effected by offshoots (_innovations_), runners
(_flagella_), or by _gemmae_, which appear at the margin of the leaves or
on the surface of the thallus, often in special receptacles.


ORDER 137. JUNGERMANNIACEAE. SCALE-MOSSES.

Plant-body a leafy axis or rarely thallose. Capsule borne on a slender
often elongated pedicel, splitting at maturity into 4 valves. Elaters
mixed with the spores, mostly bispiral (unispiral in n. 1--3, 32, and
33, 1--3-spiral in n. 5 and 28). Antheridia and archegonia dioecious or
monoecious, in the latter case either mingled in the same inflorescence,
or separated upon the same branch, with the antheridia naked in the
axils of the lower leaves, or on separate parts of the same plant.
Leaves 2-ranked, incubous (i.e. the apex of each leaf lying on the base
of the next above), or succubous (i.e. the apex of each leaf lying under
the base of the next above), or sometimes transverse, with frequently a
third row of rudimentary leaves beneath the stem.


Artificial Key to the Genera.

Sec. 1. Plant-body a leafy axis.

[*] Leaves complicate-bilobed (i.e. folded together) or with a small
basal lobe.

[+] Lower lobe smaller than the upper.

[++] Root-hairs borne on the stems or underleaves.

1. Frullania. Lower lobe mostly saccate, more or less remote from the
stem. Branches intra-axillary, the leaves on either side free.

2. Jubula. Lower lobe saccate; branches lateral, a basal leaf borne
partly on the stem, partly on the branch.

3. Lejeunea. Lower lobe incurved, more or less inflated.

5. Porella. Lower lobe ligulate. Perianth triangular, the third or odd
angle ventral.

[++][++] Root-hairs rising from the lower lobes.

4. Radula. Perianth compressed. Underleaves none.

[+][+] Upper lobe smaller than the lower, or the two somewhat equal.

[++] Leaves succubous as to their lower lobes.

15. Scapania. Involucral leaves 2; perianth dorsally compressed, the
mouth truncate, bilabiate, decurved.

16. Diplophyllum. Involucral leaves few; perianth erect, round, the
mouth denticulate.

[++][++] Leaves transverse.

25. Marsupella. Perianth tubular or somewhat compressed. (Compare also
Jungermannia Sec. Sphenolobus.)

[*][*] Leaves palmately 3--4- (or many-) cleft.

[+] Divisions numerous, capillary. Plants large, usually in conspicuous
mats.

6. Ptilidium. Leaves palmatifid with ciliate margins.

7. Trichocolea. Leaves setaceously multifid.

[+][+] Leaves 3--4-cleft or parted; plants small, mostly inconspicuous.

10. Lepidozia. Leaf-divisions two cells wide or more.

11. Blepharostoma. Leaf-divisions only one cell wide.

[*][*][*] Leaves entire, emarginate, or 2--3-toothed or -lobed.

[+] Leaves closely imbricate on short julaceous stems.

27. Gymnomitrium. Involucre double, the inner shorter.

[+][+] Leaves deeply bilobed.

8. Herberta. Underleaves large. Perianth fusiform on an elongated
branch.

12. Cephalozia. Underleaves mostly wanting; perianth mostly triangular
on a short branch.

[+][+][+] Leaves incubous, mostly plane or depressed.

9. Bazzania. Leaves mostly 2--3-toothed. Perianth fusiform on a short
branch.

14. Kantia. Leaves mostly entire. Perianth fleshy, pendulous,
subterranean.

[+][+][+][+] Leaves succubous or transverse.

[++] Underleaves entire or nearly so.

13. Odontoschisma. Involucral leaves numerous, small, incised, those of
the stem rounded or retuse.

21. Mylia. Involucral leaves 2, connate at base. Large.

22. Harpanthus. Involucral leaves few, smaller than the semi-vertical
emarginate stem-leaves. Small.

24. Jungermannia. Involucral leaves few, mostly larger than the entire
or bidentate stem-leaves. Medium-sized or large.

[++][++] Underleaves 2--4-cleft, -parted, or -divided.

17. Geocalyx. Involucre fleshy, saccate, pendent. Leaves bidentate;
underleaves 2-cleft.

18. Lophocolea. Fruit terminal on the main stem or a primary branch.
Involucral leaves distinct.

19. Chiloscyphus. Fruit on a short lateral branch. Involucral leaves
distinct. (See also Jungermannia.)

[++][++][++] Underleaves mostly wanting.

[a.] Leaves entire or barely retuse.

23. Liochlaena. Involucral leaves distinct, like those of the stem;
perianth truncate-depressed at the apex.

26. Nardia. Involucral leaves connate at base and adnate to the
perianth.

[b.] Leaves bidentate or bilobed, rarely 3-lobed.

12. Cephalozia. Branches all from beneath. Perianth on a short branch,
mostly trigonal with the odd angle beneath.

24. Jungermannia. Simple or branching laterally. Perianth terminal,
mostly laterally compressed.

[c.] Leaves mostly spinulose or dentate.

20. Plagiochila. Involucral leaves large; perianth laterally compressed.

Sec. 2. Plant-body pseudo-foliaceous with succubous leaf-like lobes.

28. Fossombronia. Perianth large, campanulate.

Sec. 3. Plant-body a thallus.

[*] Thallus with a distinct costa.

29. Pallavicinia. Thallus 3--6'' wide, mostly simple, the margins
sinuate or undulate. Perianth tubular, at length dorsal.

30. Blasia. Thallus 3--6'' wide, lobed, dichotomous, or radiate, the
margins pinnatifid-sinuate.

32. Metzgeria. Thallus narrow (1--2''), ciliate at the margins or on one
or both sides.

[*][*] Thallus with an inconspicuous costa or none.

33. Aneura. Thallus rather narrow, mostly palmately or pinnately lobed.
Sporogonium rising from the under side near the margin.

31. Pellia. Thallus wider, mostly simple or forked. Sporogonium rising
from the upper surface.


1. FRULLANIA, Raddi. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves incubous, complicate-bilobed, the lower lobe usually inflated,
helmet- or club-shaped; underleaves bifid, rarely entire, with basal
rootlets. Dioecious or monoecious. Fruit terminal on the branches.
Involucral leaves 2 or 4, larger than the stem-leaves; perianth
3--4-angled, mucronate. Calyptra pyriform, fleshy. Capsule globose, the
lower third solid. Elaters truncate at each end, unispiral, adherent to
the valves. Spores large, reddish, minutely muricate. Antheridia most
often on a short branch, globose-oblong or cylindric. Archegonia 2--4,
long-styled. (Named for _Leonardo Frullani_, an Italian Minister of
State.)

Sec. 1. TRACHYCOLEA. _Perianth triangular in section, rough with tubercles
or scales, or villous; lower leaf-lobe helmet-shaped, truncate at base._

[*] _Lower leaf-lobe about three fourths the size of the upper._

1. F. Oakesiana, Aust. Stems widely branching; fertile branches short;
leaves obliquely orbicular, loosely imbricate, the lower lobe rotund,
contiguous to the stem; underleaves ovate-rotund or subobovate, little
wider than the stem, bifid; involucral leaves more or less connate,
equally bilobed, the lobes entire, obtuse; perianth small,
subobovate-pyriform, smooth or 1--7-nerved or alate both sides.--White
Mts., on stunted spruce and birch trees.

[*][*] _Lower leaf-lobe much smaller than the upper._

[+] _Underleaves scarcely wider than the stem, ovate, bifid, the
divisions entire, acute; perianth 1-carinate or smooth, except in n. 2;
stems creeping._

2. F. Virginica, Lehm. Stems short, irregularly branching; leaves
crowded, ovate, entire, somewhat concave, the lower lobes sometimes
expanded into a lanceolate lamina; underleaves round-ovate, bifid, twice
the width of the stem; perianth compressed-pyriform, tuberculate,
2--4-carinate dorsally, 4-carinate ventrally.--On bark of trees, rarely
on rocks; common.

3. F. Eboracensis, Lehm. Branches clustered; leaves loose, imbricate on
the branches, round-ovate, entire; perianth pyriform, slightly
compressed and repand, smooth, obscurely carinate beneath and gibbous
toward the apex. (F. saxatilis, _Lindenb._)--On trees and rocks; common
northward.

4. F. Pennsylvanica, Steph. Stems dichotomous; leaves imbricate, flat,
ovate, mucronate or rarely obtuse, entire; lower lobe marginal, large,
round-cucullate; underleaves broadly ovate, deeply parted, the divisions
long-acuminate; dioecious; antheridial spikes on short lateral branches,
elongated; lobes of the involucral leaves acuminate, much narrowed at
base, and the large underleaves carinate-concave, deeply parted, their
apiculate divisions entire or toothed.--Shaded rocks, Stony Creek,
Carbon Co., Penn. (_Rau_). Known only from the original description.

5. F. saxicola, Aust. Stems numerous, widely branching; leaves
orbicular, scarcely oblique, flat; lower lobe near the stem, small, or
rarely larger and round-galeate; underleaves scarcely wider than the
stem, subovate, bifid; perianth broadly oblong, bowl-shaped with very
short mouth, papillose, abruptly broad-carinate beneath, 1--many-nerved
each side of the keel, 2-angled.--Sloping dry trap rocks, Closter, N. J.
(_Austin_).

[+][+] _Underleaves 2--3 times wider than the stem, round or
subquadrate, bifid, the divisions blunt or truncate._

[++] _Leaves lax, rather distant; lower lobe mostly expanded,
ovate-lanceolate._

6. F. aeolotis, Nees. Procumbent, irregularly branched or subpinnate;
leaves semi-vertical, subsquarrose, obliquely cordate, the lower lobe
expanded; underleaves ovate, acutely bifid, the upper margin
angular-dentate or entire; sporogonium unknown.--On trees and rocks,
chiefly in mountain regions.

[++][++] _Leaves close-imbricate; lower lobe galeate, seldom expanded
except on terminal leaves._

7. F. squarrosa, Nees. Decumbent, pinnately branching, the short fertile
branch lateral; leaves subvertical, suborbicular, obtuse, entire; lower
lobe obovate-cucullate or galeate, subappressed; underleaves cordate or
rounded, sinuate-subdentate, slightly bifid; perianth oblong,
triquetrous, convex dorsally, strongly keeled ventrally.--On rocks and
trees, N. Y. to Ohio, and southward; rather common.

8. F. plana, Sulliv. Procumbent, widely branching or subpinnate; leaves
orbicular, subimbricate; lower lobe very small, as broad as long, close
to the stem; underleaves rather large, flat, rounded, slightly bifid;
monoecious; perianth oblong-oval or subobovate, triquetrous, dorsally
sulcate, acutely keeled ventrally; antheridial spikes globose.--Shaded
rocks, N. Y. and N. J. to E. Tenn.

9. F. dilatata, Nees. Loosely and widely pinnate; leaves round, entire,
opaque; lower lobe subrounded, cucullate, close to the stem; underleaves
subquadrate, toothed at the anterior angles; involucral leaves with 2 or
3 entire lobes; perianth tuberculate, retuse.--Rocks and trunks of
trees; rather common. (Eu.)

Sec. 2. THYOPSIELLA. _Perianth smooth; leaves semicordate at base (marked
by a central moniliform row of cells, or sometimes in n. 12 by a few
scattered large cells); lower lobe near the stem (except in n. 11),
cylindric-saccate, mostly erect; underleaves round-oval, the margin
entire, recurved; dioecious._

[*] _Leaves orbicular._

10. F. Asagrayana, Mont. (Pl. 24.) Creeping, simply pinnate; leaves
concave, obtuse, decurved; lower lobe oblong-clavate, emarginate at
base; underleaves oblong, flat, 2-cleft, the sinus obtuse; involucral
leaves unequally 2-cleft, the dorsal segment oblong, pointed, nearly
entire, the ventral subulate; perianth pyriform, 3-sided, obtusely
keeled beneath. (F. Grayana of authors.)--Rocks and bark of coniferous
trees; frequent.

11. F. Tamarisci, Nees. Bipinnately branching, somewhat rigid; leaves
obtuse, mucronately acute or subacuminate, decurved, entire; lower lobe
distant from the stem, oval or oblong; underleaves quadrate-ovate or
obovate, emarginate, the margin revolute; involucral leaves bifid,
serrulate; perianth oblong, sulcate dorsally, obtusely keeled
ventrally.--N. Eng. and southward; rare. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Leaves oblong from a narrowed base._

12. F. fragilifolia, Tayl. Procumbent, subpinnate, the alternate
flattened branches subremote; leaves subimbricate, ascending, recurved,
entire; lower lobe oblong-galeate; underleaves round-obovate, flat,
appressed, bifid, the margins entire or angled; perianth
obovate-cordate, concave dorsally, keeled ventrally; involucral leaves
subequally lobed, obtusely few-toothed. (F. polysticta, _Mont._ F.
Sullivantiae, _Aust._)--On trees in a cedar swamp, Urbana, Ohio
(_Sullivant_). (Eu.)


2. JUBULA, Dumort. (Pl. 25.)

Characters nearly as in Frullania. Leaves large and flat, an axillary
one at the base of each branch without a lower lobe. Calyptra
turnip-shaped, abruptly globose above. Monoecious, with 2 antheridia in
each leaf of a spike-like branch, and the archegonia mostly solitary.
(Name from _juba_, a mane, alluding to the persistent elaters.)

1. J. Hutchinsiae, Dumort., var. Sullivantii, Spruce. Subdichotomously
branching; leaves dark olive-green, subimbricate, obliquely ovate,
acute, entire or subrepand; lower lobe saccate, rather remote from the
stem, not spurred as in the European form; underleaves roundish,
serrate or entire; involucral leaves bifid, serrate; perianth
triangular-obpyriform. (Frullania Hutchinsiae, _Nees_, in part.)--Wet
rocks, N. Eng. to S. C.; more common in the mountains.


3. LEJEUNEA, Libert. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves decurrent at the folds, the lower lobe incurved and ventricose;
underleaves usually present, entire or bifid. Archegonium with a slender
persistent style, solitary on a usually very short branch; the perianth
free from the involucral leaves, oval or oblong, terete or angular,
variously carinate, cristate, or ciliate. Capsule globose, 4-cleft to
the middle, the valves recurved. Spores large (40--50  mu broad), globose
or oblong, tuberculate. Antheridia at the base of ordinary leaves or in
the axils of the leaves of a spike-like branch.--Otherwise as Frullania.
(Named for _A.-L.-S. Lejeune_, a French botanist.)

[*] _Underleaves entire._

1. L. clypeata, Sulliv. (Pl. 24.) Stems procumbent, somewhat pinnately
branched, 3/4--1' long; leaves whitish-green, round-ovate,
cellular-crenulate, deflexed; lower lobe flat, oblong-quadrate;
underleaves round-quadrate; monoecious; involucral leaves larger than
those of the stem, the perianth round-obovate, 2--3-carinate dorsally,
1-carinate ventrally, the keels rough. (L. calyculata, _Tayl._)--On
rocks and trees; common south and westward.

[*][*] _Underleaves bifid; leaves entire._

2. L. serpyllifolia, Libert, var. Americana, Lindb. Stems long, somewhat
branching, pale, pellucid and fragile; leaves rather remote, flat,
opening from a basilar sac, scarcely decurved, obliquely roundish-ovate,
obtuse, often slightly repand; underleaves about half as large,
round-oval with a broad obtuse sinus and acute lobes; monoecious; the
obovate-clavate perianth on a lateral branch. (L. cavifolia,
_Aust._)--On cedars, etc., Catskill Mts. (_Cleve_), Belleville, Ont.
(_Macoun_), and southward; rather common.

3. L. lucens, Tayl. Whitish, filiform, pinnately branched; leaves
remote, rarely subimbricate, obliquely ovate-triangular, rounded or
obtuse, semi-cordate at base; lower lobe ovoid, acute or apiculate;
underleaves 1/2 as large as the lateral, round-oval, deeply bifid, the
lobes broad-subulate; dioecious; involucral leaves rather longer, with
lanceolate lobes; perianth scarcely emersed, broadly pyriform,
5-carinate. (L. cucullata, _Sulliv._; not _Nees._)--Near Cincinnati;
moist rocks, Alleghany Mts. and southward (_Sullivant_). Minute and
flaccid.

[*][*][*] _Underleaves obsolete; leaves muriculate-denticulate._

4. L. calcarea, Libert. Very minute; stems slender, loosely branching;
leaves ovate, falcate-decurved, sinuate-complicate at base; monoecious;
involucral leaves bifid, the divisions entire; perianth on a very short
lateral branch, pyriform-clavate, acutely 5-angled, the margin
echinate-muriculate. (L. echinata, _Tayl._)--On rocks and roots of
trees; rather common. (Eu.)


4. RADULA, Dumort. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves large, complicate-bilobed, incubous; lower lobe small, bearing
root-hairs; underleaves none. Dioecious, rarely monoecious. Fruit
usually terminal. Involucral leaves 2, slightly smaller than the
cauline, 2-lobed; perianth tubular, compressed or nearly terete,
truncate, entire or crenate. Calyptra pyriform, persistent. Capsule
oval-cylindric. Elaters slender, free. Spores large, globose, minutely
tuberculate. Antheridia in the ventricose bases of spicate leaves.
(_Radula_, a scraper or spatula, in allusion to the form of the
perianth.)

[*] _Lower lobe subquadrate, barely incumbent on the stem._

1. R. complanata, Dumort. Creeping, widely subpinnately branching;
leaves imbricate, spreading, rounded, the lower lobe obtuse or acute;
monoecious; perianth obconic, compressed, the mouth entire, truncate;
antheridia in the bases of 2--3 pairs of strongly imbricate tumid
leaves.--On rocks and roots of trees; common. (Eu.)

2. R. obconica, Sulliv. (Pl. 24.) Smaller, indeterminately branched;
leaves somewhat remote, round-obovate, convex; monoecious; perianth
clavate-obconic, obliquely truncate; antheridia axillary on short
lateral branches rising near the terminal involucre.--On trees in cedar
swamps, N. J. to Ohio.

[*][*] _Lower lobe small, rounded, more or less transversely adnate._

3. R. tenax, Lindb. Stems brownish-green, rigid, tenacious; leaves
remote, scarcely decurrent, obliquely elliptic-ovate, opaque, the cells
round and strongly chlorophyllose; dioecious; the antheridial spike
lateral below the keel of a leaf, long, linear, somewhat obtuse. (R.
pallens, _Sulliv._; not _Gottsche._)--On rotten trunks, in the Catskill
Mts., and southward, especially in the mountains.


5. PORELLA, Dill. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves large, incubous, complicate-bilobed; lower lobe ligulate,
suberect; underleaves similar, decurrent at base, the apex entire.
Dioecious. Fruit on a short lateral branch. Involucral leaves usually 4,
2-lobed, the margin ciliate or denticulate; perianth somewhat oval,
compressed, bilabiate, incised or entire. Calyptra globose, persistent.
Capsule globose, reddish, short-stalked. Elaters very numerous,
2--3-spiral, free. Spores large, rough. Antheridia solitary in the
saccate bases of leaves, crowded in short spikes. (Name a diminutive of
_porus_, an opening.)

[*] _Leaves more or less remote; stems bipinnate._

1. P. pinnata, L. Stems irregularly pinnate, fastigiate at the ends;
leaves scarcely incubous, ovate-oblong, the rounded apex sometimes
slightly decurved; lower lobe minute, flat, oblong, obtuse, as long but
not half as wide as the flat, entire, ovate-rectangular, scarcely
decurrent underleaves. (Madotheca Porella, _Nees._)--On rocks and trees
subject to inundation; common. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Leaves mostly closely imbricate; stems mostly simply pinnate (or
bipinnate in n. 2)._

2. P. platyphylla, Lindb. (Pl. 24.) Yellowish or fuscous-green; stems
irregularly pinnate, often fastigiate at the ends; leaves obliquely
ovate, more or less concave at base and the rounded upper margin curved
upward and undulate, mostly entire; lower lobe obliquely ovate, the
margin strongly recurved, with an acute tooth at base; underleaves
semicircular, with strongly reflexed margins. (Madotheca platyphylla,
_Dumort._)--On rocks and trees; common eastward. (Eu.)

3. P. Thuja, Lindb. Fuscous-green or blackish, somewhat regularly
pinnate; leaves convex, closely appressed, obliquely round-ovate, the
rounded apex decurved, more or less denticulate; lower lobe oblong,
obtuse, with an acute tooth at base, longer but narrower than the
quadrate underleaves, both with strongly recurved sparsely denticulate
margins. (Madotheca Thuja, _Dumort._)--On rocks and trees; more common
westward. (Eu.)

4. P. dentata, Lindb. Mostly fuscous-green, irregularly pinnate or
subdichotomous; leaves more remote on the branches, obliquely
round-ovate, the rounded summit slightly decurved, more or less
denticulate; lower lobe decurrent, twisted, obliquely ovate, acute, with
recurved undulate denticulate margin and a large acute tooth at base;
underleaves twice as wide as the lower lobes, quadrate-oval, the
undulate reflexed margin dentate, especially near the base. (Madotheca
rivularis, _Nees._)--Shaded rocks, Yellow Springs, Ohio (_Sullivant_).
(Eu.)

5. P. Sullivantii, Underw. Stems strongly decurved at the ends in
drying; leaves suberect, the straight ventral margin strongly involute
toward the apex; cells large, punctate-stelliform; perianth broadly
keeled beneath, the keel 2-angled. (Madotheca Sullivantii,
_Aust._)--Alleghany Mts. (_Sullivant_); rare.


6. PTILIDIUM, Nees. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves incubous, complicate-bilobed, each lobe divided and lacerately
ciliate; underleaves 4--5-lobed, ciliate. Dioecious. Fruit terminating
short branches. Involucral leaves 2--4, 4-cleft; perianth terete,
obovate, the mouth connivent, plicate, denticulate. Calyptra pyriform,
coriaceous. Capsule ovate. Spores globose. Antheridia in the base of
closely imbricated leaves. (Name a diminutive of [Greek: pti/lon], _a
feather_, from the fringed foliage.)

1. P. ciliare, Nees. Stems crowded, subpinnate; fringes of the foliage
long-setaceous. (Blepharozia ciliaris, _Dumort._)--On rotten logs and
stumps; common. (Eu.)


7. TRICHOCOLEA, Dumort. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves succubous, 4--5-divided, and with the underleaves setaceously
fringed. Dioecious. Fruit terminal, or axillary from the growth of
innovations. Involucral leaves coalescent into an oblong truncate hairy
tube, blended in our species with the calyptra; perianth none. Capsule
oblong, its pedicel bulbous at base. Elaters free. Antheridia large, in
the axils of leaves on terminal branches. (Name from [Greek: thri/x],
_hair_, and [Greek: koleo/s], _a sheath_, from the hairy involucre.)

1. T. tomentella, Dumort. Stems pinnately decompound, densely tufted,
glaucous, 2--6' long; leaves nearly uniform; underleaves subquadrate, as
wide as the stem.--Among mosses in swamps; common. (Eu.)

T. BIDDLECOMIAE, Aust., very imperfectly described from specimens
collected in Urbana, Ohio, is said to be simply and rather distantly
pinnate.


8. HERBERTA, S. F. Gray. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves large, incubous or nearly transverse, narrow, 3-ranked, the
underleaves being scarcely smaller, cleft to or below the middle, the
lobes acute. Dioecious. Fruit terminal on a long branch. Involucral
leaves numerous, equitant; perianth ovate-subulate or narrowly fusiform,
3-angled, deeply 6--8-lobed. Calyptra small, obovate, deeply trifid.
Capsule large, globose. Elaters free. Spores large, muriculate.
Antheridia in the bases of leaves of a short terminal spike. (Named for
_William Herbert_, an English botanist.)

1. H. adunca, S. F. Gray. Stems long and slender, erect, brownish,
nearly simple; leaves and underleaves almost alike, curved and
one-sided, the lobes lanceolate. (Sendtnera juniperina, _Sulliv._; not
_Nees._)--On rocks, Greenwood Mts., N. J., Catskill Mts., N. Y., and
probably northward. (Eu.)


9. BAZZANIA, S. F. Gray. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves incubous, oblique, decurved, mostly truncate-tridentate;
underleaves wider than the stem, mostly 3--4-toothed or crenate.
Dioecious. Fruit on a short branch from the axil of an underleaf.
Involucral leaves much imbricate, concave, orbicular or ovate, incised
at the apex; perianth ovate-subulate or fusiform, somewhat 3-keeled.
Calyptra pyriform or cylindric-oblong. Capsule oblong. Antheridial
spikes from the axils of underleaves. (Named for _M. Bazzani_, an
Italian Professor of Anatomy.)

1. B. trilobata, S. F. Gray. (Pl. 24.) Creeping, dichotomous,
proliferous; leaves ovate, the broad apex acutely 3-toothed; underleaves
roundish-quadrangular, spreading, 4--6-toothed above; perianth curved,
cylindric, plicate at the narrow apex and 3-toothed. (Mastigobryum
trilobatum, _Nees._ M. tridenticulatum, _Lindenb._)--Ravines, wet woods
and swamps; common and variable. (Eu.)

2. B. deflexa, Underw. Stems forked or alternately branched; leaves
strongly deflexed, cordate-ovate or ovate-oblong, falcate, the upper
margin arcuate, the narrow apex 2--3-toothed or entire; underleaves
roundish-quadrate, the upper margin bifid, crenate, or entire; perianth
cylindric, arcuate, plicate above and denticulate. (Mastigobryum
deflexum, _Nees._)--On rocks in the higher mountains eastward. (Eu.)


10. LEPIDOZIA, Dumort. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves small, incubous, palmately 2--4-cleft or -parted; underleaves
similar, often smaller. Dioecious or rarely monoecious. Fruit terminal
on short branches from the under side of the stem. Involucral leaves
small, appressed, concave, 2--4-cleft; perianth elongated,
ovate-subulate or narrowly fusiform, obtusely triangular above, entire
or denticulate. Calyptra included, pyriform or oblong. Capsule
oblong-cylindric. Spores minute, smooth or roughish. Antheridia large,
pedicelled, solitary in the axils of 2-cleft spicate leaves. (Name from
[Greek: lepi/s], _a scale_, and [Greek: o)/zos], _a shoot_, for the
scale-like foliage.)

1. L. reptans, Dumort. (Pl. 24.) Creeping, pinnately compound, the
branches often flagellate; leaves decurved, subquadrate, 3--4-cleft;
involucral leaves ovate, truncate, unequally 4-toothed; perianth
incurved, dentate.--On the ground and rotten wood, N. J., and common
northward. (Eu.)

2. L. setacea, Mitt. Leaves deeply 2--3-cleft or -parted, incurved, the
lobes subulate, formed of a somewhat double series of cells; underleaves
similar; perianth ciliate. (Jungermannia setacea, _Web._)--On the ground
and rotten wood; common. Resembling the next in its leaves, but smaller
and brownish. (Eu.)


11. BLEPHAROSTOMA, Dumort. (Pl. 25.)

Leaves transverse or slightly incubous, 3--4-parted, the divisions
capillary; underleaves smaller, mostly 2--3-parted. Dioecious or
monoecious. Fruit terminal. Involucral leaves numerous, verticillate,
deeply 4-cleft; perianth exserted, pyriform-cylindric, laciniate.
Calyptra short, oblong, bilabiate. Capsule cylindric-oblong. Elaters
large, very obtuse. Spores large, smooth. Antheridia solitary in the
axils of leaf-like bracts. (Name from [Greek: ble/pharon], _an eyelid_,
and [Greek: sto/ma], _mouth_, in allusion to the fringed orifice of the
perianth.)

1. B. trichophyllum, Dumort. Flaccid, branched, creeping; leaf-divisions
straight, spreading, each composed of a single row of cells; perianth
ovate-cylindric. (Jungermannia trichophylla, _L._)--On the ground and
rotten wood. Minute, light green. (Eu.)


12. CEPHALOZIA, Dumort. (Pl. 23.)

Leaves mostly succubous, chiefly 2-lobed, the margins uniformly plane or
subincurved; underleaves smaller, often wanting except on fruiting
branches. Branches from the under side of the stem. Monoecious or
dioecious. Involucral leaves numerous, capitate, 3-ranked, usually
2-lobed; perianth long, triangular-prismatic, the constricted mouth
variously dentate. Calyptra small. Capsule somewhat oblong. Elaters
free. Spores minute. Antheridia in the base of inflated spicate leaves.
(Name from [Greek: kephale/], _head_, and [Greek: o)/zos], _bud_, for
the capitate involucre.)

Sec. 1. CEPHALOZIA proper. _Perianth more or less 3-angled or 3-carinate;
leaf-cells large (mostly 25--50  mu broad); plants mostly medium-sized._

[*] _Underleaves rarely present except on fruiting branches._

1. C. Virginiana, Spruce. Without runners, usually pale; leaves small,
obliquely round-ovate, acutely 2-lobed nearly to the middle; cells
quadrate-hexagonal, opaque; dioecious, rarely monoecious; involucral
leaves round-quadrate, with slender acuminate lobes; perianth large,
widest above the middle, unequally ciliolate; capsule large,
long-exserted; antheridial spike long. (C. catenulata of authors; not
_Huebn._)--On rotten wood or swampy ground, N. Eng. to Va., and
southward.

2. C. multiflora, Spruce. (Pl. 23.) Often subpinnate, without runners,
pale green; leaves small, round-rhombic, decurrent, bifid {1/3} their
length; cells quadrate-hexagonal, pellucid; dioecious; inner involucral
leaves 3--4 times as long as the outer; perianth linear-fusiform,
3-plaited when young, triangular only above when mature, ciliate or
toothed, fleshy; calyptra fleshy, oval-globose; capsule rather
short-pedicelled; spores cinnamon-color.--On the ground and rotten wood;
common. (Eu.)

3. C. pleniceps, Underw. Stems very short, branching, densely cespitose,
pale green or whitish; leaves thick, orbicular, strongly concave,
subclasping but not decurrent, bifid {1/3} their length, the acute lobes
incurved and strongly connivent; involucral leaves oblong, palmately
2--4-cleft, the ventral like the underleaves; perianth large,
oblong-cylindric, obtusely angled, the plicate mouth denticulate.
(Jungermannia pleniceps, _Aust._)--Among Sphagnum in the White Mts.
(_Oakes_).

4. C. bicuspidata, Dumort. Prostrate or assurgent, cespitose, usually
greenish or reddish, with runners; lower leaves small and distant, the
upper larger, round-ovate, cleft nearly to the middle, the lobes
ovate-lanceolate and acute, the lower lobe narrower and acuminate; cells
large, pellucid; monoecious; involucral leaves about 3 pairs, the
innermost nearly three times as long as the outer, cleft 1/2 their length;
perianth four times as long as the leaves, linear-prismatic or fusiform,
thin, denticulate or ciliate; capsule cylindric-oblong; spores purple.
(Jungermannia bicuspidata, _L._)--On the ground, mountains of N. Eng.,
N. Y., and N. J. (Eu.)

5. C. curvifolia, Dumort. Slender, rarely forked, without runners,
greenish, reddish, or often purple; leaves imbricate, ascending,
obovate, concave, semicordate at base, lunately bifid below the middle,
the lobes incurved or hooked; cells small, quadrate; monoecious or
dioecious; involucral leaves complicate, the lobes subovate,
spinulose-denticulate; perianth large, rose-purple, triquetrous, the
wide mouth ciliate; calyptra thin; capsule oblong-globose.
(Jungermannia curvifolia, _Dicks._)--On rotten logs in swamps, etc.;
common. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Underleaves usually present; leaves rarely subimbricate._

6. C. fluitans, Spruce. Stems 2--3' long, loosely creeping, with short
thick runners; leaves large, ovate-oblong, lobed to near the middle, the
lower lobe larger, lanceolate, obtuse; cells large, mostly hexagonal;
underleaves linear, appressed; dioecious; involucral leaves cleft to the
middle; perianth oval-cylindric, nearly entire; calyptra short,
pyriform; capsule oblong; spores small, minutely tuberculate; antheridia
globose, pedicelled, solitary in the axils.--In bogs, on mosses or
partly floating; rare. (Eu.)

Sec. 2. CEPHALOZIELLA. _Perianth 3--6-angled; leaf-cells small (14--20  mu
broad); plants small, often minute; underleaves present in n. 9._

7. C. divaricata, Dumort. Sparingly branched, without runners; leaves
very small, cuneate or round-quadrate, the ovate-triangular lobes acute;
cells pellucid or subopaque; involucral leaves larger, the lobes acute,
denticulate; perianth linear or narrowly fusiform, prismatic,
denticulate or subentire; capsule oblong-globose, long-exserted.
(Jungermannia divaricata, _Smith._)--Dry rocks and sand, pine barrens of
N. J., and northward. (Eu.)

8. C. Macounii, Aust. Slender, much branched, dark green; leaves
scarcely broader than the stem, wide-spreading, bifid with a broad or
lunate sinus, the broad-subulate lobes mostly acute; cells subquadrate,
somewhat pellucid; dioecious; involucral leaves appressed, 2--3-lobed,
irregularly spinulose; perianth small, whitish, obovate or
ovate-fusiform, obtusely 3-angled, setulose or ciliate.--Rotten logs,
mountains of N. Eng., and northward (_Austin_, _Macoun_).

9. C. Sullivantii, Aust. Stems 3--6'' long, fleshy, rootlets numerous;
fertile branches suberect, clavate; leaves imbricate, often narrower
than the stem, subquadrate-ovate, more or less serrate, the sinus and
lobes subacute; dioecious; involucral leaves 3, erect, free; perianth
broadly oval or subobovate, obtusely and sparingly angled, the apex
slightly plicate, the mouth connivent, dentate, sometimes narrowly
scarious; capsule oval.--On rotten wood, N. J., Ohio, and Ill.; rare.
Our smallest species.


13. ODONTOSCHISMA, Dumort. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves succubous, ovate or roundish, entire or retuse, rarely bidentate;
underleaves minute, sometimes obscure or wanting. Dioecious or sometimes
monoecious. Fruit terminal on a short branch from the lower side of the
stem. Involucral leaves few, 3-ranked, bifid or rarely 3--4-cleft;
perianth large, triangular-fusiform, ciliate or dentate. Calyptra
membranous. Capsule cylindric-oblong. Antheridia in small whitish spikes
on the under side of the stem. (Name from [Greek: o)doy/s], _a tooth_,
and [Greek: schi/sma], _a cleft_, alluding to the perianth.)

1. O. Sphagni, Dumort. (Pl. 24.) Leaves spreading or ascending, ovate,
rounded or oblong, entire or retuse, subconcave; underleaves mostly
wanting; perianth 3--6 times longer than the leaves, subulate-fusiform,
laciniate or ciliate. (Sphagnoecetis communis, _Nees_.)--Among mosses,
N. J. to Ill., and southward. (Eu.)

2. O. denudata, Lindb. Stems densely rooting, somewhat leafless at base,
flagellate, branching above; leaves spreading, broadly ovate, entire;
underleaves broadly oval, entire or subdenticulate; perianth
close-connivent above, at length bursting irregularly.--On rotten wood,
Canada to Ohio, and south along the mountains. (Eu.)


14. KANTIA, S. F. Gray. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves large, incubous, flat or convex, entire or retuse; underleaves
small, roundish, the apex entire, retuse or bifid. Dioecious or
monoecious. Involucre pendulous, subterranean, clavate or subcylindric,
fleshy, hairy, attached to the stem by one side of its mouth. Calyptra
membranous, partly adnate to the involucre. Capsule cylindric, the
valves spirally twisted. Spores minute, roughish. Antheridia solitary in
the reduced leaves of short lateral branches. (Name from _J. Kant_, a
physician at The Hague.)

1. K. Trichomanis, S. F. Gray. (Pl. 24.) Creeping, without ventral
runners; leaves pale green, imbricate, spreading, roundish-ovate,
obtuse. (Calypogeia Trichomanis, _Corda_.)--On the ground and rotten
logs; very common. (Eu.)--Var. RIVULARIS, Aust. Leaves dusky green or
blackish, more scattered, flaccid; cells large. N. J. (_Austin_.)--Var.
TENUIS, Aust. Very slender, innovate-branching; leaves smaller,
especially above, dimidiate-ovate or subfalcate, subdecurrent. Southern
N. J. (_Austin_).

2. K. Sullivantii, Underw. Prostrate, with ventral runners; leaves flat,
subcontiguous or imbricate, obliquely round-ovate, minutely 2-toothed
with a lunulate sinus, abruptly decurrent; cells large, uniform;
underleaves minute, the upper orbicular, bifid, the lower twice 2-lobed,
the primary lobes round-quadrate, divaricate, the secondary ovate or
subulate. (Calypogeia Sullivantii, _Aust._)--Delaware Water Gap, N. J.
(_Austin_).


15. SCAPANIA, Dumort. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves complicate-bilobed, the upper lobe smaller, the lower succubous;
margins entire or dentate or ciliate; underleaves none. Dioecious. Fruit
terminal. Involucral leaves like the cauline but more equally lobed;
perianth obovate, dorsally compressed, bilabiate, the mouth truncate,
entire or toothed, decurved. Capsule ovate. Elaters long, attached to
the middle of the valves. Antheridia 3--20, in the axils of small
saccate leaves, which are scarcely imbricate or crowded into terminal
heads. (Name from [Greek: skapa/nion], _a shovel_, from the form of the
perianth.)

[*] _Leaf-lobes somewhat equal._

1. S. subalpina, Dumort. Leaves equidistant, imbricate, cleft nearly to
the middle, the roundish obtuse lobes denticulate on the outer margin;
perianth much exceeding the involucral leaves, obovate from a narrow
base, denticulate.--Mountains of N. Eng. (_Oakes, Austin_); L. Superior
(_Gillman, Macoun_). (Eu.)

2. S. glaucocephala, Aust. Stems short, cespitose, creeping or
ascending, subsimple, with numerous offshoots; leaf-lobes broadly ovate,
entire, mostly obtuse and apiculate; involucral leaves sometimes
denticulate; perianth small, subcuneate, entire. (Jungermannia
glaucocephala, _Tayl._; S. Peckii, _Aust._)--On rotten wood, N. Eng. to
N. Y. and Canada.

[*][*] _Lower lobe about twice the size of the upper, except near the
summit._

[+] _Leaves broader than long; upper lobes rounded or blunt._

3. S. undulata, Dumort. (Pl. 24.) Ascending or erect, slightly branched;
leaves lax, spreading, entire or ciliate-denticulate, the lobes
round-trapezoidal, equal at the summit of the stem; perianth
oblong-incurved, nearly entire, twice as long as the outer
involucre.--In woods, damp meadows, and rills; common, especially in
mountain districts.--Var. PURPUREA, Nees; a form with long lax stems and
rose-colored or purplish leaves. (Eu.)

4. S. irrigua, Dumort. Creeping; leaves somewhat rigid, repand, deeply
lobed; lobes rounded, submucronate, the lower appressed, the upper
convex with incurved apex; perianth ovate, denticulate. (S. compacta,
var. irrigua, _Aust._)--Wet places, N. J., Catskill Mts., mountains of
N. Eng., and northward. (Eu.)

[+][+] _Leaves longer than broad; upper lobes more or less acute._

5. S. nemorosa, Dumort. Rather stout, flexuose, creeping at base; leaves
rather distant, decurrent on both sides, ciliate-dentate, the lower lobe
obovate, obtuse, slightly convex, the upper cordate, acute, concave;
perianth densely ciliate; capsule large, roundish-ovate, reddish-brown.
(S. breviflora, _Tayl._)--On rocks, etc., in swamps and rills; common
and variable. (Eu.)

6. S. Oakesii, Aust. Leaves obovate, somewhat spreading, often deflexed,
closely complicate, convex, the lower lobe coarsely dentate, and with
deep purple spur-like teeth on the keel, the upper roundish and less
dentate; perianth usually dentate.--White Mts. (_Oakes, Austin_).

[*][*][*] _Lower lobes 3--4 times the size of the upper._

7. S. exsecta, Aust. Ascending; leaves subcomplicate, entire, the lower
lobe ovate, acute or bidentate, concave, the upper small and tooth-like;
involucral leaves 3--5-cleft; perianth oblong, obtuse, plicate.
(Jungermannia exsecta, _Schmidel._)--High mountains, far northward;
rare.--Perhaps better retained in Jungermannia. (Eu.)

8. S. umbrosa, Dumort. Stems short, decumbent, slightly branched;
leaf-lobes ovate, acute, serrate; perianth incurved, naked at the
mouth.--White Mts.; rare.--The tips of the shoots are frequently covered
with a dark mass of gemmae. (Eu.)


16. DIPLOPHYLLUM, Dumort. (Pl. 25.)

Leaves rather narrow, complicate-bilobed, the lobes subequal or the
upper smaller, the lower succubous; underleaves none. Fruit terminal.
Involucral leaves few. Perianth cylindrical, scarcely or not at all
compressed, pluriplicate, denticulate. (Name from [Greek: diplo/s],
_double_, and [Greek: phy/llon], _leaf_, on account of the folded
2-lobed leaves.)

1. D. albicans, Dumort., var. taxifolium, Nees. Stems ascending, almost
rootless; leaves closely folded, subdenticulate, with a rudimentary
pellucid line near the base or none, the lobes obtuse or acutish, the
lower oblong-scymitar-shaped, the upper smaller, subovate; perianth
ovate, plicate. (Jungermannia albicans and J. obtusifolia of _Sulliv._;
not of _L._ and _Hook._)--Under rocks in mountain ravines and on the
ground. (Eu.)--The typical form occurs in N. Scotia, distinguished by a
broad pellucid median line in both lobes.


17. GEOCALYX, Nees. (Pl. 23.)

Leaves succubous, bidentate; underleaves 2-cleft, with linear divisions.
Fruit lateral, pendent. Involucre simple, fleshy, saccate, oblong,
truncate, attached to the stem by one side of the mouth. Calyptra
membranous, partly adnate to the involucre. Capsule oblong. Elaters
free. Antheridia in the axils of small leaves on spike-like lateral
branches. (Name from [Greek: ge/a], _the earth_, and [Greek: ka/lyx], _a
cup_, from the subterranean involucres.)

1. G. graveolens, Nees. Leaves ovate-quadrate, 2-toothed, light green;
underleaves oval-lanceolate, cleft to the middle.--On the ground, and
rotten logs; not rare. (Eu.)


18. LOPHOCOLEA, Dumort. (Pl. 23.)

Leaves succubous, dorsally decurrent, obliquely ovate-oblong, broadly
truncate or bidentate; underleaves smaller, more or less quadrate, bifid
or with 4--8 capillary lobes. Dioecious or monoecious. Fruit terminal on
the main stem or primary branches. Involucral leaves 2--4, large, often
spinulose; perianth triangular-prismatic, 3-lobed, ciliate or laciniate.
Calyptra short, obovate, at length lacerate above. Capsule
oblong-globose. Antheridia mostly solitary in or near the base of
ordinary leaves. (Name from [Greek: lo/phos], _a crest_, and [Greek:
koleo/s], _a sheath_, from the crested perianth.)

[*] _Underleaves mostly bifid (or 3--4-cleft in n. 1); divisions mostly
entire._

1. L. bidentata, Dumort. Stems 1--2' long, procumbent, sparsely
branching; leaves pale green, ovate-triangular, acutely 2-toothed, the
teeth oblique with a lunulate sinus; monoecious; perianth
oblong-triangular, lacinate; antheridia 2--3 in a cluster, axillary.--On
rocks in shady rills; not common. (Eu.)

2. L. Austini, Lindb. Creeping; leaves uniformly deeply lobed, the lobes
and usually the sinus acute; underleaves comparatively small, the lobes
subulate; cells small; monoecious; antheridia solitary in the upper
axils. (L. minor, _Aust._; not _Nees_.)--On roots of trees in woods
(_Austin_). Imperfectly known.

3. L. Macounii, Aust. Stems very short, prostrate, ascending at the
apex, densely radiculose; leaves suberect, ovate-subquadrate, 2-lobed
with obtuse lobes and sinus, or retuse or often entire; underleaves
light pink, deeply bifid, the setaceous lobes spreading-incurved;
monoecious; involucral leaves somewhat oblong, repandly 2--4-toothed at
the apex; perianth subobovate, slightly angled.--On logs, Little Falls,
N. Y. (_Austin_); Ont. (_Macoun_).

4. L. minor, Nees. Diffusely branching; leaves pale green,
oval-subquadrate, expanded, convex, slightly rigid, equally and acutely
bifid with a lunate sinus; underleaves {1/3} as large, deeply bifid, the
lanceolate lobes acuminate; dioecious; involucral leaves like the
cauline; perianth obtusely triangular-plicate at the apex. (L. crocata,
_Aust._; not _Nees_.)--On the ground and dry rocks in limestone regions
(_Austin_). (Eu.)

[*][*] _Divisions of the underleaves more or less dentate._

5. L. heterophylla, Nees. (Pl. 23.) Stems short, creeping or ascending,
much branched; leaves ovate-subquadrate, entire, retuse and bidentate on
the same stem; underleaves large, 2--3-cleft; involucral leaves lobed
and dentate; perianth terminal, the mouth crested.--On the ground and
rotten logs in woods and swamps; very common. (Eu.)

6. L. Hallii, Aust. Creeping, very slightly rooting; leaves subvertical,
oblong, cleft nearly to the middle with obtuse sinus and erect mostly
obtuse lobes; lower underleaves small, subequally 2-parted with an
obtuse sinus, the upper ones larger, with a single tooth on each side or
palmately 3--4-parted, the apical sublanceolate and narrowly bifid.--On
the ground, Ill. (_Hall_).


19. CHILOSCYPHUS, Corda. (Pl. 23.)

Leaves succubous, dorsally decurrent, mostly rounded and entire;
underleaves rooting at the base, usually deeply 2-cleft. Fruit terminal
on a very short lateral branch. Involucral leaves 2--6, the outer
smaller, the inner variously cut; perianth small, obconic or
campanulate, 3-angled and 3-lobed only at the apex, the lobes usually
spinose. Calyptra fleshy, subglobose or clavate. Capsule
oblong-globose. Antheridia in the saccate bases of stem-leaves. (Name
from [Greek: chei~los], _a lip_, and [Greek: sky/phos], _a bowl_, from
the form of the perianth.)

[*] _Underleaves 4-parted._

1. C. ascendens, Hook. & Wils. (Pl. 23.) Prostrate; leaves large, pale
green, ascending, roundish-oblong, slightly emarginate; involucral
leaves two, 2-cleft; perianth 2--3-lobed, the lobes long and irregularly
lacerate-toothed.--On rotten logs; rather common.

[*][*] _Underleaves bifid._

2. C. pallescens, Dumort. Procumbent, creeping; leaves flattened,
ovate-subquadrate, obtuse or retuse; underleaves ovate, distant, free;
involucral leaves two, 2-toothed; perianth deeply trifid, the
lobes spinose-dentate, mostly shorter than the conspicuous
calyptra.--Mountains of N. Eng. (_Oakes_).

3. C. polyanthos, Corda. Procumbent, creeping; leaves subascending,
ovate-subquadrate, truncate or subretuse; underleaves ovate-oblong,
distant, free; involucral leaves 2, slightly 2-toothed; perianth
3-lobed, the short lobes nearly entire, shorter than the calyptra.--Var.
RIVULARIS, Nees. Larger, more branching, succulent; leaves mostly
rounded above; underleaves often divided in halves or wanting.--On the
ground among mosses or on rotten logs, common; the variety in shaded
rills or still ponds. (Eu.)


20. PLAGIOCHILA, Dumort. (Pl. 24.)

Leaves large, succubous, rounded or truncate above, dentate or spinose
or rarely entire, the dorsal margin reflexed; underleaves usually none.
Dioecious or monoecious. Fruit terminal, or axillary by the growth of
offshoots. Involucral leaves larger than the cauline; perianth laterally
compressed, erect or decurved, obliquely truncate and bilabiate, the
lobes entire or ciliate-dentate. Capsule thick, oval. Elaters attached
to the middle of the valves. Antheridia oval, 2--3 in the axils of
spicate leaves. (Name from [Greek: pla/gios], _oblique_, and [Greek:
chei los], _lip_, from the form of the perianth.)

[*] _Underleaves 2--3-cleft, fugacious._

1. P. porelloides, Lindenb. Branches ascending; leaves subimbricate,
convex-gibbous, round-obovate, the uppermost repand-denticulate, the
rest entire, the dorsal margin reflexed; perianth terminal,
oblong-ovate, the mouth compressed, denticulate.--Among mosses in swamps
and river-bottoms; common.

2. P. interrupta, Dumort. (Pl. 24.) Prostrate, horizontally branched,
copiously rooting; leaves imbricate, horizontal, oval, entire or
slightly repand; underleaves lanceolate; perianth terminal, broadly
obconic, the mouth compressed, repand-crenulate. (P. macrostoma,
_Sulliv._)--Moist banks and decayed logs, N. Eng., Ohio, and northward.
(Eu.)

[*][*] _Underleaves wanting._

3. P. spinulosa, Dumort. Creeping, branches ascending; leaves remote,
obliquely spreading, obovate-cuneate, the dorsal margin reflexed,
entire, the ventral and apex spinulose-toothed; perianth rounded, at
length oblong, the mouth spinulose.--Shaded rocks in mountain regions;
rare. (Eu.)

4. P. asplenoides, Dumort. Branched, creeping or ascending; leaves
subimbricate, obliquely spreading, round-obovate, entire or denticulate,
the dorsal margin reflexed; perianth much exceeding the involucral
leaves, oblong, dilated at the truncate or ciliate apex.--In rocky
rivulets; common. (Eu.)


21. MYLIA, S. F. Gray. (Pl. 25.)

Leaves succubous, semi-vertical, circular, or ovate and pointed;
underleaves subulate. Dioecious. Fruit terminal or pseudaxillary.
Involucral leaves 2, clasping; perianth ovate-oblong, laterally
compressed above a subterete base, the apex at length bilabiate,
denticulate. Capsule ovate, coriaceous. Elaters free. Antheridia 2 in
the axils of bracts clustered near the apex of distinct branches. (Name
from _Mylius_, an early botanist.)

1. M. Taylori, S. F. Gray. Stems erect, nearly simple, radiculose;
leaves large, convex, orbicular, entire, purplish; cells large;
underleaves lance-subulate, entire or subdentate; perianth terminal,
oval; calyptra finally long-exserted. (Jungermannia Taylori,
_Hook._)--Wet rocks, high mountains of N. Eng. and N. Y. (Eu.)


22. HARPANTHUS, Nees. (Pl. 23.)

Leaves succubous, semi-vertical, ovate, emarginate; underleaves connate
with the leaves, ovate or lanceolate, 1-toothed at base. Dioecious.
Fruit on short shoots from the axils of the underleaves, finally
sublateral. Involucral leaves 2 or 4. Perianth terete, the lower half
thickened. Calyptra fleshy, confluent with the perianth for {2/3} its
length. Capsule oval. Antheridia 1 or 2 in the axils of bracts terminal
on slender branches. (Name from [Greek: a(/rpe] _a sickle_, and [Greek:
a)/nthos], _flower_.)

1. H. scutatus, Spruce. Stems filiform, decumbent, usually simple;
leaves smaller at the base and apex of the stems, roundish-ovate,
concave, sharply bidentate, the apex lunate or acute; underleaves large,
acuminate, involucral leaves two, 2--3-cleft, the upper adnate to the
perianth; perianth ovate, becoming obovate, obscurely 3--4-plicate,
splitting above on one side; capsule deep brown. (Jungermannia scutata,
_Weber._)--On rotten logs in damp places; common. (Eu.)

H. FLOTOVIANUS, Nees. (Pl. 23.) Stems flexuous, procumbent, mostly
unbranched; leaves ovate-orbicular, horizontal, the apex contracted and
emarginate with a shallow sinus; underleaves large, ovate or lanceolate,
obliquely inserted, entire or more often toothed on one or both sides
near the middle; dioecious; perianth subcylindric, slightly
sickle-shaped, the mouth pointed at first, notched on one side and
finally crenulate; antheridia elliptic, single in the base of swollen
leaves. (Pleuranthe olivacea, _Tayl._)--"North America" (_Drummond_),
but not collected recently; certainly extralimital.


23. LIOCHLAENA, Nees. (Pl. 25.)

Leaves succubous, ovate-oblong, entire or slightly retuse; underleaves
none. Dioecious or monoecious. Involucral leaves 2 or 4, like the
cauline; perianth pyriform, becoming cylindric, incurved, abruptly
rounded at the summit, the minute orifice prominently ciliolate. Capsule
oblong, long-exserted. Elaters attached to the middle of the valves.
Spores minute, globose. Antheridia in the axils of ordinary leaves.
Archegonia 5--12. (Name from [Greek: lei~os], _smooth_, and [Greek:
chlai na], _a cloak_, referring to the perianth.)

1. L. lanceolata, Nees. Closely creeping, branched; leaves sometimes
decurrent; involucral leaves vertical; perianth at right angles with the
stem; monoecious.--On banks and rotten logs; not rare. (Eu.)


24. JUNGERMANNIA, Micheli. (Pl. 25.)

Leaves succubous, rarely subtransverse, entire, lobed or dentate, the
margins never recurved; underleaves present or none. Dioecious or
monoecious. Fruit terminal. Involucral leaves 4 or fewer, like the
cauline or more incised, free; perianth laterally compressed or terete,
usually 3--10-carinate, the usually small mouth entire or toothed.
Calyptra oval-pyriform. Capsule globose or oblong, rarely cylindric.
Spores minute, smooth or roughish. Archegonia 8--70. (Named for _L.
Jungermann_, a German botanist of the 17th century.)

Sec. 1. JUNGERMANNIA proper. _Leaves orbicular or ovate, entire or barely
retuse; underleaves none (very small in n. 1)._

1. J. Schraderi, Martius. (Pl. 25.) Creeping, flexuous; leaves
round-elliptic, entire, ascending; underleaves broadly subulate, not
apparent on old stems; involucral leaves large, elongated, the inner
smaller and more or less laciniate; perianth oval-obovate,
ascending.--On the ground and rotten logs; common. (Eu.)

2. J. sphaerocarpa, Hook. Stems creeping, the tips ascending, subsimple,
greenish; leaves semi-vertical, rather rigid, orbicular, obliquely
spreading, decurrent dorsally, pale green; involucral leaves separate;
perianth exserted, obovate-oblong, the mouth 4-cleft; capsule
globose.--Mountains of N. Eng. (_Austin_); rare. (Eu.)

3. J. pumila, With. Stems creeping, the tips somewhat ascending,
subsimple, rooting, pale; leaves ascending, ovate, obtuse, concave,
entire; involucral leaves like the cauline, erect; perianth terminal,
fusiform, plicate above and denticulate; capsule oval.--On shaded rocks
along rivulets, Closter, N. J. (_Austin_). (Eu.)

Sec. 2. LOPHOZIA. _Leaves roundish or subquadrate, bidentate, bifid, or
sometimes 3--5-cleft; underleaves none, or small and mostly 2-parted;
perianth usually strongly plicate._

[*] _Underleaves present._

[+] _Leaves bifid or 2-lobed._

4. J. Gillmani, Aust. Stems short, densely cespitose, prostrate,
strongly radiculose; leaves vertical, round-ovate, subconcave, bifid,
the lower leaves with usually acute sinus and lobes, the upper much
larger with rounded lobes and obtuse sinus; underleaves entire or the
broader bifid; perianth without involucral leaves, dorsal, sessile,
obovate, subgibbous, ciliate, at length much incised.--In a sandstone
cave, Traine Island, L. Superior (_Gillman_).

5. J. Wattiana, Aust. Stems rather thick, 2--4'' long, fragile,
subflexuose, strongly radiculose; leaves subvertical or spreading,
subovate, concave, emarginately 2-lobed, the lobes acute or the upper
obtuse; underleaves somewhat obsolete, hair-like or subulate, incurved;
involucral leaves little larger, less deeply lobed; perianth terminal,
small, ovate-gourd-shaped, whitish, ciliate.--On the ground, northern
shore of L. Superior (_Macoun_).

[+][+] _Leaves 3--5-cleft._

6. J. barbata, Schreb. (Pl. 25.) Procumbent, sparingly branched; leaves
roundish-quadrate, with obtuse, acute, or mucronulate lobes and obtuse
undulate sinuses; underleaves broad, entire or 2-toothed, sometimes
obsolete; perianth ovate, plicate-angled toward the apex,
denticulate.--On rocks in mountain regions; common. (Eu.)

Var. attenuata, Martius. Ascending, with numerous offshoots; stem-leaves
semi-vertical, obliquely spreading, roundish, acutely 2--4-toothed,
those of the shoots closely imbricate, premorsely 2--4-denticulate;
involucral leaves two, 3-toothed; perianth oblong.--In similar
localities. (Eu.)

7. J. setiformis, Ehrh. Erect or ascending, dichotomous; leaves toothed
at base, 3--4-cleft, the lobes ovate-oblong, acute, channelled;
underleaves ciliate-dentate at base, deeply bifid, the divisions
lanceolate, acuminate; involucral leaves more toothed than the cauline;
perianth terminal, oval, plicate.--Alpine summits of N. H. (_Oakes_).
(Eu.)

[*][*] _Underleaves wanting._

[+] _Leaves 2-toothed; involucral leaves 2--4-cleft._

8. J. alpestris, Schleich. Stems creeping, crowded, bifid-branching, the
ends ascending; leaves semi-vertical, ovate subquadrate, obliquely
toothed, the teeth unequal, acute or mucronulate, distant; involucral
leaves wider, 2--3-cleft; perianth twice as long, oblong, smooth, the
mouth complicate; capsule oval.--Alpine region of N. H. (_Oakes_). (Eu.)

9. J. ventricosa, Dicks. Stems dense, close-creeping, branching from
beneath; leaves semi-vertical, subquadrate, mostly flat, broadly and
acutely emarginate-bidentate, often bearing globules; involucral leaves
larger, round, erect-spreading, 3--4-cleft, subdentate; perianth ovate,
inflated, narrowly complicate above; capsule oval.--On the ground and
rotten wood in the mountains, and far northward; common. (Eu.)

10. J. Wallrothiana, Nees. Minute, blackish; stems creeping, strongly
rooting, subsimple; leaves clasping, semi-vertical, closely imbricate,
ovate-quadrate, concave, obtusely bidentate with an obtuse sinus, or
acute in the upper leaves; involucral leaves larger, erect, connate at
base, 3-toothed, wavy-plicate; perianth oval-cylindric, plicate and
subdentate, pellucid, reddish below.--On coarse sand in the White Mts.
(_Oakes_). (Eu.)

[+][+] _Leaves bifid or 2-lobed, the ventral lobe often inflexed or
subcomplicate; involucral leaves merely toothed, except in n. 11._

11. J. laxa, Lindb. Widely creeping, mostly simple, usually
purplish-black; leaves imbricate, or distant on the erect fertile stems,
2--3-lobed, the lobes obtuse, wavy; cells very large, lax; involucral
leaves 2, wide, short, cristate-undulate, obtusely many-lobed; perianth
exserted, long-clavate, sub-plicate above, minutely ciliate. (J. polita,
_Aust._; not _Nees._)--Among Sphagnum near Closter, N. J. (_Austin_).

12. J. excisa, Dicks. Stems closely creeping, short, subsimple, rather
rigid; leaves semi-vertical, erect-spreading, pellucid, roundish, with
straight acute lobes and deep obtuse sinus; involucral leaves erect,
quadrate, usually 4--5-toothed; perianth erect, oblong, pale, banded and
spotted with pink, plicate above, irregularly denticulate.--Sterile
grounds in open woods; common. (Eu.)

Var. crispa, Hook. Leaves round-quadrate, closely imbricate, deeply and
obtusely 2--3-cleft; involucral leaves 3--4-cleft, connate at base,
subserrate. (J. intermedia, _Lindenb._)--In crevices of rocks, N. Y.
and N. J. (_Austin_). (Eu.)

13. J. incisa, Schrad. Stems thick, rooting, closely creeping or
ascending; leaves crowded, semi-vertical, complicate, subquadrate,
2--6-cleft, the acute lobes unequal, more or less spinulose-dentate;
involucral leaves similar, more plicate and dentate, free; perianth
short, oval or obovate, plicate above, denticulate.--On rotten wood in
the mountains, and northward. (Eu.)

Sec. 3. SPHENOLOBUS. _Leaves 2-lobed, subtransverse, complicate-concave;
underleaves none; involucral leaves 2--3-cleft._ (Verging toward
Marsupella on one side and Diplophyllum on the other.)

14. J. Michauxii, Weber. Stems ascending, flexuous by repeated
innovations below the summit; leaves crowded, subvertical,
erect-spreading, subsaccate at base, subquadrate, bifid with straight
acute lobes and a narrow sinus; involucral leaves similar, the outer
serrulate, the inner smaller; perianth ovate-subclavate, obtuse, plicate
above, fringed.--Fallen trunks, mountains of N. Y. and N. Eng.; common.
(Eu.)

15. J. minuta, Crantz. Rootless; leaves cleft 1/4--1/2 their length, the
lobes ovate, subequal, acute or obtuse, entire, or gemmiparous ones
subdentate; involucral leaves trifid; perianth oval-oblong or
subcylindric.--On rocks in high mountain regions, and northward. (Eu.)

16. J. Helleriana, Nees. (Pl. 25.) Creeping, entangled; leaves
spreading, subascending, cleft {1/3}--1/2 their length, the lobes equal,
acute, entire or serrate; involucral leaves 2--3-cleft, spinulose
serrate; perianth ovate, the mouth contracted.--On rotten wood, N. Y.,
N. Eng., and northward. (Eu.)

Sec. 4. GYMNOCOLEA. _Leaves 2-lobed; underleaves none; involucral leaves
like the cauline; perianth pedunculate, denticulate._

17. J. inflata, Huds. (Pl. 25.) Procumbent or ascending, loosely
radiculose, branching; leaves semi-vertical, roundish-elliptic,
inequilateral, the sinus and unequal lobes obtuse; perianth terminal or
at length dorsal, oval or pyriform, smooth, the mouth connivent; capsule
oblong.--On sterile ground and rocks, N. J. (_Austin_), and northward in
the mountains. (Eu.)


25. MARSUPELLA, Dumort. (Pl. 23.)

Stems dorsally compressed, with rootlets at the base and often producing
somewhat leafless runners. Leaves transverse, complicate-bilobed;
involucral leaves 2 or 4, connate with the perianth. Perianth tubular or
oval, subcompressed parallel to the base of the leaves. Elaters free.
Spores round, rufous (in our species). Antheridia mostly terminal. (Name
a diminutive of _marsupium_, a pouch, from the form of the perianth.)

1. M. sphacelata, Dumort. Stems erect, subflexuous, pale brown; leaves
rather distant, concave, obovate to obcordate, somewhat clasping, the
sinus narrow; dioecious; involucral leaves larger than the cauline,
cordate; perianth free at the apex, with 4--5 broad acute teeth;
antheridia 1--3, in short terminal spikes.--Wet rocks, mountains of
N. Eng. to N. J., and southward. (Eu.)

2. M. emarginata, Dumort. (Pl. 23.) Stems simple or innovating at the
summit, rigid, somewhat thickened upward; leaves usually broader than
long, round-cordate or subquadrate, lobes obtuse or mucronate, sinus
acute; dioecious; involucral leaves 4--8, usually larger, more deeply
and acutely emarginate; perianth urceolate, the closed apex splitting
into 4--5 triangular lobes; antheridia 2--3, oval, axillary in terminal
spikes. (Sarcoscyphus Ehrharti, _Corda._)--On wet rocks, chiefly in
mountain rivulets, N. Y. and N. Eng. Floating forms are longer with
distant leaves. (Eu.)

3. M. adusta, Spruce. Stems minute, clavate; leaves (5--8 pairs)
imbricate, round or broadly ovate from a sheathing base, acutely lobed
with angular sinus; monoecious; perianth included, campanulate, crenate
becoming irregularly lobed; spores punctate; antheridia 1 or 2, oval, in
the axils of the lower involucral leaves. (Gymnomitrium adustum,
_Nees._)--Alpine region of the White Mts. (_Oakes, Austin_). (Eu.)


26. NARDIA, S. F. Gray. (Pl. 25)

Stems laterally compressed, usually without runners. Leaves succubous,
subconcave or flat, the apex rounded, rarely retuse or bidentate;
underleaves none (in our species). Monoecious or dioecious. Involucral
leaves 2--4 pairs, connate at base. Perianth subcompressed laterally,
connate with the involucral leaves. Antheridia terminal on somewhat
spike-like stems. (Named for _S. Nardi_, an Italian abbot.)

Sec. 1. EUCALYX. _Perianth connate at base with the inner involucral
leaves, somewhat surpassing them, 3--8-carinate, the mouth constricted._

1. N. hyalina, Carring. Creeping, with ascending tips, the branches
dichotomous-fastigiate, with claret-colored rootlets; leaves loosely
imbricate, decurrent, roundish, repand-undulate; monoecious or
dioecious; involucral leaves broader, appressed, one connate with the
lower third of the perianth, which is somewhat exserted, obovate,
plicate with acute rough angles, rostellate, at length 4-cleft; capsule
round-ovate. (Jungermannia hyalina, _Lyell_.)--On banks in woods,
Closter, N. J. (_Austin_), Ohio (_Lesquereux_). (Eu.)

2. N. crenulata, Lindb. (Pl. 25.) Prostrate, branching; leaves
orbicular, entire, larger toward the involucre and with large marginal
cells; dioecious; involucral leaves 2, rarely 3, adnate to the base of
the perianth, which is flattened or terete, more or less regularly
4--5-plicate, the angles smooth; mouth much contracted, toothed.
(Jungermannia crenulata, _Smith_.)--On the ground in old fields, N. Y.
and southward. (Eu.)

3. N. crenuliformis, Lindb. Densely cespitose; fertile stems creeping,
thickened upward, with numerous purple rootlets, the sterile
subascending, attenuate upward; leaves subdecurrent, obliquely
spreading, orbicular, concave, entire or nearly so; perianth small,
subobovate, more or less connate with the involucral leaves, not
exserted or slightly so, rooting at base, triquetrous above, becoming
4--7-plicate; calyptra often violet-purple; capsule oval-globose.
(Jungermannia crenuliformis, _Aust._)--On rocks in rivulets, Closter,
N. J. (_Austin_), Coshocton Co., Ohio (_Sullivant_).

4. N. biformis, Lindb. Densely cespitose, much branched, innovating from
beneath; rootlets numerous; leaves scarcely imbricate, alternate,
spreading, obliquely semicircular or broadly ovate, retuse or entire,
decurrent dorsally; cells large, hyaline; branch-leaves half as large,
ovate or obovate, scarcely decurrent; dioecious; antheridia solitary;
fruit unknown. (Jungermannia biformis, _Aust._)--On steep wet rocks,
Delaware Water Gap, N. J. (_Austin_).

Sec. 2. CHASCOSTOMA. _Perianth exserted, subcampanulate and open, deeply
laciniate, connate with the involucral leaves._

5. N. fossombronioides, Lindb. Stems densely cespitose, ascending;
rootlets numerous, purple; leaves 2-ranked, subvertical,
spreading-subrecurved, rooting, closely imbricate, orbicular, clasping
by a slightly cordate base, subventricose, undulate-repand, the apex
uniplicate and slightly emarginate; monoecious; perianth very large,
6--10-plicate, the lobes entire; calyptra violet; capsule short-oval.
(Jungermannia fossombronioides, _Aust._)--On rocks in a rivulet,
Closter, N. J. (_Austin_), and southward.


27. GYMNOMITRIUM, Corda. (Pl. 23.)

Leaves closely imbricated, 2-ranked on fascicled ascending julaceous
stems, emarginate-bidentate; underleaves none. Dioecious. Involucre
double, the inner shorter, of 2 or more dentate and deeply cleft leaves.
Calyptra short, campanulate. Capsule globose, the valves at length
reflexed. Elaters caducous. Antheridia in the axils of leaves, oval,
stipitate. (Name from [Greek: gymno/s], _naked_, and [Greek: mitri/on],
_a little cap_.)

1. G. concinnatum, Corda. Stems simple or imbricately branching,
thickened at the apex; leaves ovate, bifid, with a narrow scarious
margin. (Cesia concinnata, _S. F. Gray_.)--Alpine regions of the White
Mts. (_Oakes_).--Grayish or silvery-olive. (Eu.)


28. FOSSOMBRONIA, Raddi. (Pl. 23.)

Stems thalloid, with large subquadrate succubous leaves; underleaves
none. Dioecious or monoecious. Fruit terminal or by innovation dorsal on
the main stem. Involucral leaves 5--6 (in our species), small, subulate,
adnate. Perianth open-campanulate or obpyramidal, crenate-lobed.
Calyptra free, sub-globose. Capsule short-pedicelled, globose,
irregularly valved. Elaters very short, 1--3- (mostly 2-) spiral, free.
Spores large, very rough. Antheridia 2--3, short-pedicelled, naked.
Perfect archegonia 2--3. (Named for _V. Fossombroni_, an Italian
Minister of State.)

[*] _Plant large or of medium size; stems mostly simple._

1. F. pusilla, Dumort. (Pl. 23.) Stems 6--10'' long; leaves retuse,
entire or irregularly indented; perianth obconic, dentate; elaters short
and thick; spores brown, depressed-globose-tetrahedral, 40  mu broad,
crested, the slender crests pellucid, rarely becoming confluent.--On
damp ground. Its occurrence in America is doubtful. (Eu.)

2. F. Dumortieri, Lindb. Cespitose, greenish or brownish-yellow; stems
3--6'' long, 1'' wide, shortly bifurcate; rootlets copious, purple;
leaves numerous, smaller toward each end of the stem; monoecious;
perianth large, broadly obpyramidal; calyptra nearly as long; elaters
scanty; spores globose-tetrahedral yellowish-brown, regularly
pitted.--White Mts. (_Farlow_), N. J. (_Austin_), and perhaps
elsewhere; confused with n. 1.

3. F. angulosa, Raddi. Stems narrowly forked at the apex; leaves
horizontal, subquadrate, the upper undulate-lobed; dioecious; perianth
dilated-conic, crenate; spores brownish-yellow, globose-tetrahedral, not
depressed, 30  mu broad, deeply reticulated, the reticulations large,
5--6-angled.--Brackish meadows, common; fruiting in early spring. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Plant minute; stems forked or fastigiately divided._

4. F. cristula, Aust. Stems 1--2'' long; leaves whitish, quadrate or
round-obovate, subentire, strongly crisped-undulate; capsule immersed on
a short pedicel; elaters short, more or less diverse, with a single
narrow annular and spiral fibre; spores pale fuscous, more or less
tuberculate.--On moist sand in unfrequented paths, Batsto, N. J.
(_Austin_).


29. PALLAVICINIA, S. F. Gray. (Pl. 22.)

Thallus with a distinct costa. Fruit arising from the costa, at first
terminal, becoming dorsal. Dioecious. Involucre cup-shaped,
short-lacerate. Perianth long-tubular, denticulate. Calyptra irregularly
lacerate. Capsule slender-cylindric. Elaters slender, free. Spores
minute. Antheridia dorsal, covered with minute fimbriate scales. (Named
for _L. Pallavicini_, Archbishop of Genoa.)

1. P. Lyellii, S. F. Gray. Thallus thin, 1--4' long, 3--5'' wide, simple
or bifid, the margin entire, slightly crenate or serrate; cells large,
oblong-hexagonal; perianth erect, fleshy (5 cells thick below), the
somewhat constricted mouth lobate-ciliolate; pedicel long, exceeding the
thallus; capsule cylindric, five times as long as broad. (Steetzia
Lyellii, _Lehm._)--Among mosses in swamps and on dripping rocks; common,
especially southward. (Eu.)


30. BLASIA, Micheli. (Pl. 23.)

Thallus simple or forked or stellate, with sinuous margins. Dioecious.
Fruit from an oval cavity in the costa. Involucre mostly none. Calyptra
obovate. Capsule oval-globose. Antheridia immersed in the thallus,
covered with dentate scales. Gemmae globose, issuing by a slender
ascending tube from large flask-shaped receptacles which are immersed in
the thallus. (Named for _Blasius Biagi_, a monk of Valombrosa and
companion of Micheli.)

1. B. pusilla, L. Thallus 3/4--11/2' long, 2--3'' wide, narrowly obovate,
the margins pinnatifid-sinuous.--Wet banks; common. (Eu.)


31. PELLIA, Raddi. (Pl. 23.)

Thallus with a broad indeterminate costa. Monoecious or dioecious.
Fructification dorsal near the end of the thallus. Involucre short,
cup-shaped, lacerate-dentate. Calyptra membranous, oval, longer or
shorter than the involucre. Capsule globose. Elaters long, free.
Antheridia globose, immersed in the costa. (Named for _A. L. Pelli_, an
Italian botanist.)

[*] _Monoecious._

1. P. epiphylla, Raddi. (Pl. 23.) Thallus oblong, lobed and sinuate,
somewhat fleshy, much thickened in the middle; capsule exserted.--On the
ground in wet places; not uncommon eastward. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Dioecious._

2. P. endiviaefolia, Dumort. Thallus flat, green or purplish, broadly
linear, dichotomous, the margin mostly undulate or crisped.--On the
ground and in ditches; common, but often confused with n. 1. (Eu.)

3. P. calycina, Nees. Thallus dichotomous, proliferous, the early
divisions linear-oblong, the margins ascending and remotely sinuate, the
later divisions linear-palmatifid, coarsely nerved; cells large,
hexagonal; involucre ciliate-fringed or lacerate; calyptra smooth,
included.--Wet limestones and shales. (Eu.)


32. METZGERIA, Raddi. (Pl. 23.)

Thallus linear, dichotomous, with well defined costa. Dioecious.
Fructification arising from the under side of the costa. Involucre
1-leaved, scale-like, at length ventricose. Calyptra clavate or
pyriform, fleshy. Capsule short-pedicelled. Elaters unispiral, some
remaining attached to the tips of the valves. Spores minute, mostly
smooth. Antheridia globose, enclosed in a scale on the under surface of
the costa. (Named for _J. Metzger_, a German botanist.)

[*] _Densely villous throughout._

1. M. pubescens, Raddi. Thallus 1--2' long, 1'' wide, alternately
pinnate or somewhat decompound, the short linear branches of uniform
width, flat, the margin undulate; hairs longer beneath, single or in
twos and threes near the margin, irregularly curved; midrib nearly
without cortical layer, with 6--10 (mostly 8) rows of very uniform
peripheral cells; dioecious.--In mountain regions, eastward. (Eu.)

[*][*] _Hairy on the margins and midrib beneath, smooth above; dioecious
(n. 4 monoecious)._

2. M. myriopoda, Lindb. Thallus elongated (2' long, 1/2'' wide),
dichotomous, the long linear branches of uniform width, convex above,
the reflexed margins not undulate; midrib densely pilose beneath; hairs
rather long, straight or nodding, the marginal mostly in clusters of
3--6, some with discoid tips; midrib covered above with 2 rows of
enlarged cells, and beneath with 3--7 (usually 4--6) rows of smaller
cells, lax and often indistinct. (M. furcata, _Sulliv._, in part; not
_Nees._)--Shaded rocks and trees in the Alleghanies (_Sullivant_), and
southward.

3. M. hamata, Lindb. Like the last; thallus much elongated (4' long,
1--11/2'' wide); hairs very long, divaricate and hooked-deflexed, the
marginal in twos, rarely with discoid tips; midrib covered above and
below with two rows of enlarged lax cells. (M. furcata, _Sulliv._, in
part.)--Alleghany Mts. (_Sullivant_).

4. M. conjugata, Lindb. Thallus 11/2' long, 1/2--1'' wide, usually
dichotomous, the short branches irregular in width, convex above, the
margins more or less undulate; hairs rather long, straight, divaricate,
the marginal usually in twos, very often disk-bearing; midribs covered
above with 2, below with 3--6 rows of enlarged lax cells.--On shaded
rocks and trunks of trees, central N. Y., and southward. (Eu.)


33. ANEURA, Dumort. (Pl. 23.)

Thallus fleshy, prostrate or assurgent from a creeping base; costa
obscure. Dioecious or monoecious. Fructification arising from the under
side near the margin. Involucre cup-shaped, short and lacerate, or none.
Calyptra large, fleshy, more or less clavate. Capsule large,
oblong-cylindric. Elaters unispiral, in part adherent to the tips of the
valves. Spores minute, smooth or minutely roughened. Antheridia immersed
in the surface of receptacles proceeding from the margin of the thallus.
(Name from [Greek: a]- privative, and [Greek: neu~ron], a nerve.)

[*] _Thallus narrow (about 1'' wide), palmately divided._

1. A. latifrons, Lindb. Thallus cespitose, ascending or erect, usually
dark green, 6--9'' long, mostly pellucid; branches linear, obtuse and
emarginate, plano-convex; cells large, oblong-rhombic; monoecious;
archegonia 3--10, short, conic; calyptra white, verrucose,
pyriform-clavate; capsule oval, brown; spores 121/2--141/2  mu broad, globose,
minutely and densely papillose; antheridia globose. (A. palmata of
authors; not _Dumort_.)--On rotten logs; common.

[*][*] _Thallus narrow (about 1'' wide), pinnate or bipinnate._

2. A. multifida, Dumort. Thallus prostrate, brownish-green, pinnately
divided, the primary portion biconvex, somewhat rigid, the branches
horizontal, pectinately pinnate with narrow linear divisions;
monoecious; fructification rising from the primary part or from the
branches; involucre fleshy; calyptra tuberculate.--Var. MAJOR, Nees.
Primary portion and branches thick, the branches interruptedly pinnate
with short obtuse divisions.--On decayed wood and moss in swamps, N. J.
(_Austin_), and south in the mountains. (Eu.)

3. A. pinnatifida, Nees. Thallus pinnately divided or subsimple, flat or
somewhat channelled; branches horizontal, the broader pinnatifid or
dentate, obtuse; calyptra somewhat smooth.--On dripping rocks, Hokokus,
N. J. (_Austin_), N. Haven, Conn. (_Eaton_). (Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Thallus wider (2'' or more), simple or irregularly lobed._

4. A. sessilis, Spreng. Thallus decumbent, irregularly lobed, 1--2'
long, 3--5'' wide; involucre none; pedicel 3/4--1' long, sometimes folded
upon itself and remaining within the calyptra, the capsule thus
appearing sessile; antheridia on elongated receptacles.--Wooded swamps.
Elongated floating forms, 5--6' long, have been found in the White Mts.
(_Farlow, Faxon_).

5. A. pinguis, Dumort. Thallus 1--2' long, decumbent or ascending,
fleshy, linear-oblong, simple or slightly lobed, the margin sinuate;
dioecious; involucre short, lacerate; calyptra cylindric, smooth;
capsule brownish, furrowed; antheridia in 2-lobed receptacles.--Wet
banks, N. J. to Ohio, and southward. (Eu.)


ORDER 138. ANTHOCEROTACEAE. (HORNED LIVERWORTS.)

Plant-body a thallus, irregularly branching, flaccid, without epidermis
or pores, and more or less vesiculose. Involucre single, tubular.
Calyptra rupturing early near the base, and borne on the apex of the
capsule. Capsule dorsal, pod-like, erect or curved outward, more or
less perfectly 2-valved, usually stomatose, tapering into a pedicel or
often sessile with a bulbous base. Columella filiform. Elaters with or
without spiral fibres. Spores flattish, more or less convex-prismatic,
papillose or smooth.

1. Anthoceros. Capsule narrowly linear, exsertly pedicelled, 2-valved.
Elaters present.

2. Notothylas. Capsule very short, sessile, not valved below the middle.
Elaters not obvious.


1. ANTHOCEROS, Micheli. (Pl. 22.)

Thallus dark green or blackish, usually depressed, variously lobed, with
large chlorophyll-grains, frequently glandular-thickened at the apex or
in lines along the middle so as to appear nerved. Monoecious or
dioecious. Capsule linear, 2-valved, exsertly pedicelled. Elaters
simple or branched, often geniculate, more or less heteromorphous, the
fibres wanting or indistinct. (Name from [Greek: a)/nthos], _flower_,
and [Greek: ke/ras], _horn_, from the shape of the capsule.)

1. A. laevis, L. (Pl. 22.) Thallus smooth, nearly flat above; dioecious;
involucre 1--2'' long, trumpet-shaped when dry, repand-toothed; capsule
pale brown or yellowish, 1--11/2' long; elaters rather short, yellowish;
spores yellow, nearly smooth, angular.--Wet clay banks, from Canada
south and westward. (Eu.)

2. A. punctatus, L. Thallus small, depressed, or often cespitose and
erect, more or less glandular; monoecious; involucre rather short,
oblong-linear, slightly repand, sometimes scarious at the mouth; capsule
1' high, black; elaters fuscous, flattish, geniculate; spores black,
strongly muriculate, sharply angled.--Wet banks, Canada to Mo., and
southward. (Eu.)


2. NOTOTHYLAS, Sulliv. (Pl. 22.)

Thallus orbicular, tender, laciniate and undulate or crisped,
papillose-reticulate. Monoecious. Involucre sessile, continuous with the
thallus, opening irregularly above. Capsule very short, oblong-globose
or ovate-cylindric, pedicelled from a thickened bulb, 2-valved to the
middle or rupturing irregularly. Elaters none, or fragmentary and
inconspicuous. Spores subglobose, smoothish. Antheridia
elliptic-globose, immersed in the thallus. (Name from [Greek: no~tos],
_the back_, and [Greek: thyla/s], _a bag_, from the shape and position
of the involucre.)

1. N. orbicularis, Sulliv. (Pl. 22.) Thallus 3--8'' wide; capsules
1--2'' long, erect or decurved, wholly included or slightly exserted, of
thin and loose texture, with a suture on each side; spores light
yellowish-brown. (Including N. valvata, _Sulliv._)--Wet places, Canada
to the Gulf.

2. N. melanospora, Sulliv. Thallus small, depressed or sometimes
cespitose, of lax texture; capsule often without sutures; spores dark
brown, a half larger.--Moist ground, Ohio (_Sullivant_).


ORDER 139. MARCHANTIACEAE. LIVERWORTS.

Plant-body a thallus, dichotomous or subpalmately branching, usually
innovating from the apex or beneath it, more or less thickened in the
middle, and bearing numerous rootlets beneath and usually colored or
imbricating scales. Epidermis usually more or less distinct and strongly
porose above. Capsules globose, rarely oval, opening irregularly,
pendent from the under side of a peduncled disk-like receptacle
(_carpocephalum_). Elaters present, mostly 2-spiral.

[*] Thallus plainly costate, distinctly porose except in n. 6.

[+] Gemmae present on sterile stems.

1. Marchantia. Gemmae in cup-shaped receptacles. Fertile receptacle
7--11-rayed.

8. Lunularia. Gemmae in crescent-shaped receptacles. Fertile receptacle
cruciform.

[+][+] Gemmae wanting.

[++] Receptacle conic-hemispherical, 2--4-lobed; perianth lobed or
fringed.

2. Preissia. Receptacle 2--4-lobed, with as many alternate rib-like
rays. Perianth 4--5-lobed.

3. Fimbriaria. Receptacle 4-lobed. Perianth conspicuous, split into
8--16 fringe-like segments.

[++][++] Receptacle more or less conical; perianth none.

4. Conocephalus. Thallus very large, strongly areolate. Receptacle
conical, membranous.

5. Grimaldia. Thallus small. Peduncle chaffy at base and apex.
Receptacle conic-hemispheric, truncately 3--4-lobed.

6. Asterella. Thallus eporose. Receptacle conic-hemispheric, becoming
flattened, acutely 4- (1--6-) lobed.

[*][*] Thallus thin, ecostate or barely costate.

7. Dumortiera. Receptacle convex, 2--8-lobed. Perianth none.


1. MARCHANTIA, Marchant f. (Pl. 22.)

Thallus large, forking, areolate, porose, with broad diffused midrib;
gemmae in a cup-shaped receptacle. Dioecious. Fertile receptacle
peduncled from an apical sinus of the thallus, radiately lobed.
Involucres alternate with the rays, membranous, lacerate, enclosing 3--6
1-fruited cleft perianths. Calyptra persistent. Capsule globose,
exserted, pendulous, dehiscing by several revolute segments. Elaters
long, attenuate to each end. Spores smooth. Antheridia immersed in a
peduncled disk-like radiate or lobed receptacle. (Named for _Nicholas
Marchant_, a French botanist.)

1. M. polymorpha, L. Thallus 2--5' long, 1/2--11/2' wide, numerously porose,
venulose; receptacle divided into usually 9 terete rays; peduncles 1--3'
high; antheridial disk crenately or palmately 2--8-lobed, on a peduncle
1' high or less.--Everywhere common. (Eu.)


2. PREISSIA, Nees. (Pl. 22.)

Thallus obcordate, sparingly forked, increasing by joints; pores
conspicuous; gemmae none. Dioecious or monoecious. Fertile receptacle
hemispheric, 1--4-lobed, with as many alternating shorter rib-like rays.
Outer involucres attached beneath the lobes, 1--3-fruited, opening
outward by an irregular line; perianth obconic-campanulate, angular,
unequally 4--5-lobed. Calyptra persistent. Capsule large, distinctly
pedicelled, dehiscing by 4--8 revolute segments. Elaters short. Spores
coarsely tuberculate. (Named for _L. Preiss_, a German botanist.)

1. P. commutata, Nees. Thallus 1--2' long, with conspicuous white pores
above, and dark purple scales beneath; usually monoecious; peduncle
1/2--1' high; capsules conspicuous, dark purple; antheridia in a peduncled
disk-like receptacle. (P. hemisphaerica, _Cogn._)--On slaty and limestone
rocks, from N. J. north and westward. (Eu.)


3. FIMBRIARIA, Nees. (Pl. 22.)

Thallus thickened in the middle by a keeled costa, usually conspicuously
porose, with dark purple scales beneath; gemmae none. Monoecious.
Receptacle rising from the apex, conic or hemispheric, concave beneath
and expanded into usually 4 large campanulate 1-fruited involucres.
Perianth oblong-oval or subconic, exserted half its length and cleft
into 8--16 fringe-like segments. Calyptra with a long style, fugacious.
Capsule nearly sessile, irregularly circumscissile. Elaters rather
short, 1--4-spiral. Spores angular, subreticulated. Antheridia immersed
in the thallus. (Name from _fimbria_, a fringe, alluding to the
perianth.)

1. F. tenella, Nees. Thallus of one or more long-wedge-shaped emarginate
divisions about 6--9'' long, grayish-green and porose above, purple on
the margins; peduncle 1' high or more, usually purple; receptacle
obtusely conic; perianth white, 8-cleft.--On damp ground in sandy fields
or on rocks, central N. Y. to Mo., and southward.


4. CONOCEPHALUS, Neck. (Pl. 22.)

Thallus dichotomous, copiously reticulate and porose, with a narrow
costa; gemmae none. Receptacle conic-mitriform, membranous. Involucres
5--8, tubular, 1-fruited, suspended from the apex of the peduncle;
perianth none. Calyptra persistent, campanulate, 2--4-lobed at the
apex. Capsule pedicelled, oblong-pyriform, dehiscing by 5--8 revolute
segments. Elaters short, thick. Spores muriculate. Antheridia imbedded
in an oval disk sessile near the apex of the thallus. (Name from [Greek:
ko nos], _a cone_, and [Greek: kephale/], _a head_.)

1. C. conicus, Dumort. Thallus 2--6' long, 1/2--3/4' wide; receptacle conic,
striate, crenate. (Fegatella conica, _Corda._)--Shady banks; common.
(Eu.)


5. GRIMALDIA, Raddi. (Pl. 23.)

Thallus thick, more or less channelled, dichotomous, innovating from the
apex, with thick epidermis, closely areolate and porose-scabrous above,
purple and more or less scaly beneath; gemmae none. Monoecious or
dioecious. Receptacle peduncled, hemispherical or conoidal, 3--4-lobed.
Involucres as many, 1-fruited, each a distention of the lobe. Capsule
filling the involucre, circumscissile in the middle, the calyptra
persistent at its base. Antheridia in an oval or obcordate disk immersed
in the apex of the thallus. (Named for _D. Grimaldi_, an Italian
botanist.)

1. G. barbifrons, Bisch. (Pl. 23.) Thallus linear-obcuneate, 3--6''
long, 1--2'' wide, 2-lobed at the apex, pale green with usually distinct
whitish pores, the scales beneath often extending far beyond the margin
and becoming whitish; peduncle profusely chaffy at base and apex,
sometimes much reduced; antheridial disks obcordate. (Including G.
sessilis, _Sulliv._)--Thin soil on rocks, Conn. and N. J. to Iowa; rare
or local. (Eu.)

2. G. rupestris, Lindenb. Thallus 3--6'' long, 1--3'' wide, with
membranous margins; receptacle small, hemispherical, 1--4-fruited, the
peduncle about 1' high, sparingly scaly at base, barbulate at the apex;
involucre short, crenulate; spores tuberculate. (Duvalia rupestris,
_Nees_.)--On calcareous or shaly rocks, N. Y. and Ohio. (Eu.)


6. ASTERELLA, Beauv. (Pl. 22.)

Thallus rigid, very indistinctly porose, the midrib broad, strong and
distinct. Receptacle conic-hemispheric, becoming flattened, 1--6-
(usually 4-) lobed. Monoecious. Involucres coherent with the lobes,
1-fruited, 2-valved. Calyptra minute, lacerate, persistent at the base
of the capsule. Capsule greenish, rupturing by irregular narrow teeth or
by a fragmentary operculum. Elaters moderately long, mostly 2-spiral.
Spores tuberculate. Antheridia in sessile lunate disks. (Diminutive of
_aster_, a star, from the form of the receptacle.)

1. A. hemisphaerica, Beauv. Thallus forking and increasing by joints,
pale green, purple beneath; receptacle papillose on the summit (less so
at maturity); peduncle bearded at base and apex, 3/4--1' long, often 2--3
times longer after maturity. (Reboulia hemisphaerica, _Raddi._)--Shaded
banks, chiefly along streams; more common southward.--A smaller form or
perhaps variety (Reboulia microcephala, _Nees_; R. Sullivantii, _Lehm._)
occurs in Penn., Ohio, and southward. (Eu.)


7. DUMORTIERA, Nees. (Pl. 22.)

Thallus large, thin, soft, with a slight costa, dichotomous, usually
with scattered hair-like rootlets beneath; gemmae none. Receptacle
convex, 2--8-lobed. Involucres 1-fruited, connate with the lobes
beneath, horizontal, opening by a vertical terminal slit. Capsule
distinctly pedicelled, oblong-globose, dehiscing by 4--6 irregular
valves. Elaters 2--3-spiral, parietal, very long, straight, attenuate
both ways. Spores muriculate. Antheridia in a short peduncled disk
paleaceous beneath. (Named for _B. C. Dumortier_, a Belgian botanist.)

1. D. hirsuta, Nees. Thallus 2--5' long, 6--9'' wide, deep green,
becoming blackish, entire on the margins, naked above or with a delicate
appressed pubescence; dioecious; receptacle many-fruited, the margin
closely hairy; peduncle rather long, chaffy at the apex.--On moist
calcareous rocks, Easton, Penn. (_Porter_), and southward.


8. LUNULARIA, Micheli. (Pl. 25.)

Thallus oblong with rounded lobes, distinctly areolate and porose, with
imbricate sublunate scales beneath; gemmae in crescent-shaped
receptacles. Dioecious. Fertile receptacle usually cruciately divided
into 4 horizontal segments or involucres, which are tubular, vertically
bilabiate and 1-fruited. Calyptra included, persistent. Capsule
exserted, 4--8-valved. Elaters short, very slender, mostly free. Spores
nearly smooth. Antheridia borne in the apical sinus of the thallus.
(Name from _lunula_, a little moon.)

L. VULGARIS, Raddi. Thallus 1--2' long, forked, innovating from the
apex, with a somewhat diffuse costa; peduncle very hairy, 1--11/2'
long.--Introduced into greenhouses; always sterile, but easily
recognized by the characteristic receptacles. (L. cruciata, _Dumort._)
(Int. from Eu.)


ORDER 140. RICCIACEAE.

Plant-body a dichotomously branching thallus, terrestrial or aquatic.
Capsules short-pedicelled, or sessile on the thallus, or immersed in its
substance, free or connate with the calyptra, globose, at length
rupturing irregularly. Calyptra crowned with a more or less deciduous
point. Elaters none. Spores usually angular, reticulate or muriculate.
Antheridia ovate, immersed in the thallus in flask-shaped cavities with
protruding orifices (_ostioles_).

1. Riccia. Capsule immersed in the thallus. Involucre none.

2. Sphaerocarpus. Capsule sessile on the thallus. Involucre
inflated-pyriform.


1. RICCIA, Micheli. (Pl. 22.)

Thallus at first radiately divided, the centre often soon decaying; the
divisions bifid or di--tri-chotomous, flat or depressed or channelled
above, usually convex and naked or squamulose beneath; margins naked or
spinulose-ciliate; epidermis usually distinct, eporose; air-cavities
evident or wanting. Capsule immersed, sessile. Calyptra with a
persistent style. Spores alveolate or muriculate, usually flattened and
angular. (Named for _P. F. Ricci_, an Italian nobleman, patron of
Micheli.)

Sec. 1. LICHENODES. _Fruit mostly protuberant above; spores about 84  mu
broad, issuing through openings in the upper surface of the thallus;
terrestrial species (on damp, usually trodden or cultivated ground),
without air-cavities._

[*] _Thallus naked, without cilia or scales._

1. R. Frostii, Aust. Thallus orbicular, 6--12'' broad, thinnish,
grayish-green, the apex and narrowly membranous margins sometimes
purplish, minutely pitted; divisions linear or subspatulate, subtruncate
and slightly emarginate; rootlets smooth or obsoletely papillose within;
capsules very prominent beneath; spores barely 50  mu broad, nearly round,
somewhat margined, with depressed sides when dry, fuscous.--Ohio, Ill.,
and westward.

[*][*] _Thallus with white scales beneath (dark purple in n. 4), the
margin naked._

2. R. sorocarpa, Bisch. Thallus 3--8'' in diameter, pale green becoming
whitish, finely reticulate, subradiately or dichotomously divided, the
oblong-linear segments subacute, deeply sulcate, with a few
inconspicuous scales toward the apex not extending beyond the margin;
margins erect when dry; spores issuing through chinks early appearing
along the groove above.--Thin rocky soil and cultivated fields, Closter,
N. J. (_Austin_), western N. Y. (_Clinton_), and Ill. (_Hall_). (Eu.)

3. R. lamellosa, Raddi. Thallus pale green, elegantly reticulated,
subradiately divided, the divisions obovate or obcordate, bifid or
2-lobed, 2--5'' long, channelled at the apex, with membranous ascending
margins, and furnished beneath with transverse scales which extend
considerably beyond the margin; spores much as in n. 2.--Thin rocky
soil, Closter, N. J. (_Austin_).

4. R. nigrella, DC. Thallus dichotomously divided, the divisions linear,
channelled, with entire narrowly membranous margins, green above, dark
purple beneath and furnished with transverse semicircular scales not
exceeding the margin.--Rocky ground, N. Y. (_Torrey_), and Chester,
Penn. (_Porter_). (Eu.)

[*][*][*] _Thallus more or less ciliate, naked beneath or obsoletely
squamous along the extreme edge._

5. R. arvensis, Aust. Thallus much divided, 3--9'' broad,
papillose-reticulate, dull green both sides, becoming fuscous above, the
flat margins at length purple; divisions sulcate, dichotomous, the
linear-elliptic or subspatulate lobes acutish and obsoletely emarginate;
cilia whitish, very short and inconspicuous or nearly wanting; capsules
aggregated toward the apex; spores 71--84  mu broad, dark fuscous,
reticulate, with pellucid margin.--Var. HIRTA, Aust., decidedly ciliate
and with spine-like hairs scattered over the upper surface; divisions
broader, more obtuse; spores nearly black, larger (84--101  mu) and
smoother.--Cultivated fields and (the var.) rocky places, Closter, N. J.
(_Austin_).

6. R. Lescuriana, Aust. Stellately or subcruciately divided, the
obcordate or cuneate-linear divisions 2--6'' long, punctate-reticulate,
subglaucous or ashy-green both sides or becoming purple beneath, the
slightly concave lobes emarginate, closely ciliate with short obtuse
spine-like white hairs; capsules scattered, chiefly near the base of the
divisions; spores 71--83  mu broad, dark brown, reticulate, not
margined.--Cultivated fields and rocky grounds, N. J. to Ill., and
southward.

Sec. 2. SPONGODES. _Thallus with large air-cavities usually opening by pits
through the upper surface, and with slight depressions over the capsules
which are prominent beneath; spores 41--51  mu broad, obtusely angular or
globose; terrestrial._

7. R. crystallina, L. Orbicular, 6--9'' broad, the obcordate or cuneate
divisions bifid or 2-lobed, flat above and the surface much broken up
into pits, the margins subcrenate; capsules scattered; spores issuing
through the upper surface.--On mud flats, Ill. (_Hall_), west and
southward. (Eu.)

8. R. lutescens, Schwein. Orbicular, 1--11/2' in diameter, light green;
divisions 6--8, linear, 2--3 times forked, narrowly channelled,
obcordate and thickened at the apex, with delicate whitish obliquely
ovate appressed scales, rootlets wanting beneath above the middle;
fruiting plant unknown.--Dried up pools and ditches, Canada to Mo., and
southward. An analogous form has been developed by Lindberg from R.
natans.

9. R. tenuis, Aust. Thallus thin, olive or yellowish-green, shining, the
2--4 divisions roundish-obovate, 2--4'' long, flat, with sinuate
margins, green beneath with a slender costa and few rootlets; capsule
very delicate, closely adherent to the substance of the thallus,
minutely apiculate; spores round or short-oval, conspicuously depressed
at one end when dry.--Wet ground in open woods, Closter and Lawrence,
N. J. (_Austin_), and Mo. (_Hall_).

Sec. 3. RICCIELLA. _Thallus linear, dichotomous, floating or rarely
terrestrial; capsule protuberant from the lower surface._

10. R. fluitans, L. Thallus often in extended patches, thin, green,
radiately expanding, the often imbricate divisions 1/2--11/2'' wide,
parallel-nerved, flat, without rootlets, cavernous only toward the
slightly dilated very obtuse or subtruncate apex; capsules present only
in some terrestrial forms, very prominent below, rupturing beneath the
apex.--Very variable. The most notable form is var. SULLIVANTI, Aust.,
with divisions about 1/2'' wide, channelled, cavernous throughout, the
margins crisped-crenulate, and rootlets numerous on the costa tumid with
abundant capsules, which are tipped with a long funnel-mouthed point;
spores obscurely angled, reticulate and margined. (R. Sullivanti,
_Aust._)--In ponds or ditches or growing in wet places upon the ground;
the variety often in cultivated fields. (Eu.)

Sec. 4. RICCIOCARPUS. _Thallus obcordate, floating or rarely terrestrial;
capsules not protruding, at length exposed by a cleft in the central
groove._

11. R. natans, L. (Pl. 22.) Divisions obcordate or cuneate, broadly
emarginate, 3--6'' long, purplish, very narrowly channelled, with
numerous uniform air-cavities beneath the epidermis, rooting toward the
base and at length with dark purple scales beneath the apex; capsules in
1 or 2 rows beneath the groove; spores black, angular, strongly
papillose.--Canada to the Gulf. (Eu.)


2. SPHAEROCARPUS, Micheli. (Pl. 22.)

Thallus lobed, without costa or epidermis. Involucres sessile, obconic
or pyriform, perforated at the apex, continuous with the thallus at
base. Calyptra closely investing the single globose indehiscent capsule,
crowned with a deciduous point. Spores globose, muriculate, remaining
united in a coccus. Antheridia borne in follicular bodies on the
surface of a separate thallus.--An anomalous genus, perhaps more closely
related to the Jungermanniaceae. (Name from [Greek: sphai~ros], _a
sphere_, and [Greek: karpo/s], _fruit_.)

1. S. terrestris, Smith. Thallus orbicular, 3--6'' broad, covered by the
clustered inflated involucres, which are nearly 1'' long, 3--4 times the
length of the capsule; coccus 102--127  mu wide, indistinctly lobed. (S.
Michelii, _Bellardi_.)--In cultivated fields, mostly southern. (Eu.)




ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.


Page 59.--ARGEMONE MEXICANA. Collected at Merodosia, Ill., with white
flowers, by _A. B. Seymour_.

Page 75.--Insert after Cleome integrifolia--

C. SPINOSA, L. Viscid-pubescent, 3--4 deg. high; a pair of short stipular
spines under the petiole of each leaf; leaflets 5--7, oblong-lanceolate;
flowers large, rose-purple to white; stamens 2--3' long; stipe of the
linear pod about 2' long. (C. pungens, _Willd._)--An escape from
cultivation, near Mt. Carmel, Ill. (_Schneck_), and in waste grounds
southward; also on ballast. (Int. from Trop. Amer.)

Page 86.--Arenaria Groenlandica. Found on Mt. Desert Island, Maine
(_Rand_).

Page 87.--Stellaria borealis. In the mountains of northern N. J.

S. humifusa. This species has also been found on Cranberry Island, near
Mt. Desert, Maine, by _J. H. Redfield_.

Page 91.--Under Talinum teretifolium add the character--style equalling
the stamens.--Insert

2. T. calycinum, Engelm. Leaves somewhat broader; flowers and capsules
larger; stamens 30 or more; style twice longer than the stamens,
declined.--Central Kan. to W. Tex.

Under Claytonia insert--

3. C. Chamissonis, Esch. Weak, procumbent or ascending, rooting below
and perennial by lateral and terminal filiform runners; leaves several
pairs, oblong-spatulate, 1--2' long; inflorescence racemosely
1--9-flowered; petals pale rose-color; capsule small, 1--3-seeded.--In a
cold ravine, Winona Co., Minn.; in the mountains from Colorado north and
westward.

Page 211.--Hydrocotyle Americana. Add--propagating by filiform
tuberiferous stolons.

Page 230.--Insert after the genus Dipsacus--

2. SCABIOSA, Tourn. SCABIOUS.

Characters of Dipsacus, but the green leaves of the involucre and
involucels not rigid nor spinescent. (Name from _scabies_, the itch,
from its use as a remedy.)

S. AUSTRALIS, Wulf. Perennial, sparsely branched, nearly glabrous,
11/2--3 deg. high; leaves narrowly lanceolate to linear, the lower
oblanceolate, slightly toothed or entire; heads short-oblong; calyx
obtusely short-lobed; corolla pale blue.--Central N. Y. and Penn.; rare.
(Adv. from Eu.)

Page 395.--After OROBANCHE MINOR insert--

O. RAMOSA, L. Often branched, 6' high or less, of a pale straw-color;
flowers 3-bracteate, the lateral bracts small; calyx 4-toothed, split at
the back; corolla pale blue, 6--8'' long.--On the roots of hemp and
tobacco; Ky. (Int. from Eu.)

Page 421.--After LAMIUM PURPUREUM insert--

L. INTERMEDIUM, Fries. Resembling L. purpureum, but the calyx-teeth
longer than the tube, the rather narrower corolla without a hairy ring
within near the base, and the nutlet longer (3 times as long as
broad).--Cultivated fields near Hingham, Mass. (_C. J. Sprague_). (Adv.
from Eu.)

Page 427.--Insert in the generic key--

5. Cladothrix. Flowers perfect, minute, axillary. Densely
white-tomentose.

Page 430.--Insert after the genus Froelichia--

5. CLADOTHRIX, Nutt.

Flowers perfect, 3-bracted. Sepals 5, erect, rigid-scarious, somewhat
pilose. Stamens 5, the filaments united at base; anthers large,
1-celled. Stigma large, capitate, 2-lobed. Utricle globose,
indehiscent.--Densely stellate-tomentose low herbs or woody at base,
with opposite petiolate leaves and very small flowers solitary or few in
the axils. (Name from [Greek: kla/dos], _a branch_, and [Greek: thri/x],
_hair_, for the branching tomentum.)

1. C. lanuginosa, Nutt. Prostrate or ascending, much branched; leaves
round-obovate to rhomboidal, 3--10'' long.--Central Kan. (_Meehan_) and
southwestward.

Page 435.--Salsola Kali. This species has been found in Emmet Co., Iowa
(_Cratty_), at Yankton, Dak. (_Bruhin_), and in river-bottoms in N. W.
Neb. and central Dak.

Page 437.--After Eriogonum annuum insert--

2. E. Alleni, Watson. Perennial, white-tomentose throughout, the tall
scape-like stem repeatedly dichotomous above; radical leaves lanceolate,
long-petiolate, the upper in whorls of 4 or 5, ovate to oblong-ovate,
very shortly petiolate, much reduced above; involucres mostly sessile;
flowers glabrous, yellow, the segments elliptical.--Near White Sulphur
Springs, W. Va. (_T. F. Allen_).

Page 445.--Asarum Canadense. In this species there are rudimentary
subulate petals, alternate with the calyx-lobes.

Page 463.--Celtis Mississippiensis. Common in low river-bottoms of W.
Mo. (_F. Bush_); described as having a very smooth trunk, like a
sycamore, and soft yellowish brittle wood, not coarse-grained as in C.
occidentalis.

Page 491.--Under Pinus add--

10. P. ponderosa, Dougl., var. scopulorum, Engelm. Leaves in twos or
usually threes from long sheaths, 3--6' long, rather rigid; staminate
flowers 1' long; cones subterminal, 2--3' long, oval, often 3--5
together, the prominent summit of the thick scales bearing a stout
straight or incurved prickle.--Central Neb. and westward in the Rocky
Mountains.--A large tree with very thick bark.

Page 514.--After IRIS CAROLINIANA insert--

2^a. I. hexagona, Walt. Stems flexuous, often low and slender (1--3 deg.
high), leafy; leaves much exceeding the stem, 6--12'' broad; flowers
solitary and sessile in the axils, large, deep blue, variegated with
yellow, purple, and white; tube 1/2' long; segments about 3' long, the
inner narrow; capsule oblong-cylindric, 6-angled, 2' long--Prairies, Ky.
(_Short_) to W. Mo. (_Bush_), and on the coast from S. Car. southward.

Page 515.--Sisyrinchium angustifolium. What appears to be a form of this
species with pale yellow flowers is found near Independence, Mo.
(_Bush_).

Page 516.--Under Zephyranthes Atamasco insert the synonym (Amaryllis
Atamasco, _L._).

Page 555.--Sagittaria teres has been collected also at Brewster, Mass.
(_Farlow_).

Page 575.--After Eleocharis Torreyana insert--

13^a. E. albida, Torr. Like n. 12 and 13 in habit, somewhat stouter;
spikelet dense, ellipsoidal or oblong, 1--4'' long, acutish, with pale
obtuse scales; achene very small, triangular-obovate, very smooth, with
a broadly triangular tubercle upon a narrow base, shorter than or
exceeding the reddish bristles.--Salt marshes, Northampton Co., Va.
(_Canby_), and south to Fla. and Tex.

Page 653.--Trisetum subspicatum, var. molle, is reported from Roan Mt.,
N. C. (_Scribner_), and probably occurs on the higher Alleghanies
northward.

Page 662.--After Melica diffusa insert--

3. M. Porteri, Scribn. Tall and slender; panicle very narrow, the
slender branches erect or the lower slightly divergent; pedicels
flexuous or recurved, pubescent; glumes very unequal and shorter than
the spikelet; fertile flowers 3--5, the glumes scabrous.--Mountains of
Col. and southward; reported from Cass Co., Neb. (_J. G. Smith_).

Page 663.--Distichlis maritima. On alkaline soil in Neb., and very
common in similar localities west and southwestward; chiefly the var.
STRICTA, Thurb., with setaceously convolute leaves, the many- (10--20-)
flowered spikelets in a loose panicle.




                            LIST OF ORDERS,

                 WITH THE NUMBER OF GENERA AND SPECIES,
                         NATIVE AND INTRODUCED.


ANGIOSPERMOUS EXOGENS.               |    Genera.    |    Species.   |
                                     |Native.|Introd.|Native.|Introd.|
DIV. 1. POLYPETALOUS.                |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |       |       |       |       |
 1. Ranunculacae                      |   19  |    5  |   62  |   14  |
 2. Magnoliaceae                      |    2  |   --  |    6  |   --  |
 3. Anonaceae                         |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
 4. Menispermaceae                    |    3  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
 5. Berberidaceae                     |    5  |   --  |    5  |    1  |
 6. Nymphaeaceae                       |    5  |   --  |    8  |   --  |
 7. Sarraceniaceae                    |    1  |   --  |    2  |   --  |
 8. Papaveraceae                      |    3  |    3  |    3  |    6  |
 9. Fumariaceae                       |    3  |    1  |    9  |    1  |
10. Cruciferae                        |   15  |    8  |   46  |   25  |
11. Capparidaceae                     |    3  |   --  |    4  |    1  |
12. Resedaceae                        |   --  |    1  |   --  |    2  |
13. Cistaceae                         |    3  |   --  |    9  |   --  |
14. Violaceae                         |    3  |   --  |   19  |    1  |
15. Caryophyllaceae                   |    6  |    6  |   31  |   22  |
16. Portulacaceae                     |    3  |   --  |    7  |    1  |
17. Elatinaceae                       |    1  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
18. Hypericaceae                      |    3  |   --  |   20  |    1  |
19. Ternstroemiaceae                  |    2  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
20. Malvaceae                         |    7  |    4  |   15  |   10  |
21. Tiliaceae                         |    1  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
22. Linaceae                          |    1  |   --  |    5  |    1  |
23. Geraniaceae                       |    4  |    1  |   10  |    7  |
24. Rutaceae                          |    2  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
25. Ilicineae                         |    2  |   --  |   10  |   --  |
26. Celastraceae                      |    3  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
27. Rhamnaceae                        |    3  |   --  |    6  |    1  |
28. Vitaceae                          |    3  |   --  |   11  |   --  |
29. Sapindaceae                       |    5  |   --  |   11  |   --  |
30. Anacardiaceae                     |    1  |   --  |    7  |   --  |
31. Polygalaceae                      |    1  |   --  |   15  |   --  |
32. Leguminosae                       |   41  |    5  |  137  |   19  |
33. Rosaceae                          |   17  |    1  |   87  |    8  |
34. Calycanthaceae                    |    1  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
35. Saxifragaceae                     |   14  |   --  |   43  |    1  |
36. Crassulaceae                      |    3  |   --  |    8  |    3  |
37. Droseraceae                       |    1  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
38. Hamamelideae                      |    3  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
39. Halorageae                        |    4  |   --  |   13  |   --  |
40. Melastomaceae                     |    1  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
41. Lythraceae                        |    6  |   --  |    8  |    1  |
42. Onagraceae                        |    7  |   --  |   43  |    1  |
43. Loasaceae                         |    1  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
44. Passifloraceae                    |    1  |   --  |    2  |   --  |
45. Cucurbitaceae                     |    5  |   --  |    5  |   --  |
46. Cactaceae                         |    2  |   --  |    6  |   --  |
47. Ficoideae                         |    1  |    1  |    1  |    1  |
48. Umbelliferae                      |   26  |   10  |   49  |   13  |
49. Araliaceae                        |    1  |   --  |    6  |   --  |
50. Cornaceae                         |    2  |   --  |   11  |   --  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |  251  |   46  |  777  |  141  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
ANGIOSPERMOUS EXOGENS.               |    Genera.    |    Species.   |
                                     |Native.|Introd.|Native.|Introd.|
DIV. 2. GAMOPETALOUS.                |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |       |       |       |       |
51. Caprifoliaceae                    |    8  |   --  |   31  |   --  |
52. Rubiaceae                         |    7  |    1  |   25  |    5  |
53. Valerianaceae                     |    2  |   --  |    7  |    1  |
54. Dipsaceae                         |   --  |    2  |   --  |    3  |
55. Compositae                        |   78  |   20  |  356  |   51  |
56. Lobeliaceae                       |    1  |   --  |   13  |   --  |
57. Campanulaceae                     |    2  |   --  |    6  |    2  |
58. Ericareae                         |   26  |   --  |   69  |   --  |
59. Diapensiaceae                     |    3  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
60. Plumbaginaceae                    |    1  |   --  |    2  |   --  |
61. Primulaceae                       |   10  |    1  |   16  |    3  |
62. Sapotaceae                        |    1  |   --  |    2  |   --  |
63. Ebenaceae                         |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
64. Styraceae                         |    3  |   --  |    5  |   --  |
65. Olcaceae                          |    3  |    1  |    8  |    1  |
66. Apocynaceae                       |    3  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
67. Asclepiadaceae                    |    5  |    1  |   29  |    1  |
68. Loganiaceae                       |    4  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
69. Gentianaceae                      |    9  |    1  |   31  |    3  |
70. Polemoniaceae                     |    3  |   --  |   14  |   --  |
71. Hydrophyllaceae                   |    5  |   --  |   13  |   --  |
72. Borraginaceae                     |    8  |    3  |   22  |   11  |
73. Convolvulaceae                    |    6  |   --  |   20  |    7  |
74. Solanaceae                        |    3  |    5  |   14  |    8  |
75. Scrophulariaceae                  |   24  |    3  |   65  |   15  |
76. Orobanchaceae                     |    3  |    1  |    5  |    2  |
77. Lentibulariaceae                  |    2  |   --  |   13  |   --  |
78. Bignoniaceae                      |    3  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
79. Pedaliaceae                       |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
80. Acanthaceae                       |    3  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
81. Verbenaceae                       |    4  |   --  |   11  |    1  |
82. Labiatae                          |   20  |   14  |   65  |   33  |
83. Plantaginaceae                    |    2  |   --  |   11  |    1  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |  254  |   53  |  874  |  148  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
ANGIOSPERMOUS EXOGENS.               |    Genera.    |    Species.   |
                                     |Native.|Introd.|Native.|Introd.|
DIV. 3. APETALOUS.                   |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |       |       |       |       |
84. Nyctaginaceae                     |    2  |   --  |   41  |   --  |
85. Illecebraceae                     |    2  |    1  |    5  |    1  |
86. Amarantaceae                      |    4  |   --  |    9  |    7  |
87. Chenopodiaceae                    |    8  |    2  |   17  |   11  |
88. Phytolaccaceae                    |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
89. Polygonaceae                      |    6  |    1  |   33  |   13  |
90. Podostemaceae                     |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
91. Aristolochiaceae                  |    2  |   --  |    6  |    1  |
92. Piperaceae                        |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
93. Lauraceae                         |    4  |   --  |    5  |   --  |
94. Thymelaeaceae                      |    1  |    1  |    1  |    1  |
95. Eaeagnaceae                        |    2  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
96. Loranthaceae                      |    2  |   --  |    2  |   --  |
97. Santalaceae                       |    2  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
98. Euphorbiaceae                     |   10  |    1  |   34  |    8  |
 99. Urticaceae                       |   11  |    1  |   16  |    4  |
100. Platanaceae                      |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
101. Juglandaceae                     |    2  |   --  |    9  |   --  |
102. Myricaceae                       |    1  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
103. Cupuliferae                      |    8  |   --  |   37  |   --  |
104. Salicaceae                       |    2  |   --  |   25  |   5   |
105. Empetraceae                      |    2  |   --  |    2  |   --  |
106. Ceratophyllaceae                 |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |   76  |    7  |  257  |   51  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
GYMNOSPERMOUS EXOGENS.               |       |       |       |       |
                                     |       |       |       |       |
107. Coniferae                        |   10  |   --  |   22  |   --  |
                                     |       |       |       |       |
ENDOGENS.                            |       |       |       |       |
                                     |       |       |       |       |
108. Hydrocharidaceae                 |    3  |   --  |    3  |   --  |
109. Burmanniaceae                    |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
110. Orchidaceae                      |   17  |   --  |   58  |   --  |
111. Bromeliaceae                     |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
112. Haemodoraceae                     |    3  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
113. Iridaceae                        |    3  |    1  |   10  |    2  |
114. Amaryllidaceae                   |    4  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
115. Dioscoreaceae                    |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
116. Liliaceae                        |   29  |    4  |   74  |    8  |
117. Pontederiaceae                   |    2  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
118. Xyridaceae                       |    1  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
119. Mayaceae                         |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
120. Commelinaceae                    |    2  |   --  |    6  |   --  |
121. Juncaceae                        |    2  |   --  |   32  |   --  |
122. Typhaceae                        |    2  |   --  |    5  |   --  |
123. Araceae                          |    6  |   --  |    8  |   --  |
124. Lemnaceae                        |    3  |   --  |    9  |   --  |
125. Alismaceae                       |    3  |   --  |   11  |   --  |
126. Naiadaceae                       |    7  |   --  |   39  |   --  |
127. Eriocauleae                      |    3  |   --  |    5  |   --  |
128. Cyperaceae                       |   16  |   --  |  237  |    8  |
129. Gramineae                        |   60  |   17  |  204  |   46  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |  170  |   22  |  721  |   64  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |    Genera.    |    Species.   |
                                     |Native.|Introd.|Native.|Introd.|
PTERIDOPHYTES.                       |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |       |       |       |       |
130. Equisetaceae                     |    1  |   --  |   11  |   --  |
131. Filices                         |   21  |   --  |   62  |   --  |
132. Ophioglossaceae                  |    2  |   --  |    7  |   --  |
133. Lycopodiaceae                    |    1  |   --  |    9  |   --  |
134. Selaginellaceae                  |    2  |   --  |   10  |   --  |
135. Marsiliaceae                     |    1  |   --  |    2  |   --  |
136. Salviniaceae                     |    1  |   --  |    1  |   --  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |   29  |       |  102  |       |
BRYOPHYTES.                          |-------+-------+-------+-------|
DIV. HEPATICAE.                       |       |       |       |       |
                                     |       |       |       |       |
137. Jungermanniaceae                 |   32  |    1  |  115  |    1  |
138. Anthocerotaceae                  |    2  |   --  |    4  |   --  |
139. Marchantiaceae                   |    8  |   --  |    9  |   --  |
140. Ricciaceae                       |    2  |   --  |   12  |   --  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |   44  |    1  |  140  |    1  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
Exogens.                             |       |       |       |       |
  Polypetalous                       |  251  |   46  |  777  |  141  |
  Gamopetalous                       |  254  |   53  |  874  |  148  |
  Apetalous                          |   76  |    7  |  257  |   51  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |  581  |  106  | 1908  |  340  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |       |       |       |       |
  Gymnospermous                      |   10  |   --  |   22  |   --  |
                                     |       |       |       |       |
Endogens                             |  170  |   22  |  721  |   64  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
Total Phaenogams                      |  761  |  128  | 2651  |  404  |
                                     |       |       |       |       |
Cryptogams                           |   73  |    1  |  242  |    1  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|
                                     |  834  |  129  | 2893  |  405  |
                                     |-------+-------+-------+-------|

  Total of Genera                       963
  Total of Species                     3298




GLOSSARY.


_Abnormal._ Differing from the normal or usual structure.

_Abortion._ Imperfect development or non-development of an organ.

_Abortive._ Defective or barren.

_Acaulescent._ Stemless or apparently so.

_Accumbent_ (cotyledon). Having the edges against the radicle.

_Acerb._ Sour and astringent.

_Achene._ A small, dry and hard, 1-celled, 1-seeded, indehiscent fruit.

_Achlamydeous._ Without calyx or corolla.

_Acicular._ Slender needle-shaped.

_Acrogenous._ Growing from the apex by a terminal bud or by the apical
cell only.

_Aculeate._ Prickly, beset with prickles.

_Aculeolate._ Beset with diminutive prickles.

_Acuminate._ Tapering at the end.

_Acute._ Terminating with a sharp or well-defined angle.

_AEstivation._ The arrangement of the parts of the perianth in the bud.

_Adnate._ United, as the inferior ovary with the calyx-tube. _Adnate
anther_, one attached for its whole length to the inner or outer face of
the filament.

_Adventive._ Recently or imperfectly naturalized.

_Alate._ Winged.

_Albumen._ Any deposit of nutritive material accompanying the embryo.

_Albuminous._ Having albumen.

_Alliaceous._ Having the smell or taste of garlic.

_Alternate._ Not opposite to each other, as sepals and petals, or as
leaves upon a stem.

_Alveolate._ Honeycombed, having angular depressions separated by thin
partitions.

_Ament._ A catkin, or peculiar scaly unisexual spike.

_Amphitropous_ (ovule or seed). Half-inverted and straight, with the
hilum lateral.

_Amplexicaul._ Clasping the stem.

_Anastomosing._ Connecting by cross-veins and forming a network.

_Anatropous_ (ovule). Inverted and straight, with the micropyle next
the hilum and the radicle consequently inferior.

_Androgynous_ (inflorescence). Composed of both staminate and
pistillate flowers.

_-androus_. In composition, having stamens.

_Angiospermous._ Having the seeds borne within a pericarp.

_Annual._ Of only one year's duration. _Winter annual_, a plant from
autumn-sown seed which blooms and fruits in the following spring.

_Annular._ In the form of a ring.

_Anterior._ On the front side of a flower and next the bract, remote
from the axis of inflorescence, equivalent to inferior and (less
properly) exterior.

_Anther._ The polliniferous part of a stamen.

_Antheridium._ In Cryptogams, the organ corresponding to an anther.

_Antheriferous._ Anther-bearing.

_Antherizoid._ One of the minute organs developed in an antheridium,
corresponding to pollen-grains.

_Anthesis._ The time of expansion of a flower.

_Apetalous._ Having no petals.

_Apical._ Situated at the apex or tip.

_Apiculate._ Ending in a short pointed tip.

_Appressed._ Lying close and flat against.

_Aquatic._ Growing in water.

_Arachnoid._ Cobwebby, of slender entangled hairs.

_Archegonium._ The organ corresponding to a pistil in the higher
Cryptogams.

_Arcuate._ Moderately curved.

_Areolate._ Marked out into small spaces, reticulate.

_Aril._ An appendage growing at or about the hilum of a seed.

_Arillate._ Having an aril.

_Articulate._ Jointed; having a node or joint.

_Ascending._ Rising somewhat obliquely, or curving upward. _Ascending
ovule_, one that is attached above the base of the ovary and is directed
upward.

_Assurgent._ Ascending.

_Attenuate._ Slenderly tapering, becoming very narrow.

_Auricle._ An ear-shaped appendage.

_Auriculate._ Furnished with auricles.

_Awl-shaped._ Narrowed upward from the base to a slender or rigid
point.

_Awn._ A bristle-shaped appendage.

_Axil._ The angle formed by a leaf or branch with the stem.

_Axile._ Situated in the axis.

_Axillary._ Situated in an axil.

_Axis._ The central line of any organ or support of a group of organs; a
stem, etc.


_Baccate._ Berry like; pulpy throughout.

_Barbed._ Furnished with rigid points or short bristles, usually
reflexed like the barb of a fish-hook.

_Barbellate._ Finely barbed.

_Barbulate._ Finely bearded.

_Basal, Basilar._ At or pertaining to the base.

_Basifixed._ Attached by the base.

_Beaked._ Ending in a beak or prolonged tip.

_Bearded._ Bearing a long awn, or furnished with long or stiff hairs.

_Berry._ A fruit the whole pericarp of which is fleshy or pulpy.

_Bi-_ or _Bis-_. A Latin prefix signifying two, twice, or doubly.

_Bidentate._ Having two teeth.

_Biennial._ Of two years' duration.

_Bifid._ Two-cleft.

_Bilabiate._ Two-lipped.

_Bilocellate._ Having two secondary cells.

_Bilocular._ Two-celled.

_Bisexual._ Having both stamens and pistils.

_Bladdery._ Thin and inflated.

_Blade._ The limb or expanded portion of a leaf, etc.

_Bract._ A more or less modified leaf subtending a flower or belonging
to an inflorescence, or sometimes cauline.

_Bracteate._ Having bracts.

_Bracteolate._ Having bractlets.

_Bracteose._ With numerous or conspicuous bracts.

_Bractlet._ A secondary bract, as one upon the pedicel of a flower.

_Bristle._ A stiff hair or any similar outgrowth.

_Bud._ The rudimentary state of a stem or branch; an unexpanded flower.

_Bulb._ A subterranean leaf-bud with fleshy scales or coats.

_Bulbiferous._ Bearing bulbs.

_Bulblet._ A small bulb, especially one borne upon the stem.

_Bulbous._ Having the character of a bulb.


_Caducous._ Falling off very early.

_Calcarate._ Produced into or having a spur.

_Callus._ A hard protuberance or callosity.

_Calyculate._ Having bracts around the calyx imitating an outer calyx.

_Calyptra._ The membranous hood or covering of the capsule in Hepaticae
and Mosses.

_Calyx._ The outer perianth of the flower.

_Campanulate._ Bell-shaped; cup-shaped with a broad base.

_Campylospermous._ Having seeds with longitudinally involute margins, as
in some Umbelliferae.

_Campylotropous_ (ovule or seed). So curved as to bring the apex and
base nearly together.

_Canaliculate._ Longitudinally channelled.

_Canescent._ Hoary with gray pubescence.

_Capitate._ Shaped like a head; collected into a head or dense cluster.

_Capitellate._ Collected into a small head.

_Capsular._ Belonging to or of the nature of a capsule.

_Capsule._ A dry dehiscent fruit composed of more than one carpel; the
spore-case of Hepaticae, etc.

_Capsuliferous._ Capsule-bearing.

_Carinate._ Having a keel or a projecting longitudinal medial line on
the lower surface.

_Carpel._ A simple pistil, or one member of a compound pistil.

_Cartilaginous._ Of the texture of cartilage; firm and tough.

_Caruncle._ An excrescence or appendage at or about the hilum of a seed.

_Carunculate._ Having a caruncle.

_Caryopsis._ A grain, as of grasses; a seed-like fruit with a thin
pericarp adnate to the contained seed.

_Castaneous._ Of a chestnut color; brown.

_Catkin._ An ament.

_Caudate._ Having a slender tail-like appendage.

_Caudex._ The persistent base of an otherwise annual herbaceous stem.

_Caulescent._ Having a manifest stem.

_Cauline._ Belonging to the stem.

_Cavernous._ Hollow; full of air-cavities.

_Cell._ One of the minute vesicles, of very various forms, of which
plants are formed. Any structure containing a cavity, as the cells of
an anther, ovary, etc.

_Cellular_ (tissue). Composed of short transparent thin-walled cells, in
distinction from fibrous or vascular.

_Cespitose._ Growing in tufts; forming mats or turf.

_Chaff._ A small thin scale or bract, becoming dry and membranous.

_Chaffy._ Having or resembling chaff.

_Channelled._ Deeply grooved longitudinally, like a gutter.

_Chartaceous._ Having the texture of writing-paper.

_Chlorophyll._ The green grains within the cells of plants.

_Chlorophyllose._ Containing chlorophyll.

_Ciliate._ Marginally fringed with hairs.

_Ciliolate._ Minutely ciliate.

_Cinereous._ Ash-color.

_Circinate._ Coiled from the top downward, as the young frond of a fern.

_Circumscissile._ Dehiscing by a regular transverse circular line of
division.

_Clavate._ Club-shaped; gradually thickened upward.

_Cleistogamous._ Fertilized in the bud, without the opening of the
flower.

_Cleft._ Cut about to the middle.

_Climbing._ Ascending by laying hold of surrounding objects for support.

_Cluster._ Any assemblage of flowers on a plant.

_Clustered._ Collected in a bunch of any sort.

_Coalescence._ The union of parts or organs of the same kind.

_Coccus_ (pl. _Cocci_). One of the parts into which a lobed fruit with
1-seeded cells splits.

_Cochleate._ Spiral, like a snail-shell.

_Cohesion._ The union of one organ with another.

_Columella._ The persistent axis of some capsules, spore-cases, etc.

_Columnar._ Like a column.

_Commissure._ The surface by which one carpel joins another, as in the
Umbelliferae.

_Comose._ Furnished with a _coma_ or tuft of hairs.

_Complicate._ Folded upon itself.

_Compound._ Composed of 2 or more similar parts united into one whole.
_Compound leaf_, one divided into separate leaflets.

_Compressed._ Flattened laterally.

_Conceptacle._ In some Cryptogams a case or receptacle containing the
organs of fructification.

_Conduplicate._ Folded together lengthwise.

_Confluent._ Running into each other; blended into one.

_Coniferous._ Cone-bearing.

_Connate._ United congenitally.

_Connective._ The portion of a stamen which connects the two cells of
the anther.

_Connivent._ Coming into contact; converging.

_Conoidal._ Nearly conical.

_Convergent._ Approaching each other.

_Convolute._ Rolled up longitudinally.

_Cordate._ Heart-shaped with the point upward.

_Coriaceous._ Leathery in texture.

_Corm._ The enlarged fleshy base of a stem, bulb-like but solid.

_Corolla._ The inner perianth, of distinct or connate petals.

_Coroniform._ Shaped like a crown.

_Corrugate._ Wrinkled or in folds.

_Corymb._ A flat-topped or convex open flower-cluster, in the stricter
use of the word equivalent to a contracted raceme and progressing in its
flowering from the margin inward.

_Corymbose._ In corymbs, or corymb-like.

_Cosmopolite._ Found in most parts of the globe (of plants).

_Costa._ A rib; a midrib or mid-nerve.

_Costate._ Ribbed; having one or more longitudinal ribs or nerves.

_Cotyledons._ The foliar portion or first leaves (one, two, or more) of
the embryo as found in the seed.

_Crateriform._ In the shape of a saucer or cup, hemispherical or more
shallow.

_Creeping._ Running along or under the ground and rooting.

_Crenate._ Dentate with the teeth much rounded.

_Crenulate._ Finely crenate.

_Crested, Cristate._ Bearing an elevated appendage resembling a crest.

_Crown._ An inner appendage to a petal, or to the throat of a corolla.

_Cruciate._ Cross-shaped.

_Crustaceous._ Of hard and brittle texture.

_Cucullate._ Hooded or hood-shaped; cowled.

_Culm._ The peculiar stem of sedges and grasses.

_Cuneate._ Wedge-shaped; triangular with the acute angle downward.

_Cuspidate._ Tipped with a _cusp_, or sharp and rigid point.

_Cylindraceous._ Somewhat or nearly cylindrical.

_Cyme._ A usually broad and flattish determinate inflorescence, i.e.
with its central or terminal flowers blooming earliest.

_Cymose._ Bearing cymes or cyme-like.


_Deciduous._ Not persistent; not evergreen.

_Decompound._ More than once compound or divided.

_Decumbent._ Reclining, but with the summit ascending.

_Decurrent_ (leaf). Extending down the stem below the insertion.

_Decurved._ Curved downward.

_Decussate._ Alternating in pairs at right angles, or in threes.

_Definite._ Of a constant number, not exceeding twenty.

_Deflexed._ Bent or turned abruptly downward.

_Dehiscent._ Opening regularly by valves, slits, etc., as a capsule or
anther.

_Deltoid._ Shaped like the Greek letter [Greek: D].

_Dentate._ Toothed, usually with the teeth directed outward.

_Denticulate._ Minutely dentate.

_Depressed._ Somewhat flattened from above.

_Di-, Dis-._ A Greek prefix signifying two or twice.

_Diadelphous_ (stamens). Combined in two sets.

_Diandrous._ Having two stamens.

_Dicarpellary._ Composed of two carpels.

_Dichotomous._ Forking regularly by pairs.

_Dicotyledonous._ Having two cotyledons.

_Didymous._ Twin; found in pairs.

_Didynamous_ (stamens). In two pairs of unequal length.

_Diffuse._ Widely or loosely spreading.

_Digitate._ Compound, with the members borne in a whorl at the apex of
the support.

_Dimerous_ (flower). Having all the parts in twos.

_Dimidiate._ In halves, as if one half were wanting.

_Dimorphous._ Occurring in two forms.

_Dioecious._ Unisexual, with the two kinds of flowers on separate
plants.

_Discoid._ Resembling a disk. _Discoid head_, in Compositae, one without
ray-flowers.

_Disk._ A development of the receptacle at or around the base of the
pistil. In Compositae, the tubular flowers of the head as distinct from
the ray.

_Dissected._ Cut or divided into numerous segments.

_Dissepiment._ A partition in an ovary or fruit.

_Distichous._ In two vertical ranks.

_Distinct._ Separate; not united, evident.

_Divaricate._ Widely divergent.

_Divergent._ Inclined away from each other.

_Divided._ Lobed to the base.

_Dorsal._ Upon or relating to the back or outer surface of an organ.

_Drupaceous._ Resembling or of the nature of a drupe.

_Drupe._ A fleshy or pulpy fruit with the inner portion of the pericarp
(1-celled and 1-seeded, or sometimes several-celled) hard or stony.

_Drupelet._ A diminutive drupe.


_E-_ or _Ex-_. A Latin prefix having often a privative signification, as
_ebracteate_, without bracts.

_Echinate._ Beset with prickles.

_Effuse._ Very loosely spreading.

_Elater._ A usually spirally marked thread found in the capsules of most
Hepaticae.

_Ellipsoidal._ Nearly elliptical; of solids, elliptical in outline.

_Elliptical._ In the form of an ellipse, oval.

_Emarginate._ Having a shallow notch at the extremity.

_Embryo._ The rudimentary plantlet within the seed.

_Endocarp._ The inner layer of a pericarp.

_Endogenous._ Growing throughout the substance of the stem, instead of
by superficial layers.

_Entire._ Without toothing or division.

_Ephemeral._ Lasting only for one day.

_Epidermis._ The cuticle or thin membrane covering the outer surface.

_Epigynous._ Growing on the summit of the ovary, or apparently so.

_Epiphyte._ A plant growing attached to another plant, but not
parasitic; an air-plant.

_Eporose._ Without pores.

_Equitant._ Astride, used of conduplicate leaves which enfold each other
in two ranks, as in Iris.

_Erect._ Vertical; upright as respects the plane of the base.

_Erose._ As if gnawed.

_Exalbuminous._ Without albumen.

_Excurrent._ Running out, as a nerve of a leaf projecting beyond the
margin.

_Exfoliating._ Cleaving off in thin layers.

_Exogenous._ Growing by annular layers near the surface; belonging to
the Exogens.

_Exserted._ Projecting beyond an envelope, as stamens from a corolla.

_Extrorse._ Facing outward.


_Falcate._ Scythe-shaped, curved and flat, tapering gradually.

_Farinaceous._ Containing starch, starch-like.

_Farinose._ Covered with a meal-like powder.

_Fascicle._ A close bundle or cluster.

_Fastigiate_ (branches). Erect and near together.

_Ferruginous._ Rust-color.

_Fertile._ Capable of producing fruit, or productive, as a flower having
a pistil, or an anther with pollen.

_Fibrillose._ Furnished or abounding with fine fibres.

_Fibrous._ Composed of or resembling fibres. _Fibrous tissue_, a tissue
formed of elongated thick-walled cells.

_Fibro-vascular._ Composed of woody fibres and ducts.

_Filament._ The part of a stamen which supports the anther; any
thread-like body.

_Filamentous._ Composed of threads.

_Filiferous._ Thread-bearing.

_Filiform._ Thread-shaped; long, slender, and terete.

_Fimbriate._ Fringed.

_Fimbrillate._ Having a minute fringe.

_Fingered._ Digitate.

_Fistular._ Hollow and cylindrical.

_Flaccid._ Without rigidity, lax and weak.

_Fleshy._ Succulent; juicy; of the consistence of flesh.

_Flexuous._ Zigzag; bending alternately in opposite directions.

_Floccose._ Clothed with locks of soft hair or wool.

_Foliaceous._ Leaf-like in texture or appearance.

_foliate._ Having leaves.

_-foliolate._ Having leaflets.

_Follicle._ A fruit consisting of a single carpel, dehiscing by the
ventral suture.

_Follicular._ Like a follicle.

_Forked._ Divided into nearly equal branches.

_Fornicate._ Arched over, as the corona of some Borraginaceae, closing
the throat.

_Free._ Not adnate to other organs.

_Friable._ Easily crumbled.

_Frond._ The leaf of Ferns and some other Cryptogams; also in some
Phaenogams, as in Lemnaceae, where it serves for stem as well as foliage.

_Fruit._ The seed-bearing product of a plant, simple, compound, or
aggregated, of whatever form.

_Fugacious._ Falling or fading very early.

_Funicle._ The free stalk of an ovule or seed.

_Fuscous._ Grayish-brown.

_Fusiform._ Spindle-shaped; swollen in the middle and narrowing toward
each end.


_Galea._ A hooded or helmet-shaped portion of a perianth, as the upper
sepal of Aconitum, and the upper lip of some bilabiate corollas.

_Galeate._ Helmet-shaped; having a galea.

_Gamopetalous._ Having the petals of the corolla more or less united.

_Gamophyllous._ Composed of coalescent leaves, sepals, or petals.

_Gemma._ A bud or body analogous to a bud by which a plant propagates
itself.

_Gemmiparous._ Producing gemmae.

_Geniculate._ Bent abruptly, like a knee.

_Gibbous._ Protuberant or swollen on one side.

_Glabrate._ Somewhat glabrous, or becoming glabrous.

_Glabrous._ Smooth; not rough, pubescent, or hairy.

_Gland._ A secreting surface or structure; any protuberance or appendage
having the appearance of such an organ.

_Glandular._ Bearing glands or of the nature of a gland.

_Glaucous._ Covered or whitened with a bloom.

_Globose, Globular._ Spherical or nearly so.

_Glochidiate._ Barbed at the tip.

_Glomerate._ Compactly clustered.

_Glumaceous._ Furnished with or resembling glumes.

_Glume._ One of the chaffy bracts of the inflorescence of Grasses.

_Granular._ Composed of small grains.

_Gregarious._ Growing in groups or clusters.

_Gymnospermous._ Bearing naked seeds, without an ovary.

_Gynandrous._ Having the stamens borne upon the pistil, as in
Orchidaceae.

_Gynobase._ An enlargement or prolongation of the receptacle bearing the
ovary.


_Habit._ The general appearance of a plant.

_Halberd-shaped._ The same as Hastate.

_Hastate._ Like an arrow-head, but with the basal lobes pointing outward
nearly at right angles.

_Head._ A dense cluster of sessile or nearly sessile flowers on a very
short axis or receptacle.

_Heart-shaped._ Ovate with a sinus at base.

_Herb._ A plant with no persistent woody stem above ground.

_Herbaceous._ Having the characters of an herb; leaf-like in color and
texture.

_Heterocarpous._ Producing more than one kind of fruit.

_Heterogamous._ Bearing two kinds of flowers.

_Hilum._ The scar or point of attachment of the seed.

_Hirsute._ Pubescent with rather coarse or stiff hairs.

_Hispid._ Beset with rigid or bristly hairs or with bristles.

_Hispidulous._ Minutely hispid.

_Hoary._ Grayish-white with a fine close pubescence.

_Homogamous._ Bearing but one kind of flowers.

_Hooded._ Shaped like a hood or cowl.

_Hyaline._ Transparent or translucent.

_Hybrid._ A cross-breed of two species.

_Hypogynous._ Situated on the receptacle beneath the ovary and free from
it and from the calyx; having the petals and stamens so situated.


_Imbricate._ Overlapping, either vertically or spirally, where the lower
piece covers the base of the next higher, or laterally, as in the
aestivation of a calyx or corolla, where at least one piece must be
wholly external and one internal.

_Immersed._ Growing wholly under water; wholly covered by the involucral
leaves, as sometimes the capsule in Hepaticae.

_Incised._ Cut sharply and irregularly, more or less deeply.

_Included._ Not at all protruded from the surrounding envelope.

_Incubous_ (leaf). Having the tip or upper margin overlapping the lower
margin of the leaf above.

_Incumbent_ (cotyledons). Lying with the back of one against the
radicle.

_Indefinite_ (stamens). Inconstant in number or very numerous.

_Indehiscent._ Not opening by valves, etc.; remaining persistently
closed.

_Indigenous._ Native and original to the country.

_Indurated._ Hardened.

_Indusium._ The proper (often shield-shaped) covering of the sorus or
fruit-dot in Ferns.

_Inequilateral._ Unequal-sided.

_Inferior._ Lower or below; outer or anterior. _Inferior ovary_, one
that is adnate to the calyx.

_Inflated._ Bladdery.

_Inflorescence._ The flowering part of a plant, and especially the mode
of its arrangement.

_Infra-_. In composition, below; as _infra-axillary_, below the axil.

_Innovation._ An offshoot from the stem.

_Inserted._ Attached to or growing out of.

_Inter-_ or _intra-_. In composition, between.

_Interfoliaceous._ Between the leaves of a pair as the stipules of many
Rubiaceae.

_Internode._ The portion of a stem between two nodes.

_Intramarginal._ Within and near the margin.

_Introrse._ Turned inward or toward the axis.

_Involucel._ A secondary involucre, as that of an umbellet in
Umbelliferae.

_Involucellate._ Having an involucel.

_Involucral._ Belonging to an involucre.

_Involucrate._ Having an involucre.

_Involucre._ A circle or collection of bracts surrounding a flower
cluster or head, or a single flower.

_Involute._ Rolled inward.

_Irregular_ (flower). Showing inequality in the size, form, or union of
its similar parts.


_Julaceous._ Resembling a catkin in appearance.


_Keel._ A central dorsal ridge, like the keel of a boat; the two
anterior united petals of a papilionaceous flower.

_Kidney-shaped._ Crescentic with the ends broad and rounded; reniform.


_Labiate._ Lipped; belonging to the Labiatae.

_Lacerate._ Irregularly cleft as if torn.

_Laciniate._ Slashed; cut into narrow pointed lobes.

_Lamella._ A thin flat plate or laterally flattened ridge.

_Lanceolate._ Shaped like a lance-head, broadest above the base and
narrowed to the apex.

_Lateral._ Belonging to or borne on the side.

_Lax._ Loose and slender.

_Leaflet._ A single division of a compound leaf.

_Legume._ The fruit of the Leguminosae, formed of a simple pistil and
usually dehiscent by both sutures.

_Leguminous._ Pertaining to a legume or to the Leguminosae.

_Lenticular._ Lentil-shaped; of the shape of a double-convex lens.

_Lepidote._ Beset with small scurfy scales.

_Ligulate._ Furnished with a ligule.

_Ligule._ A strap-shaped corolla, as in the ray-flowers of Compositae; a
thin scarious projection from the summit of the sheath in Grasses.

_Liliaceous._ Lily-like; belonging to the Liliaceae.

_Limb._ The expanded portion of a gamopetalous corolla, above the
throat; the expanded portion of any petal, or of a leaf.

_Linear._ Long and narrow, with parallel margins.

_Lip._ Each of the upper and lower divisions of a bilabiate corolla or
calyx; the peculiar upper petal in Orchids.

_Lobe._ Any segment of an organ, especially if rounded.

_Lobed._ Divided into or bearing lobes.

_-locular._ In composition, having cells.

_Loculicidal._ Dehiscent into the cavity of a cell through the dorsal
suture.

_Lunate._ Of the shape of a half-moon or crescent.

_Lunulate._ Diminutive of Lunate.

_Lyrate._ Pinnatifid with a large and rounded terminal lobe, and the
lower lobes small.


_Macrospore._ The larger kind of spore in Selaginellaceae, etc.

_Marcescent._ Withering but persistent.

_Marginal._ Along or near the edge.

_Marginate._ Furnished with a border peculiar in texture or appearance.

_Mealy._ Farinaceous.

_Membranaceous, Membranous._ Thin and rather soft and more or less
translucent.

_Meniscoid._ Concavo-convex.

_Mericarp._ One of the achene-like carpels of Umbelliferae.

_-merous._ In composition, having parts, as 2-merous, having two parts
of each kind.

_Micropyle._ The point upon the seed at which was the orifice of the
ovule.

_Microspore._ The smaller kind of spore in Selaginellaceae, etc.

_Midrib._ The central or main rib of a leaf.

_Mitriform._ Shaped like a mitre or cap.

_Monadelphous_ (stamens). United by their filaments into a tube or
column.

_Moniliform._ Resembling a string of beads; cylindrical with
contractions at intervals.

_Monocotyledonous._ Having but one cotyledon.

_Monoecious._ With stamens and pistils in separate flowers on the same
plant.

_Mucilaginous._ Slimy; containing mucilage.

_Mucro._ A short and small abrupt tip.

_Mucronate._ Tipped with a mucro.

_Multifid._ Cleft into many lobes or segments.

_Muricate._ Rough with short hard points.

_Muriculate._ Very finely muricate.


_Naked._ Bare; without the usual covering or appendages.

_Nectary._ Any place or organ where nectar is secreted.

_Nectariferous._ Producing nectar.

_Nerve._ A simple or unbranched vein or slender rib.

_Node._ The place upon a stem which normally bears a leaf or whorl of
leaves.

_Nodose._ Knotty or knobby.

_Nucleus._ The germ-cell of the ovule, which by fertilization becomes
the seed; the kernel of a seed.

_Numerous._ Indefinite in number.

_Nut._ A hard indehiscent 1-celled and 1-seeded fruit, though usually
resulting from a compound ovary.

_Nutlet._ A diminutive nut.


_Ob-_. A Latin prefix, usually carrying the idea of inversion.

_Obcompressed._ Compressed dorso-ventrally instead of laterally.

_Obconically._ Inversely conical, having the attachment at the apex.

_Obcordate._ Inverted heart-shaped.

_Oblanceolate._ Lanceolate with the broadest part toward the apex.

_Oblique._ Unequal-sided or slanting.

_Oblong._ Considerably longer than broad and with nearly parallel sides.

_Obovate._ Inverted ovate.

_Obovoid._ Having the form of an inverted egg.

_Obsolete._ Not evident; rudimentary.

_Obtuse._ Blunt or rounded at the end.

_Ocrea._ A leggin-shaped or tubular stipule.

_Ocreate._ Having sheathing stipules.

_Ochroleucous._ Yellowish-white.

_Officinal._ Of the shops; used in medicine or the arts.

_Oospore._ The fertilized nucleus or germ-cell of the archegonium in
Cryptogams, from which the new plant is directly developed.

_Opaque._ Dull; not smooth and shining.

_Operculate._ Furnished with a lid.

_Operculum._ A lid; the upper portion of a circumscissile capsule.

_Orbicular._ Circular.

_Orthotropous_ (ovule or seed). Erect, with the orifice or micropyle at
the apex.

_Oval._, Broadly elliptical.

_Ovary._ The part of the pistil that contains the ovules.

_Ovate._ Egg-shaped; having an outline like that of an egg, with the
broader end downward.

_Ovoid._ A solid with an oval outline.

_Ovule._ The body which after fertilization becomes the seed.

_Ovuliferous._ Bearing ovules.


_Palate._ A rounded projection of the lower lip of a personate corolla,
closing the throat.

_Paleaceous._ Chaffy.

_Palet._ The upper thin chaffy or hyaline bract which with the glume
encloses the flower in Grasses.

_Palmate_ (leaf). Radiately lobed or divided.

_Palmately._ In a palmate manner.

_Panicle._ A loose irregularly compound inflorescence with pedicellate
flowers.

_Panicled, Paniculate._ Borne in a panicle; resembling a panicle.

_Papilionaceous_ (corolla). Having a standard, wings, and keel, as in
the peculiar corolla of many Leguminosae.

_Papillose._ Bearing minute nipple-shaped projections.

_Pappus._ The modified calyx-limb in Compositae, forming a crown of very
various character at the summit of the achene.

_Parasitic._ Growing on and deriving nourishment from another plant.

_Parietal._ Borne on or pertaining to the wall or inner surface of a
capsule.

_Parted._ Cleft nearly but not quite to the base.

_Partial._ Of secondary rank.

_Pectinate._ Pinnatifid with narrow closely set segments; comb-like.

_Pedate._ Palmately divided or parted, with the lateral segments
2-cleft.

_Pedicel._ The support of a single flower.

_Pedicellate._ Borne on a pedicel.

_Peduncle._ A primary flower-stalk, supporting either a cluster or a
solitary flower.

_Pedunculate._ Borne upon a peduncle.

_Peltate._ Shield-formed and attached to the support by the lower
surface.

_Pendulous._ More or less hanging or declined. _Pendulous ovule_, one
that hangs from the side of the cell.

_Perennial._ Lasting year after year.

_Perfect_ (flower). Having both pistil and stamens.

_Perfoliate_ (leaf). Having the stem apparently passing through it.

_Perianth._ The floral envelope, consisting of the calyx and corolla
(when present), whatever their form; in Hepaticae, the inner usually
sac-like involucre of the archegonium.

_Pericarp._ The matured ovary.

_Perigynium._ The inflated sac which encloses the ovary in Carex.

_Perigynous._ Adnate to the perianth, and therefore around the ovary and
not at its base.

_Persistent._ Long-continuous, as a calyx upon the fruit, leaves through
winter, etc.

_Personate_ (corolla). Bilabiate, and the throat closed by a prominent
palate.

_Petal._ A division of the corolla.

_Petaloid._ Colored and resembling a petal.

_Petiolate._ Having a petiole.

_Petiole._ The footstalk of a leaf.

_Phaenogamous._ Having flowers with stamens and pistils and producing
seeds.

_Phyllodium._ A somewhat dilated petiole having the form of and serving
as a leaf-blade.

_Pilose._ Hairy, especially with soft hairs.

_Pinna_ (pl. _Pinnae_). One of the primary divisions of a pinnate or
compoundly pinnate frond or leaf.

_Pinnate_ (leaf). Compound, with the leaflets arranged on each side of a
common petiole.

_Pinnatifid._ Pinnately cleft.

_Pinnule._ A secondary pinna; one of the pinnately disposed divisions of
a pinna.

_Pistil._ The seed-bearing organ of the flower, consisting of the ovary,
stigma, and style when present.

_Pistillate._ Provided with pistils, and, in its more proper sense,
without stamens.

_Pitted._ Marked with small depressions or pits.

_Placenta._ Any part of the interior of the ovary which bears ovules.

_Plane._ Flat; with a flat surface or surfaces.

_Plicate._ Folded into plaits, usually lengthwise.

_Plumose._ Having fine hairs on each side, like the plume of a feather,
as the pappus-bristles of Thistles.

_Plumule._ The bud or growing point of the embryo.

_Pod._ Any dry and dehiscent fruit.

_Pointed._ Acuminate.

_Pollen._ The fecundating grains contained in the anther.

_Polliniferous._ Bearing pollen.

_Pollinium_ (pl. _Pollinia_). A mass of waxy pollen or of coherent
pollen-grains, as in Asclepias and Orchids.

_Polypetalous._ Having separate petals.

_Pome._ A kind of fleshy fruit of which the apple is the type.

_Porose._ Pierced with small holes or pores.

_Posterior._ In an axillary flower, on the side nearest to the axis of
inflorescence.

_Posticous._ On the posterior side; extrorse.

_Praemorse._ Appearing as if bitten off.

_Prickle._ A small spine or more or less slender sharp outgrowth from
the bark or rind.

_Prismatic._ Of the shape of a prism, angular, with flat sides, and of
nearly uniform size throughout.

_Procumbent._ Lying on the ground.

_Proliferous._ Producing offshoots.

_Prostrate._ Lying flat upon the ground.

_Proterogynous._ Having the stigma ripe for the pollen before the
maturity of the anthers of the same flower.

_Prothallus._ A cellular usually flat and thallus-like growth, resulting
from the germination of a spore, upon which are developed sexual organs
or new plants.

_Pseudaxillary._ Terminal but becoming apparently axillary by the growth
of a lateral branch.

_Pseudo-costate._ False-ribbed, as where a marginal vein or rib is
formed by the confluence of the true veins.

_Pteridophytes._ Fern-plants; Ferns and their allies.

_Puberulent._ Minutely pubescent.

_Pubescent._ Covered with hairs, especially if short, soft and downy.

_Punctate._ Dotted with depressions or with translucent internal glands
or colored dots.

_Puncticulate._ Minutely punctate.

_Pungent._ Terminating in a rigid sharp point; acrid.

_Putamen._ The shell of a nut; the bony part of a stone-fruit.


_Quadrate._ Nearly square in form.


_Raceme._ A simple inflorescence of pedicelled flowers upon a common
more or less elongated axis.

_Racemose._ In racemes; or resembling a raceme.

_Radiate._ Spreading from or arranged around a common centre; bearing
ray-flowers.

_Radical._ Belonging to or proceeding from the root or base of the stem
near the ground.

_Radicle._ The portion of the embryo below the cotyledons, more properly
called the caudicle.

_Radiculose._ Bearing rootlets.

_Rameal._ Belonging to a branch.

_Ramification._ Branching.

_Ray._ The branch of an umbel; the marginal flowers of an inflorescence
when distinct from the disk.

_Receptacle._ The more or less expanded or produced portion of an axis
which bears the organs of a flower (the _torus_) or the collected
flowers of a head; any similar structure in Cryptogams.

_Recurved._ Curved downward or backward.

_Reflexed._ Abruptly bent or turned downward.

_Regular._ Uniform in shape or structure.

_Reniform._ Kidney-shaped.

_Repand._ With a slightly uneven and somewhat sinuate margin.

_Resiniferous._ Producing resin.

_Reticulate._ In the form of network; net-veined.

_Retrorse._ Directed back or downward.

_Retuse._ With a shallow notch at a rounded apex.

_Revolute._ Rolled backward from the margins or apex.

_Rhachis._ The axis of a spike or of a compound leaf.

_Rhaphe._ The ridge or adnate funicle which in an anatropous ovule
connects the two ends.

_Rhizome._ Any prostrate or subterranean stem, usually rooting at the
nodes and becoming erect at the apex. Very variable in character, and
including morphologically the tuber, corm, bulb, etc.

_Rhombic, Rhomboidal_, Somewhat lozenge-shaped; obliquely four-sided.

_Rib._ A primary or prominent vein of a leaf.

_Ringent._ Gaping, as the mouth of an open bilabiate corolla.

_Root._ The underground part of a plant which supplies it with
nourishment.

_Rootstock._ Same as Rhizome.

_Rostrate._ Having a beak or spur.

_Rosulate._ In the form of a rosette.

_Rotate_ (corolla). Wheel-shaped; flat and circular in outline.

_Rotund._ Rounded in outline.

_Rudiment._ A very partially developed organ; a vestige.

_Rudimentary._ But slightly developed.

_Rufous._ Reddish brown.

_Rugose._ Wrinkled.

_Runcinate._ Sharply incised, with the segments directed backward.

_Runner._ A filiform or very slender stolon.


_Saccate._ Sac-shaped.

_Sagittate._ Shaped like an arrow-head, the basal lobes directed
downward.

_Salver-shaped_ (corolla). Having a slender tube abruptly expanded into
a flat limb.

_Samara._ An indehiscent winged fruit.

_Scabrous._ Rough to the touch.

_Scalariform_ (vessels). Having transverse markings like the rounds of a
ladder.

_Scape._ A peduncle rising from the ground, naked or without proper
foliage.

_Scapose._ Bearing or resembling a scape.

_Scarious._ Thin, dry, and membranaceous, not green.

_Scorpioid_ (inflorescence). Circinately coiled while in bud.

_Scurf._ Small bran-like scales on the epidermis.

_Scymitar-shaped_ (leaf). Curved with a flat-triangular section, the
straighter edge the thickest.

_Seed._ The ripened ovule, consisting of the embryo and its proper
coats.

_Segment._ One of the parts of a leaf or other like organ that is cleft
or divided.

_Sepal._ A division of a calyx.

_Septicidal_ (capsule). Dehiscing through the partitions and between the
cells.

_Septum._ Any kind of partition.

_Serrate._ Having teeth pointing forward.

_Serrulate._ Finely serrate.

_Sessile._ Without footstalk of any kind.

_Setaceous._ Bristle-like.

_Setose._ Beset with bristles.

_Setulose._ Having minute bristles.

_Sheath._ A tubular envelope, as the lower part of the leaf in Grasses.

_Sheathing._ Enclosing as by a sheath.

_Shrub._ A woody perennial, smaller than a tree.

_Silicle._ A short silique.

_Silique._ The peculiar pod of Cruciferae.

_Silky._ Covered with close-pressed soft and straight pubescence.

_Simple._ Of one piece; not compound.

_Sinuate._ With the outline of the margin strongly wavy.

_Sinus._ The cleft or recess between two lobes.

_Smooth._ Without roughness or pubescence.

_Sorus_ (pl. _Sori_). A heap or cluster, applied to the fruit-dots of
Ferns.

_Spadix._ A spike with a fleshy axis.

_Spathe._ A large bract or pair of bracts enclosing an inflorescence.

_Spatulate._ Gradually narrowed downward from a rounded summit.

_Spicate._ Arranged in or resembling a spike.

_Spiciform._ Spike-like.

_Spike._ A form of simple inflorescence with the flowers sessile or
nearly so upon a more or less elongated common axis.

_Spikelet._ A small or secondary spike.

_Spindle-shaped._ Same as Fusiform.

_Spine._ A sharp woody or rigid outgrowth from the stem.

_Spinose._ Spine-like, or having spines.

_Sporangium._ A spore-case.

_Spore._ The reproductive organ in Cryptogams which corresponds to a
seed.

_Sporocarp._ The fruit-cases of certain Cryptogams containing sporangia
or spores.

_Spur._ A hollow sac-like or tubular extension of some part of a
blossom, usually nectariferous.

_Squamula._ A reduced scale, as the hypogynous scales in Grasses.

_Squarrose._ Having spreading and projecting processes, such as the tips
of involucral scales.

_Squarrulose._ Diminutively squarrose.

_Stamen._ One of the pollen-bearing or fertilizing organs of the flower.

_Staminodium._ A sterile stamen, or any structure without anther
corresponding to a stamen.

_Standard._ The upper dilated petal of a papilionaceous corolla.

_Stellate, Stelliform._ Star-shaped.

_Stem._ The main ascending axis of a plant.

_Sterile._ Unproductive, as a flower without pistil, or stamen without
an anther.

_Stigma._ That part of a pistil through which fertilization by the
pollen is effected.

_Stigmatic._ Belonging to or characteristic of the stigma.

_Stipe._ The stalk-like support of a pistil; the leaf-stalk of a Fern.

_Stipitate._ Having a stipe.

_Stipular._ Belonging to stipules.

_Stipulate._ Having stipules.

_Stipule._ An appendage at the base of a petiole or on each side of its
insertion.

_Stolon._ A runner, or any basal branch that is disposed to root.

_Stoloniferous._ Producing stolons.

_Stoma_ (pl. _Stomata_). An orifice in the epidermis of a leaf
communicating with internal air-cavities.

_Striate._ Marked with fine longitudinal lines or ridges.

_Strict._ Very straight and upright.

_Strigose._ Beset with appressed sharp straight and stiff hairs.

_Strobile._ An inflorescence marked by imbricated bracts or scales, as
in the Hop and Pine-cone.

_Strophiole._ An appendage at the hilum of certain seeds.

_Style._ The usually attenuated portion of the pistil connecting the
stigma and ovary.

_Stylopodium._ A disk-like expansion at the base of a style, as in
Umbelliferae.

_Sub_-. A Latin prefix, usually signifying somewhat or slightly.

_Subulate._ Awl-shaped.

_Succubous_ (leaves). Having the upper margin of a leaf covered by the
base of the one above.

_Succulent._ Juicy; fleshy.

_Suffrutescent._ Slightly or obscurely shrubby.

_Suffruticose._ Very low and woody; diminutively shrubby.

_Sulcate._ Grooved or furrowed.

_Superior_ (ovary). Free from the calyx.

_Suspended_ (ovule). Hanging from the apex of the cell.

_Suture._ A line of dehiscence.

_Symmetrical_ (flower). Regular as to the number of its parts; having
the same number of parts in each circle.

_Synonym._ A superseded or unused name.


_Tail._ Any slender terminal prolongation.

_Terete._ Having a circular transverse section.

_Terminal._ At or belonging to the apex.

_Ternary._ Consisting of three.

_Ternate._ In threes.

_Tetradynamous._ Having four long and two shorter stamens.

_Tetragonal._ Four-angled.

_Thalamiflorous._ Having the parts of the flower hypogynous.

_Thalloid, Thallose._ Resembling a thallus.

_Thallus._ In Cryptogams, a cellular expansion taking the place of stem
and foliage.

_Throat._ The orifice of a gamopetalous corolla or calyx; the part
between the proper tube and the limb.

_Thyrse._ A contracted or ovate and usually compact panicle.

_Thyrsoid._ Resembling a thyrse.

_Tomentose._ Densely pubescent with matted wool.

_Tooth._ Any small marginal lobe.

_Torose._ Cylindrical with contractions at intervals.

_Torulose._ Diminutive of Torose.

_Torus._ The receptacle of a flower.

_Transverse._ Across; in a right and left direction.

_Tri-._ In composition, three or thrice.

_Triandrous._ Having three stamens.

_Trifoliolate._ Having three leaflets.

_Trigonous._ Three-angled.

_Trimorphous._ Occurring under three forms.

_Triquetrous._ Having three salient angles, the sides concave or
channelled.

_Truncate._ Ending abruptly, as if cut off transversely.

_Tuber._ A thickened and short subterranean branch, having numerous buds
or eyes.

_Tubercle._ A small tuber or tuber-like body.

_Tuberiferous._ Bearing tubers.

_Tuberous._ Having the character of a tuber; tuber-like in appearance.

_Tumid._ Swollen.

_Tunicated._ Having concentric coats, as an onion.

_Turbinate._ Top-shaped; inversely conical.

_Twining._ Winding spirally about a support.


_Umbel._ An inflorescence in which a cluster of peduncles or pedicels
spring from the same point.

_Umbellate._ In or like an umbel.

_Umbellet._ A secondary umbel.

_Umbonate._ Bearing a stout projection in the centre; bossed.

_Underleaves._ The small accessory leaves or stipules on the under side
of the stem in Hepaticae.

_Undulate._ With a wavy surface; repand.

_Unguiculate._ Contracted at base into a claw.

_Uni-._ In composition, one.

_Unisexual._ Of one sex, either staminate or pistillate only.

_Urceolate._ Hollow and cylindrical or ovoid, and contracted at or below
the mouth, like an urn.

_Utricle._ A small bladdery 1-seeded fruit; any small bladder-like body.


_Valvate._ Opening by valves, as a capsule; in aestivation, meeting by
the edges without overlapping.

_Valve._ One of the pieces into which a capsule splits.

_Vascular._ Furnished with vessels or ducts.

_Veins._ Threads of fibro-vascular tissue in a leaf or other organ,
especially those which branch (as distinguished from nerves).

_Ventral._ Belonging to the anterior or inner face of an organ; the
opposite of dorsal.

_Ventricose._ Swelling unequally, or inflated on one side.

_Vernation._ The arrangement of leaves in the bud.

_Verrucose._ Covered with wart-like elevations.

_Versatile_ (anther). Attached near the middle and turning freely on its
support.

_Vertical._ Perpendicular to the horizon; longitudinal.

_Verticillate._ Disposed in a whorl.

_Vesicle._ A small bladder or air-cavity.

_Vesicular, Vesiculose._ Composed of or covered with vesicles.

_Villous._ Bearing long and soft hairs.

_Virgate._ Wand-shaped; slender, straight and erect.

_Viscid._ Glutinous; sticky.


_Whorl._ An arrangement of leaves, etc., in a circle round the stem.

_Wing._ Any membranous or thin expansion bordering or surrounding an
organ; the lateral petal of a papilionaceous corolla.

_Woolly._ Clothed with long and tortuous or matted hairs.




INDEX.

[SYNONYMS IN ITALICS.]


Abele, 486

Abies, _492_, 492

Abronia, 425

Abutilon, 99

Acacia, Rose, 134

Acalypha, 459

ACANTHACEAE, 399

Acer, 117

Acerates, _339_, 343

Achillea, 289

Acnida, 429

Aconitum (Aconite), 46
  Winter, 45

Acorus, 551

Actaea, 47

Actinella, 287

Actinomeris, 281, _281_

Adam-and-Eve, 499

Adam's Needle, 524

Adder's-mouth, 498

Adder's-tongue, 695
  Yellow, 528

Adenocaulon, 269

Adiantum, 680

Adlumia, 60

Adonis, 40

Adoxa, 216

AEgopodium, 208

AEschynomene, 137

AEsculus, 115

AEthusa, 205

Agave, 516

Agrimonia (Agrimony), 161

Agropyrum, 671

_Agrostemma_, 85

Agrostis, 647

Ailanthus, 107

Aira, 652, _652_

Ajuga, 406

Alchemilla, 161

Alder, 472
  Black, 109
  White, 322

Aletris, 512

Alfalfa, 129

Alisma, 554

ALISMACEAE, 553

Alligator Pear, 446

Allium, 521, _522_

_Allosorus_, 683

Allspice, Carolina, 167
  Wild, 447

Alnus, 472

Aloe, American, 516
  False, 516

Alopecurus, 645

Althaea, 97

Alum-root, 171

Alyssum, 68

AMARANTACEAE, 427

Amarantus (Amaranth), 427

AMARYLLIDACEAE, 515

_Amaryllis_, 735

Ambrosia, 273

Amelanchier, 166

Amianthium, 535

Ammannia, _184_, 185, _185_

Ammophila, _651_, 651

Amorpha, 131

Ampelopsis, 115

Amphiachyris, 243

Amphicarpaea, 146

Amphicarpum, 634

Amsonia, 337

ANACARDIACEAE, 118

_Anacharis_, 496

Anagallis, 331

Anaphalis, 268

Andromeda, 316

Andropogon, 637, _638_

Androsace, 329

Androstephium, 522

Anemone, 36
  Rue, 39

Anemonella, 38

Aneura, 725

Angelica, 201

Angelica-tree, 210

ANONACEAE, 50

Antennaria, 267, _268_

Anthemis, 288

Anthoceros, 726

ANTHOCEROTACEAE, 726

Anthoxanthum, 639

Anthriscus, 206

Antirrhinum, 380

Anychia, 426

Apera, 649

Aphanostephus, 253

Aphyllon, 394

_Apiastrum_, 209

Apios, 144

_Apium_, 209

Aplectrum, 499

Aplopappus, 245

APOCYNACEAE, 337

Apocynum, 338

Apple, 164
  Balsam, 195
  Crab, 164
  May, 53
  Thorn, 377

Apple-of-Peru, 376

Aquilegia, 45

Arabis, 65, _71, 72_

ARACEAE, 548

Aralia, 212

ARALIACEAE, 212

Arbor-vitae, 493

Arbutus, Trailing, 315

Arceuthobium, 450

_Archangelica_, 201, 202, 205

_Archemora_, 202

Arctium, 295

Arctostaphylos, 315

Arenaria, 85, 733

Arethusa, 504

Argemone, 59, 733

Argythamnia, 459

Arisaema, 549

Aristida, 639

Aristolochia, 445

ARISTOLOCHIACEAE, 444

Arnica, 292

Arrhenatherum, 651

Arrow-grass, 557

Arrowhead, 554

Arrow-wood, 217

Artemisia, 290

Artichoke, Jerusalem, 277

_Arum_, 550
  Arrow, 549
  Dragon, 549
  Water, 550

Arundinaria, 674

Arundo, 658

Asarabacca, 444

Asarum, 444, 734

ASCLEPIADACEAE, 338

Asclepias, 339

Asclepiodora, 339

Ascyrum, 92

Ash, 335
  Mountain, 164
  Prickly, 106

Asparagus, 525

Aspen, 486

Asperugo, 361

Asphodel, Bog, 532
  False, 532

Aspidium, 686

Asplenium, 683

Asprella, 674

Aster, 255
  acuminatus, 264

Aster _aestivus_, 262
  amethystinus, 260
  angustus, 264
  anomalus, 258
  azureus, 258
  _carneus_, 261
  concinnus, 260
  concolor, 258
  cordifolius, 259
  corymbosus, 255
  diffusus, 261
  Drummondii, 259
  dumosus, 260
  ericoides, 260
  Fendleri, 257
  _flexuosus_, 264
  gracilis, 256
  grandiflorus, 257
  Herveyi, 256
  infirmus, 263
  junceus, 262
  laevis, 259
  linariifolius, 263
  Lindleyanus, 259
  _linifolius_, 264
  longifolius, 262, _262_
  macrophyllus, 256
  _miser_, 261
  modestus, 257
  multiflorus, 260
  nemoralis, 264
  Novae Angliae, 257
  Novi Belgii, 262
  oblongifolius, 257
  paludosus, 255
  paniculatus, 261
  patens, 258
  patulus, 262
  polyphyllus, 260
  prenanthoides, 263
  ptarmicoides, 264
  puniceus, 263
  radula, 256
  sagittifolius, 259
  salicifolius, 261
  sericeus, 257
  Shortii, 258
  _simplex_, 261
  spectabilis, 256
  subulatus, 264
  surculosus, 256
  tardiflorus, 262
  tenuifolius, _261_, 264
  Tradescanti, _261_, 261
  turbinelius, 259
  umbellatus, 263
  undulatus, 258
  vimineus, 260
  virgatus, 259

Aster, Golden, 244
  White-topped, 254

Asterella, 729

Astilbe, 169

Astragalus, 134

Atamasco Lily, 516

Atriplex, 433

_Atropis_, 668

Avena, 653

Avens, 156

Awlwort, 69

_Azalea_, 320
  Alpine, 322

Azolla, 701


Baccharis, 266

Baked-apple Berry, 154

Baldwinia, 285

Ballota, 420

Balm, 412
  Bee, 414
  Horse, 406

Balm-of-Gilead, 487

Balsam, 105

Balsam Poplar, 487

Baneberry, 47

Baptisia, 125

Barbarea, 70

Barberry, 52

Barley, 672

Bartonia, 352

Bartsia, 392

Basil, 409, 412

Bass-wood, 101

Bay, Loblolly, 96
  Red, 447
  Rose, 320

Bayberry, 469

Bazzania, 710

Bean, Indian, 399
  Kidney, 144
  Sacred, 55
  Wild, 144

Bearberry, 315

Beard-tongue, 381

Beckmannia, 628

Bedstraw, 225

Beech, 479
  Blue, 474
  Water, 474

Beech-drops, 394
  False, 326

Beggar-lice, 362

Beggar-ticks, 284

Belamcanda, 515

Bellflower, 308

Bellis, 253

Bellwort, 527

Benjamin-bush, 447

BERBERIDACEAE, 52

Berberis, 52

Berchemia, 111

Bergamot, Wild, 414

Berlandiera, 271

Berula, 207

Betony, Wood, 392

Betula, 471

Bidens, 284

Bigelovia, 245

Bignonia, 398

BIGNONIACEAE, 398

Bilberry, 312

Bilsted, 180

Bindweed, 369
  Black, 442

Birch, 471

Birthroot, 530

Birthwort, 445

Bishop's-cap, 171

Bishop-weed, Mock, 209

Bitter-nut, 469

Bittersweet, 373
  Climbing or Shrubby, 110

Bitter-weed, 273

Blackberry, 155

Bladder Ketmia, 100

Bladdernut, 118

Bladderwort, 395

Blasia, 724

Blazing-star, 242, 532

Blepharostoma, 711

_Blepharozia_, 709

Blephilia, 415

_Bletia_, 501

Blite, Coast, 432

Blite, Sea, 435
  Strawberry, 432

_Blitum_, 432, 433

Bloodroot, 58

Bloodwort Family, 512

Bluebell, 364

Blueberry, 312

Bluebottle, 297

Blue-curls, 405

Blue-hearts, 388

Blue-joint, 650, 671

Blue-stem, 671

Blue-tangle, 311

Bluets, 223

Blue-weed, 367

Boehmeria, 466

Bois d'Arc, 464

Boltonia, 253

_Bonamia_, 370

Boneset, 241

Borage Family, 360

BORRAGINACEAE, 360

Borrichia, 277

Botrychium, 693

Bouncing Bet, 83

Bouteloua, 655

Bowman's-root, 154

Boxberry, 316

Box-elder, 118

Boykinia, 170

Brachychaeta, 253

Brachyelytrum, 644

Bracken, 681

Brake, 681
  Cliff, 682
  Rock, 682

Bramble, 154

Brasenia, 55

Brassica, 72

Breweria, 370

Brickellia, 241

Briza, 663

_Brizopyrum_, 663

BROMELIACEAE, 511

Bromus, 669

Brooklime, American, 386

Brookweed, 332

Broom, 127

Broom-rape, 395
  Naked, 394

Brunella, 418

Brunnichia, 443

Bryanthus, 318

Buchloe, 657

Buchnera, 388

Buckbean, 353

Buckeye, 115

Buckthorn, 111, 332

Buckwheat, 443
  Climbing False, 443

Buda, 89

Buffalo-berry, 449

Buffalo-nut, 451

Bugbane, 47
  False, 39

Bugleweed, 408

Bugloss, 367

Bugseed, 434

Bulrush, 578

Bumelia, 332

Bunchberry, 214

Bunch-flower, 533

Bupleurum, 206

Burdock, 295

Burmannia, 497

BURMANNIACEAE, 496

Burnet, 161

Burning-bush, 110

Bur-reed, 547

Butter and eggs, 379

Buttercup, 40

Butterfly-weed, 340

Butternut, 467

Butterweed, 265, 293

Butterwort, 397

Button-bush, 224

Buttonweed, 225

Buttonwood, 464


Cabbage, Skunk, 550

Cabomba, 55

Cacalia, 294

CACTACEAE, 196

Cactus Family, 196

Cakile, 74

_Caladium_, 550

Calamagrostis, 649, 651

Calamint, 411

Calamintha, 411

Calamus, 557

Calico-bush, 319

Calla, 550

Callicarpa, 403

Callirrhoe, 98

Callitriche, 182

Calluna, 318

Calophanes, 400

Calopogon, 504

Caltha, 44

CALYCANTHACEAE, 167

Calycanthus, 167

Calycocarpum, 51

_Calypogeia_, 713

Calypso, 499

_Calystegia_, 369, 370

Camassia, 523

Camelina, 69

Camellia Family, 95

Campanula, 308

CAMPANULACEAE, 307

Campion, 83

Camptosorus, 685

Cancer-root, 394

Cane, 674

Cannabis, 463

Caper Family, 74

CAPPARIDACEAE, 74

CAPRIFOLIACEAE, 216

Capsella, 73

Caraway, 208

Cardamine, 64

Cardinal-flower, 305

Carduus, 296

Carex, 587
  acutiformis, 598
  adusta, 621, _621_
  aestivalis, 604
  _alata_, 622
  alopecoidea, 615
  alpina, 598
  _angustata_, 600
  _aperta_, 600
  aquatilis, 600
  _arcta_, 619
  arctata, 603
  arenaria, 616
  _arida_, 620
  _aristata_, 598
  atrata, 599
  aurea, 610
  Backii, 613
  _Barrattii_, 602
  _Bebbii_, 620
  _Boottiana_, 611
  bromoides, 619
  bullata, 594
  _Buxbaumii_, 599
  canescens, 618
  capillaris, 603
  capitata, 617
  Careyana, 608
  castanea, 603
  cephaloidea, 617
  cephalophora, 617
  chordorhiza, 614
  communis, 612
  _comosa_, 596
  conjuncta, 614
  conoidea, 607
  Crawei, 606
  crinita, 601
  _cristata_, 620
  Crus-corvi, 614
  Davisii, 605
  debilis, 604, _604_
  decomposita, 614
  deflexa, 611
  Deweyana, 619
  digitalis, 608
  _disticha_, 615
  eburnea, 610
  echinata, 618
  _Emmonsii_, 611
  exilis, 617
  extensa, 606
  filiformis, 597
  _flaccosperma_, 605
  flava, 606
  flexilis, 603
  foenea, 621, _622_
  folliculata, 592
  formosa, 605
  Fraseri, 613
  fusca, 599
  gigantea, 593
  _glabra_, 604
  glaucodea, 605
  gracillima, 604
  grandis, 593
  granularis, 605
  gravida, 615
  Grayii, 592
  grisea, 605
  gynandra, 601
  gynocrates, 617
  hirta, 597
  Hitchcockiana, 607
  Houghtonii, 597
  hystricina, 596
  intumescens, 592
  irrigua, 602
  Jamesii, 613
  _Knieskernii_, 603
  _lagopodioides_, 620
  lanuginosa, 597
  laxiculmis, 608
  laxiflora, 607
  lenticularis, 600
  leporina, 622
  limosa, 602
  _limula_, 599
  littoralis, 602
  livida, 610
  longirostris, 603
  _lupuliformis_, 593
  lupulina, 593
  lurida, _593_, 595
  Magellanica, 602
  maritima, 601
  _Meadii_, 609
  Michauxiana, 592
  _miliacea_, 601
  miliaris, 593
  _mirabilis_, 622
  monile, 594
  Muhlenbergii, 617
  muricata, 616
  Muskingumensis, 620
  nigro-marginata, 613
  Norvegica, 619
  Novae-Angiae, _611_, 612
  _OEderi_, 606
  oligocarpa, 607
  oligosperma, 593
  _Olneyi_, 595
  pallescens, 606
  _paludosa_, 598
  panicea, 609
  pauciflora, 592
  pedunculata, 610
  Pennsylvanica, 612
  picta, 610
  _pinguis_, 621
  plantaginea, 609
  platyphylla, 608
  polymorpha, 609
  polytrichoides, 613
  praecox, 612
  prasina, 601
  Pseudo-Cyperus, 596
  ptychocarpa, 608
  pubescens, 613
  _pulla_, 594
  rariflora, 602
  _retrocurva_, 608
  _retroflexa_, 616
  retrorsa, 598
  Richardsoni, 610
  _rigida_, 599
  riparia, 598
  rosea, 616
  _rostrata_, 592
  _rotundata_, 593
  salina, 601
  Saltuensis, 609
  Sartwellii, 615
  scabrata, 597
  Schweinitzii, 595
  scirpoidea, 611
  _scirpoides_, 618
  scoparia, 620
  Shortiana, 596
  siccata, 619
  silicea, 621
  sparganioides, 616
  squarrosa, 596
  _stellulata_, 619
  stenolepis, 596
  stenophylla, 614
  _Steudelii_, 613
  stipata, 614
  straminea, 621
  striata, 597
  stricta, 599
  subulata, 592
  _Sullivantii_, 605
  sychnocephala, 622
  tenella, 616
  tentaculata, 595
  tenuiflora, 619
  teretiuscula, 614
  tetanica, 609
  _Torreyi_, 606
  torta, 600
  tribuloides, 620
  triceps, 602
  trichocarpa, 698
  trisperma, 619
Carex Tuckermani, 594
  umbellata, 612
  utriculata, 594
  _vaginata_, 609
  varia, 611, _612_
  _Vaseyi_, 594
  venusta, 604
  vestita, 597
  virescens, 602
  _vitilis_, 618
  vulgaris, 599
  vulpinoidea, 615
  Willdenovii, 613
  _Woodii_, 609

Carnation, 83

Carpetweed, 198

Carpinus, 474

Carrion-flower, 520

Carrot, 201

Carum, 208

Carya, 468

CARYOPHYLLACEAE, 82

Cashew Family, 118

Cassandra, 317

Cassena, 108

Cassia, 147

Cassiope, 318

Castanea, 479

Castelleia, 390

Castor-oil Plant, 460

Catalpa, 399

Cat-brier, 519

Catchfly, 83

Catgut, 133

Catmint, 416

Catnip, 416

Cat-tail Flag, 547

Caucalis, 201

Caulophyllum, 52

Ceanothus, 112

Cedar, Red, 494
  White, 493, 494

Cedronella, 416

Celandine, 58

CELASTRACEAE, 109

Celastrus, 110

Celtis, 463, 734

Cenchrus, 634

Centaurea, 297

Centaury, 347

Centrosema, 145

Centunculus, 332

Cephaianthus, 234

Cephalozia, 711

Cerastium, 88

CERATOPHYLLACEAE, 488

Ceratophyllum, 488

Cercis, 147

_Cesia_, 723

Chaerophyllum, _206_, 209

Chaetopappa, 253

Chaffseed, 391

Chaffweed, 332

Chamaecyparis, 493

Chamaelirium, 531

Chamaesaracha, 374

Chamomile, 288
  Wild, 289

Charlock, 72, 74

Cheat, 670

Checkerberry, 316

Cheilanthes, 681

Chelidonium, 58

Chelone, 381

CHENOPODIACEAE, 430

Chenopodium, 431

Cherry, 151

Cherry, Ground, 375
  Sand, 152

Chervil, 206

Chess, 670

Chestnut, 479
  Horse, 115

Chickweed, 86
  Forked, 426
  Indian, 198
  Jagged, 87
  Mouse-ear, 88

Chicory, 298

Chiloscyphus, 716

Chimaphila,   322

Chinquapin, 479
  Water, 55

Chiogenes, 314

Chionanthus, 337

Chives, 522

Chokeberry, 164

Chondrilla, 303

Chrysanthemum, 289

Chrysogonum, 271

Chrysopogon, 638

Chrysopsis, 244

Chrysosplenium, 172

Cichorium, 298

Cicuta, 208

Cimicifuga, 47

Cinna, 649

Cinquefoil, 158

Circaea, 193

_Cirsium_, 295, 296

Cissus, 114

CISTACEAE, 76

Cladium, 586

Cladothrix, 734

Cladrastis, 126

Clary, 413

Claytonia, 91, 733

Clear-weed, 465

Cleavers, 225

Clematis, 35

Cleome, 75, 733

Cleomella, 75

Clethra, 322

Clintonia, 527

Clitoria, 145

Clotbur, 274

Cloudberry, 154

Clover, 128
  Bush, 141
  Prairie, 132
  Sweet, 129

Club-moss, 695, 697

Cnicus, 295, _297_

Cocculus, 51

_Cochlearia_, 70

Cockle, 85

Cocklebur, 274

Coelopleurum, 205

Coffee, Wild, 219

Coffee-tree, Kentucky, 148

Cohosh, 47, 52

Colic-root, 512

Collinsia, 380

Collinsonia, 406

_Collomia_, 356

Coltsfoot, 291
  Sweet, 292

Columbine, 45

Columbo, American, 352

Comandra, 450

Comfrey, 367
  Wild, 362

Commelina, 538

COMMELINACEAE, 538

Compass-plant, 270

COMPOSITAE, 230

_Comptonia_, 470

Cone-flower, 270
  Purple, 275

CONIFERAE, 489

Conioselinum, 202

Conium, 209

Conobea, 383

Conocephalus, 728

Conopholis, 394

Convallaria, 524

CONVOLVULACEAE, 367

Convolvulus, 369

Coptis, 45

Coral-berry, 220

Coral-root, 500

Corallorhiza, 500

Corema, 488

Coreopsis, 281

Corispermum, 434

CORNACEAE, 213

Cornel, 214

Corn-salad, 228

Cornus, 214

Coronilla, 138

Corpse-plant, 325

Corydalis, 61

Corylus, 473

Cottonwood, 487

Cowberry, 314

Cowslip, 321
  American, 328
  Virginian, 364

Cow-wheat, 393

Crab-apple, 164

Cranberry, 312, 314

Cranberry-tree, 217

Cranesbill, 103

Crantzia, 205

CRASSULACEAE, 170

Crataegus, 165

Cress, Bitter, 64
  Mouse-ear, 72
  Penny, 73
  Rock, 65
  Spring, 65
  Swine, 74
  Water, 69
  Winter, 70

Crepis, 300

Cross-vine, 398

Crotalaria, 127

Croton, 457

Crotonopsis, 458

Crowberry, 487
  Broom, 488

Crowfoot, 40

Crown-beard, 280

CRUCIFERAE, 61

_Crypsis_, 640

Cryptogramme, 682

Cryptotaenia, 207

Ctenium, 654

Cuckoo-flower, 65

Cucumber, 194
  Bur, 195

Cucumber-root, Indian 529

Cucumber-tree, 49

Cucurbita, 196

CUCURBITACEAE, 194

Cudweed, 268

Culver's-physic, 386

Culver's-root, 386

Cunila, 409

Cuphea, 186

Cup-plant, 271

_Cupressus_, 493

Cupseed, 51

CUPULIFERAE, 470

Currant, 174
  Indian, 220

Cuscuta, 369

Custard-apple Family, 50

Cyclanthera, 196

Cycloloma, 431

Cymopterus, 203

Cynodon, 654

Cynoglossum, 362, _363_

_Cynthia_, 298

CYPERACEAE, 567

Cyperus, 569

Cypress, 493

Cypress-vine, 368

Cypripedium, 510

Cystopteris, 689

Cytisus, 127


Dactylis, 663

_Dactyloctenium_, 656

Dahoon Holly, 108

Daisy, 253
  Ox-eye, 289
  White, 289

Dalea, 132

Dalibarda, 156

Dame's-violet, 71

Dandelion, 303
  Dwarf, 297
  Fall, 299
  False, 303

Dangleberry, 311

Danthonia, 654

Daphne, 448

Darnel, 671

Datura, 377

Daucus, 201

Day-flower, 538

Dead-nettle, 420

Decodon, 186

Decumaria, 173

Deerberry, 312

Delphinium, 46

Dentaria, 64

Deschampsia, 652

Desmanthus, 149

Desmodium, 138

Devil's-bit, 531

Dewberry, 155

_Deyeuxia_, 650

Dianthera, 401

Dianthus, 83

Diapensia, 326

DIAPENSIACEAE, 326

Diarrhena, 662

Dicentra, 60

Dichondra, 368

Dichromena, 577

Dicksonia, 691

Didiplis, 184

Diervilla, 222

Diodia, 225

Dionaea, 179

Dioscorea, 517

DIOSCOREACEAE, 517

Diospyros, 333

Diphylleia, 53

Diplachne, 658

_Diplopappus_, 263

Diplophyllum, 715

DIPSACEAE, 229

Dipsacus, 229

Dirca, 448

Discopleura, 209

Disporum, 526

Distichus, 663, 735

Dittany, 409

Dock, 437
  Prairie, 270
  Spatter, 56

Dockmackie, 218

Dodder, 370

Dodecatheon, 328

Dogbane, 338

Dogwood, 214

Draba, 67

Dracocephalum, 416

Dragon-head, 416
  False, 419

Dragon-root, 549

Drosera, 178

DROSERACEAE, 178

Dryas, 157

Duck's-meat, 552

Duckweed, 552

Dulichium, 573

Dumortiera, 729

Dutchman's-breeches, 60

Dutchman's-pipe, 445

_Duvalia_, 729

Dyer's-weed, 75

Dysodia, 288


Eatonia, 659

EBENACEAE, 333

Ebony Family, 333

Echinacea, 275

Echinocystis, 195

Echinodorus, 556

Echinospermum, 362

Echium, 367

Eclipta, 274

Eel-grass, 496, 565

Eglantine, 164

ELAEAGNACEAE, 448

Elaeagnus, 448

ELATINACEAE, 91

Elatine, 91

Elder, 217
  Box, 118
  Marsh, 272
  Wild, 213

Elecampane, 269

Eleocharis, 573, 735

Elephantopus, 237

Elephant's-foot, 237

Eleusine, 656

Ellisia, 358

Elm, 462

Elodea, 495

Elodes, 95

Elymus, 673

EMPETRACEAE, 487

Empetrum, 487

Enchanter's Nightshade, 193

Engelmannia, 272

Enslenia, 343

Epigaea, 315

Epilobium, 188

Epipactis, 504

Epiphegus, 394

EQUISETACEAE, 675

Equisetum, 676

Eragrostis, 660

Eranthis, 45

Erechtites, 294

Erianthus, 636

Erica, 318

ERICACEAE, 309

Erigenia, 210

Erigeron, 264

ERIOCAULEAE, 566

Eriocaulon, 566

Eriochloa, 629

Eriogonum, 436, 734

Eriophorum, 582

Erodium, 104

Eryngium, 211

Eryngo, 211

Erysimum, 71

Erythraea, 347

Erythronium, 528

Eulophus, 206

Euonymus, 110

Eupatorium, 239

Euphorbia, 452

EUPHORBIACEAE, 451

Euphrasia, 391

Eustoma, 349

Evax, 267

Evening Primrose Family, 186

Everlasting, 267, 268

Evolvulus, 370

Eyebright, 391


Fagopyrum, 443

Fagus, 479

False-mermaid, 104

Farkleberry, 312

Featherfoil, 328

_Fedia_, 229

_Fegatella_, 729

Fennel, 205
  Dog, 239

Fennel-flower, 48

Fern, Beech, 686
  Bladder, 689
  Chain, 683
  Christmas, 689
  Cinnamon, 693
  Climbing, 692
  Cloak, 680
  Filmy, 692
  Flowering, 693
  Lip, 681
  Sensitive, 690
  Shield, 686
  Wood, 686

Ferns, 678

Fescue, 668
  Sheep's, 669

Festuca, _666_, 668

Fever-bush, 447

Feverfew, 289

Feverwort, 219

FICOIDEAE, 198

Fig, Indian, 197

Figwort, 380

Filago, 267

Filbert, 473

FILICES, 678

Fimbriaria, 728

Fimbristylis, 577

Fiorin, 647

Fir, 492

Fire-weed, 188, 294

Five-finger, 158

Flag, 513
  Cat-tail, 547
  Sweet, 551

Flax, 101

Fleabane, 264
  Marsh, 266

Floating-heart, 353

Floerkea, 104

Flower-de-luce, 513

Fly-poison, 535

Foeniculum, 205

Fog-fruit, 402

Forestiera, 336

Forget-me-not, 364

_Forsteronia_, 338

Fossombronia, 723

Fothergilla, 179

Four-o'clock, 425

Foxberry, 314

Foxglove, False, 389
  Mullein, 338

Foxtail, 634

Fragaria, 158

_Frangula_, 112

Frasera, 352

Fraxinus, 335

Fringe-tree, 337

Froelichia, 430

Frog's-bit, American 496

Frost-weed, 76

Frullania, 704, _706_

Fuirena, 583

Fumaria, 61

FUMARIACEAE, 59

Fumitory, 61
  Climbing, 66


Gaillardia, 288

Galactia, 146

Galax, 327

Gale, Sweet, 469

Galeopsis, 421

Galingale, 569

Galinsoga, 234, 286

Galium, 225

Gall-of-the-earth 301

Garget, 436

Garlic, 521

Gaultheria, 315

Gaura, 192

Gaylussacia, 311

Gelsemium, 345

Genisca, 127

Gentian, 349
  Horse, 219
  Spurred, 352

Gentiana, 349

GENTIANACEAE, 346

Geocalyx, 715

GERANIACEAE, 102

Geranium, 103
  Feather, 433

Gerardia, 388

Germander, 406

Geum, 156

Gilia, 356

Gillenia, 154

Gill-over-the-ground, 416

Ginger, Wild, 444

Ginseng, 212

Glasswort, 434

Glaucium, 58

Glaux, 331

Gleditschia, 148

Globe-flower, 45

Glyceria, 666, _668_

Glycyrrhiza, 137

Gnaphalium, 268

Goat's-beard 153, 298
  False, 169

Goat's-rue, 133

Golden-club, 551

Goldenrod, 246
  False, 253
  Rayless, 245

Goldthread, 45

Gonolobus, 344

Good-King-Henry 432

Goodyera, 503

Gooseberry, 174

Goosefoot, 431

Gordonia, 93

Gourd Family, 194

Gout-weed, 208

GRAMINEAE, 623

Grape, 113

Grape Hyacinth, 523

Graphephorum, 666

Grass Family, 623

Grass, Barnyard 633
  Beak, 584
  Bear, 524
  Beard 636, 637, 648
  Bengal, 634
  Bent, 647, 648, 649
  Bermuda, 654
  Blue, English, 664
  Blue, Kentucky, 665
  Blue-eyed, 515
  Blue-joint, 650, 671
  Blue-stem, 671
  Bottle, 634
  Bottle-brush, 674
  Brome, 669
  Buffalo, 657
  Bur, 634
  Canary, 638
  Catchfly, 636
  Cat's-tail, 644
  Cord, 627
  Cotton, 582
  Couch, 671
  Crab, 630, 656
  Cut, Rice, 636
  Deer, 183
  Ditch, 564
  Dog's-tail, 656
  Drop seed, 643, 645
  Eel, 496, 565
  Feather, 641
  Fescue, 668
  Finger, 630
  Foxtail, 634, 645
  Gama, 635
  Goose, 226, 668
  Hair, 644, 648, 652
  Hedgehog, 634
  Herds, 645, 647
  Holy, 639
  Hungarian, 634
  Indian, 638
  Joint, 629
  June, 665
  Lyme, 673
  Manna, 666
  Marsh, 627
  Meadow 663, 665, 667
  Melic, 662
  Millet, 642
  Muskit, 655
  Oat, 641, 651, 654
  Old-witch, 630
  Orange, 95
  Orchard, 663
  Panic, 629
  Pigeon, 634
  Porcupine, 641
  Quaking, 663
  Quick, or Quitch, 671
  Rattlesnake, 667
  Ray, 671
  Redtop, 647, 657, 665
  Reed, 627, 649
  Rib, 423
  Ribbon, 639
  Ripple, 423
  Rush, 645
  Rye, 671, 673
  Salt, 627
  Sand, 658
  Scorpion, 364
  Scurvy, 71
  Scutch, 654
  Seneca, 639
  Sesame, 635
  Shave, 677
  Soft, 652
  Spear 663, 665, 668
  Spike, 662, 663
  Squirrel-tail, 672
  Star, 512, 516
  Sweet Vernal, 639
  Tape, 496
  Thin, 648
  Timothy, 645
  Toothache, 657
  Triple-awned, 639
  Umbrella, 583
  Vanilla, 652
  Velvet, 652
  Wheat, Awned, 672
  White, 336
  Whitlow, 67, 68
  Wire, 656, 664
  Wood, 638
  Worm, 346
  Yard, 656
  Yellow-eyed, 537

Grass of Parnassus, 173

Grass wrack, 565

Gratiola, 384

Greenbrier, 519

Green-dragon, 549

Greenweed, Dyer's, 127

Grimaldia, 729

Grindelia, 244

Gromwell, 365
  False, 366

Groundnut, 144, 213

Groundsel, 292

Groundsel tree, 266

Guelder rose, 218

Gum-tree, 215
  Sweet, 180

Gutierrezia, 243

Gymnocladus, 148

Gymnomitrium, _721_, 722

Gymnopogon, 655

_Gymnostichum_, 674

Gypsophila, 83


Habenaria, _506_, 506

Hackberry, 463

Hackmatack, 493

HAEMODORACEAE, 512

Halenia, 352

Halesia, 334

HALORAGEAE, 180

HAMAMELIDEAE, 179

Hamamelis, 179

Harbinger-of-spring, 210

Hardhack, 153

Harebell, 308

Harpanthus, 717

Hart's-tongue, 685

Haw, 166
  Black, 219

Hawkbit, 298

Hawkweed, 299

Hawthorn, 165

Hazel, Witch, 179

Hazelnut, 473

Heal-all, 419

Heart's-ease, 78, 81

Heather, 318

Heath Family, 309

Hedeoma, 412

Hedysarum, 138

Helenium, 237

Heleochloa, 644

Helianthemum, 76

Helianthus, 277

_Heliophytum_, 362

Heliopsis, 275

Heliotropium (Heliotrope), 361

Hellebore, 45
  False, 533

Helleborus, 45

Helonias, 531

Hemerocallis, 523

Hemicarpha, 583

Hemlock, 209, 492
  Ground, 494
  Water, 208

HEMODORACEAE, 512

Hemp, 463
  Indian, 338
  Water, 429

Henbane, 376

Hepatica, 34, 38

HEPATICAE, 702

Heracleum, 202

Herb-Robert, 103

Herba-impia, 267

Herberta, 709

Hercules' Club, 213

Herpestis, 383

Hesperis, 71

Heteranthera, 536

Heterotheca, 244

Heuchera, 171

Hexalectris, 501

Hibiscus, 100

Hickory, 468

Hieracium, 299

Hierochloe, 639

High-water Shrub, 272

Hippuris, 182

Hobble-bush, 217

Hoffmanseggia, 148

Hogweed, 273

Hoicus, 652

Holly, 107
  Dahoon, 108
  Mountain, 109

Holosteum, 87

Honewort, 207

Honeysuckle, 220
  Bush, 222

_Honkenya_, 86

Hop, 464

Hop tree, 107

Hordeum, 672

Horehound, 419
  Black, 420
  Fetid, 420
  Water, 408

Hornbeam, 474
  Hop, 474

Hornwort, 488

Horse-brier, 520

Horse-chestnut, 115

Horseradish, 70

Horse-sugar, 335

Horsetail, 676

Horse-weed, 265

Hosackia, 130

Hottonia, 328

Hound's-tongue, 362

Houstonia, 222

Huckleberry, 311
  Squaw, 312

Hudsonia, 76

Humulus, 464

Huntsman's-cup, 57

Hyacinth, Grape, 523
  Wild, 523

Hydrangea, 173

Hydrastis, 48

HYDROCHARIDACEAE, 495

Hydrocotyle, 210, 733

Hydrolea, 360

HYDROPHYLLACEAE, 357

Hydrophyllum, 357

Hymenocallis, 516

Hymenopappus, 286

Hyoscyamus, 376

HYPERICACEAE 92

Hypericum, 92

Hypoxis, 516

Hyssopus (Hyssop) 409
  Giant, 415
  Hedge, 384


Ilex, 107

ILICINEAE, 107

ILLECEBRACEAE 426

Ilysanthes, 385

Impatiens, 105

Indian-physic 154

Indian-pipe 325

Indian-poke 534

Indigo, 133
  False, 125, 131
  Wild, 125

Indigofera, 133

Inkberry, 109

Innocence, 223

Inula, 269

Ionidium, 81

Ipecac, American 154

Ipomoea, 368

Iresine, 429

IRIDACEAE, 513

Iris, 513, 735

Ironweed, 238

Iron-wood, 474

Isanthus, 406

Isoetes, 698

Isopyrum, 44

Itea, 174

Iva, 272

Ivy, American, 115
 Ground, 416
 Poison, 119


Jacob's-ladder, 357

Jamestown-weed, 377

Jatropha, 457

Jeffersonia, 53

Jessamine, Yellow, 345

Jewel-weed, 105

Joe-Pye Weed, 239

Jubula, 706

Judas-tree, 147

JUGLANDACEAE 467

Juglans, 467

JUNCACEAE, 539

Juncus, 540

Juneberry, 166

Jungermannia, _710-712, 714, 715, 717, 718_, 718, _722_

JUNDERMANNIACEAE, 702

Juniperus (Juniper), 494

JUSSIAEA, 187


Kalmia, 310, 319

Kantia, 713

Ketmia, Bladder, 100

King-nut, 468

Kinnikinnik, 214

Knapweed, 297

Knawel, 427

Knotweed, 439

Knotwort Family, 426

Kochia, 431

Koeleria, 659

Kosteletzkya, 100

Krigia, 297

Krynitzkia, 363

Kuhnia, 241

Kyllinga, 573


LABIATAE, 403

Lachnanthes, 512

Lachnocaulon, 567

Lactuca, 303

Lady's-mantle, 161

Lady's-slipper, 510

Lady's-thumb, 441

Lady's-tresses, 501

Lambkill, 319

Lamb's-quarters, 432

Lamium, 420, 734

Lampsana, 297

Laportea, 465

Larch, 492

Larix, 492

Larkspur, 46

Lathyrus, 143

LAURACEAE, 446

Laurel, 319, 321
  American, 319
  Ground, 315
  Mountain, 319

Laurestinus, 217

Lavender, Sea, 327

Lead-plant, 131

Leadwort Family, 327

Leaf-cup, 269

Leather-flower, 36

Leather-leaf, 317

Leatherwood, 448

Leavenworthia, 63

Lechea, 77

Ledum, 321

Leek, Wild, 521

Leersia, 636

LEGUMINOSAE, 122

Leiophyllum, 322

Lejeunea, 707

Lemna, _552_, 552

LEMNACEAE, 551

LENTIBULARIACEAE, 395

Leontodon, 298

Leonuras, 420

Lepachys, 277

Lepidium, 73

Lepidozia, 710

_Lepigonum_, 89

Leptocaulis, 209

Leptochloa, 656, _658_

_Leptopoda_, 287

Lepturus, _655_, 672

Lespedeza, 141

Lesquerella, 68

Lettuce, 303
  Lamb, 228
  White, 301

_Leucanthemum_, 289

Leucothoe, 317

Lever-wood, 474

Liatris, 242, _243_

Ligusticum, 204

Ligustrum, 337

LILIACEAE, 517

Lilium, 529

Lily, 529
  Atamasco, 516
  Blackberry, 515
  Day, 523
  Pond, 56
  Water, 55

Lily-of-the-valley, 524

Limnanthemum, 353

Limnobium, 496

Limosella, 384

LINACEAE, 101

Linaria, 379

Linden, 101

Lindera, 447

Ling, 318

Linnaea, 219

Linum, 101

Liochlaena, 718

Lion's-foot, 301

Liparis, 499

Lipocarpha, 584

Lippia, 402

Liquidambar, 179, 180

Liquorice, 137
  Wild, 226

Liriodendron, 50

Listera, 501

Lithospermum, 365

Litsea, 447

Littorella, 424

Live-forever, 178

Liver-leaf, 38

Liverworts, 702

Lizard's-tail, 446

LOASACEAE, 193

Lobelia, 305

LOBELIACEAE 305

Loblolly-bay, 96

Locust, 134
  Honey, 148
  Water, 149

LOGANIACEAE, 345

Loiseleuria, 322

Lolium, 671

Lonicera, 220

Loosestrife, 185, 330
  False, 187
  Swamp, 186

Lophanthus, 415

Lophiola, 512

Lophocolea, 715

Lopseed, 403

LORANTHACEAE, 449

Lousewort, 392

Lovage, 202

Lucerne, 129

Ludwigia, 187

Lungwort, 363

Lunularia, 730

Lupinus (Lupine), 128

Luzula, 546

Lychnis, 85

Lycium, 376

Lycopsis, 367

LYCOPODIACEAE, 695

Lycopodium, 695

Lycopus, 408

Lygodesmia, 302

Lygodium, 692

Lysimachia, _330_, 330

LYTHRACEAE, 184

Lythrum, 185


Maclura, 464

Madder Family, 222

_Madotheca_, 708, 709

Magnolia, 49

MAGNOLIACEAE, 49

Maianthemum, 526

Maidenhair, 680

Mallow, 97
  False, 98
  Glade, 98
  Indian, 99
  Marsh, 97
  Rose, 100

Malva, 97

MALVACEAE, 96

Malvastrum, 98

Mamillaria, 197

Mandrake, 53

Man-of-the-earth, 369

Maple, 117
  Ash-leaved, 118

Marchantia, 727

MARCHANTIACEAE, 727

Mare's-tail, 182

Marigold, Bur, 284
  Fetid, 288
  Marsh, 44
  Water, 285

Marjoram, Wild, 411

Marrubium, 419

Marshallia, 286

Marsilia, 700

MARSILIACEAE, 700

Marsupella, 721

Martynia, 399

Marvel-of-Peru, 425

_Mastigobryum_, 710

Matricaria, 289

Matrimony-vine, 376

Mayaca, 538

MAYACEAE, 537

May-apple, 53

Mayflower, 315

May-weed, 288

Meadow-beauty, 183

Meadow-sweet, 153

Medeola, 529

Medicago, 129

Medick, 129

Melampyrum, 393

Melanthium, 533

MELASTOMACEAE, 183

Melica, 662, 735

Melilotus (Melilot), 129

Melissa, 412

Melothria, 196

MENISPERMACEAE, 51

Menispermum, 51

Mentha, 407

Mentzelia, 193

Menyanthes, 353

Menziesia, 319

Mercury, Three-seeded, 459

Mermaid-weed, 181

Mertensia, 363

Metzgeria, 724

Mezereum, 448

Mieranthemum, 385

Microstylis, 498

Mignonette, 75

Mikania, 239

Milfoil, 289
  Water, 181

Milium, 642

Milkweed, 339
  Green, 343

Milkwort, 120

Milkwort, Sea 331

Millet, 642

Mimulus, 382

Mint, 407
  Cat, 416
  Horse, 413
  Mountain, 409
  Pepper, 407
  Spear, 407

Mirabilis, 425

Mist-flower, 241

Mistletoe, 450
  False, 449

Mitchella, 224

Mitella, 171

Mitreola, 346

Mitrewort, 171, 346
  False, 171

Moccason-flower, 510

Mocker-nut, 468

Modiola, 100

Mollugo, 198

Monarda, 413

Moneses, 323

Moneywort, 331

Monkey-flower, 382

Monkshood, 46

Monotropa, 325

_Montelia_, 429

Moonseed, 51

Moonwort, 693

Moosewood, 443

Morning-glory, 368

Morus, 464

Moschatel, 216

Moss, Black, or Long, 411
  Club, 695, 697
  Flowering, 326

Motherwort, 420

Mouse-tail, 40

Mudwort, 384

Mugwort, 291

Muhlenbergia, 643

Mulberry, 464
  French, 403

_Mulgedium_, 304,305

Mullein, 379

Munroa, 659

Muscari, 523

Mustard, 72
  Hedge, 71, 72
  Tansy, 72
  Tower, 66
  Treacle, 71
  Wormseed, 71

Mylia, 717

Myosotis, 364

Myosurus, 40

Myrica, 469

MYRICACEAE, 469

Myriophyllum, 181

Myrtle, Sand, 322
  Wax, 469


_Nabalus_, 301, 302

Naiad, 565

NAIADACEAE, 557

Naias, 565

Napaea, 98

Nardia, 721

_Nardosmia_, 292

Narthecium, 532

Nasturtium, 69

Neckweed, 387

Negundo, 118

_Nelumbium_, 55

Nelumbo, 55

Nemastylis, 514

Nemopanthes, 109

Nemophila, 358

Nepeta, 416

_Nesaea_, 186

Nettle, 464
  Dead, 420
  False, 466
  Hedge, 421
  Hemp, 421
  Horse, 374
  Spurge, 457
  Wood, 465

Nettle-tree, 463

Nicandra, 376

Nicotiana, 377

Nigella, 48

Nightshade, 373
  Enchanter's, 193

Nimble-Will, 644

Ninebark, 153

Nipplewort, 297

Nonesuch, 130

Notholaena, 680

Nothoscordum, 522

Notothylas, 727

Nuphar, 56

NYCTAGINACEAE, 54

Nymphaea, 55

NYMPHAEACEAE, 54

Nyssa, 215


Oak, 475
  Jerusalem, 433
  Poison, 119

Oakesia, 528

Oat, 653
  Sea, 662
  Water, 636
  Wild, 654

Obolaria, 353

Odontoschisma, 713

OEnothera, 190

Oil-nut, 451

Oldenlandia, 224

OLEACEAE, 335

Oleaster Family, 448

Olive Family, 335

ONAGRACEAE, 186

Onion, 521

Onoclea, 690

Onopordon, 297

Onosmodium, 366

OPHIOGLOSSACEAE, 693

Ophioglossum, 695

Opuntia, 197

Orache, 433

Orange, Mock, 174
  Osage, 464

Orange-root, 48

ORCHIDACEAE, 497

Orchis, 498, 506
  Crane, fly, 499
  Rein, 506
  Showy, 506

Origanum, 411

Ornithogalum, 523

OROBANCHACEAE, 393

Orobanche, 395, 734

Orontium, 551

Orpine, 177

Orthocarpus, 391

Oryzopsis, 642

Osier, 480

Osmorrhiza, 210

Osmunda, 692

Ostrya, 474

Oxalis, 105

Ox-eye, 275, 289
  Sea, 277

Oxybaphus, 425

Oxydendrum, 316

Oxyria, 437

Oxytropis, 137

Oyster-plant, 298


Pachysandra, 456

Pachystima, 110

Paepalanthus, 567

Painted-cup, 390

Pallavicinia, 723

_Pancratium_, 516

Panicum, 629

Pansy, 81

Papaver, 59

PAPAVERACEAE, 57

Papaw, 50

Pappoose root, 53

_Pardanthus_, 515

Parietaria, 466

Parnassia, 173

Paronychia, 426

Parsley Family, 198

Parsley, Fool's, 205
  Hemlock, 202

Parsley-piert, 161

Parsnip, 202
  Cow, 202
  Meadow, 204
  Water, 207

Parthenium, 272

Partridge Berry, 224

Paspalum, 628

Pasque-flower, 37

Passiflora, 194

PASSIFLORACEAE, 194

Passion flower, 194

Pea, Beach, 143
  Butterfly, 145
  Everlasting, 143
  Hoary, 133
  Milk, 146
  Partridge, 148

Peanut, Hog, 146

Pear, 164
  Alligator, 446
  Prickly, 197

Pearlwort, 88

Pecan-nut, 468

PEDALIACEAE, 399

Pedicularis, 392

Pellaea, 682

Pellia, 724

Pellitory, 466

Peltandra, 549

Pennycress, 73

Pennyroyal, American, 412
  Bastard, 405
  False, 406
  Mock, 412

Pennywort, Water, 210

Penthorum, 176

Pentstemon, 381

Pepper Family, 446

Pepper, Water, 441

Pepper-bush, 322

Peppergrass, 73

Pepperidge, 215

Peppermint, 407

Pepper-root, 64

Pepperwort, 73

Perilla, 407

Periploca, 339

Persea, 446

Persimmon, 333

Petalostemon, 132

Petasites, 292

_Petroselinum_, 208

Peucedanum, 203

Phacelia, 359

Phalaris, 638

Phaseolus, 144, _145_

Pheasant's-eye, 48

Phegopteris, 686

_Phelipaea_, 395

Philadelphus, 174

Phleum, 644

Phlomis, 420

Phlox, 354

Phoradendron, 449

Phragmites, 658

Phryma, 403

Phyllanthus, 457

_Phyllodice_, 318

Physalis, 375

Physocarpus, 153

Physostegia, 419

Phytolacca, 436

PHYTOLACCACEAE, 435

Picea, 491

Pickerel-weed, 536

Picris, 299

Pigeon berry, 436

Pig nut, 469

Pigweed, 428, 431
  Winged, 431

Pilea, 465

Pimpernel, 331
  False, 385
  Water, 332

Pimpinella, 206

Pine, 490
  Ground, 697

Pine-apple, Family, 511

Pine-drops, 325

Pine sap, 325

Pine weed, 95

Pinguicula, 397

Pink, 83, 84
  Fire, 84

Pink-root, 346

Pinus, 490, 734

Pinweed, 77

Pinxter flower, 320

PIPERACEAE, 446

Pipe vine, 445

Pipewort, 566
  Hairy, 567

Pipsissewa, 322

Pitcher-plant, 57

Plagiochila, 717

Plane-tree Family, 466

Planer-tree, 463

PLANTAGINACEAE, 422

Plantago, 422

Plantain, 422
  Indian, 294
  Mud, 536
  Rattlesnake, 503
  Robin's, 266
  Water, 554

PLATANACEAE, 466

Platanus, 466

_Pleuranthe_, 718

Pleurisy-root, 340

Pleurogyne, 352

Plucea, 266

Plum, 151
  Date, 333

Plum, Ground, 135
  Red, 151

PLUMBAGINACEAE, 327

Poa, 663

Podophyllum, 53

PODOSTEMACEAE, 444

Podostemon, 444

Pogonia, 505

Pokeweed, 436

Polanisia, 74

POLEMONIACEAE, 354

Polemonium, 356

Polygala, 120

POLYGALACEAE, 120

POLYGONACEAE, 436

Polygonatum, 524

Polygonella, 443

Polygonum, 439, _443_

Polymnia, 269

Polypodium, 680

Polypody, 680

Polypogon, 648

Polypremum, 345

Polytaenia, 203

Pomme-blanche, 131

Pond spice, 447

Pondweed, 558
  Horned, 565

Pontederia, 536

PONTEDERIACEAE, 535

Poplar, 486
  White, 50

Poppy, 59
  Celandine, 58
  Corn, 59
  Horn, 58
  Mexican, 59
  Prickly, 59

Populus, 486

Porella, 708

Portulaca, 90

PORTULACACEAE, 90

Potamogeton, 558

Potato vine, Wild, 369

Potentilla, 158

Poterium, 161

Preissia, 728

Prenanthes, 300

Prim, 337

Primrose, 329
  Evening, 190

Primula, 329

PRIMULACEAE, 328

Prince's-feather, 441

Prince's-pine, 323

_Prosartes_, 527

Psilocarya, 577

Psoralea, 130

Ptelea, 107

Pteris, 681

Pterospora, 325

Ptilidium, 709

Puccinellia, 668

Puccoon, 365
  Yellow, 48

Pulse, Family, 122

Purslane, 90
  Sea, 198
  Water, 184, 188

Putty-root, 499

Pycnanthemum, 409

Pyrola, 323

Pyrrhopappus, 303

Pyrularia, 451

Pyrus, 164

Pyxidanthera, 326

Pyxie, 326


_Quamoclit_, 368

Queen-of-the-prairie, 153

Quercus, 475

Quillwort, 698


Radish, 74

Radula, 707

Ragged-Robin, 85

Ragweed, 273

Ragwort, 293

Ramsted, 379

RANUNCULACEAE, 34

Ranunculus, 40

Rape, Broom, 395

Raphanus, 74

Raspberry, 154

Rattlebox, 127

Rattlesnake-master, 211

Rattlesnake-root, 300

Rattlesnake-weed, 299

_Reboulia_, 729

Redbud, 147

Red-root, 112, 512

Redtop, 647
  False, 665
  Tall, 667

Reed, 658
  Bur, 547

Reseda, 75

RESEDACEAE, 75

RHAMNACEAE, 111

Rhamnus, 111

Rheumatism-root, 53

Rhexia, 183

Rhinanthus, 392

Rhododendron, 320

_Rhodora_, 321

Rhus, 118

Rhynchosia, 147

Rhynchospora, _577_, 584

Ribes, 174

Ribgrass, 423

Ribwort, 422

Riccia, 730

RICCIACEAE, 730

Rice, Indian, 635
  Water, 635

Richweed, 407, 465

Ricinus, 460

Riverweed, 444

Robinia, 134

Rocket, 71
  Dyer's, 75
  Sea, 74
  Yellow, 70

Rock-rose, 76

Rosa, 162

ROSACEAE, 150

Rose, 162
  Cotton, 267
  Guelder, 218
  Rock, 76

Rosebay, 320

Rosemary, Marsh, 327

Rosin-weed, 270

Rotala, 184

Rottboellia, 636

Roubieva, 433

RUBIACEAE, 222

Rubus, 154

Rudbeckia, 276

Rue Family, 106

Rue, Meadow, 39

Ruellia, 400

Rumex, 437

Ruppia, 564

Rush, 540

Rush, Bald, 577
  Bog, 540
  Club, 578
  Horned, 586
  Nut, 586
  Scouring, 676
  Spike, 573
  Twig, 586
  Wood, 546

RUTACEAE, 106

Rye, Wild, 673


Sabbatia, 347

Sage, 412
  Jerusalem, 420
  Wood, 406

Sagina, 88

Sagittaria, 554, 735

St. Andrew's-cross, 92

St. John's-wort, 92
  Marsh, 95

St. Peter's-wort, 92

SALICACEAE, 480

Salicornia, 434

Salix, 480

Salmon-berry, 154

Salsify, 298

Salsola, 435, 734

Saltwort, 435

Salvia, 412

Salvinia, 701

SALVINIACEAE, 701

Sambucus, 217

Samolus, 332

Samphire, 434

Sandal-wood Family, 450

Sandweed, Sea, 651

Sandwort, 85

Sanguinaria, 58

Sanicula (Sanicle), 212

SANTALACEAE, 450

SAPINDACEAE, 115

Sapindus, 116

Sapodilla Family, 332

Saponaria, 83

SAPOTACEAE, 332

_Sarcoscyphus_, 721

Sarracenia, 57

SARRACENIACEAE, 57

Sarsaparilla, 212, 213

Sassafras, 447

Satureia, 411

Saururus, 446

Savin, 494

Savory, 411

Saxifraga, 169

SAXIFRAGACEAE, 168

Saxifrage, 169
  Golden, 172

Scabiosa (Scabious), 229, 733

Scale-mosses, 702

Scapania, 713

Schedonnardus, 655

Scheuchzeria, 558

Schizaea, 690

_Schollera_, 536

Schrankia, 149

Schwalbea, 391

Schweinitzia, 325

_Scilla_, 523

Scirpus, _576_, 578, _582_

Scleranthus, 427

Scleria, 586

Sclerolepis, 238

Scolochloa, 666

Scolopendrium, 685

Scrophularia, 380

SCROPHULARIACEAE, 377

Scutellaria, 416

Sedge, 587

Sedge Family, 567

Sedum, 177

Seed-box, 187

Selaginella, 697

SELAGINELLACEAE, 697

Selenia, 63

Self-heal, 418

_Sendtnera_, 710

Senebiera, 74

Senecio, 292

Senna, 147

Sensitive-brier, 149

Sensitive-plant, Wild, 148

Sericocarpus, 254

Service-berry, 166

Sesuvium, 198

Setaria, 634

Seymeria, 388

Shad-bush, 166

Sheep-berry, 219

Shepherdia, 449

Shepherd's-purse, 73

Sherardia, 227

Shin-leaf, 323

Shooting-star, 329

Sibbaldia, 161

Sickle-pod, 66

Sicyos, 195

Sida, 99

Side-saddle Flower, 57

Silene, 83

Silkweed, 339

Silphium, 270

Silver-bell Tree, 334

Silver-berry, 449

Silver-weed, 160

_Sinapis_, 72

Sisymbrium, 71

Sisyrinchium, 515, 735

Sium, 207, _207_

Skullcap, 416

Skunk-cabbage, 550

Sloe, 152

Smartweed, 441

Smilacina, 525, _526_

Smilax, 519

Snake-head, 381

Snake-root, 47
  Black, 212
  Button, 211, 242
  Seneca, 120
  Virginia, 445
  White, 241

Snapdragon, 380

Sneezeweed, 287

Sneezewort, 289

Snowball-tree, 218

Snowberry, 220
  Creeping, 314

Snowdrop, 334

Soapberry, 116

Soapwort, 83

SOLANACEAE, 373

Solanum, 373

Solea, 81

Solidago, 246
  _altissima_, 249
  arguta, 250, _250_
  bicolor, 247
  Bigelovii, 247
  Boottii, 250
  caesia, 247
  Canadensis, 251
  Curtisii, 247
  Drummondii, 252
  Elliottii, 250
  _elliptica_, 250
  _gigantea_, 251
  Houghtonii, 252
  humilis, 248
  juncea, 250
  lanceolata, 252
  latifolia, 247
  Lindheimeriana, 247
  _linoides_, 250
  macrophylla, 247
  Missouriensis, 251
  monticola, 247
  _Muhlenbergii_, 250
  neglecta, 250
  nemoralis, 251
  odora, 249
  Ohioensis, 252
  patula, 249
  petiolaris, 246
  pilosa, 249
  puberula, 248
  radula, 251
  Riddellii, 252
  rigida, 252
  rugosa, 249
  rupestris, 251
  sempervirens, 248
  serotina, 251, _251_
  Shortii, 251
  speciosa, 249
  squarrosa, 246
  stricta, 248, _249_
  tenuifolia, 252
  _thyrsoidea_, 248
  tortifolia, 249
  uliginosa, 249
  ulmifolia, 250
  virgata, 248
  Virgaurea, 248

Solomon's-seal, 524
  False, 525

Sonchus, 305

Sophora, 127

Sorrel, 437
  Mountain, 437
  Wood, 105

Sorrel-tree, 316

Sour-gum, 215

Sour-wood, 316

Spanish-bayonet, 524

Spanish-needles, 285

Sparganium, 547

Spartina, 627

Spatter-dock, 56

Spearmint, 407

Spearwort, 41

Specularia, 308

Speedwell, 386

Spergula, 90

_Spergularia_, 89

Spermacoce, 225

Sphaeralcea, 99

Sphaerocarpus, 732

_Sphagnoecetis_, 713

Spice-bush, 447

Spiderwort, 539

Spigelia, 346

Spikenard, 213
  False, 525

Spindle-tree, 110

Spiraea, 153, _153_

Spiranthes, 501

Spirodela, 552

Spleenwort, 683

Spoonwood, 319

Sporobolus, 645

Spring-beauty, 91

Spruce, 491

Spurge, 452

Spurrey, 90
  Sand, 89

Squaw-root, 394

Squaw-weed, 293

Squirrel-corn, 60

Stachys, 421

Staff-tree, 110

Stagger-bush, 316

Staphylea, 118

Star-flower, 329

Star-grass, 512, 516

Star-of-Bethlehem, 523

Starwort, 86, 255
  Water, 182

Statice, 327

Steeple-bush, 153

_Steetzia_, 724

Steironema, 330

Stellaria, 86, 733

Stenanthium, 534

Stenosiphon, 193

Stickseed, 362

Sticktight, 284

Stillingia, 460

Stipa, 641

Stitchwort, 87

Stonecrop, 177
  Ditch, 176

Stone-root, 407

Storax, 333

Storksbill, 104

Stramonium, 377

Strawberry, 158
  Barren, 158

Strawberry-bush, 110

Streptopus, 526

Strophostyles, 145

_Struthiopteris_, 690

Stuartia, 96

Stylophorum, 58

Stylosanthes, 142

STYRACACEAE, 333

Styrax, 334

Suaeda, 434

Subularia, 69

Succory, 298

Sugar-berry, 463

Sullivantia, 171

Sumach, 118

Sundew, 178

Sunflower, 277

Supple-Jack, 111

Sweetbrier, 164

Sweet-cicely, 210

Sweet-flag, 551

Sweet-gale, 469

Sweet-gum, 180

Sweet-leaf, 334

Sweet-scented shrub, 167

Sweet William, 83
  Wild, 354

Sycamore, 466

Symphoricarpos, 220

Symphytum, 367

Symplocarpus, 550

Symplocos, 334

Synandra, 419

Synthyris, 386

Syringa, 174


Tacamahac, 487

Talinum, 91, 733

Tamarack, 493

Tanacetum, 290

Tansy, 290

Taraxacum, 303

Tare, 142

Taxodium, 493

Taxus, 494

Tea-berry, 316

Tea Family, 95

Tea, Labrador, 321
  Mexican, 433
  New, Jersey, 112
  Oswego, 414

Tear-thumb, 442

Teasel, 229

Tecoma, 398

Tephrosia, 133

TERNSTROEMIACEAE, 95

Tetragonotheca, 274

_Tetranthera_, 447

Teucrium, 406

Thalictrum, 39, 39

Thaspium, 204, _208_

Thelesperma, 285

Thelypodium, 72

Thermopsis, 126

Thimbleberry, 155

Thistle, 295
  Canada, 296
  Cotton, 297
  Plumeless, 296
  Scotch, 297
  Sow, 305
  Star, 297

Thlaspi, 73

Thorn, 165
  Black, 152
  White, 165

Thoroughwax, 206

Thoroughwort, 239

Thuya, 493

Thyme, 411
  Basil, 411
  Creeping, 411

THYMELAEACEAE, 448

Thymus, 411

Tiarella, 171

Tickseed, 281

Tiedemannia, 202

Tilia, 101

TILIACEAE, 101

Tillaea, 177

Tillandsia, 511

Timothy, 645

Tinker's-weed, 291

Tipularia, 499

_Tissa_, 89

Toadflax, 379
  Bastard, 450

Tobacco, 377
  Indian, 307

Tofieldia, 532

Toothache-tree, 106

Toothwort, 64

Touch-me-not, 106

Townsendia, 254

Trachelospermum, 338

Tradescantia, 539

Tragia, 460

Tragopogon, 298

Trantvetteria, 39

Tread-softly, 457

Tree-of-heaven, 107

Trefoil, 128
  Shrubby, 107
  Tick, 138

Trichocolea, 709

Trichomanes, 692

Trichostema, 405

_Tricuspis_, 657, 658

Trientalis, 329

Trifolium, 128

Triglochin, 557

Trilisa, 243

Trillium, 530

Triodia, 657

Triosteum, 219

Tripsacum, 636

Trisetum, 653, 735

_Triticum_, 671, 672

Trollius, 45

Troximon, 302

Trumpet-creeper, 398

Trumpet-flower, 398

Trumpets, 57

Trumpet-weed, 239

Tsuga, 492

Tulip-tree, 50

Tumbleweed, 428

Tupelo, 215

Turnip, Indian, 549

Turnsole, 361

Turtlehead, 381

Tussilago, 291

Twayblade, 499, 501

Twin-flower, 219

Twin-leaf, 53

Twisted-stalk, 526

Typha, 547

TYPHACLAE, 547


Ulmus, 462

UMBELLIFERAE, 198

Umbrella-leaf, 53

Umbrella-tree, 49, 50

Unicorn-plant, 399

Uniola, 662

Urtica, 464

URTICACEAE, 461

Utricularia, 395

Uvularia, 527, _528_


_Vaccaria_, 83

Vaccinium, 312

Valeriana (Valerian), 228
  Greek, 356

VALERIANACEAE, 228

Valerianella, 228

Vallisneria, 496

Vanilla-plant, 243

Velvet-leaf, 99

Venus's Fly-trap, 179
  Looking-glass, 308

Veratrum, _533_, 533

Verbascum, 379

Verbena, 401

VERBENACEAE, 401

Verbesina, 280

Vernonia, 238

Veronica, 386

Vervain, 401

_Vesicaria_, 69

Vetch, 142
  Joint, Sensitive, 137
  Milk, 134

Vetchling, 143

Viburnum, 217

Vicia, 142

_Vilfa_, 645, 646

Vincetoxicum, 344

Vine Family, 112

Viola, 78

VIOLACEAE, 78

Violet, 78

Violet, Dame's, 71
  Dog's-tooth, 528
  Green, 81
  Water, 328

Virginian-creeper, 115

Virgin's-bower, 35

VITACEAE, 112

Vitis, 113, 114


Waahoo, 110

Wake-robin, 530

Waldsteinia, 157

Walking-leaf, 685

Wallflower, Western, 71

Walnut, 467

Watercress, 69

Waterleaf, 357

Water-nymph, 55

Water-shield, 55

Waterweed, 495

Waterwort, 91

Wax work, 110

Wayfaring-tree, 217

Weigela, 222

Weld, 75

Wheat, Cow, 393
  India, 443

Whin, 127

Whiteweed, 289

Whitlow-wort, 426

Wicky, 319

Willow, 480

Willow-herb, 188

Wind-flower, 36, 38

Winterberry, 109

Wintergreen, 315, 323
  Aromatic, 315
  Chickweed, 329
  Creeping, 315
  Spotted, 313

Wistaria, 134

Witch hazel, 179

Wolf berry, 220

Wolfsbane, 46

Woodbine, 115, 220

Woodsia, 690

Woodwardia, 683

Wood-waxen, 127

Wormseed, 434

Wormwood, 289
  Roman, 273


Xanthium, 274

Xanthorrhiza, 48

_Xanthosoma_, 550

Xanthoxylum, 106

Xerophyllum, 532

XYRIDACEAE, 536

Xyris, 537


Yam, 517

Yarrow, 289

Yaupon, 108

Yellow-eyed, Grass, 537

Yellow-rattle, 392

Yellow-root, 48

Yellow-wood, 126

Yew, 494

Yucca, 524


Zannichellia, 565

Zephyranthes, 516, 735

Zizania, 635

Zizia, _206_, 207

Zostera, 565

Zygadenus, 534




PLATES

WITH EXPLANATIONS.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE I.

CYPERUS.--(1) Small plant of C. diandrus; (2) a spikelet magnified; (3)
a piece of the rhachis with one scale enclosing its flower; (4) a
separate flower more magnified.--(5) C. erythrorhizos, a spikelet
magnified; the lower scales and flowers have fallen, showing the small
internal scales of the section Papyrus, formed of the winged margins of
the joints of the rhachis detached; (6) a separate one, more enlarged;
(7) a flower; (8) an achene, cut in two.--(9) C. dentatus, a piece of
the rhachis of a spike with the lower part of one scale, showing how it
is decurrent on the joint beneath (cut across) to form scale-like wings.

DULICHIUM.--(1) Upper part of a plant of D. spathaceum; (2) part of a
spikelet somewhat enlarged; (3) piece of rhachis, and one scale
decurrent on the joint beneath; (4) magnified flower.

KYLLINGA.--(1) Plant of K. pumila; (2) one-flowered spikelet on a piece
of the rhachis, enlarged; (3) the same, more enlarged and open; (4)
achene; and (5) section of same magnified.

[Illustration: Genera of Cyperaceae. Plate I]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE II.

HEMICARPHA.--(1) Plant of H. subsquarrosa, natural size; (2) a spikelet
enlarged, with its bract; (3) magnified scale of the same; (5) a flower,
with its single stamen and minute internal scale, magnified; (6) achene,
magnified.

LIPOCARPHA.--(1) Upper part of plants of L. maculata, with spikelets;
(2) diagram of a flower, representing the ovary between the two internal
scales, a single stamen, the scale of the spikelet on one side, and the
axis of the spikelet on the other; (3) scale of spikelet detached; (4) a
flower with its two inner scales; (5) achene, magnified.

FUIRENA.--(1) Upper portion of plant of F. squarrosa, var. pumila; (2)
scale of spike enclosing a flower; (3) open scale of same; (4) flower;
(5) one of the scales and one of the bristles of the perianth; (6)
achene, and (7) section of same.

[Illustration: Genera of Cyperaceae. Plate II]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE III.

ELEOCHARIS.--(1) Small plant of E. olivacea; (2) the spikelet enlarged;
(3) detached scale; (4) flower; (5) achene and bristles.--(6) E.
quadrangulata, spikelet; (7) a scale; (8) flower; (9) achene and
bristles.--(10) E. tuberculosa; the achene with its great tubercle, and
bristles.

SCIRPUS.--(1) Summit of plant of small S. debilis; (2) a spikelet; (3) a
scale of the same, and (4) flower; (5) achene with its bristles.

ERIOPHORUM.--(1) Small plant of E. alpinum, in flower; (2) spikelet; (3)
a scale, and (4) a flower from the same; (5) the spikelet, in fruit, the
bristles forming a cottony tuft; (6) achene and its bristles.--(6, under
_Scirpus_) a small portion of the inflorescence of E. cyperinum; (7) a
flower; (8) a spikelet in fruit; (9) achene from the same, with the
tortuous bristles; (10) section of the achene.

FIMBRISTYLIS.--(1) Summit of a small flowering stem of F. laxa; (2) a
spikelet of the same; (3) a detached scale, and (4) a flower of the
same; (5) achene.--F. autumnalis, (6), a spikelet, enlarged; (7) flower;
(8) achene, and (9) section of the same.

[Illustration: Genera of Cyperaceae. Plate III]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE IV.

DICHROMENA.--(1) Head and involucre of D. latifolia; (2) a scale from
one of the spikelets, and (3) the same cut across; (4) a flower; (5)
achene with its tubercle.

PSILOCARYA.--(1) Part of plant, (2) enlarged spikelet, (3) detached
scale, (4) flower, and (5) achene with its beak, of P. scirpoides.

RHYNCHOSPORA.--(1) Upper part of flowering stem of R. Torreyana; (2) a
spikelet; (3) detached flower; (4) achene, with short bristles at its
base; (5) one of these bristles more magnified.

R. (Sec. CERATOSCHOENUS).--(1) Upper part of fruiting plant, (2) detached
spikelet, (3) flower, and (4) beaked achene, with its bristles, of R.
macrostachya.

[Illustration: Genera of Cyperaceae. Plate IV]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE V.

CLADIUM.--(1) Summit of a plant of C. mariscoides; (2) detached
spikelet; (3) same, open, showing a staminate and a perfect flower; (4)
the nut-like achene, and (5) the longitudinal section of the same.

SCLERIA.--(6) Summit of a flowering stem of S. reticularis; (7) three
spikelets from a cluster, the middle one pistillate, the lateral ones
staminate; (8) staminate spikelet displaying four male flowers, the
filaments of two of them having lost their anthers; (9) pistillate
spikelet displaying a single pistillate flower; (10) achene with the
3-lobed double cup underneath.

CAREX.--(11) Plant of C. pauciflora; (12) a staminate flower with its
scale; (13) scale, and (14) mature pistillate flower, in its perigynium;
(15) cross section of perigynium and of the contained achene; (16)
achene on its stalk, style and stigmas.--(17) C. Jamesii, upper part of
flowering plant; (18) the spike enlarged; (19) a staminate flower and
its scale; (20) pistillate flower in its perigynium; (21) the same with
half the perigynium cut away to show the contained achene and style.

[Illustration: Genera of Cyperaceae. Plate V]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE VI.

CAREX.--(1) C. trisperma, upper part of a stem in fruit; (2) enlarged
spike displayed, with three staminate and two pistillate flowers; (3) a
scale, and (4) a ripe perigynium, of the latter; with (5) a section of
the perigynium near the base, and of the contained achene.--(6) C.
straminea, var. brevior, summit of a fruiting plant; (7) a spike
enlarged; (8) scale of a pistillate flower; (9) the winged perigynium
and the contained achene cut across; (10) detached achene with
persistent style and stigmas.--(11) C. umbellata, whole plant; (12) a
perigynium and its scale; (13) cross-section toward the base of
perigynium and its contained achene; (14) detached achene with its
persistent style and stigmas.--C. bullata; (15) upper part of plant in
fruit, with one pistillate and two staminate spikes; (16) one of its
staminate flowers with the scale; (17) a pistillate scale, and (18)
mature perigynium; (19) longitudinal section of the latter, showing the
achene and its style, and (20) cross-section of the same.

[Illustration: Genera of Cyperaceae. Plate VI]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE VII.

LEERSIA.--(1) Panicle of L. oryzoides, reduced in size; (2) a branchlet
of the same, with its spikelets, of the natural size; and (3) an open
spikelet in flower, enlarged.

ZIZANIA.--(1) A staminate, and (2) a pistillate flower or spikelet of Z.
aquatica; (3) a magnified pistil with a pair of squamulae or hypogynous
scales; (4) a grain, and a magnified longitudinal section of the lower
part of the same, showing the embryo at the outside of the base of the
albumen.

ALOPECURUS.--(1) Part of a plant of A. geniculatus, in flower; (2) a few
spikelets from the spike-like inflorescence, moderately magnified; (3)
an open spikelet in flower, more magnified, and (4) the single flowering
glume detached.

PHLEUM.--A detached spikelet of P. pratense, having the flower with its
glume and palet raised above the empty glumes, magnified.

HELEOCHLOA.--(1) Inflorescence of H. schoenoides; (2) a separate
enlarged spikelet; and (3) the same open, in flower.

SPOROBOLUS.--(1) A spikelet of S. cryptandrus, magnified; (2) the same,
with the flower open, raised above the empty glumes; and (3) the fruit,
more magnified, showing the seed loose in the pericarp (utricle).--(4)
An enlarged spikelet of E. vaginaeflora; and (5) the same displayed.

AGROSTIS.--(1) Panicle of A. alba, var. vulgaris, with (2) an enlarged
open spikelet of the same; also (3) the rough pedicel and glumes of A.
scabra, with the flower separated, the latter having no palet.

[Illustration: Genera of Grasses. Plate VII]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE VIII.

POLYPOGON.--(1) Spike-like contracted panicle of P. Monspeliensis; (2)
an enlarged detached spikelet, showing the long awns to the empty
glumes; (3) the same open in flower; and (4) a separate flower without
the empty glumes.

CINNA.--(1) A magnified spikelet of C. arundinacea; and (2) the same
open, displaying the flowering glume and palet, the single stamen, and
the pistil.

MUHLENBERGIA.--(1) A magnified closed spikelet of M. sylvatica; (2) the
same with the open flower raised out of the empty glumes.--(3) A
magnified spikelet of M. diffusa; (4) its minute and unequal empty
glumes more magnified; and (5) an open spikelet of the same.

BRACHYELYTRUM.--(1) A spikelet of B. aristatum enlarged; (2) the same
displayed.

CALAMAGROSTIS.--(1) An open spikelet of C. Canadensis, enlarged,
displaying all the parts; (2) the same with the flower raised out of the
empty glumes, showing the hairy rudiment behind the palet.

ORYZOPSIS.--(1) An open magnified spikelet of O. asperifolia; and (2)
the flower of the same removed from the empty glumes. Notice the
remarkably long squamulae or hypogynous scales, which here nearly equal
the glume in length.

STIPA.--Empty glumes and flower (a little separated) of S. avenacea,
enlarged.

ARISTIDA.--A spikelet of A. purpurascens, enlarged.

[Illustration: Genera of Grasses. Plate VIII]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE IX.

SPARTINA.--(1) Portion of the inflorescence of S. stricta, of the
natural size; (2) a spikelet enlarged; and (3) the same displaced, the
flower raised above the empty glumes.

CTENIUM.--(1) Spike of C. Americanum; (2) a single spikelet magnified;
and (3) the same displayed, the empty glumes separated.

BOUTELOUA.--(1) A portion of the compound spike of B. racemosa, of the
natural size; and (2) a spikelet displayed and magnified, the flowers
raised out of the empty glumes.

GYMNOPOGON.--(1) Inflorescence of G. racemosus, reduced in size; and (2)
a magnified spikelet with the parts displayed.

CYNODON.--(1) Inflorescence of C. Dactylon, of digitate spikes; (2) a
spikelet magnified and displayed, showing a perfect flower and a
rudiment.

ELEUSINE.--(1) One of the spikes from the digitate inflorescence of E.
Indica; (2) a magnified spikelet; (3) the same with the flowers more
displayed; (4) a flower from the last, showing its parts; (5) the fruit
magnified, showing the seed loose in the utricle; and (6) the wrinkled
seed detached.--(1, under _Dactyloctenium_) Inflorescence of E.
AEgyptiaca, of digitate spikes; (2) one of the spikelets magnified; (3)
the fruit magnified, showing the seed loose in the thin pericarp
(utricle); and (4) the wrinkled seed more magnified.

DIPLACHNE.--(1) Small portion of the inflorescence of D. fascicularis;
(2) one of its spikelets displayed and magnified; (3) an open flower of
the same.

[Illustration: Genera of Grasses. Plate IX]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE X.

TRIODIA.--(1) Magnified spikelet of T. seslerioides; (2) the same
displayed and the lowest flower open; (3) back view of the flowering
glume spread out.

GRAPHEPHORUM.--(1) A magnified spikelet of G. melicoides, displayed; (2)
a part of the hairy rhachis and one flower of the same.

DIARRHENA.--(1) A spikelet of D. Americana, enlarged; (2) the grain in
its glume and palet.

DACTYLIS.--A spikelet of D. glomerata magnified and displayed.

KOELERIA.--(1) A magnified spikelet of K. cristata, expanded, showing
the empty glumes, the three flowers, and a rudiment; (2) lower half of a
flowering glume, partly spread open; it is much more folded and keeled
in its natural condition.

EATONIA.--A magnified spikelet of E. obtusata, expanded, showing the
empty glumes, the two flowers, and a rudiment.

MELICA.--A magnified spikelet of M. mutica, expanded, showing the empty
glumes, two perfect flowers, and an abortive one.

GLYCERIA.--(1) A magnified spikelet of G. nervata; (2) a separate flower
with one joint of the rhachis; and (3) the lower half of a flowering
glume, showing its form (rounded on the back, not keeled).

DISTICHLIS--(1) A pistillate spikelet of D. maritima, enlarged; (2) a
flower from the same; and (3) a flower from a staminate spikelet.

POA.--(1) Panicle of P. compressa, reduced in size; (2) a magnified
spikelet; (3) a separate flower more magnified; (4) a flowering glume
cut across and somewhat outspread.

ERAGROSTIS.--(1) A spikelet of E. pilosa, enlarged; (2) the same, from
which the glumes and all of six lower flowers except the palets have
fallen away; (3) a magnified flower, open; (4) the flowering glume of
the same outspread.

BRIZA.--(1) A spikelet of B. media, enlarged; (2) a separate flower.

FESTUCA.--(1) A spikelet of F. elatior, enlarged; (2) a separate flower;
(3) lower part of a flowering glume, outspread.

BROMUS.--(1) A spikelet of B. secalinus, or Chess; and (2) a separate
flower, enlarged.

[Illustration: Genera of Grasses. Plate X]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XI.

UNIOLA.--(1) A spikelet of U. latifolia, of about the natural size; (2)
a flower, enlarged; (3) empty flowering glume of the lowest (sterile)
flower.

PHRAGMITES--(1) A spikelet of P. communis, enlarged; (2) one of the
perfect flowers, enlarged; and (3) the lowest flower, which has stamens
only.

ARUNDINARIA.--(1) A spikelet of A. macrosperma; and (2) a separate
flower, magnified.

SCHEDONNARDUS.--(1) Portion of the spike of S. Texanus, enlarged; and
(2) a flower, magnified.

LOLIUM.--(1) Portion of the spike of L. temulentum; and (2) a separate
flower, magnified.

AGROPYRUM.--(1) Portion of the spike of A. repens, or Couch-Grass, of
about the natural size; (2) a flower, magnified.

HORDEUM.--(1) The three one flowered spikelets from one joint of the
spike of H. jubatum, with their awn-like empty glumes, the lateral
flowers abortive and neutral, the middle one alone perfect; (2) this
perfect flower (with an awn-like rudiment) open and enlarged.

ELYMUS.--(1) The two spikelets of one joint of the spike of E.
Virginicus, about the natural size; (2) the empty glumes and the flowers
of one spikelet, enlarged and displayed; and (3) an open flower, more
magnified.

GYMNOSTICHUM.--(1) A spikelet of G. Hystrix; and (2) an expanded flower,
magnified.

ASPRELLA.--(1) A spikelet of A. Hystrix; and (2) an expanded flower,
magnified.

[Illustration: Genera of Grasses. Plate XI]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XII.

DESCHAMPSIA.--(1) Panicle of D. flexuosa; (2) a spikelet, magnified, the
parts displayed; and (3) one of the flowers detached and open.

DANTRONIA.--(1) Panicle of D. spicata; (2) a spikelet enlarged; and (3)
a separate flower from the same.

TRISETUM.--(1) A spikelet of T. subspicatum, var. molle, expanded and
magnified; and (2) a separate open flower.

AVENA.--(1) A spikelet of A. striata, displayed and magnified; and (2) a
separate flower.

ARRHENATHERUM.--A spikelet of A. avenaceum, displayed and magnified; (1)
the empty glumes; (2) the flowers, the lower one staminate only, the
next perfect, and the third a rudiment.

HOLCUS.--(1) A spikelet of H. lanatus, magnified; (2) the same displayed
to show the two flowers, the lower perfect and awnless, the upper
staminate and awned.

[Illustration: Genera of Grasses. Plate XII]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XIII.

HIEROCHLOA.--(1) A spikelet of H. borealis, enlarged; (2) the same
displayed, the flowers separated from the empty glumes, the two lateral
ones with 3 stamens and no pistil, the middle or terminal one with a
pistil and only 2 stamens.

ANTHOXANTHUM--(1) The spike-like inflorescence of A. odoratum; (2) a
spikelet magnified; (3) another with the parts displayed, the flowers
raised from the lower empty glumes, the lateral glumes empty and awned,
the terminal flower perfect and diandrous.

PHALARIS.--(1) A spikelet of P. arundinacea, enlarged, (2) the empty
glumes, and a perfect flower with a hairy rudiment on each side of it.

MILIUM.--(1) Portion of the panicle of M. effusum; (2) a closed
spikelet, magnified; and (3) the same displayed.

AMPHICARPUM.--(1) A spikelet from the panicle of A. Purshii, magnified;
(2) the same, with the parts displayed; and (3) a radical (fertile)
spikelet, enlarged.

PASPALUM.--(1) Inflorescence of P. laeve; (2) a closed spikelet,
enlarged; (3) the same with the parts displayed.

PANICUM.--(1) Part of a spike of P. sanguinale; (2) one of its
spikelets, magnified; (3) the same with its parts displayed, the three
lower glumes empty.--(4) A spikelet of P. capillare, magnified; (5) the
same displayed, the three lower glumes empty.--(6) A spikelet of P.
clandestinum, magnified, (7) the same displayed, the lower flower
represented by a glume and palet only.--(8) A spikelet of P. virgatum,
magnified; (9) the same displayed, the lower flower staminate.

SETARIA.--(1) A magnified spikelet of S. glauca, with the accompanying
cluster of bristles, (2) the spikelet displayed, showing the neutral
lower flower, of a glume and palet only, and the perfect flower.

[Illustration: Genera of Grasses. Plate XIII]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XIV.

CENCHRUS.--(1) Involucre of C. tribuloides, in flower, enlarged; (2)
longitudinal section of the same; (3) a spikelet displayed (the stigmas
should belong to the right-hand flower; the left-hand or lower flower is
only staminate).

TRIPSACUM.--(1) Piece of the spike (of the natural size), pistillate
below, staminate above; (2) a longitudinal section of one of the
pistillate spikelets; (3) a pistillate spikelet with its parts
displayed; (4) a staminate (two-flowered) spikelet, with its parts
displayed.

ERIANTHUS.--(1) Part of the hairy inflorescence with two spikelets of E.
saccharoides, enlarged; (2) one of the spikelets displayed.

ANDROPOGON.--(1) Small portion of the spike of A. furcatus, enlarged,
with one fertile and awned spikelet, and one staminate and awnless
spikelet; (2) the fertile spikelet, and (3) the staminate spikelet,
displayed.

CHRYSOPOGON.--(1) A fertile spikelet of C. nutans, enlarged, with a
sterile pedicel on each side; (2) the spikelet displayed.

[Illustration: Genera of Grasses. Plate XIV]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XV.

BECKMANNIA.--(1) Inflorescence of B. erucaeformis, var., reduced in size;
(2) a spike, enlarged; (3) a spikelet, and (4) the same opened; (5) the
flower.

ERIOCHLOA.--(1) Inflorescence of E. polystachya, reduced; (2) a
spikelet, enlarged, and (3) the same opened; (4) the flower opened.

ROTTBOELLIA.--(1) Portion of the spike of R. rugosa, somewhat reduced,
and (2) a portion enlarged, with (3) the fertile spikelet and (4) the
pedicelled sterile spikelet of the middle joint displaced; (5) the
fertile spikelet opened; (6) the third empty glume, and (7) the flower.

AMMOPHILA.--(1) Inflorescence of A. arundinacea, reduced; (2) a
spikelet, enlarged, and (3) the flower, with a hairy rudiment at the
base of the palet.

LEPTOCHLOA.--(1) Inflorescence of L. mucronata, reduced; (2) portion of
rhachis of a spike, bearing two spikelets; (3) a 3-flowered spikelet;
and (4) a flower removed.

BUCHLOE.--(1) Staminate and (2) pistillate inflorescence of B.
dactyloides; (3) a staminate spikelet, and (4) one of its flowers
removed; (5) a pistil late spikelet, enlarged; (6) vertical section of
same; and (7) the outer empty glume removed.

MUNROA.--(1) Inflorescence of M. squarrosa; (2) a spikelet, enlarged;
and (3) a flower, opened.

SCOLOCHLOA.--(1) Inflorescence of S. festucacea, reduced; (2) a
spikelet, enlarged; and (3) a flower.

PUCCINELLIA.--(1) Inflorescence of P. maritima, reduced; (2) a spikelet,
enlarged; and (3) a flower.

[Illustration: Genera of Grasses. Plate XV]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XVI.

POLYPODIUM.--Plant of P. vulgare; piece of the frond; a magnified
sporangium with its stalk, and another bursting and discharging spores.

ONOCLEA.--(1) Pinna of the sterile frond of O. Struthiopteris; (2)
portion of a fertile frond; (3) a piece of one pinna cut off to show the
manner in which it is rolled up; and (4) a portion of the last,
magnified, with one side unrolled; toward the base the sporangia all
removed, to show how the fruit-dots are borne each on the middle of a
vein.

PELLAEA.--Sterile and fertile plants of P. gracilis, and (1) a portion of
the fertile frond enlarged, with a piece of the marginal indusium turned
back to display the fruit; the sporangia are all removed from the
fruit-bearing tips of the two forks of the lower vein.

[Illustration: Genera of Filices. Plate XVI]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XVII.

PTERIS.--A pinnule of P. aquilina, and (2) a piece of one of the lobes,
enlarged, the marginal indusium rolled back on one side, displaying the
fruit; the sporangia all removed from the lower part to show the
receptacle that bears them, viz. a cross-line connecting the tips of the
veins.

ADIANTUM.--(1) Piece of the frond of A. pedatum; (2) a pinnule somewhat
enlarged; and (3) a piece of one more enlarged, with the indusium of one
fruit dot turned back to show the attachment of the fruit.

CHEILANTHES.--(1) Small plant of C. vestita; and (2) a fruit-bearing
pinnule, enlarged.

WOODWARDIA.--(1) Portion of the sterile and (2) of the fertile frond of
W. augustifolia; (3) a piece of the latter, enlarged; (4) piece of the
frond of W. Virginica; and (5) part of a fruiting lobe, enlarged.

[Illustration: Genera of Filices. Plate XVII]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XVIII.

CAMPTOSORUS.--Plant of C. rhizophyllus, and (1) a portion of a frond,
with fruit dots, enlarged.

SCOLOPENDRIUM.--Tip of a fertile frond of S. vulgare, and (2) a piece
enlarged, with two fruit-dots.

ASPLENIUM.--(1) A pinna of A. thelypteroides; and (2) part of a lobe in
fruit, enlarged.

DICKSONIA.--(1) Pinna of D. pilosiuscula; (2) portion of a pinnule,
enlarged; and (3) a fruit-dot in its cup shaped indusium.

[Illustration: Genera of Filices. Plate XVIII]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XIX.

CYSTOPTERIS.--(1) Piece of the frond of C. bulbifera; (2) a lobe in
fruit, enlarged; and (3) a small portion more magnified, bearing a
fruit-dot with its indusium thrown back.

WOODSIA.--(1) Small frond of W. glabella; (2) a part of a fruiting pinna
of the same, magnified; and (3) a separate indusium, more magnified; (4)
a piece of a fruitful pinnule of W. obtusa, enlarged; and (5) a fruit
with the opened indusium beneath, more magnified.

ASPIDIUM.--(1) Pinna of A. (Dryopteris) marginale; and (2) a magnified
fruiting portion; (3) piece of A. (Polystichum) acrostichoides; and (4)
a small fruiting portion, magnified.

ONOCLEA.--Sterile and fertile frond of O. sensibilis; (1) front view of
a fruiting contracted pinnule, enlarged; and (2) the same laid open and
viewed from the other side; on one lobe the sporangia are removed from
the veins.

[Illustration: Genera of Filices. Plate XIX]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XIX.

CYSTOPTERIS.--(1) Piece of the frond of C. bulbifera; (2) a lobe in
fruit, enlarged; and (3) a small portion more magnified, bearing a
fruit-dot with its indusium thrown back.

WOODSIA.--(1) Small frond of W. glabella; (2) a part of a fruiting pinna
of the same, magnified; and (3) a separate indusium, more magnified; (4)
a piece of a fruitful pinnule of W. obtusa, enlarged; and (5) a fruit
with the opened indusium beneath, more magnified.

ASPIDIUM.--(1) Pinna of A. (Dryopteris) marginale; and (2) a magnified
fruiting portion; (3) piece of A. (Polystichum) acrostichoides; and (4)
a small fruiting portion, magnified.

ONOCLEA.--Sterile and fertile frond of O. sensibilis; (1) front view of
a fruiting contracted pinnule, enlarged; and (2) the same laid open and
viewed from the other side; on one lobe the sporangia are removed from
the veins.

[Illustration: Genera of Filices. Plate XIX]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XX.

SCHIZAEA.--Plant of S. pusilla, of the natural size; (1) a fertile pinna
with eleven sporangia, magnified, and (2) a separate sporangium, more
magnified.

LYGODIUM.--(1) Summit of frond of L. palmatum, with fertile and sterile
divisions; (2) a fruiting lobe enlarged, with two of the lower scales,
or indusia, removed, displaying a sporangium under each; and (3) a
sporangium more magnified.

OSMUNDA.--(1) Small piece of the frond of O. Claytoniana, with a fertile
and a sterile pinna; (2) a portion of the fruit magnified; and (3) one
sporangium more magnified.

BOTRYCHIUM.--Plant of B. ternatum, and (1) a portion of the fruit, with
six sporangia, magnified.

OPHIOGLOSSUM.--Frond of O. vulgatum, and (1) a portion of the fruiting
spike enlarged.

[Illustration: Genera of Filices. Plate XX]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XXI.

EQUISETUM.--(1) Upper part of fertile plant of E. limosum; (2) one of
the shield shaped scales or receptacles of the spike, with the six
sporangia underneath, enlarged; (3) same seen from below, discharging
the spores; (4) a magnified spore with the club shaped filaments
spreading; and (5) the same with the filaments coiled up.

LYCOPODIUM.--Plant of L. Carolinianum, and (1) a magnified scale of the
spike removed, with the sporangium in its axil, discharging powdery
spores.

SELAGINELLA.--Plant of S. rupestris; (1) part of a fertile spike,
enlarged; (2) scale from the upper part of it, with its sporangium,
containing innumerable powdery spores; (3) scale from the base, with its
sporangium containing few large spores; and (4) three large spores.

ISOETES.--(1) Plant of I. lacustris; (2) sporocarp containing the minute
spores, cut across, enlarged; (5) same divided lengthwise; (3) sporocarp
with the large spores, divided lengthwise; and (4) three large spores
more magnified.

AZOLLA.--(1) Plant; (2) a portion magnified, with conceptacles of both
kinds; (3) the macrosporic one, more magnified; (4) the microsporic one,
more magnified; (5) the same burst open, showing the stalked
microsporangia; (6) one of the latter more magnified; (7) another
bursting; and (8) three masses of microspores beset with glochidiate or
barbed bristles.

[Illustration: Gen. of Lycopodiaceae, Equisetaceae, &c. Pl. XXI]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XXII.

RICCIA.--Plant of R. natans; section of thallus, showing two imbedded
capsules and numerous air cavities; spores enclosed in a mother cell;
three free spores; and calyptra with style.

ANTHOCEROS.--Plant of A. laevis; portion of the columella and valves of
the capsule, with spores and elaters; two spores and two elaters.

NOTOTHYLAS.--Plants of N. orbicularis; section of the thallus through
the involucre; apex of protruding capsule; lower half of capsule showing
the columella; upper half of capsule; a gemma, an antheridium; twelve
free spores, and two clusters of spores (4 in each).

ASTERELLA.--Plant of A. hemisphaerica; [female] receptacle viewed from
above, the same from below; capsule dehiscing, with remains of calyptra
at base; section of [male] disk; an elater, a portion of same, and
spores.

SPHIEROCARPUS.--Plant of S. terrestris, cluster of five involucres;
involucre enclosing a capsule; capsule filled with spores; and three
spores.

DUMORTIERA.--Portions of [male] and [female] plants of D. hirsuta;
[female] receptacle showing three involucres, two with capsules; capsule
with calyptra; section of [male] disk; elater and portion of same;
spores.

AITONIA.--Plant of A. Wrightii; upper view of [female] receptacle with
three involucres; side view of same, involucre partly cut away showing
capsule and remains of calyptra; a capsule closed, and dehiscent; an
elater, a piece of same, and spores.

CONOCEPHALUS.--Parts of [male] and [female] plants of C. conicus;
section of [female] receptacle, showing two involucres and capsules;
capsule with ruptured calyptra; section of [male] disk; elaters, a
portion of one, and spores.

PREISSIA.--Parts of [male] and [female] plants of P. commutata; section
of [female] receptacle; perianth opened showing calyptra and capsule,
section of part of [male] disk; elaters, a part of one, and spores.

MARCHANTIA.--Parts of [male] and [female] plants of M. polymorpha;
section of receptacle; perianth, calyptra, and capsule; section of part
of [male] disk; an elater, part of same, and spores.

FIMBRIARIA--Plant of F. tenella; [female] receptacle, and section of
same; capsule dehiscing; elaters and spores.

PALLAVICINIA.--Plant of P. Lyellii, part of thallus with involucre,
perianth, and calyptra; perianth cut away showing young calyptra;
capsule closed, and dehiscent, antheridium enclosed in a leaf, elater
and spores.

[Illustration: Genera of Hepaticae. Plate XXII]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XXIII.

PELLIA.--Plant of P. epiphylla; calyptra with base of pedicel; capsule;
an elater, part of same, two spores, and two antheridia.

BLASIA.--Plants of B. pusilla; section of cavity at the end of the
midrib showing young perianth and calyptra; end of thallus with calyptra
and protruding capsule; capsule dehiscing; elaters and spores; part of
elater and two spores; [male] thallus with two antheridia; gemmiparous
thallus with two receptacles; section of a receptacle showing enclosed
gemmae and the protruded orifice.

METZGERIA.--Plants ([male], [female], and gemmiparous) of M. furcata,
and parts of same enlarged; hispid perianth with 2-lobed involucral leaf
and base of pedicel; a gemma; an antheridium; elaters and spores.

ANEURA.--Plants ([male] and [female]) of A. sessilis; section of fleshy
calyptra with base of pedicel; dehiscing capsule bearded by persistent
elaters; elater, part of same, and spores; part of thallus with long
deflexed [male] receptacles, and one cut transversely showing
antheridia.

FOSSOMBRONIA.--Plant of F. pusilla, and a part enlarged; capsule
dehiscing, with perianth and involucral leaves; part of stem with two
leaves and dorsal antheridia; an antheridium, elaters, and spores.

GEOCALYX.--Plant of G. graveolens; two pairs of leaves with underleaves;
part of stem with an underleaf; section of involucre showing calyptra
and base of pedicel; dehiscent capsule; elaters and spores.

GRIMALDIA.--Parts of [male] and [female] plants of G. barbifrons;
section of [male] disk; [female] receptacle and section of same;
dehiscent capsule; elaters and spores.

CHILOSCYPHUS.--Plant of C. ascendens; a leaf with underleaf; a pair of
leaves with antheridia; a part of stem with involucral leaves, perianth,
and calyptra; dehiscent capsule; elaters and spores.

HARPANTHUS.--Plant of H. Flotovianus, and same enlarged; a pair of
leaves with underleaf; perianth with involucral leaves, and section
showing calyptra; elaters, a part of one, and spores.

LOPHOCOLEA.--Plant of L. heterophylla; a part enlarged with involucral
leaves and perianth; cross section of perianth; three pairs of leaves
with underleaves; a leaf and antheridium; an underleaf; an elater and
spores.

CEPHALOZIA.--Plant of C. multiflora; two pairs of leaves; perianth with
involucral leaves; an involucral leaf; calyptra; capsule closed, and
dehiscent; an elater and spores.

GYMNOMITRIUM.--Plants of G. concinnatum; three pairs of leaves; apex of
stem with involucral leaves and dehiscent capsule; two involucral
leaves; calyptra.

MARSUPELLA.--Plant of M. emarginata; part of same with involucral
leaves; involucre and perianth opened showing calyptra and base of
pedicel; capsule; elater and spores.

[Illustration: Genera of Hepaticae. Plate XXIII]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XXIV.

SCAPANIA.--Plant of S. undulata; apex of stem with involucral leaves and
perianth enclosing calyptra; three pairs, of leaves, a capsule, elater
and spores.

PLAGIOCHILA.--Plant of P. interrupta; five leaves; an underleaf;
perianth enclosing calyptra; antheridia, capsule, elaters, and spores.

ODONTOSCHISMA.--Plant of O. Sphagni; parts of stems, one bearing gemmae,
the other a perianth with involucral leaves; an involucral leaf; a
capsule, elaters, and spores.

LEJEUNEA.--Plant of L. clypeata; perianth with capsule and involucral
leaves; cross section of perianth; part of stein with [male] branch;
leaves with underleaves; elaters and spores.

FRULLANIA.--Plant of F. Asagrayana; two pairs of leaves seen from above,
and from below with underleaves and ventral lobes; perianth with
involucral leaves; cross-section of perianth, involucral leaf; capsule,
elaters, and spores.

PORELLA.--Plant of P. platyphylla; a pair of leaves with underleaves;
part of stem with [male] spikes; an antheridium in its leaf; perianth
with involucral leaves and capsule; an elater, and spores.

RADULA.--Plant of R. obconica; end of branch with perianth and capsule
and lateral [male] branches; a [male] branch; an antheridium; leaves
seen from above and below; a capsule, elater, and spores.

PTILIDIUM.--Plant of P. ciliare; a pair of leaves; an underleaf;
perianth with involucral leaves; capsule, elater, and spores.

BAZZANIA.--Plant of B. trilobata; two pairs of leaves with underleaves
and [male] spike; portion of [male] spike, and antheridium; capsule,
elaters, and spores.

TRICHOCOLEA.--Plant of T. tomentella; leaf and underleaf; capsule;
elater and spores.

HERBERTA.--Plant of H. adunca; portion with leaves and underleaves;
perianth; capsules; elater and spores.

LEPIDOZIA.--Plant of L. reptans; portion with leaves and underleaves;
antheridium in its leaf and free, perianth with involucre; capsule,
elater, and spores.

KANTIA.--Plant of K. Trichomanis; leaves and underleaves; hairy
involucre, and section showing calyptra; capsule with spiral valves;
elater and spores.

[Illustration: Genera of Hepaticae. Plate XXIV]


EXPLANATION OF PLATE XXV.

JUBULA.--Plant of typical J. Hutchinsiae, enlarged; two pairs of leaves
seen from below; a lower lobe separate and divided; a perianth with its
outer involucre and the dehiscent capsule; an elater.

BLEPHAROSTOMA.--Plant of B. trichophylla, and same enlarged; perianth
with the outer involucre, ventral side; two cross sections of perianth;
portion of the margin of its orifice, expanded.

LIOCHLAENA.--Plant of L. lanceolata; end of fertile branch, with two
leaves, two involucral leaves, and young perianth; summit of perianth,
perianth and involucre, the capsule protruding; capsule on its pedicel,
with remains of calyptra; capsule dehiscent.

MYLIA.--Plants of M. Taylori, enlarged; portion of stem, seen from
beneath, a cauline leaf (below); an underleaf; an involucral leaf
(above); perianth partly cut away, showing the calyptra and exserted
dehiscent capsule.

DYPLOPHYLLUM.--Plant of typical D. albicans, enlarged; a folded leaf; a
leaf with the upper lobe expanded to show the nerve; an involucral leaf
seen from without, and from within; perianth, cut longitudinally;
calyptra.

NARDIA.--Plant of N. crenulata (a slender small leaved form), enlarged;
portion of upper stem with leaves; perianth; calyptra; elater and
spores.

JUNGERMANNIA.--Sec. 1. Plants of J. Schraderi, natural size and enlarged;
two leaves; two underleaves; involucre; summit of perianth.--Sec. 2. Plant
of J. barbata, enlarged; portion of stem with leaves and underleaves;
perianth with involucre; involucre.--Sec. 3. Plant of J. Helleriana,
enlarged; summit of stem with leaves, involucre, and perianth;
involucral leaves, margin of perianth unfolded--Sec. 4. Plants of J.
inflata, natural size and enlarged; cauline leaves; involucral leaf.

LUNULARIA.--Sterile and fruiting plants of L. vulgaris, enlarged;
section of involucre, showing calyptra and capsule; lunate receptacle of
sterile plant, with gemmae.

MARSILIA.--Portion of plant of M. quadrifolia, a sporocarp; sporocarp
burst in water and extruding the gelatinous ring with compartments
attached.

[Illustration: Genera of Hepaticae. Plate XXV]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Manual of the Botany of the
Northern United States, by Asa Gray

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MANUAL OF BOTANY OF NORTHERN U.S. ***

***** This file should be named 39423.txt or 39423.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/4/2/39423/

Produced by John Williams and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
