The Project Gutenberg EBook of Is Life Worth Living Without Immortality?, by
M. M. Mangasarian

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Is Life Worth Living Without Immortality?
       A Lecture Delivered Before the Independent Religious Society, Chicago

Author: M. M. Mangasarian

Release Date: April 16, 2012 [EBook #39455]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IS LIFE WORTH LIVING WITHOUT ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Paul Clark and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







 Transcriber's Note:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible, including non-standard spelling and punctuation.

    Some changes of spelling and punctuation have been made. They are
    listed at the end of the text.

    OE ligatures have been expanded.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.

    Bold text has been marked with =equals signs=.




 _Sacrificing the earth for paradise is giving up
 the substance for the shadow._

 --Victor Hugo.

 Is Life Worth Living
 Without Immortality?

 A Lecture Delivered Before
 the Independent Religious
 Society, Chicago

 By
 M. M. MANGASARIAN

     I may be doing you an injustice, Bertie, but it seemed to me in
     your last that there were indications that the free expression of
     my religious views had been distasteful to you. That you should
     disagree with me I am prepared for; but that you should object to
     free and honest discussion of those subjects which above all others
     men should be honest over, would, I confess, be a disappointment.
     The Free-thinker is placed at this disadvantage in ordinary
     society, that whereas it would be considered very bad taste upon
     his part to obtrude his unorthodox opinion, no such consideration
     hampers those with whom he disagrees. There was a time when it took
     a brave man to be a Christian. Now it takes a brave man not to be.

 SIR A. CONAN DOYLE,
 The Stark Munro Letters--Fourth Letter.




Is Life Worth Living Without Immortality?


Is life worth living? If we are in good health, it certainly is. In a
certain sense, even to ask such a question implies that we are not at
our best. It is the sick, mentally as well as physically, who question
the value of life. We cannot appreciate health too highly. Our
philosophy of life is more profoundly affected by the condition of our
body than we have any idea. If I were composing a new set of beatitudes,
one of them would be in exaltation of health:

_Blessed are they that have health, for they shall take pleasure in
life._

Health also inspires _faith_ in life. The first commandment of the
decalogue, instead of reading, "Thou shalt have no other gods before
me," which is metaphysical and without definite meaning, could with much
advantage be altered to read:

_Thou shalt not trifle with thy health._

How fortunate it would have been for man had the "Deity" given that as
his first and best thought to the world! Then, indeed, would he have
been the friend of man. We cannot preserve our health without observing
all the other commandments--of temperance, purity, sanity, self
possession, contentment, and serenity of mind. "Behold I bring unto you
health" ought to be the glad tidings of salvation. Give us that, and all
the rest will be added unto us. Health is the foundation of character.
If the foundation is insecure--if we have inherited disease and
corruption, we can be sound, neither in our thoughts nor in our actions.
The time may come when to be sickly will be considered a crime. A
revolution in our feelings in this matter is already taking place.
Formerly it was thought that the path to self-development is through
sorrow and suffering, and that the sick were the saints. The verdict of
science today, which has been confirmed by the growing experience of
man, is that pleasurable activity is the most wholesome environment for
man. Happiness has upon human nature the same effect that the sunshine
has upon the soil. Man is a failure if he is not happy. The highest
accomplishment is the ability to enjoy life. To those who say that
service or usefulness is the noblest aim of life, we answer, "Why should
those who serve the noblest ends of life be unhappy?"

But let me first present to you the answer which one of America's best
known psychologists, Prof. William James, of Harvard, gives to this most
interesting question. Prof. James is a teacher not only of the young men
in one of our leading Universities, but his ideas have become a part of
the furniture of the American mind. Both his thought and the candor with
which he expresses himself have secured for him a large following. Prof.
James has an engaging style. Not that he is not also a profound thinker,
but his sentences are as symmetrical as they are solid. He writes to be
understood. That, I take it, is the secret of the masters of style. The
gods always speak from behind "clouds and darkness." That explains why
it is so difficult to understand what they say. But the great teachers
permit no screens, draperies, curtains, or hangings of any sort to come
between them and the public. There is nothing hidden about their
thoughts. Neither do they speak in parables. Whoever can not make
himself understood should hold his peace.

The parents of this renowned psychologist were Swedenborgians, and I
believe the professor is still, nominally, at least, a member of the
Swedenborgian church. Swedenborg, as you know, was a mystic; he was,
indeed, a sort of a medium, who claimed to have seen and conversed with
God face to face, and to have received from him a supplementary
revelation, in some such sense that Mrs. Eddy or Joseph Smith received
one. Of course, Swedenborg was also a philosopher, which Smith and Eddy
are not. The early connections and training of Prof. James explain in
part his interest in the work of the Psychical Research Society, of
which he is one of the officers. So-called spiritist or occult
phenomena, such as automatic slate writing, table tipping and telepathy,
have always interested Prof. James, but he is by no means an easy
victim, though he looks forward hopefully to the time when science will
definitely locate the undiscovered country whose bourne has not yet been
sighted.

Some years ago when Prof. James and I were summer neighbors in New
Hampshire--near Chocorua lake--I heard the professor deliver a lecture
on hypnotism in the village church of Tamworth. An incident occurred at
the time which has its bearing on the experience our Society is having
with the directors of the Orchestral Association. While Prof. James was
explaining the phenomena of hypnotism from the pulpit, I saw, from where
I was sitting, an elderly woman showing signs of restlessness in her
seat. Presently she rose to her feet, walked up the aisle slowly, and
taking her stand directly in front of Prof. James on the platform, she
upbraided him for desecrating the House of God by delivering in it a
lecture on hypnotism. In clear, though trembling tones, she ordered him
out of the church. Naturally the professor was greatly embarrassed, as
was also his audience. The old woman, however, was soon prevailed upon
by the elders of the church to resume her seat and keep the peace. But
she was trying to oust Prof. James from the church, as the trustees of
this building are trying to oust our Society from this hall, on account
of religious differences. The old woman of New Hampshire was not
successful, and I trust that the old woman of Chicago will not fare any
better. To close a hall to a movement is an easy thing, but to close the
ear of the world to its message is not so easy.

I have spoken of the early education of Prof. James in order to explain
the metaphysical bent of his mind. As a psychologist, he has an
international reputation, but his greatest vogue is among, what are
called, the liberal Christians. The orthodox have no use for him, but to
those who are endeavoring to interpret Christianity so as to make it
harmonize with modern thought--who are filling the ancient skins with
wine newly pressed--he is a defender and a champion of the faith. Prof.
James seems to have discovered a way by which one can be a scientist and
a supernaturalist at the same time. He appears to be of the opinion that
a person may deny or reject many of the orthodox dogmas, and still be
justified in calling himself a Christian. He is, in fact, one of the
New Theologians, who are supposed to have reconstructed Christianity,
and saved the supernatural. For this service, Prof. James and his
_confreres_ are held in high esteem by those who would have had to give
up Christianity but for their timely help.

In his lecture on, "Is Life Worth Living," the professor admits that he
is writing for the pessimists. It is they who are in the "to be or not
to be" mood of mind. The optimist does not need consolation, for he is
incapable of even suspecting that life is not worth living. Some
temperaments are as incapable of depression or gloom, as others are of
happiness. If there are parts of the world on which the sun never goes
down, so there are natures which know no night. We make a mistake,
however, if we think that the pessimist represents a lower type of
mental evolution. On the contrary, pessimism comes with civilization,
and it generally attacks men and women of a higher culture. Suicide is
rare among the negroes or the less advanced races; but in the United
States, representing the most perfect type of civilization, dowered
magnificently, and rich in the possession of the treasures of art and
nature; in America, the home of hope and opportunity--with its immense
prairies, its great West, its army of earth-subduers, empire-builders,
large-natured, generous, daring, enduring, restless, resistless
pioneers--more than three thousand people every year kill themselves. If
we were to seek for an explanation of this strange phenomenon, the
nearest we can come to it would be to say that these people prefer death
to life because they do not find life worth their while. There is not
enough in it to satisfy them. To use an Emersonian phrase, life is to
them no more than "a sucked orange." When the perfume, the aroma, the
taste, the tints, and the juices have been extracted from the fruit--who
cares for what is left.

Of course, these remarks have no reference to the cases of sudden
suicide, committed in a moment of frenzy--when a man driven, as it were,
by a storm in the brain, lets go of his hold and slips into the
darkness. The professor has in mind rather those who even though they do
not commit suicide, live on reluctantly, under protest, and who treat
life as we would a guest who has overstaid his welcome, and to whose
final departure we look forward with pleasure.

But there is still another class of pessimists who need to be reasoned
with. These are the people who brood over the existence of evil in the
world, and feel the misery of the many so keenly, that they think it
involves a point of honor to consent to be happy in such a world. The
contemplation of human sorrow, the surging waves of which break upon
every shore; and the cry of human anguish rising like the blind cry of
all the seas that roll, has a tendency to slacken the hold of the
reflective mind upon life. Prof. James admits that pessimism is
essentially a religious disease, in the sense that it results from the
inability of man to entertain two contradictory thoughts at the same
time: A father in heaven, whose tender mercies are over all his
children, and children dying of hunger and neglect! Infinite wisdom
enthroned in heaven, and a world running topsy-turvy. The refined mind
cannot contemplate this contradiction without distress. If God is
everywhere, why is there darkness anywhere? If there is within reach an
ocean of truth, why is it doled out to us in driblets which hardly wet
our lips, when we are burning with thirst? Religion provokes desires
which it cannot satisfy, and makes promises which it will not fulfil. It
is this contradiction which bites the soul black and blue. God is
infinite! and behold we are starving. God is light! and we grope in
darkness. God is great! and we cannot budge without crutches. It is this
thought which teases us out of our peace of mind. The idea of a God,
gifted with infinite parts, measured against the helplessness of man,
makes for pessimism.

But in the opinion of Prof. James, religion alone can cure the disease
which religion creates. By religion, he does not mean merely loving
one's neighbor and being loyal to one's best thoughts. Religion,
according to Prof. James, means the belief that beyond this present
life, "there is an unseen world of which we now know nothing positive
but in its relation to which the significance of our mundane life
consists." If this is the first act of an unending drama, it would have
great worth and significance, but if it is a detached and disconnected
piece, upon which the curtain will soon fall never to rise again--if it
is never going to be finished--it loses, according to Prof. James, its
seriousness. In other words, it is the belief that man is an eternal
being whom no catastrophe can crush or annihilate, which makes our
present existence worth while, and which also reconciles us to the
discipline of pain and evil. Life is worth living, in short, if man is
immortal. This is the drift of Prof. James' teaching, as it is also that
of all supernaturalists.

What evidence does the professor offer to prove the existence of an
unseen world and the immortality of man? He offers none. He admits that
science has not as yet demonstrated the reality of an invisible world.
Perhaps it never will, but what of that? "You have got a right to
believe in an unseen world," declares the professor. Is it not
interesting? It will be seen that if the professor has no evidence, he
has many arguments. One of his arguments is that, since, we must either
believe or disbelieve in a future life, neutrality in the matter being
an unattainable thing, why not take our choice, and while we are at it,
choose immortality. Another argument is, that as our longings and
yearnings in other directions have turned out to be prophetic, we have
every reason to believe that the desire for eternal life also will be
fulfilled. Art, science, music, health, have come to us because of an
inner impulse which prompted us to go after them. A similar impulse
urges us to seek the divine, which is a sort of proof that the divine
exists. Still another argument is this: All the great successes or
achievements of life came as a result of the courage that takes risks.
Without audacity, man would never have crossed the ocean, or invented
the aeroplane. If the belief in immortality requires the taking of
risks, if it is hazardous even to hold it, we should not hesitate on
that account, since some of the best things have come to us by taking
risks. Start out for God and immortality; and some day you may cast
anchor in the shining waters that lap the shores of a divine continent.
"We are free to trust at our own risk anything that is not impossible,"
concludes the professor. Finally, there is the argument from analogy,
which I may explain by a personal experience. In the Pasteur Institute
in Paris, last summer, I saw in the vivisection room, physicians in
their white aprons, operating upon live rabbits, cutting and dissecting
them, while the helpless creatures were so fastened to the tables that
they could not move a muscle. Now all this must seem very cruel to the
rabbit. It must think the physician a butcher, devoid of all feeling,
or justice, and it must perforce denounce the world in which such wanton
torture is inflicted by the strong upon the weak. But if the rabbit
could take a larger view, if it could be made to see that its sufferings
are contributing to the progress of science and the amelioration of the
conditions of life upon this planet, and thereby helping to hasten the
day when disease shall be conquered, would it not be reconciled to the
physician's knife and the operating table? The larger view which would
embrace the world unseen will help to give to evil, suffering and
misery, which now we do not understand, a _raison d'etre_. The part of
wisdom as well as of courage then, is to "believe what is in the line of
our needs, for only by the belief is the need fulfilled. Refuse to
believe, and you shall indeed be right, for you shall irretrievably
perish. But believe, and again you shall be right, for you shall save
yourself."

It will be seen by what has preceded, that Prof. James of Harvard
University, throws the weight of his influence on the side of those who
have always maintained that God and immortality are indispensable to the
happiness of man. In his opinion, what a man would be if deprived of his
reason, the universe would be if deprived of a God, and life, of a
future existence. The eminent psychologist takes the further position
that it is immaterial whether or not there is any evidence to prove the
existence of a God or of a life after death. If the belief is essential
to our happiness and usefulness, he thinks we have got the right to
entertain it, irrespective of the question of evidence. "If there is a
belief of any kind to which you have taken a special fancy, or one that
you feel like crying for," the professor seems to say, "help yourself to
it; you have only yourself to suit." Even if such a belief should
involve an element of risk, we are urged to take the risk. If it
requires audacity even to believe in a God and immortality, we are told
to have the audacity. It is his idea that when we are dealing with the
unknown, the important thing is the heart's desire, and not the question
of evidence. In passing, I might suggest that Prof. James would never
have thought of pushing aside with such nonchalance, the question of
evidence, were it not for an irrepressible suspicion that the evidence
is against him. He hopes to do without the evidence because the evidence
will not help him. This reminds us of the saying of the philosopher
Hobbes, that, men are generally against reason when reason is against
_them_.

As already intimated, the liberal party in the church regards Prof.
James as a defender of the faith. He is classed with such men as Sir
Oliver Lodge and Lord Kelvin, who though scientists still believe in the
supernatural, and by their example have made such a belief respectable.
It must be borne in mind, however, that these distinguished men are
Christians only, if at all, in a very loose sense of the word. All the
cardinal doctrines of revelation, such as the creation, the atonement,
the incarnation, and a personal God--even one, to say nothing of a
trinity--they reject. These gentlemen have not enough faith to be
baptised to-day, had they not been baptised in their childhood,--or to
be received into any Christian church without greatly stretching the
rules in their behalf. It remains then quite true, and the argument has
not yet been answered, that there is not a single eminent thinker in
the world to-day who will subscribe to the creed of Christendom
without first going through it with a blue pencil, or a pair of
scissors. But Prof. James, as also Lodge and Kelvin, if they are
not supernaturalists in the ordinary sense of the word, neither are they
anti-supernaturalists. They are between and betwixt, if I may use that
phrase--not quite ready to part with supernaturalism altogether, nor yet
able to hold on to it in its entirety, and so they linger somewhere on
the borders or the edge of it.

The first remark I have to make on the position of these newly recruited
defenders of supernaturalism--even though the supernaturalism which they
defend be of the attenuated kind--is, that their argument is not even an
improvement on that of the theologian. I like the dogmatic and
autocratic, "thus saith the Lord," of theology, much better than the
"suit yourself" of these gentlemen. The one position is as destructive
of intellectual integrity, as the other. The theologian starts with the
fallacy that God can make a thing true by an act of his will--that his
_say so_ makes all need of evidence superfluous. Prof. James and the men
of his school start with a proposition equally fatal to the
truth--namely; that whatever we wish to be true concerning the unknown
is true. All that is needed, for instance, to give the universe a God is
to wish for one. All that is necessary to make a man immortal is to
desire and believe that he is. "The Will to Believe," which is the
title of one of the professor's writings, makes truth the creature of
man, as theology makes it the creature of God. You see that after all,
the theologian and the "scientific" supernaturalist pull together. That
is to say, when science lends itself to theology, it ceases to be
scientific. It is not theology that goes over to science, but science
that goes over to theology. As soon as science appears at the camp of
theology, it is forthwith swallowed up. When Prof. James speaks of the
"will to believe," and never mind the evidence, he is borrowing from
theology, the "will to create" of God.

Even as the Deity in creating did not have to consider anything but his
glory and pleasure, likewise man in believing does not have to consider
anything but his needs and desires. Ask, "What is Truth?" and the
theologian answers: "Whatever God wants it to be." Ask now the scientist
allies of the supernatural, "What is Truth," and they answer: "Whatever
man desires or craves it to be." Of course, it may be objected that it
is only concerning the unknown that man is permitted to dispense with
evidence and consult his will. But there is no merit, for instance, in a
man not telling any falsehoods where he is sure of being found out; his
character is tested by his refusal to lie where he is sure he never will
be found out. It is concerning the unknown about which we can say
anything and everything we please without the fear of ever being caught,
that we should restrain ourselves and show our loyalty to the
everlasting law of honor, never to depart from veracity. To make any
assertions about the unknown is to take an undue advantage of one's
neighbors. "Truth is not mine to do with it as I please," said Giordano
Bruno, "I must obey the truth, not command it." But the
theologico-scientific position is the very reverse of this. If a god
were to ask the question, "What is Truth?" His priests would answer,
"Lord, suit thyself." If men asked, "What is Truth?" the Harvard
professor and his colleagues would reply, "It depends upon your will to
believe."

The name given to this "free and easy philosophy," if I may use such
an expression--is pragmatism, which is a word from the Greek root
_pragmatikos_, whence our word "practice" and "practical." The idea
at the basis of this philosophy is that whatever is practical and
business-like--whatever is necessary to a given program, is
authoritative. The philosopher, Kant, was one of the first to urge that
we have a right to believe as we please concerning the things which we
can neither prove nor disprove by evidence, if such beliefs are
necessary to morality. His modern disciples following his leadership,
take the position that it is the usefulness of a hypothesis or a belief,
and not its truth, that should concern us. "Does it work," is the test,
they say, of the value of a scheme or statement, and not, "Is it true?"
If it works, what do we care whether or not it be true. If it does not
work, it is of no help to us even if it were true. This is identically
the same argument which is advanced by the Roman Catholics, to justify
for instance, the belief in the existence, somewhere in the universe, of
a place called purgatory. "The doctrine of purgatory works," argues the
priest, and therefore, it makes no difference whether or not such a
place really exists. It is a useful, consoling and profitable doctrine.
Therefore it is as good as true. In the phraseology of pragmatism,
millions of people want a purgatory, therefore, there is one. And once
again, to the question, "What is Truth," the answer of both the
theologian and the pragmatist is, "Do not bother about it." And this
describes the attitude of the Protestant as well as of the Catholic
toward truth. They do not bother about it. Yes, _they do not bother
about it_. That is why progress limps and the darkness lingers. People
have been brought up not to bother about truth, which explains why error
is still king of more than half of the world. I cannot find the
words--all words fail me to express my disappointment that a teacher of
the youth in one of our great institutions, who are to be the America of
tomorrow, should in any way contribute to the impression that truth is
secondary; that our needs, our interests, our inclinations, or our
whims, come first, and that if we have not the courage to look the truth
in the face, we can turn around and make terms with myth and fable.

If we were disposed to trip the professor, or by one single thrust to
disqualify him for further action in the arena of thought, we could say
that even from the point of view of the pragmatist, truth comes first,
and that by no imaginable manoeuvring can truth be shifted to a
subordinate rank. It cannot be done. Listen! You may not have to prove
the existence of a God, or of a future, or of a purgatory, before
believing in it. Granted: but you have to prove and you are trying to
prove, that it is _true_ that you do not have to prove them. Even
pragmatists who say that utility is before truth, labor to prove that it
is _true_ that utility is before truth. In other words, they have got to
prove the truth of their theory, whatever that may be, before they can
make it have any value, or before it can command our respect. Things
have to be true else they cannot exist. All the labor of Prof. James has
for its object the demonstration of what he considers to be a truth,
namely: that the truth of the belief concerning the unknown is not
essential. In other words, God may be true or not, a future life may be
true or not, but it has to be true that it makes no difference whether
they are true or not. Wiggle as we may, we cannot escape the ring of
reason that embraces life. This is what I mean when I say that the stars
fight for Rationalism. Truth is so tightly screwed and made fast to the
top of the flag-pole that even hands of iron and steel cannot pull it
down to a lower notch.

A second remark I would make on Prof. James' manner of reasoning is that
such arguments as he uses to prop up the belief in God and immortality
show, not confidence, but desperation, if it is not too strong a word to
use. Urging us to take risks, to have the audacity, to ignore the
question of evidence, to suit ourselves, and, not to mind the facts, is
not the language of sobriety, but of recklessness. To say to a man
standing on the edge of a precipice and looking down into a chasm of
unknown depth and darkness, to jump over, because, perchance, he may
discover his heart's desire at the bottom, is frantic advice, and a man
has to be in a panicky state of mind to let go of the sun and of the
green earth for a possible world at the bottom of the abyss. It was a
thought of Emerson that the humblest bug crawling in the dust with its
back to the sun, and shining with the colors of the rainbow, is a thing
more sublime than any possible angel. If there were the slightest
foundation for the belief in an unseen world, no one would think of
resorting to such extreme measures as our learned professor does, to
uphold it. When I see a man huffing and puffing, I do not conclude that
he has a strong case, on the contrary, I am apt to suspect that it is
the weakness of his cause which has disturbed his serenity. To tell us
that we can will ourselves immortal, or will God into existence, and
that all we need is the audacity to plunge into the unknown, whatever
the risks, reminds me of La Fontaine's parable of the frog--who thought
he could will himself into the size of a cow--with fatal results. The
beginning of wisdom is to recognize one's limitations. To tell a man
that he can _will_ things into existence is to do him an injury. Pitiful
is the God, and chimerical the immortality that has no better foundation
than the whim of man.

According to the doctrine of "The will to believe" there would be no God
if there were no men to "will" his existence, and no immortality if men
did not desire it. This is theology dressed up as philosophy or science.
How was the world made? And the theologians answer, God said, "Let there
be light, and there was light." How was God made? And the pragmatists
answer, "Man said, let there be a God, and there was one." This is
trifling. If the word is not too harsh, I shall call it sophistry, or
mental gymnastics, to which men never resort except when straight
reasoning will not help them.

Sophistry is a plea of guilty. I was debating the other evening in a
Milwaukee theater on the question of the responsibility for the burning
of Joan of Arc. While listening to the defense of the gentleman who was
trying to prove that the Catholic Church was not responsible for her
martyrdom, I said to myself that such a defense would never have been
thought of were it not for the fact that the old claim that the church
of God cannot err had not broken down. In the same way the defense that
the bible should be taken allegorically, proves that the old position
that the bible is from cover to cover the word of God with every letter
and punctuation, as well as word and meaning inspired, is no longer
tenable. To say that the bible must not be taken literally is but
another way of saying that the bible is not true, or that you can make
it mean what you please. Men never put up such a defense for anything
unless they are driven to it by sheer desperation.

My third remark on the pragmatic philosophy of Professor James is that,
besides doing violence to our reason, his doctrine that an unseen world
is indispensable to make life worth living, or to help make the world
moral, places man not only in an unenviable light, but it also does him
a great injustice. If it is true that a man will make a beast of himself
if he finds out that he is not a God, I take the position that he is
beyond hope. Nothing can save him. But it is not true. It is a priestly
tale that a man will not behave himself unless we can promise him the
moon, or the sun, or eternity. A man would only be a contemptible animal
if he must be given toys and trinkets and sawdust dolls to divert his
attention from mischief. The claim of the preachers that unless men are
assured of black-eyed houris and golden harps, or at least,--some sort
of a ghostly existence,--somewhere and at sometime in the future, they
will convert life into a debauch, is simply a falsehood. Man is not so
depraved as that. Indeed, the doctrine of total depravity was invented
by the priests to create a demand for the offices of the church. The
priest cannot afford to believe in human nature. If a man can save
himself, or if he can do good by his own effort, what need would there
be of the mysteries and the sacraments,--the rites and the dogmas?

I had occasion to tell you a few Sundays ago that if a lily can be
white, or a rose so wondrous fair, or a dog so loyal and heroic, without
dickering with the universe for a future reward, man can do, at least,
as much. Would this be expecting too much of him?

In France, there is, in one of the close-by suburbs of Paris, a cemetery
for dogs. Of course, no priest or pastor would think of officiating at
the interment of a dog, however useful or faithful the animal may have
been. They are brought here by their owners and quietly buried. The
visitor finds here, however, many tokens of appreciation and gratitude
for the services and value of the dog to man. Little monuments are
raised over the remains of some of the occupants of the modest graves.
One of these bears the inscription: "He saved forty lives, and lost his
own in the attempt to save the forty-first." He did his best without the
hope of a future reward. Is man lower than the animal? Does he require
the help of the Holy Ghost, the holy angels, the holy Trinity, the holy
infallible church, and all the terrors of hell fire to make him prefer
sense to nonsense, cleanliness to dirt, honor to disgrace, the respect
of his fellows to their contempt, and a peaceful mind to one full of
scorpions? Do we have to swing into existence fabled and mythical beings
and worlds before we can induce a human being to be as natural as a
plant and as faithful as a dog? The doctrine of total depravity is a
disgrace to those who have invented it, and a blight to those who
believe in it. It is not true that we have to be put through acrobatic
exercises,--make our reason turn somersaults, resort to
sophistry,--become frantic with fear about our future,--postulate the
existence of ghosts, Gods, and celestial abodes before we can prefer the
good to the bad and the light to darkness. Supernaturalism is both
negative and destructive. It denies goodness, and it destroys in man the
power of self-help. Von Humboldt's indignation seems pardonable, when he
used the word "infamous," to characterize the theologian's attempt to
make the well-being of the human race depend upon such supernatural
gossip as he had to market.

And what is the verdict of history on this question? Does the belief in
God and immortality make for morality? How then shall we explain the
dark ages which were ages of faith, and why are not the Moslems, whose
faith in Allah and in a future life is very much stronger than ours, a
more moral people than the Europeans or Americans? Why was King Leopold,
the Christian, a moral leper to the hour of his death, while Socrates,
the pagan, who was uncertain about the future, has perfumed the
centuries with his virtues? Has the belief in the supernatural prevented
the criminal waste of human life, protected the child from the
sweat-shop and the factory, or even robbed religion of its sting--the
sting whose bite is mortal to tolerance, brotherhood and intellectual
honesty? There are excellent people who believe in the supernatural and
equally excellent people who ignore the supernatural, from which it
would follow that excellence of character is independent of one's
speculations about either the eternal past, or the eternal future. It is
not true then that we have to prove to man that he has always existed,
or that he shall always exist before we can make him see that the sunset
is beautiful, or that the sea is vast, or that love is the greatest
thing in the world.

A man will be careful of his health whether he expects to live again or
not. He will avoid headaches, fevers, colds, anaemia, nervous
prostrations and diseases of every kind which rack the body and make
life a misery, irrespective of his attitude to the question of survival
after death. The question of health, then, which is a very important
one, is independent of any supernatural belief. It would not affect our
health a particle were the heavens empty or full of gods. In the same
way, men will continue the culture of the mind irrespective of
theological beliefs. Will a man neglect the pleasures of the mind,
despise knowledge and remain content in his ignorance, if he cannot be
sure that he is going to live forever? But if neither the culture of the
body nor that of the mind is in danger of being neglected, is there any
reason to fear that the culture of the affections and the conscience
will suffer without a belief in an unseen world? We have only to look
into the motives which govern human actions to recover our confidence in
the essential soundness of human nature, and in the ability of morality
to take care of itself without the help of ghosts and gods. You love
your country and you are willing to defend its institutions, if need be,
with your life, but is it because your country is immortal? Is America
going to live forever? Is it going to have a future existence? And yet
Washington and his soldiers loved it dearly and risked their lives for
it. Were the ancient Greeks and Romans, to whom patriotism was a
religion, and who loved and fought for their country--fools, because
they did not first make sure that their country was going to live
forever? You are devoted to art, you have built palaces for the
treasures of the brush and the chisel. You have paid fabulous prices for
the works of a Rembrandt and a Titian. Is it because these paintings are
never going to perish? Is the canvas which you adore immortal? You prize
the works of genius--of a Shakespeare, a Goethe, a Voltaire, a Darwin.
You have edifices of marble and steel in which to house the great books
of the world. And yet a fire tomorrow may wipe them out of
existence--they may become lost, as many great works have been lost in
the past. Nevertheless, are they not precious while we have them? If a
humane society will interest itself in the welfare of the horse and the
cat and the dog, which live but a few years; if the flower which blooms
in the morning and fades in the evening can command our attention and
devotion--must a man be a god before we can take any interest in him?
Must somebody be always whispering in our ears, "Ye are gods; ye are
gods," to prevent us from doing violence to ourselves or to our fellows?
And men seek health for the present, not for the future. And they
cultivate the mind to make life richer now and here. And love is desired
because it makes each passing moment a thrill and an ecstasy. What then
is the value of any speculation about the unseen world, since man can
care for his body, mind and heart, without venturing out on an ocean for
which he has neither the sails nor the compass?

       *       *       *       *       *

But the unseen world is necessary, the professor seems to think, in
order to explain the suffering and the injustice in this. In my opinion,
such a belief has done more to postpone the reform of present abuses
than anything else. The time to suppress injustice and to relieve human
suffering is now, not in some distant future,--here and not in an
undiscovered country. The belief in God has tempted man to shirk his
responsibilities. He has left many things to be done by God which he
should have done himself. It is a nobler religion that tells man to do
all he can now, and to do it himself. Moreover, how can what is wrong
here be made right in the next world? What, for instance, can make Joan
of Arc's atrocious murder--a girl of nineteen, who had saved her
country, roasted over a slow fire--right in heaven? What explanation can
the Deity give to us which shall reconcile us to so infamous a crime. A
million eternities, it seems to me, cannot alter the character of that
act. The deed cannot be undone. That frightful page cannot be torn from
the book of life. You cannot destroy the memory of that injustice; you
cannot rub so foul a stain from the hands of even a God. Suppose God
were to say to us in the next world that this crime was necessary to the
progress of civilization. Would that satisfy us? Would we not still wish
for a God who could have contributed to the progress of civilization
without resorting to so unspeakable a murder? And there you are. Another
world can never reconcile us to a policy that required the commission
of crimes whose stench rises to our nostrils. What is wrong can never be
made right.

You remember that to illustrate the thought of Professor James, I spoke
of my visit to the Pasteur Institute in Paris, where, in the vivisection
hall, I saw the physicians operating on live rabbits. Professor James
thinks that if the rabbit could see everything, it might say to the
physician, "Thy will be done." But the rabbit might also say this: "It
is well to advance science and civilization; and if it is a part of the
_scheme_ to make me contribute to it by my sufferings, I am resigned;
but what about the character of the _schemer_ who must torture to death
some of his creatures--slaughter with excruciating pain a portion of his
family--in order to make secure the lives of the rest?" The existence of
evil in a world created by a perfect God is the rock upon which all
religions go to pieces. If God can prevent misery and crime, but prefers
to work through them, he is to be feared; if he cannot help himself,
then he is to be pitied. Who would not rather be the rabbit on the
operating table, with the knife in his flesh, than such a God! A God who
cannot make a rose red except by dipping it in human blood can be sure
that no human being would ever envy him his office. On the last day of
judgment, if such a day there be, it will not be the rabbit, or man, who
will fear the opening of the books; it will be God.

And how do we know that things will be better in the unseen world?
Suppose they should be worse? Jesus intimated that the next world would
be worse, for he says in Matthew 7:13-14, "Wide is the gate, and broad
is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat; because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it."

Surely this is not an encouraging prospect. A future which offers
happiness to a small minority cannot be looked forward to with
enthusiasm. Neither is the thought of a few saved and the many damned a
consolation. One of the oft-repeated claims is that the belief in God
and immortality is such a happiness that he must be an enemy of his race
who would deprive people of it. Even Rationalists are said to envy the
believer his peace of mind. But the truth is the very opposite of this.
There is abundant testimony to prove that of all people the real and
consistent believer is the most unhappy being in the world. The
proverbial unhappiness of the Rationalist, like the proverbial death-bed
horrors of a Thomas Paine and a Voltaire, is a pure fabrication. While
there is absolutely nothing in Rationalism to make anybody miserable,
since it does away with fear, which is the only thing to fear,
Orthodoxy, on the other hand, starts by not only calling this a vale of
tears, but proceeds forthwith to make it so. If we were to place the
greatest known Christian saints on the stand to interrogate them on this
subject, they would one and all confirm our statement. Listen, for
instance, to the confession of Thomas a Kempis: "Lord, I am not worthy
of thy consolation.... Thou dealest justly with me when thou leavest me
poor and desolate, for if I could shed tears as the sea, yet should I
not be worthy of thy consolation. I am worthy only to be scourged and
punished."[A] These are not the words of a buoyant and happy soul. And
listen to the lamentation of John Bunyan: "Sometimes I could for whole
days together feel my very body as well as my mind to shake and totter
under the sense of this dreadful judgment of God.... I felt also such a
clogging and heat in my stomach by reason of this terror that I thought
my breast-bone would split asunder. Oh, how gladly would I have been
anything but a man."[B] I could quote long chapters from the biographies
of the saints to show the wretchedness, the despair and the agony of the
believer, shuddering upon the brink of eternity--uncertain whether
heaven or hell awaits to receive him. I could give you a similar chapter
from my own experience. When I was much younger, I had implicit faith in
the bible and the unseen world. What was the effect of this belief upon
me? Did it make me happy? I can never forget the moments of agony I
spent on my knees, at the "throne of grace." My pillow was often wet
with weeping over sins I had never committed, and fearing a depravity I
could never be guilty of. Christianity in its virile form took hold of
my young heart as the roots of a tree take hold of the earth in which
they grow. I was as sensitive and responsive to its influence as fire is
to the wind that fans it into flame. "Am I saved? How can I be sure that
God has forgiven me? Where would I open my eyes if I should die tonight?
Oh, God! what if I should after all be one of the reprobates--damned
forever." Such was the terrible superstition that cheated me out of a
thousand glorious moments, and made my youth a punishment to me. One day
a member of my church came to me in great distress of mind. He behaved
like one who had actually seen hell. "I am damned, I am damned," he
cried. "God has forsaken me; there is no hope for me." If a wild beast
had its paws in his hair, or a hound its teeth in his flesh, he could
not have been more scared. If he could have only laughed at the stupid
superstition, all the devils of his distorted imagination would have
melted into thin air.

  [A] _Imitation_--III 52.

  [B] Quoted by Cotter Morrison, _Service of Man_--34.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Our religion does not trouble us that way," I hear the Christians say
in reply. Of course not, they no longer believe in it. They let art,
music, science, the drama, business, to divert their attention from this
Asiatic fetish. Rationalism has dissipated the terrors of the future,
and tinted the horizon with beauty and light. But let them believe in
Christianity as their fathers believed in it, let them be sincere with
it, and it will make life miserable for them as it has for thousands of
others. Yes, believe in Christianity as the Apostle Paul did, for
example, and you must agree with him, that, "If in this life only we
have a hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable." And listen to
the cry of despair from the lips of the Son of God: "My God, My God, why
hast Thou forsaken me?" The nails in his hands and feet tore his flesh,
but it was the thought that he had been forsaken by God that broke his
heart. Surely, if a belief in a future life could make anybody happy, it
should have made the death of Jesus a symphony, instead of a tragedy.

       *       *       *       *       *

In conclusion: Not God, nor the unseen world, but Truth is the sovereign
good. There is nothing more excellent. If there be philosophies, they
shall pass away; if there be theologies, they shall pass away; if there
be creeds, cults, gods, they shall pass away. But Truth is _from_
everlasting _to_ everlasting.

     In my mind's eye, I see a wonderful building, something like the
     Coliseum of ancient Rome. The galleries are black with people; tier
     upon tier rise like waves the multitude of spectators who have come
     to see a great contest. A great contest, indeed! A contest in which
     all the world and all the centuries are interested. It is the
     contest--the fight to death--between Truth and Error.

     The door opens, and a slight, small, shy and insignificant looking
     thing steps into the arena. It is Truth. The vast audience bursts
     into hilarious and derisive laughter. Is this Truth? This
     shuddering thing in tattered clothes, and almost naked? And the
     house shakes again with mocking and hisses.

     The door opens again, and Error enters,--clad in cloth of gold,
     imposing in appearance, tall of stature, glittering with gems,
     sleek and huge and ponderous, causing the building to tremble with
     the thud of its steps. The audience is for a moment dazzled into
     silence, then it breaks into applause, long and deafening.
     "Welcome!" "Welcome!" is the greeting from the multitude.
     "Welcome!" shout ten thousand throats.

     The two contestants face each other. Error, in full armor,--backed
     by the sympathies of the audience, greeted by the clamorous
     cheering of the spectators; and Truth, scorned, scoffed at, and
     _hated_. "The issue is a foregone conclusion," murmurs the vast
     audience. "Error will trample Truth under its big feet."

     The battle begins. The two clinch, separate, and clinch again.
     Truth holds its own. The spectators are alarmed. Anxiety appears in
     their faces. Their voices grow faint. Is it possible? Look! See!
     There! Error recedes! It fears the gaze of Truth! It shuns its
     beauteous eyes! Hear it squeak and scream as it feels Truth's
     squeeze upon its wrists. Error is trying to break away from Truth's
     grip. It is making for the door. It is gone!

     The spectators are mute. Every tongue is smitten with the palsy.
     The people bite their lips until they bleed. They cannot explain
     what they have seen. "Who would have believed it?" "Is it
     possible?"--they exclaim. But they can not doubt what their eyes
     have seen. That puny and insignificant looking thing called Truth
     has put ancient and entrenched Error, backed by the throne, the
     altar, the army, the press, the people, and the gods--to rout.

The pursuit of truth! Is not that worth living for? To seek the truth,
to love the truth, to live the truth? Can any religion offer more?

What is the remedy for the pessimism that asks, "Is life worth living?"
A sound mind in a sound body. There is no better preventive of that
depression of spirits whence proceed the diseases which menace life,
and mar the happiness of man, than health--moral, intellectual,
physical--health; individual and social health. The highest ideal of
Christianity is a man of sorrows. The highest ideal of Rationalism is a
man of joy!




THE STORY OF MY MIND OR HOW I BECAME A RATIONALIST

_Price, Fifty Cents_

# In this latest publication of the Independent Religious Society, M. M.
Mangasarian describes his religious experience--how, starting as a
Calvinist, a graduate of Princeton Theological Seminary, and a pastor of
the Spring Garden Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia, he thought and
fought his way up to

RATIONALISM

# The book contains a dedication to "My Children," in which the author
says:

     "I am going to put the story in writing, that you may have it with
     you when I am gone, to remind you of the aims and interests for
     which I lived, as well as to acquaint you with the most earnest and
     intimate period in my career as a teacher of men."

 _ORDER THROUGH_
 THE INDEPENDENT RELIGIOUS SOCIETY
 CHICAGO


EARLIER PUBLICATIONS BY MR. MANGASARIAN

 =A New Catechism.= Fifth Edition, Revised and Enlarged, with Portrait
     of Author. Price                                              $1.00

 =The Truth About Jesus: Is He a Myth?= A new book of 295 pages.
     Illustrated. Cloth, $1.00; Paper                              $0.50

 =Mangasarian-Crapsey Debate on the Historicity of Jesus.= 25c.

 =Pearls.= (New Edition.) Brave Thoughts from Brave Minds. Selected
     and arranged by M. M. Mangasarian. 25c. Presentation Edition,
     limp leather                                                  $1.00


A FEW LECTURES--10c A COPY

 Is the Morality of Jesus Sound?
 Rome-Rule in Ireland, with Postlude on Ferrer.
 How the Bible Was Invented.
 Morality Without God.

Sent postpaid on receipt of price. Ask for complete list.

 INDEPENDENT RELIGIOUS SOCIETY
 CHICAGO




Transcriber's Note:


The following is a list of changes made to the original. The first line
is the original line, the second the corrected one.

    other gods before me" which is metaphysical and without
    other gods before me," which is metaphysical and without

    a _raison d'etre_. The part of wisdom as well as of courage then,
    a _raison d'etre_. The part of wisdom as well as of courage then,

    take an undue advantage of one's neighbors," "Truth is not
    take an undue advantage of one's neighbors. "Truth is not

    manoeuvreing can truth be shifted to a subordinate rank.
    manoeuvring can truth be shifted to a subordinate rank.

    frantic advice, and a man has to be in a panicy state of mind
    frantic advice, and a man has to be in a panicky state of mind

    because it makes each passing moment a thrill and an ecstacy.
    because it makes each passing moment a thrill and an ecstasy.

    straight is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth
    strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth

    instance, to the confession of Thomas A'Kempis: "Lord, I
    instance, to the confession of Thomas a Kempis: "Lord, I






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Is Life Worth Living Without
Immortality?, by M. M. Mangasarian

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IS LIFE WORTH LIVING WITHOUT ***

***** This file should be named 39455.txt or 39455.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/4/5/39455/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Paul Clark and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
