Project Gutenberg's The Hotel St. Francis Cook Book, by Victor Hirtzler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hotel St. Francis Cook Book

Author: Victor Hirtzler

Release Date: April 27, 2012 [EBook #39550]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOTEL ST. FRANCIS COOK BOOK ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation, accents, capitalization and spelling in the
  original text have been preserved. Obvious punctuation and spelling
  errors have been corrected. Page number and spelling inconsistencies
  between the index and the text have been corrected to agree with the
  text.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text by =equal
  signs=.


  Page 235: word missing before "in a wine glassful"
  Page 119: Same recipe called Beef Montpasson and Beef Montbasson




[Illustration: Victor Hirtzler]




     The
     Hotel St. Francis
     Cook Book

     By Victor Hirtzler
     Former Chef of Hotel St. Francis
     San Francisco


     Published by
     THE HOTEL MONTHLY PRESS
     JOHN WILLY, Inc.
     950 Merchandise Mart
     CHICAGO 54

     PRINTED IN U. S. A.




     Copyright 1919, by Victor Hirtzler.
     Printed and Bound in U. S. A.




PREFACE


In this, my book, I have endeavored to give expression to the art of
cookery as developed in recent years in keeping with the importance of
the catering business, in particular the hotel business, which, in
America, now leads the world.

I have been fortunate in studying under the great masters of the art in
Europe and America; and since my graduation as Chef I have made several
journeys of observation to New York, and to England, France and
Switzerland to learn the new in cooking and catering.

I have named my book The Hotel St. Francis Cook Book in compliment to
the house which has given me in so generous measure the opportunity to
produce and reproduce, always with the object of reflecting a cuisine
that is the best possible.

     VICTOR HIRTZLER.




JANUARY 1

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced oranges
       Farina with cream
       Calf's liver and bacon
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Oriental
       Tripe and potatoes, family style
       Cold ham and tongue
       Celery root, field and beet salad
       Port de Salut cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme d'Orleans
       Boiled whitefish, Netherland sauce
       Squab pot pie, a l'Anglaise
       Lettuce and tomatoes, mayonnaise
       Savarin Montmorency
       Demi tasse

=Eggs Oriental.= Put on a plate one slice of tomato fried in butter, on
top of the tomato place six slices of cucumber simmered in butter and
well seasoned, on top of that one poached egg, and cover with sauce
Hollandaise.

=Tripe and potatoes, family style.= Slice the white ends of six leeks
very fine, put in sauce pan with four ounces of butter and simmer for
five minutes. Then add a scant spoonful of flour and simmer again. Then
add one pound of tripe cut in pieces one inch square, one pint of
bouillon, two raw potatoes sliced fine, some chopped parsley, salt and
pepper, and one-half glass of white wine. Cover and cook for an hour, or
until all is soft.

=Boiled whitefish, Netherland style.= Boil, and serve on napkin with
small boiled potatoes, lemon and parsley. Serve melted butter separate.

=Squab pot pie, a l'Anglaise.= Roast the squabs and cut in two. Fry a
thin slice of fillet of beef on both sides, over a quick fire, in melted
butter. Put both in a pie dish with a chopped shallot that was merely
heated with the fillet, six heads of canned or fresh mushrooms, one-half
of a hard-boiled egg, a little chopped parsley, and some flour gravy
made from the roasted squab juice, and well seasoned with a little
Worcestershire sauce. Cover with pie dough and bake for twenty minutes.
This is for an individual pie; make in the same proportions for a large
pie.

=Lemon water ice.= One quart of water, one pound of sugar, and four
lemons. Dissolve the sugar in the water, add the rinds of two lemons and
the juice of four lemons. Strain and freeze.

=Orange water ice.= One quart of water, one pound of sugar, three
oranges and one lemon. Melt the sugar in the water, add the juice of the
oranges and the lemon, and one drop of coloring. Strain and freeze.

=Strawberry water ice.= One-half pound of sugar, one pint of water, one
pint of strawberry pulp, the juice of one lemon, and coloring. Strain
and freeze.

=Raspberry water ice.= Same directions as for strawberry water ice. Use
raspberry pulp instead.

=Cantaloupe water ice.= Add to one quart of cantaloupe pulp the juice of
three lemons and a half pound of sugar. Pass through a fine sieve and
freeze.


JANUARY 2

     BREAKFAST
       Grape nuts with cream
       Kippered herring
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Omelet with oysters
       Perch saute, meuniere
       Browned hashed potatoes
       Lobster salad with anchovies
       Floating island
       Napoleon cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Codfish chowder
       Planked shad and roe
       Artichokes au gratin
       Hearts of romaine, Roquefort dressing
       Peach Melba
       Caroline cakes
       Coffee

=Omelet with oysters.= Parboil six oysters, add one spoonful of cream
sauce and season well. Make the omelet, and before turning over on
platter place the oysters in the center. Serve with light cream around
the omelet.

=Perch saute, meuniere.= Season the fish well with salt and pepper, roll
in flour, put in frying pan and cook with butter. When done, put fish on
platter, and put a fresh piece of butter in pan, over fire, and allow to
become hazelnut color. Pour the butter and the juice of a lemon over the
fish, sprinkle with chopped parsley, and garnish with quartered lemons
and parsley in branches.

=Browned hashed potatoes.= Hash three cold boiled potatoes. Melt three
ounces of butter in a frying pan, add the potatoes, season with salt and
pepper, and fry evenly. When nearly done form in the pan in the shape of
a rolled omelet and fry again until well browned on the top. Turn over
on platter in the same manner as an omelet, and sprinkle with chopped
parsley.

=Lobster salad.= Take the tails of two boiled lobsters, season with salt
and pepper and a teaspoonful of vinegar, and let stand for a half hour,
then add one cup of mayonnaise sauce. Put some sliced lettuce in the
bottom of a salad bowl, the lobster salad on top, a few nice lettuce
leaves around the sides, cover the salad again with mayonnaise, and
decorate with hard-boiled eggs, beets and olives.

=Lobster salad with anchovies.= Same as above. Decorate with fillets of
anchovies.

=Floating island.= Beat the whites of six eggs very stiff, add six
ounces of powdered sugar and the inside of a vanilla bean. Mix well.
Boil one quart of milk, one-quarter pound of sugar, and the remainder of
the vanilla bean, in a wide vessel. Dip a tablespoon in hot water and
form the beaten eggs, or meringue, into the shape and size of an egg,
and drop into the boiling milk. Dip the spoon in hot water each time so
the meringue will not stick. Take off the fire and let stand for a few
minutes, turning the floating eggs several times. Then take out of the
milk and dress on napkin to cool. Boil the milk again and bind with the
yolks of two eggs, strain and cool. Put the sauce in a bowl, or deep
dish, and float the "islands" on top. Serve very cold.


JANUARY 3

     BREAKFAST
       Orange Juice
       Waffles and honey
       Chocolate and whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Chicken salad, Victor
       Rolls
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Normande
       Fillet of turbot, Daumont
       Sirloin of beef, Clermont
       Endives salad
       Rolled oats pudding
       Coffee

=Chicken salad, Victor.= Cut the breast of a boiled soup hen or boiled
chicken in half-inch squares, add one-half cup of string beans cut in
pieces one inch long, a cup of boiled rice, one peeled tomato cut in
small squares and one sliced truffle. Season with salt, fresh-ground
black pepper, a little chives, chervil, parsley, one spoonful of
tarragon vinegar and two spoonsful of best olive oil. Mix well and serve
on lettuce leaves.

=Potage Normande.= Veloute with Julienne of carrots and turnips.

=Fillet of turbot, Daumont.= Put the fillet in a buttered pan, season
with salt and pepper, and add one glass of white wine. Boil six fresh
mushrooms in a little water and strain the juice over the fish, or use
the juice of canned mushrooms. Cook the fish, remove to platter, and
reduce the sauce to glace, then add one pint of sauce au vin blanc
(white wine sauce), strain, and before pouring over the fish add two
ounces of sweet butter and the juice of one lemon.

=Sirloin of beef, Clermont.= Roast sirloin of beef, sauce Madere,
garnished with tomatoes stuffed with whole chestnuts, and Bermuda onions
stuffed with cabbage.

=Boiled chestnuts.= Cut the chestnut shells with a sharp knife and put
on pan in oven for ten minutes. Then peel, put in vessel with a small
piece of celery, salt, and cover with water. Boil slowly so they will
remain whole when done. Use for garnishing, stuffing, etc.

=Tomatoes stuffed with chestnuts.= Peel four nice fresh tomatoes, cut
off the tops, scoop out the insides, and fill with boiled chestnuts. Put
a small piece of butter on top, and put in oven for five minutes. Serve
as a garnish, or as an entree with Madeira sauce.

=Boiled cabbage.= Cut a head of cabbage in four, trim and wash well.
Have a kettle with salt water boiling. Put the cabbage in the kettle and
cook until nearly soft, then drain off nine-tenths of the water, add a
small piece of ham, or ham bone, and simmer till soft. Remove the ham or
bone and prepare the cabbage with cream, or any other style. For
stuffing onions, cut the cabbage up, add a little butter, and season
with salt and pepper.

=Stuffed onions with cabbage.= Peel four large Bermuda or Spanish
onions. Boil them in salt water until nearly done, then remove from the
fire and allow to cool. Take out the inside and fill with cabbage
prepared as above. Put the stuffed onions on a buttered dish with a
piece of butter on top, and bake in oven.


JANUARY 4

     BREAKFAST
       Hothouse raspberries with cream
       Baked beans, Boston style
       Brown bread
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of fresh caviar
       Consomme Julienne
       Boiled Salmon, sauce Princess
       Corned beef hash with poached eggs
       Escarole salad
       French pastry      Coffee

     DINNER
       Lynn Haven oysters
       Strained chicken okra, in cups
       Cheese straws
       Salted English walnuts
       Fillet of sole, Gasser
       Stuffed capon, St. Antoine
       Asparagus Hollandaise
       Gauffrette potatoes
       Season salad      Coupe St. Jacques
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Consomme Julienne.= The word "Julienne" is a common kitchen term,
signifying cut in slender strips, or match shape. For consomme garnish
cut "Julienne" style one carrot, one turnip, one leek, a small piece of
celery, four leaves of cabbage, and one-half of an onion. Season with a
spoonful of salt, and one-half teaspoonful of sugar. Mix well. Put in a
well-buttered casserole, cover with buttered paper and the casserole
cover, put in oven moderately hot, and allow to simmer slowly. Turn
occasionally, using a fork to avoid breaking the vegetables. They should
simmer without adding liquid, but should they be too dry, a half cup of
consomme may be added. Cook until soft, and drain on a sieve so all the
juice will run off. Combine with two quarts of consomme, and before
serving add a few peas and some chervil.

=Fillet of sole, Gasser.= Put four fillets of sole in cold milk seasoned
with salt and pepper, and leave for four hours. Then wrap around raw
potatoes, cut like a cork, and about three inches long. Let one side
extend over the potato, and fasten with a toothpick. Fry slowly in
swimming lard until golden brown, then take out, remove the toothpick,
push out the potato, and fill the center of the sole with a very thick
filling composed of two-thirds Bearnaise sauce and one-third of reduced
tomato sauce. Serve on napkin with fried parsley, and tomato sauce,
separate.

=Boiled salmon, sauce Princess.= Boil the salmon, serve the sauce
separate. Make the sauce as follows: One pint of Hollandaise sauce, one
spoonful of meat extract, and twelve parboiled oysters, thoroughly
mixed.

=Stuffed capon, St. Antoine.= Season the capon well, both inside and
out, and put in ice box. Prepare a stuffing as follows: The bread crumbs
made from a five-cent loaf of bread, twelve whole boiled chestnuts,
three boiled fresh, or canned, apricots, six stewed prunes, three
boiled, or canned, pears, and two peaches. Put in a bowl, add an egg and
one gill of brandy, and mix well. Fill the capon, wrap a piece of fat
pork around it, and put in roasting pan with a carrot, onion, bouquet
garni, and three ounces of butter. Put in oven and roast slowly, basting
continually until done. Remove the capon to a platter and take off the
fat pork. Return the pan to fire and bring to a boil. When the fat is
clear drain it off and add to the pan one-half cup of bouillon and one
cup of brown gravy. Season, boil, strain and pour over the capon.
Garnish with watercress.


JANUARY 5

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Fried hominy
       Maple syrup
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Shirred eggs, Mornay
       Fried smelts, Tartar
       Broiled spareribs and sauerkraut
       Plain boiled potatoes
       American cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Marquis
       Celery
       Stuffed lobster
       Boiled beef, sauce piquante
       Maitre d'hotel potatoes
       Brussels sprouts and chestnuts
       Spinach, English style
       Savarin Mirabelle
       Coffee

=Shirred eggs, Mornay.= Put on a buttered shirred egg dish one spoonful
of cream sauce, break two fresh eggs on top, season with salt and
pepper, cover the eggs with sauce Mornay, sprinkle with grated cheese
and bake in oven.

=Potage Marquis.= Cream of rice with breast of boiled chicken cut in
small squares.

=Stuffed lobster.= Prepare the lobster as for croquettes. Clean the
shells and fill with the prepared lobster. Sprinkle the top with cheese
and bread crumbs mixed with a small piece of butter, and bake in oven.
Serve on napkin with quartered lemon and parsley.

=Maitre d'hotel potatoes.= Peel and slice two boiled potatoes and put in
pan. Season with salt and pepper, cover with thick cream, and boil for a
few minutes. Then add two ounces of sweet butter and mix well, being
careful not to break the potatoes. Just before serving add the juice of
one-half lemon and some chopped parsley.

=Boiled Brussels sprouts.= Clean and wash the sprouts, boil in salt
water till soft. Drain and cool. Be careful that the sprouts remain
whole.

=Brussels sprouts with chestnuts.= Melt three ounces of butter in pan,
add two cups of fresh-boiled sprouts, season with salt and pepper, and
fry for a few minutes. Then add a cup of fresh-boiled chestnuts, mix
well, and serve with a sprinkle of parsley on top.

=Boiled spinach.= Clean the spinach and wash in four or five waters, as
it is difficult to remove the sand. It is sometimes necessary to wash as
many as ten times to remove it all. Put a gallon of water and a handful
of salt in a pot and bring to the boiling point. Add the spinach, and
boil over a very hot fire, so it will remain green. It will require from
five to ten minutes, depending upon the tenderness of the spinach. Drain
off water and serve plain. Or, cool with cold water, press dry with the
hand, and prepare as desired.

=Spinach, English style.= Add a small piece of butter to plain spinach.


JANUARY 6

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced pineapple
       Waffles
       Honey in comb
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Croquettes Liviannienne
       Eggs Beaujolais
       Camembert cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Victoria
       Bass, Provencale
       Stuffed lamb chops, Marechal
       Curried Lima beans
       Chateau potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       Nectarine ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Croquettes Liviannienne.= Mix four leaves of melted gelatine with one
pint of mayonnaise and use to bind some crab meat. Cool and form in
small croquettes, roll in chopped yolks of hard-boiled eggs mixed with
chopped parsley.

=Eggs Beaujolais.= Poached eggs on toast covered with sauce Colbert.

=Potage Victoria.= Half veloute of chicken and half puree of tomatoes.
Garnish with turnip cut in small squares, string beans cut in half-inch
lengths, and a few peas.

=Bass, Provencale.= Split a bass, remove the bones and skin, put in
buttered pan, season with salt and pepper, put some sliced tomatoes and
a few small pieces of butter on top, and bake in oven. When done cover
with white wine sauce with a few pieces of tomato in it.

=Stuffed lamb chops, Marechal.= Broil the lamb chops on one side. Cover
that side with force meat of veal quenelles decorated with chopped
tongue and truffles, put in buttered pan, cover with buttered paper, and
bake in oven for ten minutes. Serve with fresh mushroom sauce. (See veal
force meat recipe Jan. 11.)

=Macedoine water ice.= Two pounds of sugar, three quarts of water, and
six lemons. Dissolve the sugar in the water, add the rind of four lemons
and the juice of six, strain and freeze. When frozen add one quart of
assorted fruit, such as small seedless grapes, stoned cherries, and
apricots, strawberries, and pineapple cut in small dices, or any other
kind in season, or canned. Before adding the fruit to the water ice put
it in a bowl with a little powdered sugar and kirschwasser, and leave
for an hour. This will prevent the fruit from freezing too hard.

=Normandie water ice.= Two pounds of sugar, two quarts of water, and the
juice of six lemons. Mix together, add one quart of crabapple pulp and
one gill of cognac. Freeze.

=Curried Lima beans.= Put some boiled Lima beans in a sauce pan and
cover with well seasoned curry sauce. Before serving add a small piece
of fresh butter and some chopped parsley.


JANUARY 7

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Consomme favorite
       Broiled shad roe, maitre d'hotel
       Mirabeau salad
       Lemon pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage a l'Anglaise
       Fillet of flounder, Meissonier
       Chicken, Valencienne
       Jets de houblons
       Sybil potatoes
       Hearts of romaine
       Macedoine water ice
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Consomme favorite.= Garnish the consomme with asparagus tips cut in
small pieces, and chicken dumplings stuffed with goose liver, the size
of a large olive. Teaspoons may be used to form the dumplings.

=Broiled shad roe, maitre d'hotel.= Season the roe well with salt and
pepper, roll in olive oil, and broil. Serve with maitre d'hotel sauce,
and garnish with quartered lemon and parsley.

=Mirabeau salad.= Cut in one-inch squares one cucumber, two tomatoes,
and one potato. Put in salad bowl separately, cover with vinaigrette
sauce. Add one teaspoonful of French mustard in the vinaigrette. Lay
anchovies over the top, and a green olive cut in strips, in the middle.

=Potage a l'Anglaise.= Put in vessel two pounds of lean mutton, and one
pound of barley. Cover with water, season with salt, add a bouquet
garni, and boil for two hours. Then remove the bouquet and the meat,
strain through a fine sieve, add one pint of boiling thick cream, three
ounces of sweet butter, and a little Cayenne pepper.

=Fillet of flounder, Meissonier.= Cook the fillets in white wine. Make a
white wine sauce and add a Julienne of vegetables, and pour over the
fish before serving.

=Chicken, Valencienne.= Salt and pepper a jointed chicken and saute in
pan with butter. Put on platter and serve with supreme with truffles and
fresh mushrooms, cut in small squares, and quenelles (chicken
dumplings), teaspoon size. Garnish with heart-shaped fried crusts of
bread.

=Coupe St. Jacques.= Slice some fresh fruits, such as oranges,
pineapple, pears and bananas, and add all fresh berries in season. Put
in a bowl with one-quarter pound of sugar, and a small glass of
kirschwasser and of maraschino. Let stand for about two hours. Then fill
coupe glasses about half full with the fruit, and fill the remainder
with two kinds of water ice, raspberry and lemon. Smooth the top with a
knife, and decorate with some of the fruit used for filling.


JANUARY 8

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples
       Scrambled eggs with parsley
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Pilaff a la Turc
       Pont l'Eveque cheese
       Crackers
       Fruit
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Quirinal
       Fillet of sole, Normande
       Squab en compote
       Artichoke Hollandaise
       Peach ice cream
       Pound cake
       Coffee

=Risotto.= In a vessel put one chopped onion, two ounces of butter, and
the marrow of a beef bone chopped fine; and simmer until the onions are
done. Then stir in one pound of rice, and put in oven for five minutes.
Then add one and one-half pints of bouillon and a pinch of salt, cover,
and place in oven for twenty minutes. Add a half cup of grated cheese
before serving.

=Pilaff a la Turc.= Make a ring of risotto on a round platter, and in
center put some well-seasoned chickens' livers, saute au Madere.

=Potage Quirinal.= Make in the same manner as puree of game, but use
pheasants only. Garnish with Julienne of breast of pheasants, truffles,
and some dry sherry. Season with Cayenne pepper.

=Fillet of sole, Normande.= Cook the fillets "au vin blanc." Garnish
individually with mussels, oysters, mushrooms, small Parisian potatoes,
and very small fried fish. If small fish are not obtainable cut a fillet
of sole in strips one-quarter-inch thick and two inches long, breaded
and fry. Before serving place a slice of truffle on top of each piece of
sole.

=Peach ice cream.= One pint of cream, one quart of milk, the yolks of
eight eggs, one-half pound of sugar, one pint of peach pulp, and a few
drops of peach kernel extract. Put the milk and one-half of the sugar on
the fire to boil. Mix the other half of the sugar with the eggs, stir
into the boiling milk, and cook until it becomes creamy, but do not let
it come to the boiling point after adding the eggs. Remove from the
fire, add the cream, pulp and extract, and freeze.

=Banana ice cream.= Same as the above, except substitute the pulp of six
bananas and extract, in place of the peach pulp.

=Pineapple ice cream.= Add one pint of finely cut pineapple instead of
the peach pulp.

=Hazelnut ice cream.= Roast one-half pound of hazelnuts, pound to a fine
paste, mix with a little milk and two ounces of sugar. Use instead of
the peach pulp.

=Raspberry ice cream.= Use one pint of raspberry pulp in place of the
peach pulp.


JANUARY 9

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs with cream
       Waffles
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Omelet with soft clams
       Ripe olives
       Broiled Spanish mackerel, fine herbs
       Hollandaise potatoes
       Cucumber salad
       German huckleberry pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Bisque of California oysters
       Salted pecans
       Frogs' legs, Michels
       Roast pheasant, bread sauce and bread crumbs
       Compote of spiced peaches
       Sweet potatoes, southern style
       Asparagus, Polonaise
       Banana ice cream
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Omelet with soft clams.= Take the bellies of six soft clams and put in
pan, season with salt and pepper, add a small piece of butter, and heat
through. Mix with two spoonsful of cream sauce. Make an omelet, and
garnish with the clams in cream.

=Broiled Spanish Mackerel, aux fines herbes.= Season the mackerel with
salt and pepper, roll in oil, and broil. Prepare a maitre d'hotel sauce
with chopped chervil and chives, and pour over the fish. Garnish with
quartered lemon and parsley in branches.

=Cucumber salad.= Slice some iced cucumbers and serve with French
dressing. Or: Slice a cucumber and put in salad bowl, salt well and let
stand for an hour, then squeeze the salt water out gently, and use
dressing desired, as French dressing, Thousand Island dressing, etc. Or:
Slice the cucumbers, cover with very thick cream, season with salt and
paprika, and just before serving add the juice of one lemon.

=Bisque of California oysters.= Put one pint of California oysters, with
their juice, in a pot and bring to the boiling point. Then skim, and add
one pint of cream sauce, one-half pint of milk, a bouquet garni, and
boil for ten minutes. Remove the bouquet garni, strain the broth through
a fine sieve and return to the pot. Heat a pint of cream and strain into
the soup, add three ounces of sweet butter, and season to taste.

=Roast pheasant.= Pheasant should be kept one week to season, before
cooking. Clean, wrap in a slice of fresh lard, and roast in the same
manner as chicken. Serve bread sauce and fried bread crumbs separate.

=Bread sauce.= Boil one cup of milk, add half of an onion, a little
salt, one-third of a cup of fresh bread crumbs, and boil for five
minutes. Remove the onion, add a piece of butter the size of a walnut,
and season with Cayenne pepper.

=Bread crumbs.= Put in frying pan three ounces of butter and
three-quarters of a cup of fresh bread crumbs, and fry until brown. Then
drain off the butter and serve the dry crumbs in a sauce boat.


JANUARY 10

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal with cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Oysters Yaquino
       Cold assorted meats
       Potato salad
       Brie cheese and crackers
       Oolong tea

     DINNER
       Potage Grande Mere
       Cold goosebreast with jelly
       Fillet of sole, royale
       Plain potted squab chicken
       Potatoes a la Reine
       Stuffed fresh mushrooms
       Hearts of romaine salad
       Pineapple ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Oysters Yaquino.= Season one dozen oysters on the deep shell, with salt
and paprika, put on each a piece of butter and some chopped chives.
Place in oven, bake, and serve very hot.

=Potage Grande Mere.= Take equal parts of leeks, cabbage, onions and
celery and cut in very small dices. Put in pot, cover with water, season
with salt and pepper, and boil. When soft, add hot milk, and serve.

=Fillet of sole, royale.= Same as fillet of sole, Joinville.

=Potted squab chicken.= Prepare the chicken as for roasting. Season
well, and put a small piece of fresh butter in each. Place in a saute
pan with butter and a piece of onion, brown well, basting from time to
time. When almost done drain off the butter, add a cup of stock and a
little brown gravy, and finish roasting. Strain the gravy over the
chicken when serving. Serve in a casserole.

=Potatoes a la Reine.= Mix well, one cup of boiling water, one ounce of
butter, and a half cup of flour; cool a little, and add the yolks of two
eggs. Mix this dough with equal parts of fresh-boiled potatoes passed
through a fine sieve, season with salt and a little grated nutmeg. Take
up, with a spoon, in pieces the size of an egg, and drop one by one in
warm swimming lard, heating gradually, so the potato will have time to
swell (souffle), before becoming a golden brown color. When done, salt,
and serve on napkin.

=D'Uxelles.= Put in flat sauce pan three ounces of butter, one chopped
onion, and a slice of ham cut in small dices. Simmer for five minutes.
Add the stems of fresh or canned mushrooms chopped very fine, and simmer
again for five minutes; then add one-half glass of white wine and
reduce. Then add one-half pint of brown gravy and boil for ten minutes.
Finally stir in one-half cup of fresh bread crumbs, the yolks of two
eggs, and season with salt and Cayenne pepper, and chopped parsley.
D'Uxelles is used for garnishing in many ways.

=Stuffed fresh mushrooms.= Cut the stems from six fresh mushrooms, wash
the heads well, season with salt and pepper, and fill with D'Uxelles.
Place on a buttered dish, sprinkle with grated cheese, put a piece of
butter on the top of each, and bake in a moderate oven.


JANUARY 11

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit juice
       Pettijohns with cream
       Crescents
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Pancake Molosol
       Scotch consomme
       Sweetbread patties with cream
       Meringue glacee with raspberries
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Blue Points on shell
       Potage Bagration
       Celery. Ripe olives
       Paupiette of flounder, Bignon
       Roast ribs of beef
       Anna potatoes
       New peas
       Escarole salad
       Bavarois au chocolat
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Pancake Molosol.= Spread some very thin French pancakes with fresh
Russian caviar, roll up, and cut in diamond shapes. Serve on napkin,
garnished with leaves of lettuce filled with chopped onions, quartered
lemons, and parsley in branches. The pancakes must be fresh.

=Scotch consomme.= Boil a piece of mutton very slowly in consomme. When
done strain the broth, add the mutton, cut in small dices, some
brunoise, and some boiled barley.

=Sweetbread patties with cream.= Cut some parboiled sweetbreads in small
dices and simmer a few minutes with a piece of butter. Add a little
cream and cream sauce, season with salt and Cayenne pepper, boil for ten
minutes. Have some hot patty shells, and fill.

=Potage Bagration.= Add to cream of chicken some boiled macaroni cut in
pieces one-quarter inch in length.

=Paupiette of flounder, Bignon.= Stuff some fillets with fish force
meat. Bread, and fry. Serve tomato sauce separate.

=Fish force meat.= Quarter pound trimmings of fish chopped fine, passed
through sieve, and add one yolk of egg and a tablespoonful of cream.
Salt and pepper.

=Veal force meat.= Quarter pound raw veal chopped fine, passed through
sieve; add one raw yolk of egg, salt and pepper, and tablespoonful of
cream.

=Chicken force meat.= Quarter pound raw chicken meat, chopped fine, and
passed through sieve. Add one yolk of egg and a tablespoonful of cream.
Salt and white pepper.

=Anna potatoes.= Peel some potatoes to a round shape, about the size of
a dollar, and slice very thin, like Saratoga chips. Season with salt and
pepper. Melt some butter in a round mould or hot frying pan, and lay the
potatoes around the bottom; add layer upon layer until they are about
two inches in height. Put some melted butter over them, and bake in a
moderate oven for about a half hour. Drain off the butter and turn out
upon a napkin on a platter.

=Meringue glacee, with raspberries.= Fill meringue shells with raspberry
ice cream and garnish with fresh raspberries.


JANUARY 12

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Mirabeau
       Hasenpfeffer (hare stew)
       Noodles
       Coffee eclairs
       Rolls
       Tea

     DINNER
       Consomme d'Artagnan
       Pickles
       New England boiled dinner
       Apple pie
       Coffee

=Eggs Mirabeau.= Place some stuffed eggs in a buttered shirred egg dish,
cover with cream sauce, and bake in oven.

=Hasenpfeffer (hare stew).= Cut up a hare in three-inch pieces. Save the
blood and liver in separate dish. Put the cut up meat in an earthen pot
and cover with one-half claret, or white wine, and one-half water. Add
one sliced carrot, one sliced onion, a bouquet garni with plenty of
thyme in it, salt, and a spoonful of whole black peppers. Let stand for
forty-eight hours, then drain, strain the juice, and put the meat on a
platter. Put in a pan on the stove one-half pound of butter; when hot
add two heaping spoonsful of flour, and allow to become nice and yellow,
stirring all the while to prevent its burning. Then add the pieces of
hare and simmer for a few minutes; then add the juice and a glass of
water or bouillon, bring to the boiling point, cover and let simmer
slowly. Parboil and fry in butter one dozen small onions; also cut up
one-half pound of salt pork in half-inch squares, and parboil and fry
them. When stew is about three-quarters cooked, add the onions, pork,
and a can of French mushrooms, and cook until done. Now chop the liver
fine, mix with the blood, and stir into the stew just before removing
from the fire. Do not let it boil after adding the liver. Season to
taste, and serve with a sprinkle of chopped parsley.

=Consomme d'Artagnan.= In the bottom of a buttered pan place one sliced
carrot, one onion, a stalk of celery, a piece of raw ham, a sprig of
thyme, one bay leaf, and some pepper berries. On top place three calf's
feet, and simmer for a few minutes. Then add one-half glass of white
wine and one-half glass of sherry, and three quarts of bouillon or
stock. Clarify with the whites of six eggs, bringing to a boil slowly.
Cook until the feet are soft. Strain the broth through cheese cloth, cut
the calf's feet in small pieces and add to the consomme.

=New England boiled dinner.= Put a shoulder of salt pork in a pot, cover
with water, bring to a boil, and then allow to become cool. Then put the
pork in a pot with five pounds of brisket of beef, cover with water, add
a little salt, a bouquet garni, three whole turnips, three beets, three
carrots and a small head of cabbage. Cook until the vegetables are soft,
then remove, and continue cooking the meat until well done. Place the
meat on a platter, slice, and place the vegetables around the meat; add
some plain boiled potatoes, pour a little of the broth over all, and
serve hot.


JANUARY 13

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Broiled finnan haddie
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Oyster stew
       Eggs Gambetta
       Mutton chops
       French fried potatoes
       String beans
       Camembert cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Venitienne
       Aiguillettes of bass, a la Russe
       Beef steak, Provencale
       Georgette potatoes
       Lettuce and tomato salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Oyster stew.= Put in a pot six oysters with their own juice, bring to
the boiling point, and skim. Then add one cup of boiling milk, one ounce
of sweet butter, and salt. Serve crackers separate.

=Eggs Gambetta.= Dip four cold poached eggs in some beaten eggs, then in
bread crumbs, and fry in swimming fat. Place on toast, garnish with
boiled calf's brains and sliced truffles, and serve with Madeira sauce.

=Potage Venitienne.= Beat two spoonfuls of farina, two whole eggs and a
half cup of milk together, stir into one quart of boiling consomme, and
cook for twelve minutes.

=Aiguillettes of bass, a la Russe.= Remove the skin from the fillets of
bass, and cut in slices (aiguillettes) about one and one-half inches
wide and five inches long. Place in a buttered pan, season with salt and
pepper, place on each piece three or four round slices of cooked
carrots, add half a glass of white wine, cover with buttered paper, and
cook slowly. Add some finely cut chervil to some white wine sauce, and
pour over the fish.

=Beef steak, Provencale.= Cook a small sirloin steak saute in butter,
and season well. Cover one-half of the steak with Bearnaise sauce, and
the other half with Bearnaise sauce mixed with a little puree of
tomatoes. On top of each half place a round potato croquette the size of
a walnut, and some Julienne potatoes around the steak.

=Bearnaise sauce.= Put in a sauce pan six very finely-chopped shallots,
a spoonful of crushed white peppers, and a glass of tarragon vinegar,
and reduce until nearly dry. Then put the pan in another vessel
containing hot water, add the yolks of five eggs and stir in well. Then
add one pound of sweet butter cut in small pieces. Stir the butter in
piece by piece, and as it melts the sauce will become thick, like
mayonnaise. Be careful that the sauce does not become too hot. Salt,
strain through cheese cloth, add one teaspoonful of melted meat extract,
some chopped fresh tarragon, and a little Cayenne pepper.

=Bearnaise tomatee.= One cup of thick puree of tomatoes mixed with two
cups of Bearnaise sauce.

=Choron sauce.= Same as Bearnaise tomatee.


JANUARY 14

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit juice
       Grape-nuts with cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Barquette a l'aurore.
       Salmon steak with anchovies
       Baked potatoes
       Cheese cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme creme de volaille
       Salted English walnuts
       Frogs' legs, saute a sec
       Lamb chops, sauce Soubise
       Stewed tomatoes
       Brussels sprouts
       Hearts of romaine
       Meringue Chantilly
       Coffee

=Barquette a l'aurore.= Small tartelettes filled with Italian salad and
covered with pink mayonnaise sauce.

=Italian salad.= Use equal parts of carrots, turnips, string beans, and
roast beef cut in small squares, and of boiled peas. Season with salt,
pepper, tarragon vinegar and olive oil, and garnish with beets and
flageolet beans.

=Pink mayonnaise.= Add to two cups of mayonnaise, one-half cup of cold
puree of tomatoes.

=Consomme creme de volaille.= Put some very light chicken force meat
(quenelle) in small round buttered timbale moulds, and cook in
bain-marie (double boiler). When done, slice thin and serve in hot
consomme. (See chicken force meat recipe Jan. 11.)

=Cheese cake.= One and one-half pounds of cottage cheese, one-half pound
of sugar, one-half pound of butter, the yolks of five eggs, one-half
pint of milk, the whites of three eggs well beaten, and some vanilla
extract. Mix the butter with the sugar, then the cheese, and the yolks
of the eggs, one by one. Then add the milk, flour, and vanilla, and
finally the beaten whites of eggs should be stirred in very slowly. Pour
on pie dish or pan lined with a thin tartelette dough, and bake in a
moderate oven.

=Sauce Soubise.= Parboil six sliced onions, and then pour off the water.
Put in vessel with cold water and salt, and boil till done. Drain off
the water, pass the onions through a fine sieve, add one pint of cream
sauce, mix well, and season with salt and Cayenne pepper.

=Soubise (for stuffing crabs, etc.).= Slice a dozen onions, put in
vessel with cold water and salt, bring to the boiling point, and allow
to cool. Then put the onions in a well buttered casserole, add a
half-pound of parboiled rice, a little salt, and two ounces of butter.
Cover with a buttered paper and the casserole cover, put in oven and
cook until soft. Then strain through a fine sieve; put in a vessel and
add two spoonsful of thick cream sauce, heat well, and bind with the
yolks of four eggs, season with salt and Cayenne pepper, and allow to
cool. When cold mix with a spoon, and use as needed.


JANUARY 15

     BREAKFAST
       Broiled Yarmouth bloaters
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Corn muffins
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Scrambled eggs, Turbico
       Curried lamb with rice
       Chocolate eclairs
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Blue Point oysters
       Potage Marie Louise
       Salted hazelnuts
       Fillet of sole, Castelanne
       Squab en compote
       Spinach
       Endive salad, French dressing
       Coupe St. Jacques
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs, Turbico.= Mix with six scrambled eggs one-half cup of
Creole sauce.

=Curried lamb with rice.= Cut three pounds of shoulder and breast of
lean lamb in pieces two and one-half inches square. Parboil and put on
fire in cold water with one carrot, one onion, a bouquet garni, and
salt. Boil until the lamb is done; remove the vegetables, and strain the
broth. Put in another vessel three ounces of butter, melt, add two
spoonsful of curry powder and two of flour, heat, then add a sliced
apple and banana fried in butter, and one-half cup of chutney sauce.
Boil for twenty minutes. Strain over the lamb, and serve with boiled
rice.

=Potage Marie Louise.= Mix one quart of puree of white beans with one
pint of thick consomme tapioca.

=Fillet of sole, Castelanne.= Put six fillets in a buttered pan, season
with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of white wine, cover, and bake
in oven for ten minutes. Make on a round platter a border of boiled
rice. Place the fillets in the center. Strain the fish broth, mix with
Creole sauce, and pour over the fish, completely covering same.

=Squab en compote.= Prepare four squab as for roasting, except the
stuffing. Season well, and put in earthen pot with an onion, carrot, and
two ounces of butter. Put in oven and roast well, basting continually so
they will retain their juice. To a brown gravy, or sauce Madere, add the
following: Eight small onions boiled and fried, eight heads of fresh
mushrooms sauteed in butter, eight small boiled French carrots, and two
small pickles cut in two. Serve with the squabs.


JANUARY 16

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Chocolate

     LUNCHEON
       Clam broth in cups
       Broiled striped bass
       Vogeleier omelet
       Field salad
       Tartelette au Bar le Duc
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme, de la mariee
       Boiled codfish, oyster sauce
       Roast ribs of beef
       Lima beans
       Potato croquettes
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Savarin Montmorency
       Coffee

=Vogeleier omelet.= Cut a roll in very thin slices, put in omelet pan
with two ounces of butter, and fry until crisp. Add eight beaten eggs,
with salt, pepper, and plenty of chives, and make into an omelet.

=Tartelette au Bar le Duc.= Line the moulds with tartelette dough, fill
with raw white beans, and bake. When the dough is done remove the beans,
and fill the tartelettes with imported Bar le Duc jelly. Decorate with
whipped cream.

=Consomme de la mariee.= Boil one quart of consomme. Put the yolks of
four eggs in a soup tureen and stir well, adding the consomme slowly.
Season with a little Cayenne pepper.

=Oyster sauce.= Parboil a dozen oysters in their own juice for two
minutes. Then strain the broth through a napkin into one pint of cream
or Allemande sauce, add the oysters, and season.

=Lima beans.= Boil the beans in salt water until soft, drain off, add
sweet butter and a little pepper, and simmer for a few minutes. Serve
with a sprinkle of chopped parsley.

=Peas in cream.= Boil the peas in salt water until nearly done. Drain
off the water and add just enough thick cream to wet them, and simmer
for five minutes. Then add a cup of cream sauce and cook until the peas
are very soft. Add a little salt and a pinch of sugar.

=Coupe oriental.= Slice some fresh fruit, such as oranges, pineapple,
bananas, etc., add all kinds of berries in season, and put in a bowl
with some sugar and a small glass of kirsch or maraschino. Allow to
macerate for a couple of hours. Then fill coupe glasses half way to the
top with the fruit, and fill the remainder with vanilla ice cream. Place
a strawberry or cherry on top. Cook about one-quarter of a pound of
sugar so that it will crack when cold. It will require about 310
degrees. Dip a tablespoon into it and shake it over a stick, to form
file sugar (commonly called spun sugar). Cut this sugar in pieces and
form in the shape of a ball, and put on top of the cup before serving.


JANUARY 17

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Poached eggs on toast
       Puff paste crescents
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Pain mane
       Cold roast beef
       Fresh vegetable salad
       Roquefort cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Andalouse
       Ripe olives
       Fillet of Spanish mackerel, Montebello
       Olivette potatoes
       Leg of lamb, au jus
       Mixed string beans
       Tomato salad
       Vanilla custard pie
       Coffee

=Pain mane.= Small dinner rolls, split, toasted, and filled with a puree
of sweet-and-sour bananas, and garnished with pimentos.

=Fresh vegetable salad.= For this salad use any kind of fresh vegetables
in season, such as string beans, Lima beans, carrots, cauliflower,
asparagus, Brussels sprouts, tomatoes, peas, boiled celery, boiled
celery roots, spring turnips, Jerusalem artichokes, fresh buttons of
artichokes, etc. Place them in separate bouquets in a salad bowl, and
use French dressing, or any other dressing desired.

=Potage Andalouse.= To veloute of beef add some cooked tapioca.

=Fillet of Spanish mackerel, Montebello.= Put the fillets in a buttered
dish, season with salt and a little Cayenne pepper, cover with buttered
paper, and bake in oven. Dress on a platter, and cover with sauce
Bearnaise tomatee.

=Olivette potatoes.= Cut potatoes with a Parisian potato spoon to the
shape of an olive. Put in a vessel with cold water, bring to the boiling
point, and drain. Melt some butter in a saute pan, add the potatoes, and
bake in oven until a nice golden brown. Drain off the butter, and season
with salt.

=Sweet potatoes, rissolees.= Boil some small sweet potatoes. When done
peel and put in a pan with butter, and roast until brown. Season with
salt.


JANUARY 18

     BREAKFAST
       Baked beans, Boston style
       Brown bread
       Omelet with jelly
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Consomme Imperatrice
       Beef steak, Foch
       Gendarme potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       Meringue glacee au chocolat
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Oysters on half shell
       Creme Maintenon
       Queen olives
       Fillet of sole, Lord Curzon
       Stuffed goose, with chestnuts
       Apple sauce
       Sweet potatoes, rissolees
       Peas in cream
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Coupe Oriental
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Consomme Imperatrice.= Consomme garnished with small lobster dumplings
and asparagus tips in equal parts, and a sprinkle of chopped chervil.

=Beef steak, Foch.= Use sirloin, tenderloin, or rump steak. Season well,
and saute in butter. Place on a platter and put a thick piece of
parboiled beef marrow, with one fried egg, on top. Serve with the pan
gravy.

=Meringue glacee au chocolat.= Fill two meringue shells with chocolate
ice cream, place together, and decorate with whipped cream.

=Creme Maintenon (soup).= Three parts creme a la Reine soup, and one
part thick consomme Brunoise.

=Fillet of sole, Lord Curzon.= Put six fillets in a buttered pan, season
with salt and a teaspoonful of curry powder, add one-half glass of white
wine, cover with buttered paper, and bake in oven. When done put the
fish on a platter, strain the broth into a pint of white wine sauce, add
one chopped shallot, one tomato cut in squares, one red pepper, and two
fresh mushrooms cut in squares and simmered in butter. Mix, season well,
and pour over the fish.

=Stuffed goose with chestnuts.= Clean a goose, and keep the liver and
gizzard. Fill with a chestnut stuffing, put in a roasting pan, salt, add
a spoonful of water and place in the oven. The water will soon evaporate
and the fat begin to melt. Baste well until the goose is done. Then
remove the goose to a platter; save the grease for other purposes; and
add to the pan one-half glass of bouillon or stock, and one spoonful of
meat extract. Boil for five minutes. Serve the gravy separately. Also
serve giblet sauce and apple sauce separately. The goose should be
served very hot.


JANUARY 19

     BREAKFAST
       Hothouse raspberries in cream
       Scrambled eggs with bacon
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Consomme in cups
       Ripe California olives
       Broiled fillet of sole, maitre d'hotel
       Cucumber salad
       Deviled turkeys' legs, with chow chow
       Mashed potatoes au gratin
       Brie cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage gentilhomme
       Fish dumplings, cream sauce
       Small tenderloin steak, Florentine
       Romaine salad, Roquefort dressing
       English breakfast tea ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Deviled turkey's legs, with chow chow.= Use the legs from a boiled or
roasted turkey. Season with salt and pepper, spread some French mustard
all over the surface, roll in bread crumbs, and broil; or fry in pan
with a piece of butter. When nice and brown dish up on platter, and
garnish with large leaves of lettuce filled with chow chow.

=Mashed potatoes au gratin.= Put some mashed potatoes in a buttered
shirred egg dish or pie plate. Sprinkle with grated Parmesan or Swiss
cheese, put small bits of butter on top, and bake until brown.

=Potage gentilhomme.= Potato soup with Julienne of carrots.

=Julienne.= Julienne is the term used in cooking for vegetables, or any
kind of meat, etc., cut in long strips, like matches. Vegetable Julienne
should be prepared and cooked as follows: Cut the vegetables in strips,
add salt and a very little sugar, put in a well-buttered casserole,
cover with buttered paper and the casserole cover. Put in oven and
smother until soft. Turn gently once or twice, with a fork, so as not to
break the vegetables.

=Small tenderloin steak, Florentine.= Broiled tenderloin steak, with
sauce Madere, or brown sauce. Garnish with risotto, and just before
serving garnish the risotto with truffles, ham and tongue cut in small
squares.

=Roquefort dressing, for salads.= For four persons take four ounces of
Roquefort cheese, put in salad bowl and mash well with a fork. Add
one-half teaspoonful of salt, two pinches of ground black pepper, two
tablespoonsful of vinegar, and three tablespoonsful of olive oil. Mix
well and pour over the salad. If desired, one teaspoonful of
Worcestershire sauce and a pinch of paprika may be added.

=English breakfast tea ice cream.= Prepare in the same manner as vanilla
ice cream. Before freezing add some strong tea made of one ounce of
English breakfast tea and one cup of boiling water.


JANUARY 20

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Oudinot
       Fricassee of veal, with noodles
       Chocolate profiteroles
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage McDonald
       Lyon sausage
       Fried chicken, Maryland
       Cheese cake
       Coffee

=Eggs Oudinot.= Put some stuffed eggs in a shirred egg dish, cover with
cream sauce, sprinkle with the chopped yolks of hard-boiled eggs, put a
small piece of butter on the top of each, and bake in oven until brown.

=Fricassee of veal.= Cut five pounds of shoulder and breast of veal in
pieces two and one-half inches square, put on fire in cold water, bring
to the boiling point, and then cool. Put back in vessel, cover with
water, add one carrot, one onion, a bouquet garni, a little salt, and
boil until soft. Remove the vegetables and bouquet, and use the broth to
make the fricassee sauce. Put in casserole on stove, six ounces of
butter, when hot add three-quarters cup of flour, heat through, then add
three pints of the veal broth, stir well and boil for ten minutes, then
bind with the yolks of three eggs and a cup of cream. Season and strain
the sauce over the pieces of veal. Allow to stand five minutes before
serving. Noodles, spaghetti, or other paste, should be served, either
separate or on the side of plate with the stew.

=Noodle dough.= Mix one pound of flour with five whole eggs, with a very
little or no salt, and a pony of kirschwasser, if desired. Mix well,
roll out very thin, and then let the dough become nearly dry. Then cut
in strips. Have a vessel on the fire, with about a gallon and a half of
boiling water. Add the noodles, and boil for seven minutes over a quick
fire, so they will not stick together. Drain off the water and pour two
ounces of hot melted butter over the noodles. A little grated nutmeg may
be added, if desired. Noodles, like macaroni, may be prepared in many
ways.

=Chocolate profiteroles.= Make some small cream puffs and fill with
whipped cream. Place on a deep dish and cover with a sauce made of one
pint of water, one-half pound of sugar, and three ounces of cocoa. Boil
the water with the sugar, then add the cocoa and stir well. Boil for
five minutes.

=Potage McDonald.= Boil one calf's brains in chicken broth. Make one
quart of cream of barley soup, and strain both together through a fine
sieve. Put in vessel and add one ounce of sweet butter, and, when
melted, serve. Do not let the soup boil after the two have been joined.

=Fried chicken, Maryland.= Cut up a spring chicken, put in flour, then
in eggs, and then in bread crumbs. Season with salt and pepper. Melt
three ounces of butter in a frying pan, and when hot add the breaded
chicken and fry until golden brown, but be careful not to burn it. It
will require about twelve minutes for a young chicken. When done, put on
platter with cream sauce over the bottom, and garnish with four corn
fritters, four small potato croquettes the size of an ordinary cork, and
four strips of fried bacon on top.


JANUARY 21

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs
       Oatmeal with cream
       Rolls
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Mery
       Roast fresh leg of pork, au jus
       Apple sauce
       Spinach
       Swiss cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Petite marmite
       Radishes
       Boiled beef, horseradish sauce
       Boiled potatoes
       Pickled beets
       Apple Charlotte
       Coffee

=Eggs Mery.= Scramble eight eggs, well seasoned. Just before they are
done add one sliced truffle and two sliced pimentos. Serve in
croustades.

=Roast leg of fresh pork.= Put on bottom of roasting pan one sliced
carrot, one onion, three bay leaves, six cloves, one spoonful of pepper
berries, and a piece of celery. Season the leg of pork with salt and
pepper, and a little sage, if desired. Put on top of the vegetables, and
place in oven to roast. Baste well. When done take out the pork, remove
the fat in the pan, and add to the gravy a cup of stock or bouillon, and
one tablespoonful of meat extract. Boil, strain, and season to taste.

=Apple Charlotte.= Chop six peeled apples and fry in butter with
one-quarter pound of sugar, and one-half teaspoonful of ground cinnamon.
Line a charlotte mould with slices of white bread cut as thin as
possible, and buttered with fresh butter. Fill the mould with the fried
apple and bake in oven for twenty-five minutes. Serve with brandy sauce.


JANUARY 22

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Pettijohns with cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of fresh caviar
       Scrambled eggs with morilles
       Planked sirloin steak
       Romaine salad
       Camembert cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Bretonne
       Lyon sausage
       Lobster Thermidor
       Noisettes of lamb, Cendrillon
       Peas au beurre
       Celery mayonnaise
       Apple water ice
       Cakes
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with morilles.= Morilles are a species of mushroom
rarely found in the United States. They come principally from Europe in
cans, or dried. When fresh ones are used, saute in butter and mix with
the scrambled eggs. When in can, drain off the water, put in sauce pan
with a piece of butter, season with salt and pepper, simmer for ten
minutes, and add to the eggs. When dried, soak them in cold water over
night, wash, and then proceed in the same manner as with the canned
ones.

=Planked sirloin steak.= Broil the steak in the usual manner. When
nearly done put on a meat plank, put four slices of broiled tomatoes on
top, place four strips of broiled bacon across the tomatoes, and roast
in oven for five minutes. Cover with maitre d'hotel sauce, and garnish
with Parisian potatoes, parsley in branches, and quartered lemon.

=Consomme Bretonne.= Make a Julienne of equal parts of celery, onions
and leeks, and serve in consomme.

=Lobster Thermidor.= Cut a live lobster in two lengthwise, sprinkle with
olive oil, season with salt and pepper, and put in oven and bake. When
done remove the meat from the shell and cut in small squares. Then make
a sauce as follows: Chop two shallots, a little parsley and tarragon,
add one spoonful of meat extract, or some good meat gravy, and reduce by
boiling until nearly dry. Then add one spoonful of dry mustard, one cup
of cream sauce, and two ounces of fresh butter. Put some of the sauce in
the bottom of the shells, put the lobster in the sauce, and pour the
remainder over the top. Sprinkle with grated cheese, and bake in oven
until brown.


JANUARY 23

     BREAKFAST
       Poached eggs on toast
       Broiled ham
       Rolls
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Mariniert herring
       Potato salad
       Lemon pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       California oyster cocktails
       Bisque of crabs
       Ripe olives
       Frogs' legs, mariniere
       Roast chicken, au jus
       Watercress salad
       Asparagus Hollandaise
       Peach Melba
       Carolines (cakes)
       Coffee

=Bisque of crabs.= Take two large raw Pacific crabs and put in vessel
with cold water, season with salt and a bouquet garni, and boil for
one-half hour. Then crack the shells and remove the meat. Use the meat
for salad, an entree dish, or to garnish the soup. Put the shell in a
mortar and smash fine. In a vessel put one-quarter pound of butter and
the broken shell, and simmer. Then add one pint of the water used to
boil the crab, and one pint of milk, and boil for ten minutes. Then add
one quart of cream sauce, boil again, and strain through a fine sieve.
Put back in pot, add one pint of boiling thick cream, salt and Cayenne
pepper, and just before serving add three ounces of sweet butter and one
cup of crab meat cut in small pieces.

=Cocktail sauce, for oysters (1)= One cup of tomato ketchup, one pinch
of salt, a little Cayenne pepper, paprika, and celery salt, one
teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, and one tablespoonful of tarragon
vinegar.

=(2)= One cup of tomato ketchup, one-half teaspoonful of paprika, one
spoonful of grated horseradish sauce, salt, one spoonful of
Worcestershire sauce, and the juice of one lemon.

=Oyster cocktail.= Use California oysters, Toke Points, Blue Points,
Lynnhavens, Seapuits, or any other kind. Put in an oyster cocktail glass
and mix with plenty of cocktail sauce. Set the glass in ice, and serve
with lemons cut in half.

=Frogs' legs, mariniere.= Cut the hind legs of two dozen small frogs in
two. Put in saute pan with three ounces of butter, season with salt and
pepper, and simmer for five minutes. Then add six chopped shallots and
simmer for three minutes. Then one-half glass of white wine and boil
until nearly dry. Then add one pint of Allemande sauce, fricassee sauce,
or sauce au vin blanc, and boil for five minutes. Serve with a sprinkle
of chopped chives and parsley over the top.


JANUARY 24

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved strawberries
       Finnan haddie in cream
       Baked potatoes
       Corn muffins
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Chipolata
       Tripe a la mode de Caen
       Chocolate eclairs
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme parfait
       Pimentos a l'huile
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Leg of lamb, Boulangere
       Chiffonade salad
       Rolled oats pudding
       Coffee

=Eggs Chipolata.= Make some shirred eggs and garnish with sauce Madere,
to which has been added two small roasted onions, two heads of
mushrooms, two small French carrots, three boiled chestnuts, and two
very small fried sausages.

=Consomme parfait.= To one pint of lukewarm consomme tapioca add four
raw beaten eggs, put in buttered mould, set in pan in boiling water, and
put in moderate oven for ten minutes. Allow to cool, cut in slices, and
serve in consomme.

=Pimentos a l'huile.= This is a plain hors d'oeuvres. Take a can of
pimentos, drain off the juice, cut the pepper in four; place on a
platter, season with salt and pepper, add one part vinegar and two parts
olive oil, and sprinkle with chopped parsley.

=Leg of lamb, Boulangere.= Season a leg of lamb with salt and pepper,
and rub with garlic and butter. Put in roasting pan with a cup of water
and a bouquet garni. Slice two large onions very fine, also six raw
potatoes the size of a silver dollar, mix, season with salt and pepper,
and place around the leg of lamb. Put small pieces of butter on top, put
in oven, and baste the meat only. It will require about one and
one-quarter hours to cook. Do not disturb the potatoes while cooking.
When done remove the bouquet garni, and serve the meat and potatoes very
hot, with chopped parsley on top.

=Rolled oats pudding.= Boil one pint of milk with half of a split
vanilla bean; add two ounces of rolled oats and two ounces of sugar, and
cook for about ten minutes. Remove from the fire. Separate the yolks and
whites of four eggs, add the yolks to the rolled oats and mix well. Beat
the whites very hard with a whip, and add to the batter lightly. Put in
buttered pudding mould and bake in bain-marie (hot water bath) for about
thirty minutes. Take out of mould and serve with vanilla cream sauce.

=Vanilla cream sauce.= Boil one pint of milk with one-quarter of a split
vanilla bean. Mix one-quarter of a pound of sugar with two eggs and one
spoonful of sifted flour. Pour the boiling milk over this mixture, and
put back on the fire, stir well, and allow to become thick. Then add one
cup of cream, strain and serve.

=Cream sauce (sweet--quick).= One pint of cream, two ounces of sugar,
and some flavoring. Mix well, and serve hot or cold.


JANUARY 25

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Clam broth in cups
       Cheese straws
       Broiled lamb chops
       French fried potatoes
       Cold artichokes, mustard sauce
       Apple pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Chicken okra
       Queen olives
       Fillet of sole, Rose Caron
       Vol au vent, Toulouse
       Roast saddle of venison
       Puree of chestnuts
       Peas au cerfeuil
       Sweet potatoes, Southern style
       Lettuce salad
       Omelette souffle a la vanille
       Coffee

=Fillet of sole, Rose Caron.= Skin the four fillets of one large sole
and place on a buttered pan. Put on top of each, three slices of cooked
lobster, season with salt and paprika, add one-half glass of white wine,
cover with buttered paper, put in oven and cook for twelve minutes.
Remove the fillets to a platter, taking care that the lobster does not
fall off. To the gravy in the pan add one pint of white wine sauce and
boil for ten minutes, then add two tablespoonsful of ecrevisse butter,
and strain the sauce over the fish. Heat in sherry wine sixteen slices
of truffles, and put four on top of each fillet, after the sauce has
been added. Garnish with fleurons.

=Sweet potatoes, Southern style.= Peel and slice some boiled sweet
potatoes and put in buttered shirred egg dishes, or pie plates. Add a
little salt, molasses and maple syrup, sprinkle with powdered sugar, put
some small bits of butter on top, and bake in oven until brown.

=Vol au vent, or patty shells.= Take some puff paste, with six turns,
and roll out to about one-quarter inch in thickness. With a round pastry
cutter about three inches in diameter, cut the paste. Then moisten with
egg, and with the tip of a small knife trace a ring on each patty about
one-half inch from the edge. Bake in a hot oven for about twenty
minutes. Take out of the oven and with the knife point lift off the
center cover within the traced circle, and empty of the uncooked paste
inside.

=Garniture Toulouse.= Cut the garnishing to agree with the size of the
patty. For the size described above cut in pieces about one-half inch
square. For larger patties cut from an inch to an inch and a half
square. Use the boiled breast of chicken, sweetbreads boiled in chicken
broth, and French mushrooms in equal parts, one-half of a sliced truffle
to each person, three chicken dumplings, teaspoon size cut in two,
rooster kidneys and rooster combs. Mix well, and stew in a sauce
Allemande made of chicken broth and well seasoned. Fill the hot patty
shells and serve on platter, garnished with parsley in branches.


JANUARY 26

     BREAKFAST
       Waffles
       Honey in comb
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with sherry
       Mixed grill
       Cup custard
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree Crecy
       Radishes
       Bouillabaisse Marseillaise
       Roast leg of mutton, currant jelly
       String beans
       Hashed in cream potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Napoleon cake
       Coffee

=Mixed grill.= Broil one lamb chop, one breakfast sausage, one slice of
tomato, one whole fresh mushroom head, and one whole lamb kidney. Put
all on a plate, cover with maitre d'hotel sauce, and serve hot. Garnish
with watercress.

=Cup custard.= Mix four eggs, one-quarter pound of sugar, one pint of
milk, and flavor with vanilla. Strain, pour into cups, and bake in
bain-marie until firm. It will require about one-half hour in a moderate
oven.

=Bain-marie.= This is a term used in cookery for a vessel holding hot
water in which another vessel may be heated at a temperature not above
that of boiling water. Different dishes are variously allowed to stand,
cook or bake in bain-marie. For example, Hollandaise sauce should be
kept in bain-marie in hot water. Hollandaise or Bearnaise sauce, if kept
in boiling water, would turn. A cream soup should be kept in boiling
water, as extra cooking will not harm it. Timbale of chicken, custard
for soup, or cup custard, should be cooked in bain-marie.

=Puree Crecy (soup).= Slice six carrots very thin, put in casserole with
three ounces of butter, and simmer for thirty minutes. Then add three
pints of well-seasoned chicken broth, and boil for one hour. Strain
through a fine sieve. Serve in a separate dish small squares of bread
fried in butter.

=Roast leg of mutton.= The leg of mutton should hang in the ice box at
least four days before using. If too fresh it will be tough. Rub the
mutton with salt and pepper and, if desired, a little garlic. Put in a
roasting pan, one sliced onion, one sliced carrot, one bay leaf and two
cloves. Now put in the mutton, with a piece of butter on top, and place
in oven to roast. Baste continually. It will require from forty-five to
sixty minutes to cook. If desired well done cook for another thirty
minutes. When done take out the leg, drain off the fat, and make a gravy
by adding one cup of stock and one spoonful of meat extract; boil,
season, and strain.


JANUARY 27

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Salade thon marine
       Stuffed breast of veal, au jus
       Asparagus tips, au gratin
       Potato salad
       Savarin au rhum
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potato and leek soup
       Corned beef and cabbage
       Plain boiled potatoes
       Broiled chicken on toast
       Lettuce with egg dressing
       Coupe St. Jacques
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Thon marine salad.= Tunny fish can be obtained in cans, the best
quality being the French brands. Break up the fish with the fingers, and
place on a platter with leaves of lettuce. The fish should be in pieces
about one inch and a half thick. Sprinkle with salt, pepper, chopped
parsley, chervil, and a little finely sliced chives, and a sauce of
one-third vinegar and two-thirds olive oil.

=Stuffed breast of veal, au jus.= Have your butcher prepare a breast of
veal ready for stuffing. Use the same dressing as for chicken, and sew
up the end so the dressing will not fall out while roasting. Put in the
roasting pan one sliced onion and one carrot. Put in the veal and
sprinkle with salt and pepper. Put bits of butter all over the top and
roast in oven, basting often. It will take about an hour to cook in a
moderate oven. Remove the veal to platter when done, and make a sauce by
adding to the gravy in pan one cup of bouillon and one spoonful of meat
extract, boil for five minutes, and strain.

=Asparagus tips, au gratin.= Put the tips in a buttered pan or silver
dish, cover with well-seasoned cream sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese
and small bits of butter and bake in oven until brown.

=Corned beef and cabbage.= The best corned beef is that made from the
brisket. Put on fire in cold water and skim when it comes to the boiling
point. Cover and let it boil slowly until about three-quarters done.
Then add two heads of well-washed cabbage cut in four, and cook with the
beef for at least one hour.


JANUARY 28

     BREAKFAST
       Farina with cream
       Omelet with fine herbs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit and orange en supreme
       Ripe olives
       Eggs Marigny
       Russian salad
       Caramel custard
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Tomate Parisienne (cold)
       Consomme parfait
       Boiled salmon, Hollandaise
       Potatoes nature
       Fricandeau of veal, au jus
       Sorrel with eggs
       Carrots with cream
       Baba au rhum
       Coffee

=Russian salad.= Equal parts of boiled carrots, turnips, beets and
potatoes, cut in small dice, boiled peas, boiled string beans cut in
small pieces, and one slice of cold roast beef cut in small squares. Put
all in salad bowl, season with salt, pepper, a little Cayenne pepper,
and just enough tarragon vinegar to wet the mixture. Let stand for one
hour, drain off the liquid, if any, and form the salad in pyramid shape
in the bowl. Spread some thick mayonnaise over all, and garnish with
boiled potatoes and truffles, cut like a five-cent piece, linking one to
the other around the base of the salad like a chain. On top put a small
flower of a boiled and seasoned cauliflower, and serve very cold.

=Caramel custard.= Put two ounces of sugar in a copper pan and cook
until it is brown in color, then pour into a custard mould and allow to
become cold. Mix four eggs with one-quarter of a pound of sugar, flavor
with vanilla, add one pint of milk, and strain. Pour over the burned
sugar, and fill the mould. Put in bain-marie and cook until firm. When
cool, reverse the custard on a dish, and serve. The caramel at the
bottom of the mould will serve as a sauce.

=Tomate Parisienne (Hors d'oeuvres).= Peel and slice four tomatoes and
lay on platter with lettuce leaves. Cut the inside of a stalk of celery
in very small dice, and six anchovies in small squares. Put in a bowl,
add a pinch of salt, some fresh-ground black pepper, some chives,
parsley and chervil chopped fine, and one spoonful of vinegar and two of
olive oil. Mix well and pour over the tomatoes.

=Sorrel.= Sorrel is a fine vegetable for the promotion of health. Remove
the stems from a peck of sorrel and wash the leaves in four different
waters, to remove all the sand. Have a kettle with salted water on the
fire. Put the sorrel into the boiling water and cook for ten minutes,
stirring often. Pour off the water and let stand in the colander fifteen
minutes so it will drain dry, then strain through a fine sieve. Then put
the sorrel in a sauce pan with three ounces of butter and bring to the
boiling point. Season with salt and pepper, and bind with two whole
eggs, beaten. Do not let it boil after adding the eggs, but let it get
just hot enough to give the sorrel a firm body. Garnish with the half of
a hard boiled egg, if desired.


JANUARY 29

     BREAKFAST
       Orange juice
       Boiled eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Eggs a la Russe
       Boiled beef tongue with spinach
       Mashed potatoes
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of canned peas
       Sardines on toast
       Roast beef au jus
       Lima beans
       Rissolees potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Raspberry Bavarois
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs a la Russe.= Spread a piece of toast with fresh caviar, put an egg
fried in oil on top, and put anchovy sauce around the edge on the
platter.

=Eggs fried in oil.= Fry the eggs one at a time. Have a very small
frying pan with plenty of very hot olive oil in it. Drop a fresh egg in
it, and turn with a wooden spoon. If any other kind of spoon is used the
egg will stick to it. When of a good yellow color, take out and place on
a towel, so the oil can drain off, and season with salt. The eggs should
be soft inside, like a poached egg.

=Anchovy sauce.= To a cup of cream add one spoonful of essence of
anchovies, or one teaspoonful of anchovy paste. Anchovy sauce is also
made with sauce Allemande, white wine sauce, or even a brown sauce, if
desired. The cream sauce with the essence is more commonly used with
eggs.

=Boiled beef tongue.= Put a fresh beef tongue in cold water and bring to
the boiling point, skim, add salt, one carrot, one onion, a bouquet
garni, one stalk of celery, and one of leek. Boil until tongue is soft.
The bouillon may be used for stock or soup, or to make caper sauce. For
beef tongue with spinach, put plain boiled spinach on platter, sliced
tongue on top, and pour a little of the broth over all.

=Raspberry Bavarois.= (For four or five persons.) One pint of milk, one
pint of whipped cream, the yolks of four eggs, one-quarter pound of
sugar, six sheets of French gelatine, and one-half pint of raspberry
juice. Boil the milk with the sugar, then pour over the yolks, and set
on the fire again until it thickens, but do not let it boil. Wash the
gelatine in cold water, add to the mixture, and stir until melted. Then
set aside until cold. Mix the raspberry pulp with the whipped cream, and
stir into the mixture. Put in mould and place in ice box until set. Turn
out on platter, and serve with whipped cream or raspberry syrup,
separate or around the bavarois.

=Sardines on toast.= Take sardines from can and put on a fine thin wire
broiler and heat quickly. Serve on toast with maitre d'hotel butter on
top, and garnish with quartered lemons and parsley.


JANUARY 30

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Scrambled eggs with smoked beef
       Rolls
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with chestnuts
       Consomme in cups
       Deviled crab
       Lemon pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Toke Point oysters
       Potage tapioca, Crecy
       Terrapin, Maryland
       Squab chicken, Michels
       Stewed tomatoes
       Cepes Tyrolienne (cold)
       Fancy ice cream
       Cakes
       Coffee

=Grapefruit with chestnuts.= Cut a grapefruit in two and cut free the
sections with a pointed knife. Pour a little maraschino in the center,
and place a marron glace (candied chestnut) on top.

=Deviled crabs.= Simmer the flakes of two crabs and one-half of a
chopped onion in butter. Season with salt and Cayenne pepper, add two
cups of thick cream sauce, one dash of Worcestershire sauce, one
spoonful of English mustard, and a little chopped chives. Bring to a
boil, and bind with the yolks of two eggs. Then fill the crab shells,
spread a little French mustard over the top, sprinkle with bread crumbs,
place a small piece of butter on each, and bake in the oven. When brown
serve on napkin with lemon and parsley.

=Potage tapioca, Crecy.= Half consomme tapioca and half potage Crecy,
mixed. No croutons.

=Stewed tomatoes.= Peel six tomatoes, and cut in four. Squeeze out half
of the juice, and put the tomatoes in a vessel with three ounces of
butter, season with salt, pepper and a pinch of powdered sugar, cover,
and simmer until done.

=Cepes Tyrolienne (cold).= Cut in small dices one carrot and one celery
root, and put in casserole with one chopped onion and two ounces of
butter. Simmer. Then add one glass of white wine and reduce. Then add
one-half cup of tomato sauce, some chopped chervil, and one can of
sliced cepes. Serve cold.

=Squab chicken a la Michels.= Season four squab chickens well with salt
and pepper, both inside and out. Put in iron pot with a quarter of a
pound of sweet butter and one onion cut in two. Put the pot on the fire
and simmer slowly, until the chicken and onion are of a good yellow
color, turning them often while cooking. Then add one tablespoonful of
white wine and one of chicken broth, cover, and put in oven for ten
minutes, basting frequently. Put the chickens on a platter, take out the
onion, and boil the sauce remaining in pot with the addition of one
teaspoonful of meat extract. Strain over the chicken.


JANUARY 31

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal with cream
       Calf's liver and bacon
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Oysters Kirkpatrick
       Country sausages with baked apples
       Potato salad
       Cabinet pudding
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Windsor
       Green olives
       Fillet of sole, Admiral
       Saddle of lamb, mint sauce
       String beans
       Potato croquettes
       Hearts of lettuce
       Pineapple biscuit glace
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Oysters Kirkpatrick.= Season some oysters on half shell with salt,
pepper and a little Worcestershire sauce, cover with tomato ketchup,
sprinkle with grated cheese, put a small piece of butter on top of each,
and bake in their own shells for five minutes. Serve quartered lemon
separate.

=Cabinet pudding.= Fill a well-buttered pudding mould with left-over
pieces of sponge, layer or other kinds of cake, cut in small squares,
and mix with one-quarter pound of seedless raisins. Then make a custard
of three eggs, one-quarter pound of sugar, one pint of milk and a little
vanilla flavoring. Mix well, strain, and pour over the cake in the
moulds, and bake in bain-marie for about forty minutes. Remove from the
mould and serve hot, with vanilla cream sauce.

=Fillet of sole, Admiral.= Put fillets of sole in a buttered saute pan,
decorate the top with fish force meat in the shape of an anchor, and
cook in white wine. When done serve with a white wine sauce, with
shrimps, oysters and clams cut in small pieces, in it. Garnish with
fleurons.

=Potage Windsor.= Put in roasting pan five pounds of veal bones, one
carrot and one onion sliced, a piece of leek, a piece of celery, a
bouquet garni, and three ounces of butter. Roast in oven until well
browned, then transfer to a pot and add one gallon of water, six calf's
feet and a little salt, and boil until the feet are cooked. Strain the
broth. Allow the feet to cool, remove the meat from the bones, and slice
in very thin strips. Now put four ounces of butter in a vessel, heat,
and add four ounces of flour and cook until golden brown. Then add two
quarts of the broth, and boil for thirty minutes. Strain, add the calf's
feet, one carrot boiled and cut in very thin round slices, some small
chicken dumplings, a few French peas, and one-half cup of sherry wine.
Season with salt and Cayenne pepper.


FEBRUARY 1

     BREAKFAST
       Fried hominy
       Currant jelly
       Crescents
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs with clams, Creole
       Chicken croquettes with peas
       Camembert cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Oxtail soup, English style
       Boiled brook trout, Hollandaise
       Potatoes nature
       Roast stuffed duckling, apple sauce
       Broiled sweet potatoes
       Brussels sprouts in bouillon
       Romaine salad
       French pancake
       Coffee

=Clams, Creole.= Heat two dozen clams in their own juice, but do not
allow them to boil. Then add one pint of Creole sauce.

=Poached eggs with clams, Creole.= Serve poached eggs on toast, covered
with clams Creole.

=Ox tail, English style.= Cut two ox tails in small pieces, put on the
fire in cold water, salt, and bring to the boiling point. Take off the
stove and allow to cool. Put in sauce pan four ounces of butter, melt,
add the oxtail, and roast until colored. Then sprinkle the pieces with
two large spoonsful of flour, and cook again until of a good brown
color. Then add one gallon of bouillon, stock or hot water; bring to a
boil, and skim. Then boil for one hour. Now add three carrots and two
turnips cut in very small squares, and one pound of whole barley, and
boil for two hours. Then add one pint of puree of tomatoes, one spoonful
of Worcestershire sauce, salt, pepper, a little Cayenne, some chopped
parsley, and one-half cup of tomato ketchup. Boil again for ten minutes,
and before serving add one glass of sherry wine.

=Broiled sweet potatoes.= Peel four boiled sweet potatoes, and slice
lengthwise, one-quarter inch in thickness. Sprinkle with salt, wet with
olive oil, and broil on both sides on an iron broiler. Serve on a
platter with melted butter poured over them.

=Brussels sprouts in bouillon.= Clean and wash thoroughly one quart of
Brussels sprouts. Put a vessel on the fire, with one gallon of water and
a tablespoonful of salt. When boiling add the sprouts and cook for five
minutes; then cool off with cold water. Put the cold sprouts in a
casserole, add two ounces of butter, salt, pepper, one cup of bouillon
and a little chopped parsley. Cover, and simmer until well done. Sprouts
should be served whole, so do not touch with spoon while cooking.


FEBRUARY 2

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Smoked goosebreast
       Tomcods, meuniere
       Broiled fresh spareribs, with lentils
       Vanilla bavarois, with Bar le Duc
       Cookies
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Doria
       Scallops, Jerusalem
       Spring lamb tenderloin, Thomas
       Fried egg plant
       Chicory and escarole salad
       Homemade apple pudding
       Coffee

=Tomcods, meuniere.= Season six tomcods with salt and pepper, and roll
in flour. Melt four ounces of butter in a frying pan, put in the tomcods
and fry. When done put on platter and sprinkle with chopped parsley and
the juice of two lemons. Put four ounces of butter in the pan and cook
to the color of a hazelnut. Pour the butter over the fish, garnish with
quartered lemon and parsley in branches.

=Broiled spareribs with lentils.= Broil some spareribs and place on
platter. Garnish with lentils, and serve with a border of Madeira sauce.

=Lentils.= Soak two pounds of lentils in cold water for six hours, then
put on fire with one quart of water, a pinch of salt, one ham bone, one
carrot, one onion and a bouquet garni. Boil for about two hours, when
the lentils should be soft; remove the vegetables and the bouquet, and
drain off the water. Then chop two large onions very fine, put in
casserole with three ounces of butter, cover, and simmer until done. Add
the lentils and a cup of brown meat gravy, some chopped parsley and
ground pepper, simmer for twenty minutes, and serve hot.

=Lentil salad.= Take some of the boiled lentils, before the onions and
brown gravy have been added, and serve with French dressing.

=Vanilla Bavarois with Bar le Duc.= Bar le Duc is a currant jelly made
in the village of Bar le Duc, France. There are two kinds, red and
white. Make a vanilla bavarois, place on platter, and pour some red Bar
le Duc around the base.

=Homemade cookies.= Work one-quarter pound of butter and one-quarter
pound of sugar together until creamy, then add three eggs, one by one,
and whip well. Then add one-quarter pound of sifted flour and some
flavoring, preferably the rind of a lemon. Dress the batter in fancy, or
plain round, shapes, on a buttered pan, and bake in a quick oven.


FEBRUARY 3

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of sardines
       Eggs Benedict
       Sweetbread cutlets, cream sauce
       Broiled fresh mushrooms
       Fruit salad, Chantilly
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Lamballe
       Frogs' legs, saute a sec
       Wiener schnitzel
       Spaghetti Milanaise
       Terrine de foie gras, cold
       Lettuce salad
       Nesselrode pudding
       Cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs Benedict.= Cut an English muffin in two, toast, and put on
platter. Put a slice of broiled ham on top of each half, a poached egg
on top of the ham, cover all with Hollandaise, and lay a slice of
truffle on top of the sauce.

=Wiener Schnitzel.= Cut from a leg of veal some cutlets; or have your
butcher cut them for you. Season with salt and pepper, roll in flour,
then in beaten eggs, and then in bread crumbs. Put some melted butter in
a frying pan and fry the cutlets, or schnitzel, on both sides, until
yellow and well done. Dish up on a platter with tomato sauce. Put on
each schnitzel a thin slice of lemon. Roll a fillet of anchovy around
your finger to form a ring, place on a slice of lemon and fill the ring
with capers.

=Fruit salad, Chantilly.= Slice some fresh fruit, such as oranges,
pears, pineapple, apples, strawberries, cherries, etc. Put in a bowl,
add one spoonful of granulated sugar, one pony of kirschwasser or
maraschino, and allow to macerate for about an hour. Put in glasses or
saucers, and serve with whipped cream on top.

=Fruit salad au kirsch.= Same as above, but use kirschwasser only, to
macerate, and omit the whipped cream.

=Fruit salad au marasquin.= Same as au kirsch, only use maraschino
instead of kirschwasser.


FEBRUARY 4

     BREAKFAST
       Guava jelly
       Rolled oats with cream
       Plain omelet
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Fillet of halibut, au vin blanc
       Broiled pig's feet, special
       Celery root, field and beet salad
       Assorted fruit
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Bisque of clams
       Broiled Alaska black cod
       Breast of squab under glass, St. Francis
       Asparagus Polonaise
       Coupe Viviane
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Broiled Alaska black cod.= This Alaskan fish is brought from the north
frozen, and is very fine, being rich and fat. Broiling is the best way
of preparing it, as it needs a quick fire to cook the oil in the fish.
Season well, and serve with maitre d'hotel sauce made with plenty of
lemon juice.

=Asparagus Polonaise.= Put four pounds of boiled fresh, or two cans, of
asparagus on a platter. Have the asparagus very hot. Sprinkle the tips
with salt and pepper, one chopped boiled egg, and some chopped parsley.
Melt in a pan, three ounces of sweet butter, add two tablespoonsful of
bread crumbs, fry until brown, and pour over the tips of the asparagus.

=Breast of squab under glass, St. Francis.= Season the breast of a raw
squab with salt and pepper, and roll in flour. Fry in butter for two
minutes, or until nice and brown. Fry in the same butter, very lightly,
one slice of Virginia ham. Then fry in same pan the heads of four fresh
mushrooms, well seasoned. Put a slice of toast in a buttered shirred egg
dish, put the ham on the toast, the breast of squab on the ham, and the
mushrooms on top. Pour well-seasoned cream sauce over all, cover with a
glass bell that fits just inside of the edge of the shirred egg dish,
put in the oven and cook for ten minutes.

=Boiled lettuce.= Boil six heads of lettuce in salted water. When done
strain off the water and pound the lettuce through a fine colander. Add
two ounces of butter and one cup of cream, heat well, and serve.


FEBRUARY 5

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Buttered toast
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Omelet with soft clams, Newburg
       Breaded lamb chops, tomato sauce
       New string beans
       Potatoes au gratin
       Mince pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Seapuit oysters
       Potage Talleyrand
       Planked smelts
       Tournedos Rossini
       Jets de houblons
       Gauffrette potatoes
       Romaine salad, Roquefort dressing
       Curacao sorbet
       Alsatian wafers
       Demi tasse

=Sauce Newburg.= Put in a vessel one cup of well-seasoned cream sauce,
one cup of thick cream and one gill of sherry wine. Bring to the boiling
point and bind with the yolk of one egg and a little cream. Then stir
slowly into the sauce two tablespoonsful of lobster or crayfish butter.
This sauce is used a great deal in hotel and restaurant cookery.

=Soft clams, Newburg.= Take the bellies of two dozen soft clams and put
in a buttered saute pan, add one spoonful of Madeira wine, cover the
pan, and warm them through. Do not stir, as the clams will break easily.
Then add one and one-half cups of sauce Newburg, well seasoned with
salt, pepper and a little Cayenne pepper. Mix and serve in a chafing
dish.

=Omelet with soft clams.= Make a plain well-seasoned omelet. Put at each
end a bouquet of clams Newburg, and pour on each side of the omelet a
little sauce Newburg.

=Potage Talleyrand.= Put in soup tureen one quart of consomme tapioca,
one grated fresh, or two grated canned truffles, one glass of dry sherry
wine, a pinch of Cayenne pepper.

=Tournedos.= Tournedos are small tenderloin beef steaks, trimmed free of
fat. They may be either broiled or sauteed, and served with maitre
d'hotel sauce. Mostly used as an entree with fancy garniture.

=Tournedos Rossini.= Salt and pepper the tournedos, saute in butter, and
put on a platter. Take one slice of fresh goose liver (or Strassbourg
goose liver au natural), season, roll in flour, saute in butter, and put
on top of the tournedo. Simmer a large head of fresh mushroom in butter,
and place on top of the goose liver, lay two slices of truffle on top of
the mushroom, and pour well-seasoned Madeira sauce over all.


FEBRUARY 6

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs
       Scrambled eggs with bacon
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Antipasto
       Essence of chicken in cups
       Cheese straws
       Bear steak, port wine sauce
       Chestnuts and prunes
       Fried egg plant
       Mexican salad
       Corn meal pudding
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Clam chowder
       Ripe olives
       Striped bass saute, miller style
       O'Brien potatoes
       Asparagus Hollandaise
       Cold Westphalia ham
       Omelette soufflee a la vanille
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with bacon (1).= Put some plain scrambled eggs in a deep
platter with strips of broiled bacon over the eggs.

=(2)= Cut six slices of bacon in small squares, put in casserole with
one-half ounce of butter and fry slowly until crisp. Add ten beaten eggs
mixed with one-half cup of cream, season with salt and pepper, and cook
in the usual manner.

=Antipasto.= This is an Italian relish (hors d'oeuvre), and can be
obtained in cans. It consists of tunny fish, sardines, pickles, capers,
etc., preserved in oil. Serve on a napkin, in the can, with quartered
lemons and parsley around the sides.

=Essence of chicken.= Put in a casserole one chopped raw fowl, or plenty
of carcasses, necks, etc., of raw chickens. Add the whites of three
eggs, stir well, and add slowly two quarts of strong chicken broth.
Bring to a boil, strain through a napkin, and serve in cups.

=O'Brien potatoes.= Peel two large boiled potatoes, cut in one-half inch
squares, and put in hot fat to gain color. Cut two red peppers
(pimentos) in small squares and put in a saute pan with one ounce of
butter. When the peppers are hot add the potatoes, season with salt and
pepper, and mix carefully so the potatoes will not break.

=Omelette Soufflee.= Mix one-half pound of sugar with the yolks of two
eggs, add one-half of a split vanilla bean, and beat until light and
fluffy. Remove the pieces of vanilla bean. Beat the whites of eight eggs
until absolutely stiff, and then add to the batter lightly. Arrange on a
silver platter in fancy shape, and decorate with a pastry bag with a
fine tube. Dust with powdered sugar, and bake in a rather hot oven for a
few minutes.


FEBRUARY 7

     BREAKFAST
       Cactus fruit with lemon
       Broiled pigs' feet, Chili sauce
       Shirred eggs with parsley
       Dry toast
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Lackmee
       Lamb steak, Bercy
       String beans
       Mashed potatoes
       Fruit salad au Marasquin
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Julienne
       Fillet of flounder, Cansale
       Tenderloin of beef, Malvina
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Almond cake
       Coffee

=Cactus fruit with lemon.= Slice some cactus fruit and serve on ice,
with powdered sugar and lemon separate. No cream.

=Broiled pigs' feet, Chili sauce.= Split some cooked pigs' feet, season,
roll in bread crumbs, sprinkle with oil and broil. Put on platter and
garnish with lemon and parsley. Serve hot or cold Chili sauce, separate.

=Shirred eggs with parsley.= Crack two eggs on a buttered shirred egg
dish, season with salt and pepper, sprinkle with fresh-chopped parsley,
and bake in oven for three minutes.

=Eggs Lackmee.= Put four poached eggs on toast. Chop some boiled chicken
very fine, add one cup of cream sauce, one-half cup of cream, put on the
stove and bring to the boiling point, season with salt and a little
Cayenne pepper, and pour over the eggs.

=Lamb steak.= Cut the steak crosswise from a leg of young lamb, and
about one inch in thickness. Season with salt and pepper, roll in oil
and broil; or saute in pan with butter. Use as an entree dish, or in
place of the roast.

=Garniture Bercy.= Bercy is used with steaks, chops, fish, etc. Prepare
as follows: Mix one-quarter pound of fresh butter with salt, pepper,
three fine chopped shallots, one small piece of garlic mashed fine, some
chopped parsley, chervil and chives. Spread over the meats or fish, and
put in hot oven for two minutes. (Called also sauce Bercy.)

=Fillet of flounder, Cansale.= Put four fillets of flounder in a
buttered pan, season with salt and pepper, add the juice of one dozen
oysters, one-half wineglass full of white wine, cover with buttered
paper, and bake in oven. When done remove the fillets and add to the pan
one-half pint of white wine sauce, and boil for ten minutes. Bind with
the yolk of one egg, and strain. Poach the dozen oysters, and, with a
small can of French mushrooms, add to the sauce, and pour over the fish.

=Tenderloin of beef, Malvina.= A roast tenderloin with sauce Madere,
garnished with small onions saute, potatoes rissolees, and whole
chestnuts glace au Madere.

=Chestnuts glace.= Put one-half pound of boiled chestnuts in a saute pan
with two spoonsful of meat extract, and cook for ten minutes.

=Chestnuts glace au Madere.= Add to chestnuts glace a little sauce
Madere, just before serving.


FEBRUARY 8

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Omelette Louis XIV
       Chickens' livers saute, au Madere
       Puree of Lima beans
       Sago pudding
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Seapuit oysters
       Cream of celery, Kalamazoo
       Ripe California olives
       Fillet of pompano, en papillote
       Roast chicken
       Watercress salad
       Chateau potatoes
       Fresh asparagus, Hollandaise
       Peach Mona Lisa
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Omelette Louis XIV.= Chop the white meat of a boiled fowl very fine,
mix with one truffle cut in small dices and one-half cup of
well-seasoned cream sauce. Place in the center of a plain omelet, turn
on a platter, and pour some cream sauce around the edge.

=Chickens' livers saute, Forestiere.= Clean a dozen chicken livers, cut
in two, and season with salt and pepper. Melt a piece of butter in
frying pan, add the livers, and saute over a quick fire for a few
minutes. Slice one pound of fresh mushrooms and fry them in butter. Then
put the mushrooms and livers together in a sauce pot on the stove, and
cover with two cupsful of brown gravy or Madeira sauce. Get as hot as
possible without boiling, serve in deep dish, or chafing dish, with
chopped parsley on top.

=Puree of Lima beans.= Take one can, or a pound of fresh boiled Lima
beans, and pass through a fine sieve. Put in pot, add two ounces of
butter, season with salt and pepper, and serve hot. If too thick add a
soupspoonful of cream or consomme.

=Cream of celery, Kalamazoo.= Make a cream of celery soup. Take the
inside of two stalks of celery and cut in very small dices boiled, and
use for garnishing.

=Fillet of pompano en papillote.= Take four small Pacific pompano, or
the fillets of a large Florida pompano, season, roll in flour, and put
in pan in two ounces of hot butter. Fry on both sides until nearly done.
Simmer two chopped shallots in one ounce of butter for a minute, then
add six chopped fresh mushrooms, and simmer for ten minutes. Now add one
spoonful of Madeira sauce, season with salt and pepper, and cook for
five minutes to a puree. Add the juice of a lemon, some chopped parsley,
and one ounce of sweet butter. Now cut four pieces of manilla paper in
the shape of a heart about ten inches high and fourteen inches wide.
Fold in center, then open out flat on the table and oil well on one
side. Put a teaspoonful of the mushroom puree on one half of the paper,
place the pompano on top, and another spoonful of the puree on top of
the fish. Now fold the free side of the paper over the top, and turn in
the edges to close tight the opening. Put on a flat pan and place in an
oven for a few minutes. Be careful not to burn, and serve in the papers
on a silver platter. Other fish may be substituted for pompano if
desired.

=Papillote, club style= (for fish). Fry the fish as above. Omit the
puree of mushrooms and use, instead, a piece of butter, a slice of
fresh-boiled hot potato, and one slice of lime. Finish as above.

=Veal chops en papillote.= Season four veal chops with salt and pepper,
fry in butter, and finish in paper, with the puree of mushrooms and the
addition of a slice of cooked ham on top, before folding the paper.


FEBRUARY 9

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Broiled salt mackerel, melted butter
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Henri IV
       Pork tenderloin, sauce Madere
       Fried sweet potatoes
       Stewed apples
       Sherry wine jelly
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme national
       Radishes
       Fried fillet of sole, Marechal
       Roast rack of lamb, mint sauce
       String beans
       Mashed potatoes
       Nesselrode pudding
       Cakes
       Coffee

=Wine jelly.= Dissolve four ounces of French gelatine in two quarts of
water, add one pound of sugar, the rind and juice of six lemons, the
juice of three oranges, a piece of cinnamon stick, and six cloves. Stir
well and put on fire to boil. Then stir quickly into the jelly the
whites of six eggs, partly beaten, and boil again. Then take off the
fire and strain through a flannel jelly bag, and add the flavoring
desired. Pour into jelly moulds and put on ice until firm. To remove the
jelly, dip the moulds in hot water, and turn out on a cold dish. For the
following jellies use a wine glassful of the respective wines or
liqueurs for flavoring: Sherry wine, maraschino, Rhein wine, claret,
port wine, anisette, kirschwasser, champagne, Burgundy, Moselle wine,
Chartreuse, brandy, Benedictine, Cognac, fine champagne, etc.

=Fruit jelly.= Cut or slice all kinds of fresh fruit in season, put in
jelly mould and cover with wine jelly. Put in ice box until firm.

=Jelly a la Russe.= Put some empty jelly moulds on ice until cold, then
pour a little wine jelly in the bottom and allow to set. Do not let the
balance of the jelly set, but add a pony of Russian kuemmel, put in bowl
and beat with a whip until it looks like white frost. Then fill the
moulds to the top with the beaten jelly, and set in the ice box until
needed.

=Fillet of sole, Marechal.= Salt and pepper the fillets, dip in milk,
then in flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in bread crumbs. Fry in
swimming lard, and serve on napkin with lemon and fried parsley. Serve
the following sauce separate: Two cups of cream sauce, one dozen
parboiled oysters, one-quarter pound of picked shrimps, and six sliced
canned mushrooms.


FEBRUARY 10

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit
       Omelet with chives
       Corn muffins
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Pickled oysters
       Toasted rye bread
       Consomme vermicelli
       Calf's head a la poulette
       Potato croquettes
       Hot mince pie
       American cheese
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree of pheasant, St. Hubert
       Planked smelts
       Bacon and cabbage
       Boiled potatoes
       Roast ribs of beef, au jus
       Chiffonnade salad
       Tutti frutti ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Consomme vermicelli.= Boil one-half pound of vermicelli in two quarts
of salt water for five minutes. Drain, and add to three pints of
consomme. Serve grated cheese separate.

=Calf's head, poulette.= Take one boiled calf's head and cut in pieces
two inches square. Mix with one quart of poulette sauce, and serve in
chafing dish.

=Puree of pheasant, St. Hubert.= Remove the breast of a roasted pheasant
and cut in small squares. Put the rest of the pheasant in a pot and
cover with two quarts of bouillon, add a bouquet garni, and boil for one
hour. In a sauce pot put three ounces of butter; when hot add three
spoonsful of flour, and allow to become nice and brown. Then strain the
broth into the sauce pot and boil for thirty minutes. Chop the pheasant
very fine and add to the soup, boil again, and strain through a fine
sieve. Season with salt and pepper, add the cut-up pheasant breast, and
a glass of fine dry sherry wine.

=Bacon and cabbage.= Cut a large head of cabbage in four, wash well, and
put in two quarts of water, with a little salt, and boil. Then drain off
the water, add fresh water and two pounds of bacon, and boil until the
bacon is well done. Put the cabbage on a platter, slice the bacon and
put on top of the cabbage.

=Tutti frutti ice cream.= Macerate one-quarter of a pound of chopped
candied mixed fruit in a pony of maraschino. Mix thoroughly with one
quart of vanilla ice cream. Put in the bottom of a mould a little
raspberry water ice, and fill to the top with the ice cream and fruit.
Pack in ice and rock salt, and leave for about an hour and a half. Turn
out on platter and decorate with candied cherries and angelica.


FEBRUARY 11

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal with cream
       Rolls
       Chocolate
       Whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Bresilienne
       Sirloin steak, marchand de vin
       Fried egg plant
       Farina pudding
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Waldaise
       Fish dumplings, white wine sauce
       Mutton chops, provencale
       Mashed potatoes
       String beans
       Hearts of romaine
       Fancy ice cream
       Cakes      Coffee

=Eggs Bresilienne.= Put some boiled rice on a platter, place a poached
egg on top, and cover with tomato sauce mixed with a little chopped ham.

=Sirloin steak, marchand de vin.= Cut four slices of sirloin steak about
one-half inch thick, season with salt and pepper, and roll in flour.
Have three ounces of hot butter in a pan and fry the steaks for two
minutes. Remove the steaks to platter. Chop two shallots very fine and
put in pan, allow to become hot, add one-half glass of claret, and
reduce one-half. Then add one spoonful of meat extract, the juice of one
lemon, and some chopped parsley and pour over the steaks. Garnish with
Parisian potatoes.

=Parisian potatoes.= Take some large potatoes and cut out a quart of
small potatoes with a round Parisian spoon. Put on fire in cold water,
with one spoonful of salt, and boil for three minutes. Drain off the
water and put the potatoes in a flat saute pan with three ounces of
butter. Put in oven and roast for about twelve minutes, or until golden
yellow. Try with fingers to see if done. Serve in a deep dish.

=Potage Waldaise.= Mix one quart of consomme tapioca with one quart of
puree of tomato soup, add four slices of boiled ham cut in small
squares.

=Fish dumplings, white wine sauce.= Remove the skin and bones from one
pound of halibut, sole, salmon or other fish, put in mortar, mash well,
and mix with the following dough: One cup of boiling water, one ounce of
butter, and one-half cup of flour, well mixed. Let cool, stir in the
yolks of two eggs, and mix with the mashed fish. Season with salt and a
little Cayenne pepper, strain through a fine sieve, place in a pan on
ice, and stir in slowly one-quarter pint of thick cream, adding it
little by little. To make dumplings, drop teaspoonsful of this
forcemeat, or stuffing, into boiling fish broth, bouillon, or water with
salt, and cook very slowly for five minutes. Serve in chafing dish
covered with white wine sauce. These dumplings are also called quenelles
of fish, and are used for fish patties, vol au vent, or garniture for
fish. If made very small, can be served with clam broth. The forcemeat
can be used for fish timbales and stuffing for fish.

=Timbale of bass.= Make a force meat as above, with any kind of bass,
fill small well-buttered timbale moulds, and boil in bain-marie. Then
cover with buttered paper and put in oven for ten minutes. Turn out on
platter, and serve with any kind of fish sauce. For a fancy decoration
slices of truffles or pimentos may be cut in the shape of stars,
crescents, initials, etc., and placed in the bottom of the timbale
moulds, then fill with the forcemeat and cook.


FEBRUARY 12

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced pineapple
       Broiled lamb kidneys with bacon
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs a la tripe
       Kingfish saute meuniere
       Cucumber salad
       Chicken saute, Parisienne
       French peas
       Corn meal pudding
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Minestra
       Queen olives
       Fillet of barbel, regence
       Tournedos Beresford
       Potatoes chateau
       Asparagus Hollandaise
       Baked Alaska
       Coffee

=Eggs a la tripe.= Slice an onion very fine, put in casserole with two
ounces of butter, cover, and simmer. Cook until the onions are soft, but
not colored. Then add two spoonsful of flour, allow to get hot, pour in
one pint of boiling milk, season with salt and pepper, and boil for five
minutes. Slice eight hard-boiled eggs about one-quarter inch in
thickness, put in the sauce and cook until hot. Serve in chafing dish,
or deep dish, with chopped parsley on top.

=Chicken saute, Parisienne (1).= Joint a young chicken and saute in pan
with two ounces of butter. Season with salt and pepper, and when done
add two cups of tomato sauce and one dozen sliced canned French
mushrooms. Cook for two minutes in the sauce, dress the chicken on
platter, pour the sauce over it, and garnish with macaroni in cream.

=(2)= Joint the chicken and put in saute pan with two ounces of butter,
and season with salt and pepper. When nearly done, add two chopped
shallots and heat them through, only. Add one cup of sauce Madere, the
juice of one lemon, and some chopped parsley. Serve with Parisian
potatoes.

=Sago pudding.= One quart of milk, one-half of a split vanilla bean,
one-quarter pound of sago, six ounces of sugar, the yolks of six eggs
and the whites of six eggs. Boil the milk and the vanilla bean together,
add the sago, and cook until well done and like a stiff batter. Take off
the fire, add the sugar and the yolks, and mix well. Beat the whites
until very stiff and dry, and then add to the batter and mix lightly.
Put in buttered moulds and bake in moderate oven for nearly an hour.
Turn out of moulds and serve with vanilla sauce.

Corn meal, rice, tapioca and farina puddings are made in the same manner
as sago pudding.

=Sago pudding, family style.= One quart of milk, one-half of a split
vanilla bean, three ounces of sago, six ounces of sugar, two eggs and
one cup of cream. Boil the milk with the vanilla bean (or one-half
teaspoonful of vanilla extract), add the sago, and cook well. Mix the
sugar, eggs and cream, and add to the milk and sago. Pour in pudding
dishes or bowl, put in hot oven to color the top, and serve either hot
or cold, with cream separate.

Rice, corn meal, tapioca, farina or vermicelli puddings, family style,
are made in the same manner as sago pudding, family style.


FEBRUARY 13

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Cocoa with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Troubadour
       Haricot of mutton
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Voisin
       Smoked goosebreast
       Fillet of sole, Choisy
       Sweetbreads Eugenie
       Roast leg of lamb, au jus
       Julienne potatoes
       Celery mayonnaise
       Curacao jelly
       Coffee

=Eggs Troubadour.= Spread four pieces of toast with puree de foie gras
(goose liver pate), put a poached egg on top of each, and cover with
sauce Perigord.

=Haricot of mutton (stew).= Cut five pounds of lean shoulder of mutton
in pieces two inches square. Put in roasting pan with a little butter or
fat, season with salt and pepper, and roast in oven until nice and
brown. Add four spoonsful of flour and roast again until the flour is
brown. Then put in a casserole and cover with boiling water, add a
bouquet garni, six French carrots, six turnips cut in small pieces,
season with salt and pepper, and boil for one hour. Remove the bouquet
garni, and add one pint of puree of tomatoes, or a can of tomatoes
strained through a fine sieve, and boil again, with the pot covered,
until done. Before serving add some boiled string beans and chopped
parsley. A little Worcestershire sauce may be added if desired.

=French pastry.= This is a term used in hotels and restaurants for a
platter of mixed individual fancy cakes, such as eclairs, fruit
tartelettes, moka cake, Napoleons, apple turnovers, Pont Neuf cakes,
jalousie, cream puffs, etc.

=Potage Voisin.= Half puree of peas and half puree Crecy. Before serving
add a handful of boiled rice.

=Smoked goosebreast= (Hors d'oeuvre). The most common goosebreast is
imported from Germany; that made in the United States is seldom to be
found in the markets. Do not cook; slice very thin, and serve on an
ice-cold china platter, decorated with chopped meat jelly, and garnished
with parsley in branches.

=Fillet of sole, Choisy.= Put the four fillets of a sole in a buttered
pan, season with salt and a little Cayenne pepper, add one-half glass of
white wine, cover with a buttered paper, and bake in oven. When done
dress on a platter, and cover with green Hollandaise sauce, with a slice
of truffle on top.

=Green coloring= (Vert d'epinards). Mash in mortar a peck of well-washed
spinach. When very fine strain through a piece of cheesecloth, put in a
bowl, set in hot water (bain-marie), and boil until set. When cold it
will be a firm green mass, and may be used for coloring sauces, soups,
etc.

=Green Hollandaise sauce.= Mix one pint of Hollandaise sauce with one
spoonful of green coloring (Vert d'epinards).


FEBRUARY 14

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Plain omelet
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Smoked eels
       Pumpernickel with sweet butter
       Roast loin of pork with sauerkraut
       Plain boiled potatoes
       German huckleberry pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Lynn Haven oysters
       Cream of cauliflower
       Pickles
       Broiled Spanish mackerel, sauce fleurette
       Chicken saute, Portugaise
       Artichokes Hollandaise
       Hearts of lettuce, French dressing
       Diplomate pudding
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Smoked eels.= Imported German canned eels. Serve on napkin with
quartered lemons and parsley in branches.

=Sauerkraut, Alsatian style.= Spread one-quarter of a pound of goose
grease (lard will do) in the bottom of a casserole, then put in one
pound of sauerkraut, then two pounds of bacon, then another pound of
sauerkraut, and another quarter pound of goose grease on top. Then add a
pint of white wine and a pint of bouillon, cover with a buttered paper
and the casserole cover, put on the stove and bring to a boil. Then put
in oven and cook for an hour and a half. Serve the sauerkraut on a
platter, with the bacon sliced, as a garnish.

=Sauerkraut, German style.= Put one-quarter pound of lard in a
casserole, add one pound of sauerkraut, two pounds of salt pork, one
bouquet garni, one whole onion, one carrot, and on top another pound of
sauerkraut. Then add one glass of vinegar, two spoonsful of sugar, and
one pint of bouillon. Cover, and cook in oven for two hours. Then remove
the bouquet garni, onion and carrot, and serve the sauerkraut with the
salt pork.

=Sauerkraut, Hungarian style.= Put in a casserole one-quarter pound of
lard and one pound of sauerkraut. Sprinkle on top one spoonful of
paprika and three peeled and chopped tomatoes. Then add two pounds of
bacon and another pound of sauerkraut, and sprinkle again with another
spoonful of paprika and three chopped tomatoes. Add a pint of sweet
white wine and a pint of bouillon, and one bouquet garni. Cover and bake
in oven for one hour and a half. Remove the bouquet garni, and serve
with the bacon sliced.

=Special notice for sauerkraut.= Avoid salt, as the sauerkraut is
seasoned, and the bacon and salt pork are salty also. If the raw
sauerkraut is too salty, lay it in a dish pan, cover with water, and
squeeze out with the hands immediately. Do not let it remain in the
water but a second.

Other meats may be cooked in the sauerkraut, as beef and pork together,
lamb and pork, beef and lamb, or pheasant or other game.


FEBRUARY 15

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Baked beans, Boston style
       Boston brown bread
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Bagration
       Chicken hash on toast
       Chocolate eclairs
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Mock turtle soup
       Ripe California olives
       Aiguillettes of sole, hoteliere
       Sweetbreads braise, Clamart
       Roast partridge, bread sauce
       Jets de houblons
       Soufflee potatoes
       Endives salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs Bagration.= Put on a platter some boiled rice, lay a fresh
hard-boiled egg, cut in two, on top, and cover with the following sauce.
Take any kind of cold meats that may be left over, such as lamb, beef,
ham or tongue, and cut in small dices. Also a few mushrooms and truffles
cut in the same way. Put in a casserole with a cup of cream sauce,
season with salt and pepper, and bring to a boil.

=Chicken hash on toast.= Cut the breast of a boiled fowl in small
squares. Put in a casserole one cup of cream sauce, one gill of thick
cream and the chicken, season with salt and pepper, and cook together.
Serve on a platter on dry toast.

=Aiguillettes of sole, hoteliere.= Put aiguillettes of sole (long
fillets) in a buttered pan, season with salt and pepper, cover with a
glass of white wine, and cook for ten minutes. Then put the sole on a
platter, and reduce the wine until nearly dry. Then add a pint of
Bearnaise sauce and pour over the fish.

=Mock turtle soup.= Put in pan six pounds of cut veal bones, two sliced
onions and one carrot, and four ounces of butter, and roast until brown.
Then add one-quarter pound of flour and brown again. Change to a vessel,
add two gallons of water, one can of tomatoes, a bouquet garni, some
salt, a spoonful of black pepper berries, and two cloves, and boil for
two hours. Add one pint of cooking sherry and boil again for thirty
minutes. Skim, and remove the grease from the top, and strain through a
cheesecloth. Then take one-quarter of a boiled calf's head and cut in
small squares and put in a casserole with one glass of dry sherry wine,
a little salt and Cayenne pepper, and boil for five minutes. Now add the
strained soup to the calf's head. Before serving add three thin slices
of smoked beef tongue cut in small diamond shapes, three chopped
hard-boiled eggs, and a truffle cut in small squares.

=Roast partridge.= Tie a piece of fresh fat pork over the breast of the
dressed partridge, season inside and out with salt and pepper, put in
roasting pan with a piece of butter, and put in oven. Baste often so the
meat will not become dry. It will require about thirty minutes to cook.
Serve with lemon and watercress, and bread sauce separate.

=Bread sauce, for game.= To a pint of boiling milk add one whole onion,
a bay leaf with two cloves stuck through it, and one and one-half cups
of fresh bread crumbs, and boil for a few minutes. Then remove the onion
and bay leaf and cloves, and season with salt and Cayenne pepper. Before
serving add two ounces of sweet butter.

=Bread crumbs, for game.= Put in frying pan four ounces of sweet butter.
When just warm add a cupful of fresh bread crumbs, and fry until golden
yellow. Drain off the butter (which may be kept for roasting, etc.), and
serve the crumbs in a small bowl. This is usually served in addition to
bread sauce, with quail, pheasant, partridge, etc.


FEBRUARY 16

     BREAKFAST
       Hominy with cream
       Plain scrambled eggs
       Rolls
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Crab salad
       Mutton chops, Robinson
       String beans
       Napoleon cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Pea soup
       Radishes
       Broiled shad, maitre d'hotel
       Roast chicken, au jus
       Hot asparagus, Hollandaise
       Potato croquettes
       Watercress salad
       Peach Mona Lisa
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Crab salad.= Season the flakes of a crab with salt and pepper, add a
spoonful of mayonnaise, and mix. Put a few leaves of lettuce around the
inside of a salad bowl, put the crab in the center, cover with
mayonnaise, and garnish with a hard-boiled egg cut in four, two fillets
of anchovies, and one green olive.

=Mutton chops, Robinson.= Broil four mutton chops and season well. Cut
in four a half dozen chicken livers, season with salt and pepper and fry
in butter. Cut up a small can of mushrooms, put in a casserole with the
livers, and cover with a cup of sauce Madere. Cook together and pour
over the chops.

=Watercress salad= (1). Clean and wash the watercress well, and season
with salt and vinegar.

(2) Use French dressing with a very little oil. Watercress does not
require much oil.

=Peach Mona Lisa.= Make a fancy form in the shape of a peach of vanilla
ice cream with a brandied peach in the center. Put a spoonful of
raspberry sauce (see raspberry sauce), in the center of a small plate.
Put a round piece of sponge cake, about three inches in diameter and
one-half inch thick, on the plate. Dust the ice cream peach with some
sugar, colored pink, and place on the sponge cake. Stick two sugar peach
leaves under the edge of the peach, and serve.

=Napoleon cake.= When making vol au vent, patty shells, or anything else
with puff paste, save the trimmings, roll together and give two turns,
in the same manner as when making fresh puff paste. Leave in ice box for
one-half hour and then roll out to one-eighth inch in thickness. Put on
a pastry pan, prick all over with a fork, and bake in oven until very
dry. When done, divide and cut into three strips, and allow to become
cold. Put the three strips one on top of the other, with pastry cream
between. Glace the top with vanilla icing, and sprinkle a band one-half
inch wide along the edge with chopped pistache nuts. Then cut into
individual portions about two by four inches in size.


FEBRUARY 17

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit marmalade
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Benedict
       Tripe saute, Lyonnaise
       Potatoes hashed in cream
       Romaine salad
       Camembert cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Rachel
       Sardines.      Olives
       Boiled sheepshead, cream sauce
       Potatoes Hollandaise
       Roast leg of mutton, currant jelly
       Baked Hubbard squash
       German fried potatoes
       Celery Mayonnaise
       Plum pudding, hard and brandy sauces
       Coffee

=Tripe saute, Lyonnaise.= Cut two pounds of tripe in narrow strips. Put
in large frying pan four ounces of butter and four sliced onions, and
cook until half fried, then add the tripe, which must be dry; season
with salt and pepper, and fry until both are of a nice yellow color.
Drain off the butter and serve the tripe dry, garnished with quartered
lemons and chopped parsley. Vinegar may be served instead of the lemons
if desired.

=Consomme Rachel= (1). Plain consomme garnished with asparagus tips.

(2) Plain consomme garnished with chicken dumplings and small peas.

=Boiled sheepshead, cream sauce.= Put a whole sheepshead in cold water
with one glass of milk, season with salt, and bring to the boiling
point. Then put on side of range where it will keep very hot without
boiling, and let stand for twenty minutes. Serve on napkin with small
boiled potatoes, quartered lemons and parsley. Cream sauce separate.

=Plum pudding.= One pound of well-chopped beef suet, one pound of sifted
flour, one-half pound of bread crumbs; two lemons, both juice and rinds;
one pound of brown sugar, four eggs, one-half teaspoonful each of
powdered nutmeg, ginger, cloves and cinnamon; one pound of currant
raisins; one-half pound each of malaga raisins, orange peel, citron peel
and lemon peel, all chopped fine; one cup of molasses, and one-half pint
of good brandy. Mix all together in a bowl, putting the liquids in last,
making a thick, heavy mixture. Put in a buttered mould or in a cloth,
and boil in water, or steam cook, for about three hours. This pudding,
if kept in a cool place, will keep indefinitely. Warm the pudding until
very hot before serving, sprinkle some powdered sugar over the top, pour
on some brandy, and burn.

=Brandy sauce.= Put in a vessel one-half pint of apricot pulp, made from
fresh or preserved fruit; one pint of water, and a half pound of sugar,
and boil. Moisten a teaspoonful of arrowroot with a little water and add
it to the boiling sauce, stirring so it will not get lumpy. Then strain
and add a small glassful of brandy.

=Hard sauce.= Put in a bowl three-quarters of a pound of sweet butter,
one pound of sugar, the white of an egg, and flavor with lemon, vanilla
or a little brandy, and work into a cream. Put into a pastry bag with a
tube, and dress on a pan in small round shapes. Place in the ice box to
get hard.


FEBRUARY 18

     BREAKFAST
       Waffles
       Honey in comb
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit and oranges en supreme
       Chicken broth in cups
       Olives
       Small sirloin steak, Bordelaise
       Potato croquettes
       Lettuce and tomato salad
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Westmoreland
       Oysters a l'ancienne
       Chicken pot pie, home style
       Combination salad
       Moka cake
       Demi tasse

=Grapefruit and oranges en supreme.= Sliced oranges and grapefruit in
equal parts, add a little sugar and maraschino, and serve in supreme
glasses. Tie a ribbon around the glass, with a nice bow.

=Potage Westmoreland.= Equal parts of mock turtle soup, thick consomme
tapioca, and thick consomme brunoise. Before serving add a glass of dry
sherry wine.

=Oysters a l'ancienne.= Take a dozen oysters on the deep half shell,
season with salt and pepper, put a small piece of butter, some chopped
parsley, a little lemon juice, and a thin slice of salt pork on each,
and bake in a hot oven for about four minutes.

=Chicken pot pie, home style.= Take a young fat hen and cut up as for
fricassee. Wash well and put in a vessel with one quart of water, season
with salt, bring to a boil, skim, and add a bouquet garni. After boiling
for about thirty minutes remove the bouquet and add twelve small round
potatoes, twelve very small onions, and one-quarter pound of parboiled
salt pork cut in small squares. Boil all together until well done. Mix
in a cup three spoonsful of flour and one-half cup of water, and stir
into the stewing chicken. Boil again for about ten minutes, then put in
a deep dish, sprinkle with chopped parsley, and when nearly cold cover
with thin pie, or puff paste, brush over with the yolk of an egg, and
bake in oven until well browned. Serve on a napkin. Dumplings and a few
small French carrots may be added before covering with the paste, if
desired.

=Moka cake.= Take three layers of cake and fill between with moka
filling. For the filling beat a half pound of sweet butter with a half
pound of powdered sugar until it is white and light. Then add the yolks
of three eggs, one by one, and a half cup of rich cream, beating until
very smooth. Flavor with some strong coffee or coffee extract. Finish
the cake by glacing the top with coffee frosting, and decorate with some
of the moka filling.


FEBRUARY 19

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Scrambled eggs with chives
       Toasted muffins
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of raw meat
       Radishes
       Broiled shad, maitre d'hotel
       Potatoes au gratin
       Cauliflower mayonnaise
       Pont l'Eveque cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of Lima beans
       Celery
       Frogs' legs, Jerusalem
       Roast squab chicken
       Individual artichokes, au gratin
       Julienne potatoes
       Endives salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Canape of raw meat.= Take a quarter pound of lean fresh beef tenderloin
or sirloin and chop very fine and season with a little salt and pepper.
Toast some thin slices of rye or white bread lightly, spread with a
little sweet butter, and then spread the chopped meat on top. Serve on a
napkin, garnished with quartered lemon and parsley.

=Broiled shad, maitre d'hotel.= Split a shad, season with salt and
pepper, sprinkle with oil, and broil on both sides. Dish up on a
platter, cover with maitre d'hotel sauce, and garnish with quartered
lemons and parsley.

=Cream of Lima beans.= Put in a vessel two ounces of butter and one leek
cut in small pieces. Simmer for a few minutes, then add one-half cup of
flour and simmer again. When hot add one quart of milk and a can of Lima
beans, or one pound of fresh beans. When soft strain through a fine
sieve, put back in vessel, bring to a boil, and add one-half pint of
thick cream and two ounces of best butter. Stir well, and season with
salt and pepper and a little Cayenne pepper. In place of the cream, use
half chicken broth, light bouillon, veal broth, or half stock and half
milk, if desired.

=Frogs' legs, Jerusalem.= Put in a saute pan one soupspoonful of chopped
celery, three chopped shallots, and three ounces of butter, and simmer
for about five minutes. Then add one dozen cut up frogs' legs, season
with salt and pepper, and simmer for five minutes. Then add one cup of
cream, or one cup of cream sauce, and boil for ten minutes. Serve in
chafing dish.

=Artichokes au gratin.= Remove the leaves from four boiled artichokes
and cut the bottoms in slices. Butter four individual shirred egg
dishes, put one spoonful of cream sauce in the bottom, then put in the
sliced artichokes, season with salt and pepper, cover with cream sauce,
sprinkle with grated cheese, put a small piece of butter on top of each,
and bake in oven until brown.


FEBRUARY 20

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal
       Boiled salt mackerel
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls      Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, Rothschild
       Fried chicken, Maryland
       Field salad
       Roquefort cheese, crackers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage de sante
       Salmon, Chambord
       Leg of mutton, a la Busse
       Spinach with cream      Parisian potatoes
       Sliced tomatoes, mayonnaise
       Anise seed cake

=Poached eggs, Rothschild.= Put a spoonful of puree of game on a plate,
a poached egg on top, and cover with sauce Perigueux.

=Puree of game.= After serving roast venison, duck, quail, bear,
reindeer, hare, or other game, take the remainder, remove the meat from
the bones and mash very fine in a mortar, add just enough thick brown
gravy to make a paste, and pass through a fine sieve. Season with salt
and pepper, heat well, and use as a garnish.

=Salmon, Chambord.= Put in a buttered shallow sauce pan two slices of
salmon, season with salt and pepper, add half a glass of red wine, and
half a glass of stock, bouillon, fish stock or water, cover with
buttered paper, and put in the oven and cook until done. With its broth
make a sauce Genoise, and add to it one dozen small French mushrooms,
one dozen parboiled clams, and one sliced truffle. Pour the sauce over
the fish, and garnish with plain-boiled small ecrevisses (crayfish).

=Leg of mutton, a la Busse.= Roast a leg of mutton, serve with its own
gravy, and garnish with fresh mushrooms saute in butter, and onions
glaces.

=Fresh mushrooms saute in butter.= Clean and wash one pound of fresh
mushrooms and dry in a towel. Put in a saute pan on the range, two
ounces of butter; when hot add the mushrooms, season with salt and
pepper, and saute slowly for about ten minutes. Serve on toast with
their own gravy, or use as a garnish for entrees, stews, etc.

=Onions glaces.= Peel one dozen small white onions and put in one quart
of cold water with a spoonful of salt. Put on fire, boil for about five
minutes, drain off water, and put the onions in a shallow saute pan with
one ounce of butter. Put in oven and roast until brown. Then add one
spoonful of meat extract, let them glace in this for a few minutes, and
then serve. If preferred the onions may be glaced by sprinkling with
powdered sugar, and omitting the meat extract. Or take one pint of
strong beef consomme and reduce one-half, then add at the same time as
the onions, and they will glace while reducing.

=Anise seed cake.= One-half pound of sugar, four eggs, one-half pound of
flour, and one-half ounce of anise seed. Beat the sugar and eggs
together over a slow fire until blood warm, then remove and continue
beating until cold and firm. Then add the sifted flour and anise seed.
Mix, and lay out on a greased and floured pan in drops about one and
one-half inches in diameter. Put in a dry warm place until a crust forms
on top (a few hours will be required), and then bake in a slow oven.

=Spinach in cream.= Boil a peck of well-washed spinach in salted water.
Drain off and pound through a fine colander, add two ounces of butter,
one cup of thick cream, heat well and serve. Salt and pepper if
necessary.


FEBRUARY 21

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Plain omelet
       Rolls
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Fillet of herring, marine
       Potato salad
       Minced tenderloin, a l'estragon
       Mashed potatoes au gratin
       American cheese, crackers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Florentine      Ripe olives
       Fillet of sole, Bercy
       Sweetbreads braise, with peas
       Roast squab, au jus.      Gauffrette potatoes
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Coupe Lyonnaise.      Assorted cakes.      Coffee

=Fillet of herring, marine.= Take two marinated herrings, remove the
skins and bones, and cut in long strips. Put on platter, strain a little
of its own sauce over them, and decorate with sliced lemons.

=Minced tenderloin of beef, a l'estragon.= Slice one pound of tenderloin
of beef in strips one-eighth inch thick and two inches wide, using
trimmings or the end piece. Put two ounces of melted butter in frying
pan, and when red-hot add the slices of meat, season with salt and
pepper, and fry very quickly over a hot fire; about one minute is
required. Then remove the meat and sprinkle the pan with one spoonful of
flour, and allow to become brown, then add one cup of bouillon or stock,
boil for five minutes, add one teaspoonful of chopped fresh tarragon,
and test as to seasoning. Then add one ounce of fresh butter and the
juice of one lemon. Pour over the fillets, which have been kept warm in
a deep dish.

=Consomme Florentine.= In consomme put some plain boiled spinach cut in
small pieces, also thin pancake cut same way. Serve grated cheese
separate.

=Fillet of sole, Bercy.= Put in a buttered flat saute pan three
finely-chopped shallots, the four fillets of a sole on top of the
shallots, and a little chopped parsley and chervil on top of the
fillets. Season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of white wine,
cover with buttered paper, put on top of the stove and bring to the
boiling point. Then put in oven and finish cooking. Remove the fillets
to a platter, and put in the saute pan one pint of white wine sauce,
cook for a few minutes, and pour over the fish. Do not strain the sauce.
Other fish besides sole may be used if desired.

=Roast squab, au jus.= Season four squabs, put a piece of fresh fat pork
over the breast, and place in roasting pan with one sliced carrot, one
onion, one bay leaf, a clove, a few pepper berries, and three ounces of
butter. Roast in a hot oven for about thirty-five minutes, basting
often. Then put the squabs on a platter, and place the pan on the fire
and cook until the butter is clarified. Drain off, add one cup of
bouillon and one spoonful of meat extract, reduce one-half, strain, and
pour over the squabs. Garnish with watercress.

=Waffle potatoes.= Cut the potatoes with a special cutter called a
potato waffle machine. Put them in warm swimming lard and let it become
hot gradually so the potatoes will not become brown too quick. When
cooked soft take them out and put them for a second into very hot fat so
they will become crisp and golden yellow. Serve on a napkin, sprinkled
with salt.

=Sybil and Gauffrette potatoes.= Same as waffle potatoes.

=Coupe Lyonnaise.= Fill a glass with vanilla ice cream, and put on top
one large marron glace.


FEBRUARY 22

     BREAKFAST
       Orange marmalade
       Buckwheat cakes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Julia
       Consomme in cups
       Cheese straws
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Broiled chicken on toast
       Sybil potatoes
       Baked Hubbard squash
       Hearts of lettuce
       Meringue glacee a la vanille
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Seapuit oysters
       Clear green turtle, au Pemartin
       Crisp celery.      Queen olives
       Salted almonds
       Fillet of bass, 1905
       Noisettes of lamb, Ducale
       Breast of chicken with Virginia ham
       Peas au beurre
       Soufflee potatoes
       Alligator pear salad
       Apple Moscovite
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Canape Julia.= Chop the tail of a lobster very fine and put in a vessel
on the range. When hot add one cup of thick cream sauce, bring to a
boil, and season with salt and Cayenne pepper. Add the yolks of two
eggs, but do not boil, heat just enough to bind the lobster. Make four
pieces of toast, put the lobster on top, cover with grated cheese, put a
bit of butter on the top of each, and bake in the oven. Serve on
napkins, with lemons and parsley.

=Noisettes of lamb.= Noisettes are cut from the saddle of lamb, free
from fat and skin, and in the shape of a small tenderloin steak. Broil
or saute in butter, and serve with Colbert, Bearnaise, or any other meat
sauce.

=Ducale.= Artichoke bottoms filled with French peas, sauce Madere. Use
as a garnish for lamb, beef, sweetbreads, etc.

=Breast of chicken.= Cut the breast from two raw roasting chickens,
remove the skin, season with salt and pepper, roll in flour. Put two
ounces of butter in a shallow saute pan, and fry the breasts for about
fifteen minutes, or until golden brown. Serve with Virginia ham or
bacon, figs, or with sauce Colbert, Madere, cream, etc. If Virginia ham
is served take four slices and just heat through on the broiler, or in
pan with a little butter. Do not allow to become hard or crisp.

=Alligator pear salad.= (1). Select ripe, soft pears, but not mushy. Cut
in half, remove the stone, fill with French dressing, and serve on
cracked ice.

(2). Put in the bottom of a salad bowl some lettuce leaves, scoop out
the inside of the pears with a soup spoon, put on the lettuce leaves,
and cover with French dressing.

=Apple Moscovite.= Take four large apples and remove the insides with a
sharp spoon, leaving only a firm shell. Put a spoonful of apple sauce on
the bottom of the apples. Whip the whites of six eggs very hard, and mix
with a half pint of sweet apple sauce. Fill the apples with this, dust
over with powdered sugar, and bake in a moderate oven.


FEBRUARY 23

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Mutton chops, Daumont
       Julienne potatoes
       Swiss cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Kroumir
       Aiguillettes of sole, mariniere
       Chicken, Montmorency
       Artichokes with melted butter
       Chiffonnade salad
       Kirschwasser jelly
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Mutton chops, Daumont.= Bread four mutton chops and fry in a flat saute
pan. Dish up on a long platter, and garnish with artichoke bottoms
filled with cauliflower. Pour sauce Perigueux around the chops.

=Artichokes filled with cauliflower.= Remove the leaves and trim the
bottoms of four cold artichokes. Cut in four a boiled and well-seasoned
cauliflower, squeeze out the water, and use to fill the artichoke
bottoms. Cover with a little thick cream sauce, sprinkle with grated
cheese, place small bits of butter on top of each, put on a buttered pan
with a spoonful of bouillon, and bake in the oven.

=Potage Kroumir.= One quart of puree of tomato soup mixed with one pint
of consomme tapioca.

=Aiguillettes of sole, mariniere.= Take the four fillets from one sole
and lay them flat in a buttered pan, sprinkle with three chopped
shallots, season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of white wine,
one-half cup of stock or water, cover with buttered paper, and bring to
a boil on top of the stove. Then put in oven and cook for about seven
minutes. Put the fillets on a platter, and reduce the broth until nearly
dry. Then add two cups of white wine sauce and boil for a minute. Bind
the sauce with the yolk of an egg mixed with a spoonful of cream, add a
little chopped chives, and pour over the fish.

=Chicken saute, Montmorency.= Joint a chicken, season with salt and
pepper, put three ounces of butter in a saute pan and saute the chicken.
When done remove the chicken to a platter, and put in the pan one cup of
brown gravy or sauce Madere, and one can of French mushrooms. Boil for a
few minutes. Then pour over the chicken. Garnish with croustades filled
with small French peas.

=Croustades.= One cup of flour, one cup of milk, the whites of three
eggs, a teaspoonful of olive oil, a teaspoonful of corn starch, and a
little salt. Mix well and strain. Keep the croustade iron very hot in
swimming lard. Dip the iron in the dough for a few seconds, then dip in
the swimming lard, coated with the dough, and fry until a nice golden
color. Take out, and when cold the croustades will be very crisp.
Croustade irons can be obtained in any first-class store.


FEBRUARY 24

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Omelet with ham
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Talleyrand
       Oysters a la Hyde
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of frogs' legs
       Olives
       Scallops, Newburg
       Roast Easter kid, mint sauce
       Sweetbreads saute, with green peas
       Endives salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs Talleyrand.= Trim the bottoms of four fresh artichokes and put a
little terrine de foie gras in each, and keep hot. Put a poached egg on
top of each and cover with sauce Perigueux.

=Cream of frogs' legs.= Take the backs and front legs of two dozen
frogs, reserving the hind legs for an entree. Put in vessel with two
quarts of bouillon or chicken broth, and boil for thirty minutes. Then
take one-half pound of rice flour and mix with one pint of cream. Let it
run into the boiling soup, and cook for ten minutes. Strain through a
fine colander, put back in the vessel, season with salt and a little
Cayenne pepper, and add three ounces of sweet butter. Stir the soup so
the butter will melt slowly. Serve croutons souffles separate.

=Scallops, Newburg.= Put one pint of scallops in a saute pan with one
ounce of butter, season with salt and pepper, and saute for about three
minutes over a hot fire; then drain off and add one pint of sauce
Newburg. Do not cook further, and serve in chafing dish.

=Roast Easter kid.= Kid when young is a delicious morsel. Prepare in the
same manner as lamb for roasting.

=Sweet potatoes saute.= Peel and slice two large boiled sweet potatoes.
Put three ounces of butter in a saute pan, when hot add the potatoes and
saute until nice and brown. Season with salt and pepper.


FEBRUARY 25

     BREAKFAST
       Waffles
       Honey
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, Martha
       Hungarian beef goulash
       Noodles, Polonaise
       Savarin Chantilly
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Colbert
       Broiled Alaska candlefish
       Sweetbreads, Theodora
       Roast ribs of beef, au jus
       Saratoga potatoes
       Celery Victor
       Fruit cake
       Coffee

=Poached eggs, Martha.= On top of four pieces of toast put some lobster
croquette preparation in a layer about one-quarter of an inch thick, put
a piece of butter on top of each, and bake in oven. Put a poached egg on
top and cover with cream sauce.

=Noodles, Polonaise.= On a large platter put one pound of plain boiled
noodles. In a frying pan put one-quarter pound of butter, and one-half
cup of fresh bread crumbs. Fry until golden brown, and pour over the
noodles.

=Consomme Colbert.= Equal parts of carrots, turnips, peas, string beans,
cauliflower, and flageolet beans. Cut the carrots and turnips in small
squares. Boil the cauliflower and cut off the small flowers. Then put
all in hot consomme, with one poached egg to each person. Add a little
chopped chervil before serving.

=Broiled Alaska candlefish.= As this fish is very oily it is better
broiled. Season with salt and pepper, and serve on platter, with plenty
of lemon and parsley in branches.

=Sweetbreads, Theodora.= Split four large sweetbreads, fill with chicken
forcemeat, and braise them. Serve with sauce Madere, and garnish with
stuffed fresh mushrooms.

=Fruit cake (white).= One pound each of butter, sugar and flour,
one-half teaspoonful of baking powder, ten eggs, one-quarter pound of
currant sultana raisins, one pony of rum, and one-quarter pound of
chopped glace fruits. Work the butter and the sugar together until
creamy, then add the eggs two by two, and work well, then add the rum,
and finally the flour, baking powder and fruit. Mix lightly, and bake in
a buttered pan lined with paper.


FEBRUARY 26

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs a la Colonel
       English lamb chops, Tavern
       Lettuce salad
       Pont l'eveque cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of rice
       Ripe olives
       Rock cod, en court bouillon
       Potatoes nature
       Squab chicken saute, Sutro
       Olivette potatoes
       Endives salad
       Orange souffle, St. Francis
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs a la Colonel.= Cut two tomatoes in half, squeeze out the juice,
bread them, and fry. Put a poached egg on top of each piece, and cover
with sauce Madere with fresh mushrooms.

=English lamb chops, Tavern.= Broil an English lamb chop until nearly
done, then put in an earthern casserole, with some saute potatoes on one
side and some stewed lamb kidneys on the other. Put in the oven for a
minute or two, and serve with chopped parsley on top.

=English mutton chop, Tavern.= Same as English lamb chop, Tavern.

=Rock cod, en court bouillon.= Put in a flat pan three spoonsful of
olive oil, one onion sliced very fine, three sliced green and one red
pepper, one bouquet garni, and about five pounds of codfish cut in
slices two inches thick. Season with salt and pepper, add two glasses of
white wine and one pint of water, and a little chopped parsley. Simmer
slowly for about forty minutes. Remove the bouquet garni, and serve on a
deep platter with broth and all. Any fish may be prepared in the same
manner.

=Squab chicken saute, Sutro.= Cut two squab chickens in six pieces each.
Two legs, two wings, and the breast and carcass split. Season with salt
and pepper, and saute in pan with two ounces of butter. Prepare as
follows: Two fresh artichoke bottoms boiled and cut in four; one-half
pound of fresh mushrooms saute in butter; one can of cepes saute in
butter; the livers of the chickens whole, and one parboiled sweetbread
sliced and saute in butter. Mix all together with the chicken, season
well, and add some chopped parsley and chives.

=Orange Souffle, St. Francis.= Cut "lids" from the tops of four large
oranges and remove the insides. Have the openings about an inch and
one-half in diameter. Fill about one-third full with some sliced fresh
fruit, such as oranges, apples, bananas, pineapple, etc. Then add a few
drops of maraschino, fill another third with vanilla ice cream. Beat the
whites of six eggs until stiff, mixed with one-half pound of sugar and
the grated rind of an orange, and fill the final third of the orange.
Dust with powdered sugar, and brown on top in a very hot oven. It will
take but a second to brown, and they should be served at once.


FEBRUARY 27

     BREAKFAST
       Orange marmalade
       Ham and eggs
       Corn muffins
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Omelet with Virginia ham and peppers
       Calf's head, vinaigrette
       Baked potatoes
       Apricot layer cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Strained gumbo soup, in cups
       Radishes
       Barracouda, maitre d'hotel
       Stuffed capon, Bruxelloise
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Champs Elysees potatoes
       Hearts of romaine, Roquefort dressing
       Chocolate parfait
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Omelet with Virginia ham and peppers.= Cut two slices of Virginia ham
and one green pepper in small squares, put in frying pan with one ounce
of butter, and simmer for about two minutes. Add eight beaten eggs and
two red peppers cut in small squares, season with salt and pepper, and
proceed in the same manner as for a plain omelet.

=Calf's head, vinaigrette.= Dish up on a napkin some boiled calf's head
with the brains and the tongue sliced. Garnish the platter with pickles,
pickled beets, quartered lemons, parsley in branches, and two
hard-boiled eggs cut in two. Serve vinaigrette sauce separate.

=Strained gumbo soup, in cups.= Make a chicken okra soup, strain through
cheese cloth, and serve in cups.

=Stuffed capon, Bruxelloise.= Soak half of a loaf of white bread in
milk, then squeeze out the milk, mince fine, add salt and pepper, a
little chopped parsley, one pound of finely chopped salted almonds, and
one egg. Mix well together and fill the capon. Tie a slice of fresh fat
pork over the breast, and roast in the same manner as chicken or other
fowl.

=Layer cake.= Eight eggs, one-half pound of flour, one-quarter pound of
melted butter, and a few drops of vanilla extract. Beat the eggs with
the sugar over a slow fire until thoroughly warm, then take off the
range and continue beating until cold. Put in the flour, mixing lightly,
and add the melted butter and vanilla extract. Bake in buttered flat tin
cake moulds, for about ten minutes.

=French layer cake.= The same as above with the exception that it is
baked in one thick cake and then cut into layers.

=Chocolate layer cake.= Use three or four layers, filling between with
chocolate cream. Glace with chocolate frosting, and decorate the top
with glace fruits. See pastry cream for directions for filling.

=Apricot layer cake.= Same as chocolate layer cake, but fill with
apricot marmalade, glace the top with vanilla frosting, and decorate
with glace fruit.


FEBRUARY 28

     BREAKFAST
       Shredded wheat with cream
       Crescents
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs a la Reine
       Tripe a la mode de Caen
       Camembert cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme d'Orleans
       Celery
       Fillet of sole, Victoria
       Leg of mutton, Reforme
       Carrots, Vichy
       Potato salad
       Peach Melba
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Poached eggs, a la Reine.= Spread some puree de foie gras on a piece of
toast. Put a poached egg on top, cover with cream sauce, and sprinkle
with finely chopped truffles. After the truffles have been chopped put
in a napkin and squeeze out the juice, and then chop again. They will
then be dry, and easy to sprinkle.

=Fillet of sole, Victoria.= Put four fillets in a buttered saute pan,
season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of white wine. When done
put on platter and pour a lobster sauce over the fish, with lobster and
truffles cut in small squares, in it.

=Leg of mutton, Reforme.= Roast a leg of mutton, and serve the following
sauce separate: Ham, tongue, pickles, mushrooms, and chicken in equal
parts, cut Julienne style, and mixed with sauce poivrade.

=Sauce poivrade.= Crush one-half cup of black pepper berries and put in
vessel with one dozen chopped shallots, a little parsley, and one pint
of white wine vinegar. Boil and reduce until nearly dry, then add one
quart of brown sauce, or sauce Madere, and boil for five minutes, then
strain, and stir in three ounces of sweet butter slowly.

=Tripe a la mode de Caen.= Parboil eight pounds of raw tripe and four ox
feet. Cut both the tripe and the feet in pieces two inches square. Chop
one pound of raw beef suet and four large onions very fine. Put in an
earthen pot half of the suet and onions, then half of the tripe and
feet, then the remainder of the suet and onions, followed by the rest of
the tripe and feet. Season with salt and pepper, add one bouquet garni,
one-half pint of brandy, one pint of white wine, and fill the remainder
of the space in the pot with water. Put a cover on the pot and seal with
any kind of paste or dough, so that no air or steam can escape. Then put
the pot in a moderate oven and leave for about eight hours; then take
out of oven, take off the cover, and remove the bouquet garni. If there
should be too much fat on top a little may be taken off. Ordinarily
there will not be too much. Season to taste with salt and pepper, add
one-half pint of dry apple cider and one glass of brandy, and boil for
two minutes. Serve hot. The proper way to serve tripe a la mode de Caen
is in small individual earthen pots, on a large plate, with red-hot
ashes under the pot.


MARCH 1

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit en supreme
       Consomme in cups
       Cheese straws
       Sweet-and-sour beef tongue
       String beans
       Mashed potatoes
       Chocolate eclairs      Coffee

     DINNER
       Oysters on half shell
       Onion soup au gratin
       Kingfish saute, meuniere
       Roast chicken
       Succotash
       Potato cakes
       Escarole salad
       Corn meal pudding      Coffee

=Sweet-and-sour sauce.= Procure one-half pound of unsweetened spiced
fish cake from your grocer, break it in small pieces, put in a bowl,
cover with one pint of vinegar and one pound of brown sugar. Soak for
about an hour, then stir well, and add one cup of fish broth or meat
stock, depending upon whether it is to be used for fish or meat. Season
with salt and a little Cayenne pepper, then add one pound of seedless
raisins, and boil again for five minutes.

=Sweet-and-sour beef tongue.= Boil a fresh beef tongue in the same
manner as boiled beef. When done cut in thin slices, put in a flat pan,
cover with sweet-and-sour sauce, and simmer for five minutes. Serve on a
platter covered with the sauce.

=Omelette Suzanne.= Cut six macaroons in four and mix with a little
whipped cream. Cut six lady fingers in two and sprinkle with powdered
cocoa and powdered sugar. Melt some Bar le Duc jelly. Make an omelet in
the usual manner, powder with plenty of sugar, and burn bands across the
top with a hot iron. At one end of the omelet place the lady fingers, at
the other end the macaroons, and pour some of the Bar le Duc jelly on
each side. Pour a pony of Chartreuse over the omelet, then a pony of
fine champagne, and light it.

=Cheese straws.= Roll out some puff paste (a good way to utilize any
trimmings you may have) very thin, about one-eighth inch. Wash the top
with eggs and spread with grated Parmesan cheese mixed with a little
Cayenne pepper. Cut in narrow strips, one-half inch by six, lay on a
baking pan and bake in a moderate oven until brown and crisp.

=Onion soup, au gratin.= Slice three onions very fine, put in a
casserole with three ounces of butter, put on the cover, and simmer
until of a golden color. Then add one quart of consomme, stock or any
good broth (consomme preferred), season well, and boil for five minutes.
Slice three rolls very thin and put in oven and allow to remain until
brown and dry, like toast. Put the soup in an earthen casserole, float
the slices of rolls on top, spread a cup of grated cheese over the
bread, put in a hot oven and cook until brown on top. Serve very hot.

=Potato cakes.= Whenever there is mashed potatoes left over, make into
little cakes about one inch thick and two inches in diameter, roll in
flour, and fry in pan with a little butter, until brown on both sides.
If the potato should be too thin add the raw yolk of an egg.


MARCH 2

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal with cream
       Broiled finnan haddie
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Bordelaise
       Lamb chops, Victor Hugo
       Julienne potatoes
       Stewed tomatoes
       Brie cheese, crackers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of lettuce      Radishes
       Scallops, Mornay
       Croustades financiere
       Roast leg of mutton, currant jelly
       Potato croquettes
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Fruit salad, au marasquin
       Lady fingers      Coffee

=Eggs Bordelaise.= Fry the eggs in oil, put on toast, cover with
Bordelaise sauce, and lay two slices of truffle on each egg.

=Lamb chops, Victor Hugo.= Broil or saute six lamb chops on one side
only, and allow to become cold. Grate two horseradish roots and put in a
sauce pot with two ounces of butter, and simmer. Then add one cup of
thick cream sauce, and bring to a boil; season well and bind with the
yolks of two eggs. When this stuffing is cold put on top of the chops,
make smooth with a knife, sprinkle with a little grated Parmesan cheese
mixed with bread crumbs, put small bits of butter on each chop, place on
a buttered pan, and put in a hot oven, so they will cook from the
bottom. Cook until the tops are nice and brown, and serve on a platter
with brown gravy, and two slices of truffle on each.

=Cream of lettuce.= Take the trimmings of six heads of lettuce, in
volume about the same as two heads of lettuce, wash well and cut in
small bits. Take two quarts of chicken broth, or any kind of clear broth
or stock, add the lettuce to it and boil for thirty minutes. Put in a
separate vessel four ounces of butter, and heat; add three spoonfuls of
flour and heat again; add the broth containing the lettuce and boil for
ten minutes. Boil a pint of cream, mix with the soup, and strain through
a fine sieve. Put back in vessel, add two or three ounces of sweet
butter, and stir until the butter is melted. Season with salt and a
little Cayenne pepper.

=Scallops, Mornay.= Put one pint of scallops in a saute pan with an
ounce of butter, season with salt and pepper, and heat through. Then
remove the juice and add one cup of thick cream sauce, mix well, put in
a deep dish, sprinkle with grated Parmesan or Swiss cheese, put small
bits of butter on top, and bake in hot oven until brown.

=Croustades financiere.= Make a financiere, but cut a little smaller
than for garniture. Fill the croustades, and serve on napkin with
parsley in branches.

=Financiere (garniture).= Cut two parboiled sweetbreads in slices, and
saute in butter; add one-half can of French mushrooms, or one-quarter
pound of fresh mushrooms cut in two and sauteed, rooster combs and
kidneys, sliced truffles, small chicken dumplings, and a few green
olives with the stones removed. Put all in a casserole, season well, add
a pint of good Madeira sauce, and serve hot. This garnish may be used
for filling croustades, vol au vents, small patties, or as an entree.


MARCH 3

     BREAKFAST
       Griddle cakes with maple syrup
       Buttered toast
       Oolong tea

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, Monnet Sully
       Imported Frankfort sausages
       Sauerkraut
       Boiled potatoes
       Limberger cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Toke Point oysters
       Pannade soup
       Boiled sea bass, Hollandaise
       Potatoes nature
       Chicken saute, Salonika
       Peas au cerfeuil
       Chiffonnade salad
       Biscuit glace
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Golden buck

=Poached eggs, Monnet Sully.= Place a poached egg on a canape of chicken
and pour Bearnaise sauce over it.

=Canape of chicken.= Take the breast of a boiled fowl and chop very
fine, season with salt and pepper, mix well with two ounces of sweet
butter, and spread on fresh toast.

=Pannade soup.= Take a half loaf of stale white bread, or some rolls,
and put in a pot with three pints of water, season with salt and pepper,
add one-quarter of a pound of butter, cover, and boil slowly for one
hour. It will then be of the consistency of gruel. Mix the yolks of two
eggs with a cup of cream and a half cup of milk, and stir slowly into
the boiling soup. This is an excellent plain soup, and fine for the
digestion.

=Peas au cerfeuil.= Put three ounces of butter in a casserole, add one
quart of parboiled peas, some chopped chervil (cerfeuil), season with
salt and a pinch of sugar, and simmer for five minutes.

=Boiled sea bass, Hollandaise.= Put a whole sea bass, including the head
and tail, in a fish kettle, in cold water. Season with salt, some whole
black pepper berries, and a bouquet garni. Add one sliced onion, and one
carrot, bring to a boil and then set on the side for fifteen minutes.
Serve on a napkin with small boiled potatoes, quartered lemons and
parsley. Hollandaise sauce separate.

=Fried artichokes.= Trim the bottoms of six boiled artichokes, cut in
four, put in flour, then in milk, then in beaten egg, then in fresh
bread crumbs, and fry in swimming fat. Serve on napkin with lemon and
parsley.

=Chicken saute, Salonika.= Joint a chicken and season with salt and
pepper. Put two spoonfuls of olive oil in a saute pan, and when very hot
add the chicken. Saute until nice and brown, then add one chopped
shallot. When the shallot is hot pour off the oil, add one cup of brown
gravy, and simmer for five minutes. Dish up on a flat platter, pour the
sauce over it, sprinkle with chopped parsley, and garnish both ends of
the platter with fried artichokes.

=Golden buck.= A Welsh rabbit with a poached egg on top.


MARCH 4

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced pineapple
       Bacon and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Mussels mariniere
       Reindeer chop, port wine sauce
       Sweet potatoes, saute
       Lettuce braise
       Waldorf salad
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       California oyster cocktail
       Ox tail soup, English style
       Frogs' legs, Jerusalem
       Filet mignon, Bayard
       Flageolet beans
       Sybil potatoes
       Hearts of lettuce
       Raspberry water ice
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Hangtown fry

=Sauce mariniere.= Cut fine six shallots, put in casserole with one
ounce of butter, and simmer just enough to have the shallots hot, then
add one glass of white wine and boil until reduced nearly dry. Then add
one pint of sauce Allemande and boil for five minutes. Season with salt
and pepper, and sprinkle with a little chopped parsley and chives.

=Sauce Allemande.= Put four ounces of butter and three spoonfuls of
flour in a casserole and place on the stove. When hot add one quart of
chicken or veal broth, and boil for twenty minutes, then bind with the
yolks of three eggs mixed with one-half cup of thick cream. Strain and
season well with salt and a little Cayenne pepper.

=Mussels, mariniere.= Wash the mussels well to free them from all sand.
Put in casserole with one-half glass of white wine and one cup of water,
bring to the boiling point, then add six chopped shallots, and boil
until the mussels are open. Remove the mussels to another vessel, strain
the broth, and reduce. Then add one pint of sauce mariniere, and pour
over the mussels. The mussels may be served with the entire shells
attached; on the half shell, or removed from the shells altogether,
after they have been boiled.

=Reindeer chop.= Reindeer should be hung up for at least two weeks
before being cooked, otherwise it will be very tough. The meat is very
good, and easily prepared. Salt and pepper the chops, roll in olive oil,
and broil; or fry in frying pan, in the same manner as any other kind of
chop or steak. Serve with maitre d'hotel, or some fancy meat sauce.

=Port wine sauce.= Take the brown gravy from a roast, or use any kind of
brown sauce, or sauce Madere; add one glass of port wine and boil for
two minutes. This sauce is excellent with game. If a sweeter sauce is
desired one-half cup of hot currant jelly may be added.

=Filet mignon, Bayard.= Saute in butter, or broil, small tenderloin
steaks, place on toast, spread with puree de foie gras, cover with sauce
Madere with sliced truffles, and garnish with small round chicken
croquettes.

=Hangtown fry.= Mix plain scrambled eggs with one dozen small fried
California oysters.


MARCH 5

     BREAKFAST
       Pearl grits with cream
       Broiled smoked salmon
       Toast Melba
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs, Meyerbeer
       Paprika schnitzel with spaetzel
       Gorgonzola cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of bananas
       Ripe California olives
       Fillet of bass, Nanon
       Chicken saute, Creole
       Boiled rice
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Nesselrode pudding
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Pearl grits.= To one quart of boiling water add eight ounces of pearl
grits, season with salt, and boil for twenty minutes. Serve cream
separate.

=Eggs, Meyerbeer.= For each person cook two eggs on a shirred egg dish.
Have the eggs very soft. Place a broiled split lamb's kidney in the
center of each dish and cover with a little sauce Madere. Place two
slices of truffle on top. Season well.

=Broiled smoked salmon.= Slice the salmon about one-half inch thick,
roll in olive oil, and broil. When done put on platter, cover with
maitre d'hotel sauce, and garnish with quartered lemons and parsley.

=Toast Melba.= Cut some white bread in very thin slices, trim, put on a
pan and bake in the oven until brown.

=Paprika schnitzel.= Cut four slices from a leg of veal. The slices
should be about one-half inch thick, two and one-half inches wide and
six inches long. Season them with salt and paprika. Melt three ounces of
butter in a saute pan, when hot put the slices of meat in the pan and
saute for about five minutes. Then add one cup of very thick cream, a
little more salt, one teaspoonful of paprika, and simmer for five
minutes. If the sauce should be too thin add one spoonful of cream sauce
and simmer for a few minutes.

=Nesselrode pudding.= Beat over the fire the yolks of eight eggs,
one-half pound of sugar, and one pony of good rum, until light and
creamy. Then remove from the fire and continue beating until cold. Then
add one quart of whipped cream and one-half pound of broken marrons
glaces. Mix well, and put in one large, or in individual moulds, pack in
ice and salt, and leave until hard. It will require about two hours to
freeze. To serve, remove from mould, decorate the top with a marron
glace, and pour maraschino sauce around the bottom of the pudding.

=Spaetzel.= These are small flour dumplings, but made harder than the
usual dumpling. Mix well one cup of flour, one whole egg and the yolk of
an egg, one-third of a cup of milk, a little salt and pepper, and a very
little grated nutmeg. Form in small bits and drop into boiling salted
water and boil for about five minutes, then pour off the water. In a
frying pan put two ounces of butter and cook until brown, then pour over
the spaetzel and mix.

=Cream of bananas.= Make a cream of chicken soup, heat six bananas in
it, and strain through a fine sieve.


MARCH 6

     BREAKFAST
       Bar le Duc jelly
       Spanish omelet
       Dry toast
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Fried tomcods, Tartar sauce
       Turkeys' livers en brochette
       Flageolet beans
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme royal
       Soft clams, bateliere
       Roast turkey, cranberry sauce
       Sweet potato croquettes
       Asparagus Hollandaise
       Chiffonnade salad
       Mince pie
       American cheese
       Coffee

=Spanish omelet.= Make a plain omelet and pour one cup of Creole sauce
around it.

=Fried tomcods.= Clean eight tomcods, wash well, and dry with a towel.
Roll in milk, then in flour, and fry in swimming fat for about five
minutes, or until nice and brown. The fat must be very hot. Serve on a
napkin with fried parsley, quartered lemons, and Tartar sauce separate.

=Turkeys' livers en brochette.= Take three turkey livers and cut each in
four slices. Broil three slices of bacon, and cut in four pieces also.
Now stick a piece of liver on a skewer, then a piece of bacon, then
another piece of liver, then another piece of bacon, and so continue
until the skewer is full. Season with salt and pepper, roll in fresh
bread crumbs, sprinkle with olive oil, and broil. When done on all sides
place on a piece of toast, put some maitre d'hotel sauce over it, and
garnish with quarters of lemon and water-cress.

=Clams bateliere.= Separate the bellies from one dozen soft clams and
put them back in their half shells. Season with salt and pepper, cover
with maitre d'hotel sauce, put a thin slice of salt pork over the top,
and place in oven and bake. Garnish with quartered lemon and parsley.

=Roast turkey.= Season the turkey well, fill with any kind of stuffing,
and roast in the same manner as roast turkey stuffed with chestnuts.


MARCH 7

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Sarah Bernhardt
       Reindeer stew
       Mashed potatoes
       Camembert cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cherrystone oysters on half shell
       Cream of farina
       Fillet of turbot, Bonnefoy
       Lamb chops, charcutiere
       Succotash
       French fried potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Eggs Sarah Bernhardt.= Cut six hard-boiled eggs in two, remove the
yolks, mash them up and mix with a little salt, pepper, celery salt, one
spoonful of fresh bread crumbs, one spoonful of chopped chicken meat,
and the yolk of one raw egg. Stuff the halved whites of eggs with this,
put on a buttered dish and place in the oven for four minutes. Dress on
a silver platter, and cover with sauce Perigueux.

=Sauce Perigueux.= Chop a small can of truffles and put in a casserole
with one glass of Madeira, and reduce until nearly dry. Then add one
pint of brown gravy and season with salt and Cayenne pepper.

=Sauce Perigord.= Slice one small can of truffles, put in casserole with
one glass of Madeira or sherry wine, reduce, add one pint of brown gravy
and boil again for twelve minutes. Season with salt and Cayenne pepper.

=Reindeer stew.= Cut about five pounds of shoulder and breast of
reindeer in pieces two inches square. Put in saute pan with one-quarter
pound of butter, season with salt and pepper, and saute until nice and
brown. Then add two spoonfuls of flour and simmer until the flour is
slightly brown; add one pint of claret and one quart of boiling water, a
bouquet garni, and bring to a boil; skim, cover and let slowly cook
until nearly done. Saute in butter twelve heads of fresh mushrooms, and
parboil twelve very small potatoes and fry in butter, add them to the
stew and cook until soft. Season well with salt and pepper.

=Cream of farina.= Boil one pound of farina in one quart of milk. When
done add one pint of well-seasoned chicken broth, and strain through a
fine sieve. Put back in pot, add two ounces of sweet butter and one pint
of boiling cream. Season with salt and a little Cayenne pepper.

=Fillet of turbot, Bonnefoy.= Cut the turbot in fillets about one and
one-half inches wide and three inches long. Put in saute pan, season
with salt and pepper, add six very finely chopped shallots, one small
can of mushrooms, or a half pound of fresh mushrooms, and one glass of
claret. Cover with buttered manilla paper, put in oven and simmer for
ten minutes, then remove the fish to a platter. Put the pan with the
gravy on the fire, add one pint of tomato sauce and boil for five
minutes. Then stir in well one ounce of good butter, and pour over the
fish.

=Lamb chops, charcutiere.= Broil some lamb chops and cover with brown
sauce with which has been mixed some sliced pickle and sliced green
olives in equal parts. Season the sauce well.


MARCH 8

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Scrambled eggs with bacon
       Buttered toast
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of fresh caviar
       Consomme in cups
       Cheese straws
       Spring lamb Irish stew
       Cream puffs
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree d'Artois (soup)
       Salted pecans
       Broiled shad, Albert
       Chicken a l'Estragon
       Potatoes au gratin
       Artichokes, sauce Hollandaise
       Omelette soufflee
       Coffee

=Puree d'Artois.= Same as puree of peas.

=Broiled shad, Albert.= Broiled shad with horseradish sauce.

=Chicken a l'Estragon.= Boil a whole chicken in a quart of water with
salt and a bouquet garni. When done pull the skin off but leave the
chicken whole. Make the sauce in the following manner: Put three ounces
of butter in a casserole, when hot add two and one-half spoonfuls of
flour and one and one-half pints of the chicken broth, boil for ten
minutes, add a little chopped tarragon and boil for another ten minutes.
Bind with the yolks of two eggs and a half cup of cream, strain, and
season with salt and Cayenne pepper. Pour the sauce over the chicken,
and lay a few leaves of tarragon on top.

=Omelette soufflee.= Mix a cup of powdered sugar with the yolks of two
eggs and the inside of a vanilla bean, and beat until it is light and
fluffy. Beat the whites of eight eggs until they are very stiff, then
add to the batter, mixing lightly. Place this on a buttered silver
platter that has been dusted with powdered sugar, form into a fancy
shape, decorate through a pastry bag with some of the same preparation,
dust with powdered sugar, and bake in a rather hot oven for about ten
minutes.

=Omelette soufflee en surprise.= Cut a piece of sponge cake into an oval
shape about one-half inch thick, three inches wide and six inches long.
Put on top of the cake one pint of vanilla ice cream that has been
frozen very hard, cover with omelette soufflee preparation, decorate in
the same manner as above, dust with powdered sugar, and bake in a very
hot oven for two minutes.


MARCH 9

     BREAKFAST
       Orange marmalade
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Maltaise
       Calf's head, a la Francaise
       Plain boiled potatoes
       Brie cheese and crackers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of green corn
       Matelote of fish
       Leg of mutton, Bretonne
       Field salad
       Sand tart      Coffee

=Eggs Maltaise.= Fill a croustade with puree of fresh mushrooms, put a
poached egg on top, and cover with cream sauce.

=Calf's head, a la Francaise.= Boil a calf's head, with the tongue and
brains, and dish up on a china platter. Make a macedoine of vegetables
as follows: Boil in salt water a carrot and a turnip, and when cold cut
up in small dices. Add one-half pound of cold cooked string beans cut in
pieces about one-half inch long, one-quarter pound of boiled peas, and
one-half can of flageolet beans. Put this macedoine in a salad bowl, add
one teaspoonful of salt, one-half teaspoonful of fresh-ground black
pepper, a little parsley and chervil, one-half cup of white wine
vinegar, and one and one-half cups of olive oil. Mix well and pour over
the calf's head.

=Cream of green corn.= Soak five pounds of green corn in cold water over
night. Then put on fire in pot with one-half gallon of bouillon, and
cook until soft. Then strain through a fine sieve, put back in pot, add
one quart of boiling cream, and season with salt and a little Cayenne
pepper. Before serving add four ounces of sweet butter, and stir well
until melted.

=White beans, Bretonne.= Soak 3 pounds of white beans in cold water over
night. Put in a vessel with three quarts of water, a ham bone, a bouquet
garni, and a small handful of salt. Boil until soft, then remove the ham
bone and bouquet, and drain off the water. Chop three large onions very
fine, put in casserole with three ounces of butter, and simmer until
cooked, then add a teaspoonful of chopped garlic and heat through, pour
in a cupful of puree of tomatoes and some chopped parsley, add the
beans, season well with fresh-ground black pepper, and cook for ten
minutes.

=Leg of mutton, Bretonne.= Roast leg of mutton garnished with beans
Bretonne.

=Matelote of fish.= Take the solid meat of any kind of fresh fish such
as bass, carp, perch, etc., and cut about four pounds in slices two
inches thick. Put in buttered pan, season with salt and pepper, add one
pint of claret, one cup of stock, fish broth, or water, and a bouquet
garni. Cover, put over a slow fire and boil for about twenty minutes, or
until soft. Put the fish in a deep dish, cover with matelote sauce, and
garnish with boiled ecrevisses. To make the matelote sauce put three
ounces of butter in a casserole and allow to become hot. Then add two
spoonfuls of flour, heat well, and then pour in the strained broth from
the fish, boil for ten minutes, add one spoonful of meat extract and one
teaspoonful of essence of anchovies, and strain. Peel one dozen very
small white onions, parboil then and fry in butter until soft. Add the
onions and one can of French mushrooms to the sauce, season well, and
boil.

=Sand tart (Sable).= One pound of sugar, one pound of flour, the yolks
of five eggs, six ounces of butter, and three tablespoonfuls of thick
sour milk in which has been dissolved one pinch of soda. Mix to a hard
dough and roll very thin. Beat the whites of two eggs and use to moisten
the top of the rolled dough. Cut in the desired shape, sprinkle with
sugar mixed with a little powdered cinnamon and chopped almonds, put on
buttered pan and bake quick.


MARCH 10

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced bananas with cream
       Broiled finnan haddie
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Renaissance
       Mutton chops, Signora
       Fried egg plant
       Romaine salad
       Meringued peaches      Coffee

     DINNER
       Mock turtle soup
       Oysters, Victor
       Croustades Laguipierre
       Roast capon, au jus
       Fresh asparagus, Hollandaise
       Champs Elysees potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Eggs Renaissance.= Put a little cream sauce in the bottom of a buttered
cocotte dish, add a raw egg, season with salt and pepper, then add a few
sliced canned mushrooms and sliced truffles, cover with cream sauce,
sprinkle with grated cheese, put bits of butter on top, and bake in
oven.

=Mutton chops, Signora.= Split open four mutton chops, season with salt
and pepper, put three slices of truffle in each chop and fold together,
roll in flour, then in beaten egg, and finally in bread crumbs. Fry the
chops for ten minutes in hot melted butter. Serve cream sauce to which
has been added some chopped truffles.

=Meringued peaches.= (Peche meringuee.) Cook one quarter pound of rice
in one quart of milk for about one-half hour. The rice should be stiff
when done. Add one pony of cream, one ounce of butter, two ounces of
sugar, and mix well. Spread on a dish about one inch deep, and place on
top some halved preserved peaches, or some fresh peaches cooked in
syrup. Make a meringue paste with the whites of four eggs beaten stiff
and a half pound of sugar. Cover the peaches with the meringue, using a
pastry bag with a fancy tube. Dust over with powdered sugar, and bake in
a rather cool oven until it becomes a little dry and brown.

=Oysters Victor.= Wash the heads of three fresh mushrooms, dry them in a
towel, and chop very fine, also chop very fine six walnuts and put in
salad bowl with the mushrooms, season with salt and pepper, add three
ounces of butter and a little chopped parsley, and mix well together.
Spread this paste on top of a dozen oysters on the half shell, and bake
in oven for about five minutes. Serve with halves of lemon.

=Croustades Laguipierre.= Use equal parts of chickens' livers, saute in
butter, sliced sweetbreads saute, boiled rooster combs, sliced green
olives, sliced truffles, and French mushrooms cut in two. Stir into hot
Madeira sauce, season well, and fill the croustades.


MARCH 11

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Scrambled eggs with truffles
       Crescents
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Potato omelet
       Roquefort cheese and crackers
       Hungarian beef goulash
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Du Barry
       Queen olives
       Fillet of sole, Turbigo
       Veal kidney roast
       Carrots in butter
       Mashed potatoes
       Chicory salad
       Fried cream
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with truffles.= Cut a truffle in small dices and put in
sauce pan, on the range, with one ounce of butter. When hot add six
beaten eggs, a little salt and pepper, one spoonful of cream, and then
scramble in the usual manner. Dish up and lay six slices of heated
truffles on top.

=Potato omelet.= Cut a boiled potato in small dices. Put one ounce of
butter in a frying pan with the potato, and fry until brown, then add
six beaten eggs, season with salt and pepper, and cook into an omelet in
the usual manner.

=Consomme Du Barry.= Boil a cauliflower in salt water. When done cut the
tips of the flowers from the stems and add to boiling consomme.

=Fillet of sole, Turbigo.= Cut the fillets from a sole, and remove the
skin. Spread with fish force meat, (see fish dumplings), fold in half,
place in buttered saute pan, season with salt and pepper, add one-half
glass of white wine, and boil. When done remove the fish to a platter;
add to the gravy in the pan one cup of white wine sauce, boil for ten
minutes, and strain. Cut the tail of a lobster in slices, heat them and
lay on top of fillets and cover with the sauce.

=Carrots in butter.= Wash and peel three dozen small French carrots, and
boil in two quarts of salted water. When done drain off the water, add
two ounces of sweet butter, and simmer for two minutes. Sprinkle with a
little chopped parsley.

=Fried cream.= One quart of milk, one-half pound of sugar, the yolks of
eight eggs, four ounces of flour, and one-half of a vanilla bean. Boil
the milk with the vanilla bean. Mix the sugar, flour and the yolks of
the eggs, and then pour into the boiling milk. Continue cooking,
stirring all the time until stiff. Then pour into a flat pan in a layer
about three-quarters of an inch thick, allow to become cold, and then
cut into two inch squares. Roll in flour, then in beaten egg, and
finally in cake, macaroon, or bread crumbs, and fry in swimming lard
until brown. Serve dusted with powdered sugar, or with a lump of sugar
covered with brandy, and burning.

=Beef tongue, Parisian style.= Wash a fresh beef tongue, put in a pot,
cover with hot water, add a cup of white wine vinegar, two carrots, two
onions, a bay leaf, a few cloves, a crushed garlic clove, some thyme,
the green tops of a bunch of celery, and some salt. Simmer slowly for
three hours, or until when pricked with a fork it has the consistency of
jelly. Then peel and trim. Reduce the broth, and make a brown gravy,
adding a glass of Madeira wine. In another pan boil a dozen or so small
onions. Glace and simmer them in plenty of butter, but do not brown, add
a can of mushroom heads and quarter of a pound of salt pork that has
been boiled and diced, and simmer again. Add two tablespoonfuls of
minced parsley and a wine glass of sherry, then mix with the brown
Madeira sauce. Put the whole tongue on a platter, and pour the sauce
over it.


MARCH 12

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Boiled eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with maraschino
       Fried tomcods, Tartar
       Broiled honeycomb tripe
       Celery root, field and beet salad
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Cherry tart      Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Lamballe      Radishes
       Bass, Dijonaise
       Roast chicken
       Fonds d'artichauts, Feypell
       Julienne potatoes
       Sliced tomatoes, French dressing
       Vanilla ice cream
       Cakes      Coffee

=Bass, Dijonaise.= Put four fillets of bass in a buttered pan, season
with salt and pepper, sprinkle with two finely-chopped shallots, add
one-half cup of water, cover, and put in hot oven for fifteen minutes.
Then place the fillets on a platter, and reduce the broth until nearly
dry, add one spoonful of French mustard and two cups of cream sauce, and
boil for two minutes. Add some chopped chives, and pour over the fish.

=Fonds d'artichauts, Feypell.= (Artichoke bottoms, Feypell). Remove the
leaves, and trim the bottoms of twelve boiled artichokes. Cut six of
them into one-half inch squares. Prepare one cup of puree of fresh
mushrooms and one-half cup of grated cheese. Put in a saute pan one
ounce of fresh butter, and when hot add the cut-up artichoke bottoms,
and season with salt and pepper. Fry until of a light golden yellow
color, then add the grated cheese, mix well, add the mushrooms puree,
and boil for a minute or two. Finally stir in the yolk of an egg, mixing
quickly, and a little chopped parsley. Cover thickly the six whole
artichoke bottoms with this filling, place on a buttered dish or pan,
lay a thin slice of raw bacon about an inch and a half long on top of
each, and put in the oven and bake. Serve as a vegetable course with
Madeira or tomato sauce, or as a garnish, plain.

=Canape St. Francis.= Trim small pieces of toast, and cut in fancy
shapes, or circular. Spread with caviar. Place a slice of tomato on top
and over this strips of caviar. Place on lettuce leaves that have been
dressed with French dressing mixed with finely-chopped herbs.

=Potatoes Ritz.= Allow one large potato for each individual. Peel, and
cut into half-inch dices. Boil in salt water for ten minutes, drain, and
brown with butter. When done the potatoes should be in small free
pieces, and browned on all sides.


MARCH 13

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit marmalade
       Buckwheat cakes
       Breakfast sausages
       Maple syrup
       Rolls      Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs gastronome
       Calf's brains au beurre noir
       Persillade potatoes
       Hearts of lettuce, French dressing
       French pastry      Coffee

     DINNER
       Toke Point Oysters, mignonette
       Potage Mongol
       Ripe California olives
       Fillet of sole, Villeroi
       Roast loin of lamb, mint sauce
       Asparagus Polonaise      Potato salad
       Savarin aux fruits      Coffee

     SUPPER
       Yorkshire buck
       Coffee

=Eggs gastronome.= Boil six eggs until hard, remove the shells, and cut
in two lengthwise. Chop up the yolks and put in a bowl. Chop very fine
one can of French mushrooms, and add to the yolks, season with salt and
pepper, add the raw yolk of one egg, one-half cup of fresh bread crumbs
and a little chopped parsley, and mix well. Fill the hard-boiled whites
with this filling, put on a platter, cover with brown gravy and bake in
oven.

=Calf's brains au beurre noir.= Put two calf's brains in cold water and
leave for one hour; then remove the reddish-black outside skin with the
fingers, and put again in fresh cold water so the blood will run out,
and the brains remain white after being cooked. Now put in a casserole
two quarts of water, a heaping spoonful of salt, one-half glass of
vinegar, two onions, one-half of a carrot, and a bouquet garni. Boil for
five minutes, and then add the brains and boil for two minutes, then let
it stand in the hot broth for about one-half hour. Then remove the
brains, cut in two lengthwise and lay on a platter, sprinkle with salt
and fresh-ground black pepper, one spoonful of French capers, and a
little chopped parsley, chives and chervil. Put in a frying pan three
ounces of sweet butter and cook until very dark brown, nearly black; and
pour over the brains. Then put in the same pan one-third of a cup of
vinegar, let it become hot, and pour over the brains also.

=Potatoes persillade.= Cut two dozen potatoes to the shape of a small
egg. Put in a pot, cover with cold water, add a spoonful of salt, and
boil slowly so they will not break. When they are nearly soft drain off
the water, add one ounce of butter, cover, and simmer until the butter
is melted. Then sprinkle with chopped parsley.

=Fillet of sole, Villeroi.= Put the fillets of a large sole in a
buttered pan, add some salt and a glass of milk, bring to a boil, and
then set on the side of the stove for ten minutes; then remove the fish
to a platter. Mix in a cup one spoonful of flour and one spoonful of
butter; add this to the broth in the pan from which the fish has been
removed, and boil for five minutes; then add one cup of cream, and two
ounces of sweet butter and whip well until melted, season with salt and
pepper, and strain over the fish.

=Asparagus Polonaise.= Put four pounds of boiled fresh asparagus, (for
four persons), on a platter. In a frying pan put three ounces of fresh
butter, and one-half cup of fresh bread crumbs, and fry until the crumbs
are golden yellow. Then pour over the tips of the asparagus, sprinkle
with a little pepper and chopped parsley. A hard-boiled egg chopped
fine, may be added if desired.

=Boiled fresh asparagus.= Fresh asparagus should be peeled very thin
with a sharp knife, and well washed. If to be served hot, put in boiling
salt water over a hot fire about twenty minutes before serving. They
should not be cooked in advance. If to be served cold, as soon as the
asparagus is done pour a glass of cold water over them so they will not
continue cooking and become too soft. Allow to cool in the broth, and
before serving lay on a towel or napkin to allow the water to drip off.


MARCH 14

     BREAKFAST
       Baked beans, Boston style
       Brown bread
       Buttermilk
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Omelet with oysters
       Veal chops, saute in butter
       Puree of salad
       Camembert cheese, crackers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Chicken okra soup
       Salted almonds
       Aiguillettes of bass, Massena
       Vol au vent Toulouse
       Roast capon, giblet sauce
       Stewed asparagus      Chateau potatoes
       Endives salad
       Parfait Napolitain
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Puree of salad.= (Vegetable). Boil in salted water, lettuce or any
other kind of green salad. When done drain off the water and press
through a fine colander. Add butter and a little cream.

=Aiguillettes of bass, Massena.= Put four fillets of bass in a buttered
pan, season with salt and pepper; add one-half glass of white wine and
one-half glass of stock, bouillon, fish broth or water, cover with
buttered paper, and put in oven to bake. When done place the
aiguillettes on a platter and cover with the following sauce: Heat one
and one-half ounces of butter in a sauce pan, add one spoonful of flour
and allow to become brown, add the fish broth left from cooking the
bass, one spoonful of meat extract, and one-half spoonful of
Worcestershire sauce. Boil for ten minutes, then add one-half
teaspoonful of essence of anchovies, and strain through cheese cloth.
Boil one dozen clams and cut in two; cut half of the tail of a lobster
in small squares, and six heads of mushrooms cut in two. Put all of this
in the strained sauce, and season well.

=Giblet sauce.= Clean the giblets of chickens, turkeys, or other fowl,
boil in salt water, and chop. Put in casserole two chopped onions, and
two ounces of butter, and simmer for ten minutes, or until soft and
yellow. Then add one tablespoonful of flour, and simmer again until
brown. Add the gravy from a roast, the chopped giblets and a little of
the water the giblets were boiled in. Cook for half an hour, season with
salt and pepper and chopped parsley. A little sherry wine may be added
before serving, if desired.

=Stewed asparagus.= Cut up some asparagus tips and cook in a casserole
in salt water until soft. Mix a spoonful of flour and one ounce of
butter and add to the asparagus, with some of the water used for
boiling. Use only enough water to cover the asparagus. Sprinkle with
chopped parsley and pepper, and serve in a deep dish.

=White bean soup.= Soak a quart of beans over night. Put in a vessel
with four quarts of water, or a mild soup stock. Add a half pound of
lean bacon, and a shinbone, if desired. Start to boil rapidly, then
remove to back of stove and cook for several hours until the beans drop
to pieces. Skim from time to time. Meanwhile chop very fine an onion, a
carrot and a stalk of celery, and simmer in butter until they take on a
slightly brown color. Add a spoonful of flour, a potato cut in small
dices, and the water from the beans. Strain the beans, and to the puree
add the cooked vegetables; cut the bacon in small pieces, and cook all
together for twenty minutes. Season with salt, pepper and chopped
parsley.


MARCH 15

     BREAKFAST
       Bananas with cream
       Scrambled eggs with asparagus tips
       Toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Crab salad
       Consomme in cups      Cheese straws
       Fried whitebait, remoulade
       Lamb chops      Saute potatoes
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Roquefort cheese, crackers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Pot au feu
       Loin of pork, baker's oven style
       Mashed turnips
       Celery root and field salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Fried whitebait.= Wash the whitebait well and dry on a towel or napkin.
Roll in milk, then in flour, and fry in very hot swimming lard, just
enough to make them crisp. Lay them on a napkin, sprinkle with salt, and
garnish with fried parsley and quartered lemons. Serve brown bread and
butter sandwiches and sauce Tartar or remoulade.

=Pot au feu.= Put in a pot one brisket of beef; or five pounds of short
ribs of beef; two gallons of cold water, and a handful of salt. Bring
slowly to a boil and skim well, so the broth will remain clear. When the
boiling point is reached add two whole carrots, two turnips, three
stalks of leeks, one stalk of celery, a bouquet garni, one small head of
Savoy cabbage, and two large onions, all well washed. Bring to the
boiling point again, cover, and put on the side of the stove where it
will simmer slowly. The vegetables will be done before the meat, so when
they are cooked remove them and throw out the bouquet garni. Let the
beef cook until very soft. Cut the vegetables, with the exception of the
onions, in thin slices; and when the beef is done strain the broth over
the vegetables. Give it another boil, season well, add some chopped
chervil, and serve with toasted bread crusts, separate.

The boiled beef may be served as an extra course, usually after the
soup, if no fish is served.

=Loin of pork, baker's oven style.= For a large family, take eight
pounds of pork ribs, season with salt and pepper, rub with a piece of
garlic thoroughly, and put into a stoneware pot. Cut six large potatoes
in strips lengthwise and one inch square, slice three onions and add,
with three pints of water, a bay leaf and two cloves, to the meat. Your
baker will bake it for you in a brick oven, and it will be a dish quite
different from the usual roasted pork. If necessary, put it in your own
oven, baking for not less than four hours with a slow, even fire.
However, it is preferable to have it baked in a brick oven.

=Fried chicken, Vienna style.= Cut a chicken in six pieces; two legs,
two wings, and two pieces of breast. Season with salt and pepper, roll
in flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in fresh bread crumbs. Put in
a saute pan in two spoonfuls of hot butter, and fry. When done dish up
on a platter, garnish with corn fritters, and serve sauce supreme
separate.

=Peas, farmer style.= Shell enough peas to make two cupsful. Take twelve
firm large asparagus tips, an onion, a firm head of lettuce cut fine,
six small French carrots cut in two, three ounces of butter, a pinch of
salt and one of sugar. Add enough water to cover, and simmer slowly
until all the vegetables are thoroughly done.


MARCH 16

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit
       Fried eggs
       Dry toast
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Sardines, vinaigrette
       Paprika schnitzel with spaetzel
       German apple cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Blue Point oysters on half shell
       Puree paysanne
       Pompano saute, meuniere
       Tame duckling, apple sauce
       Young beets in butter
       Sweet potatoes saute
       Waldorf salad
       Lemon pie
       Coffee

=Sardines, vinaigrette.= Remove the skins from a can of sardines, and
arrange on a platter, on a lettuce leaf. Sprinkle with salt and
fresh-ground black pepper, pour a spoonful of vinaigre and one of olive
oil over them, and sprinkle with chopped parsley. Garnish with a lemon
cut in half, two hard-boiled eggs cut in two, some chopped onion on a
small leaf of lettuce, and another small leaf filled with small French
capers.

=Puree paysanne.= (Soup). Slice a carrot, an onion, a turnip, one-half
of a stalk of celery, two stalks of leeks, three leaves of cabbage,
one-half pound of squash or other fresh vegetable such as asparagus or
tomatoes. Put them in a vessel with one-half pound of fresh peas, and
one-quarter pound of fresh Lima beans. Cover with two quarts of bouillon
and cook until soft. Strain through a fine colander, put back in the
vessel, bring to a boil, season with salt and pepper, add two ounces of
butter and mix well.

=Young beets in butter.= Cut some young boiled beets in thin slices, put
in saute pan with butter, season with salt and pepper, and simmer for a
few minutes.

=Fillet of sole, Villeroi.= Put the fillets of a large sole in a
buttered pan, add some salt and a glass of milk, and bring to a boil,
then set on side of stove for ten minutes. Then remove the fillets to a
platter. Mix in a cup one spoonful of flour and one spoonful of butter,
and add this to the milk broth in the pan, which has been kept boiling,
and cook for five minutes. Then add one cup of cream and two ounces of
sweet butter, whip well until melted, season with salt and pepper, and
strain over the fish.

=Sponge cake.= One-half pound of sugar, six yolks of egg and six whole
eggs, one-half pound of flour, and flavoring. Beat the eggs and yolks
and sugar over a slow fire until blood warm. Then remove and continue
beating until cold and very light and spongy. Then add the flour and
vanilla, or other flavoring, and mix lightly. Put into paper-lined
moulds or pan, and bake in medium hot oven. Serve with powdered sugar
dusted on top, or frosted.

=Caroline cake.= (Chocolate or coffee). Make a dough as for cream puffs,
and dress on a pan in drops about quarter the size as for regular cream
puffs. Bake in a moderate oven; when done make a hole in the bottom of
each with a pointed stick, and fill with pastry cream, or sweetened
whipped cream. Place on a wire grill about one-quarter inch apart, and
glace with chocolate or coffee icing. Let the icing dry, and serve in
paper cases.


MARCH 17

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Princesse
       Chicken saute, Hongroise
       Mashed potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       Brie cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Consomme Camino
       Fillet of bass, Menton
       Roast leg of lamb
       String beans
       Chateau potatoes
       Chiffonnade salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs Princesse.= Put some puree of fresh mushrooms in the bottom of
small croustades, lay a poached egg on top, and cover with sauce
Perigueux.

=Chicken saute, Hongroise.= Joint a chicken and put in a saute pan with
two ounces of butter, season with salt and a little paprika, simmer for
five minutes; then add a sliced onion and simmer slowly for ten minutes
with the cover over the pan. Then add a cup of cream and cook for four
minutes, and add one-half cup of cream sauce. Remove the chicken to a
platter, pour the sauce over it, and garnish both ends of the platter
with macedoine of vegetables.

=Macedoine of vegetables.= Macedoine is a mixture of vegetables, and may
be obtained in cans, but is easily made at home. If the canned sort is
used drain off the juice, put in casserole in cold water, bring to a
boil, and then drain off the water, season with salt and pepper, and
simmer for a minute or so. To make macedoine, use equal parts of
carrots, turnips, string beans, cut in squares about one-quarter inch in
diameter, and peas and flageolet beans. Boil each separately in salt
water, and mix afterwards, season with salt and pepper and one ounce of
butter, and simmer as above. Flageolet beans come in cans, or dry like
dry peas. They may be omitted if desired.

=Consomme Camino.= Boil one-quarter of a pound of macaroni in salt
water; when soft, drain, and cool in cold water. Then cut in small
pieces about one-half inch in length, and serve in a quart of consomme.
Serve grated cheese separate.

=Fillet of bass, Menton.= Cut four fillets of bass; and prepare some
fish dumpling mixture. Spread some of the mixture over the fillets, and
fold in half, place in buttered saute pan, add a little salt and
one-half glass of white wine, cover with buttered paper, and place in
oven for fifteen minutes. Dish up on a platter and cover with white wine
sauce.

=Beans, Normandy.= Soak two pounds beans over night, then put to boil
with three pints of water, sliced carrot, a yellow turnip, an onion, and
a bouquet garni, season with salt, and cook for an hour. Put two big
spoonfuls of butter and a spoonful of flour in a pan, and make a creamy
sauce by adding the water from the beans. Now fill a baking dish; first
a layer of sliced potatoes mixed with minced onions, then the
semi-cooked beans, then potatoes, and so on until filled. Then add half
a glass of white vinegar and bake until the potatoes are done, by which
time the beans will be done also.


MARCH 18

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apple with cream
       Fried hominy
       Bar le Duc jelly
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Oranges en supreme
       Clam broth in cup
       Fillet of sole, Orly
       Tripe and oysters in cream
       Baked potatoes
       Diplomate pudding
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of celery
       Pompano, Cafe Anglaise
       Chicken saute, Portugaise
       Fresh asparagus, Hollandaise
       Julienne potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Sponge cake
       Compote of mixed fruits
       Coffee

=Orange en supreme.= Slice six oranges, put in bowl with three spoonfuls
of powdered sugar and two ponys of Curacao, let stand for thirty
minutes, and serve in supreme glasses.

=Fillet of sole, Orly.= Roll four fillets of sole in the form of cigars,
put in flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in bread crumbs, and fry
in hot swimming lard. When done lay on napkin, garnish with quartered
lemon and fried parsley, and serve tomato sauce separate.

=Diplomate pudding.= Take sponge, or any kind of left over cake and cut
in small pieces, using enough to fill a pudding mould. Add about a
teaspoonful of chopped candied fruit to each person. Make a custard with
one quart of milk, six eggs and a half pound of sugar; pour over the
cake in the mould, and bake. Serve with brandy sauce with some chopped
candied fruit in it.

=Pompano, Cafe Anglaise.= Put four small whole pompano and four fillets
of pompano in a buttered saute pan, and season with salt and pepper. Put
in another vessel one dozen clams and one dozen oysters, with their own
juice, and bring to a boil. Then strain the broth over the pompano and
boil until done. Remove the fish to platter, reduce the broth, then add
one cup of cream sauce and one cup of white wine sauce, and strain. Put
the oysters and clams and one dozen ecrevisse tails in the sauce and
pour over the fish. The sauce should be well seasoned. Garnish with
small fried fillets of sole.

=Small fried fillets of sole.= Cut fillets of sole into small strips
about one-quarter inch thick and two inches long, roll in milk and then
in flour, and fry in hot swimming lard. When crisp take out of the fat
and sprinkle with salt. Serve with Tartar sauce as fried fillet of sole,
or use as a garnish for fish.

=Chicken saute, Portugaise.= Joint a chicken and season with salt and
pepper. Put in saute pan one spoonful of olive oil and one of butter,
heat, add the chicken, and saute until golden yellow; then add three
finely chopped shallots and simmer for a minute; add one can of French,
or one-half pound of fresh mushrooms saute in butter; two peeled and
quartered tomatoes, or the same amount of canned ones, using the pulp
only, and simmer for five minutes. Add one cup of tomato sauce, and
simmer again for five minutes. Put the chicken on a platter, pour the
sauce with its garnishing on top, and sprinkle with chopped parsley. A
little chopped garlic may be added at the same time as the chopped
shallots, if desired.


MARCH 19

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs with cream
       Scrambled eggs with parsley
       Puff paste crescents
       Oolong tea

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Du Barry
       Boiled ham, Leonard
       Stewed tomatoes, Brazilian
       Mashed potatoes
       Roquefort cheese, crackers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Velvet soup
       Ripe California olives
       Skatefish au beurre noir
       Baked chicken with rice
       Chiffonnade salad
       Bavarois a la vanille
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Baked chicken with rice.= Put in a saucepan a fat hen with all of its
fat, cover with hot water, season with salt, and when it comes to a
boil, skim off the foam but leave the fat. Add a soup bouquet with the
addition of some spices and a bay leaf. When the hen is half done, which
will be in about an hour, remove the bouquet, and add a cup of washed
rice. Boil until the rice is nearly done, by which time it has absorbed
most of the broth; then put into a porcelain baking dish and bake until
brown.

=Eggs Du Barry.= Line an egg cocotte with a forcemeat made of truffles
and beef tongue, drop an egg into this, set the dish in hot water and
cook in the oven for from five to ten minutes. When done cover with hot
puree of cauliflower.

=Puree of cauliflower.= Boil a head of cauliflower in salted water. When
soft drain off the water and press the cauliflower through a fine
colander. Season with salt and pepper, and add a spoonful of cream
sauce.

=Forcemeat of truffles and tongue.= Put through a fine sieve two slices
of beef tongue, then add a truffle chopped fine, the yolk of one egg,
and a little pepper.

=Boiled ham, a la Leonard.= Soak a smoked ham in cold water for twelve
hours, after having cut off the handle bone and shortening the hip bone.
Set on the fire and bring to the boiling point very gradually, then
drain off the water, and replace with water of tepid warmth. Add four or
five carrots, two bay leaves, a small bunch of thyme, sage and basil and
a bunch of celery tops, all tied in a bunch. Season with mace, cloves
and pepper berries, let it come to bubbling heat, and then set on back
of stove, where it may simmer at an even temperature. When done;
allowing about a quarter of an hour for each pound of meat; peel, and
serve with a sauce made of some clear soup stock, Madeira sauce, three
spoonfuls of molasses and a spoonful of French mustard. The ham should
be basted frequently while cooking.

=Velvet soup.= Mince fine the red part of a few carrots, stew them with
butter, salt, sugar and a little broth. When done strain through a
sieve. Put a quart of clear broth on to boil, mix in four tablespoonfuls
of tapioca, let it stand for twenty-five minutes on the side of the
fire, skimming well. At the last minute before serving add the carrot
puree, season, boil up once or twice more, and serve in a tureen.

=Tomato stew, Brazilian.= Dice a piece of white bread and simmer with
two ounces of butter, slightly browning it. Add four peeled tomatoes and
a can of Lima beans with the water drained off, and season. Then add a
half cup of chicken broth or well-flavored stock, and simmer for twenty
minutes.


MARCH 20

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Raisin cocktail
       Consomme in cups
       Broiled shad roe with bacon
       Cold roast beef
       Cole slaw
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree Celestine
       Radishes
       Paupiettes of bass
       Mutton chops, Milanaise
       Peas, farmer style
       Homemade apple pudding
       Coffee

=Broiled shad roe with bacon.= Season four shad roes with salt and
pepper, lay in oil, and broil. When done place on platter and cover with
maitre d'hotel sauce. Lay eight crisp-broiled slices of bacon on top of
the roe, and garnish with quartered lemon and parsley.

=Puree Celestine.= Same as puree of potatoes.

=Puree of potatoes.= Peel four well-washed white potatoes, and cut in
pieces. Put in a vessel with one quart of stock and two cut-up stalks of
leeks, and boil until done. Then strain through a fine sieve, put back
in vessel, season with salt and pepper, add two ounces of butter, and
stir well until the butter is melted.

=Paupiettes of bass.= Cut four fillets of bass about one-quarter of an
inch thick, two inches wide and six inches long. Lay them flat on the
table and spread with a thin layer of fish dumpling preparation. Roll
them up and place standing in a buttered saute pan, season with salt and
white pepper, add one-half glass of white wine and one-half cup of stock
or hot water, cover with buttered paper, and put in oven for fifteen
minutes. Then remove the fish to a platter, reduce the broth until
nearly dry, add one pint of white wine sauce, strain, and pour over the
fish. Decorate the tops with chopped hard-boiled eggs, chopped parsley,
and lobster corals chopped very fine.

=Lobster corals.= In lobsters may be found a solid red substance which
is known as lobster corals. Remove the corals from a boiled lobster, put
on a covered plate and dry on the stove until very hard. Chop fine, and
use for decorating fish, salads, etc. It will keep a long time in a dry
place.

=Raisin cocktail.= Soak seedless raisins in sherry wine for fifteen
minutes, then put a heaping spoonful in each cocktail glass. Make a
sauce of tomato ketchup, tobasco sauce, celery seed, and the juice of
two lemons; allowing the latter to a half pint of ketchup. Add a few
chopped almonds, fill the glasses and chill, or serve with ice around
the glasses.

=Homemade apple pudding.= Fry four sliced apples in a little butter and
a pinch of powdered cinnamon. Cut half of a five cent loaf of milk bread
into small squares, mix with the apple and put in a pudding mould. Mix
half a pound of sugar with four eggs and one quart of milk, strain, and
pour into the mould. Allow to soak for a half hour, and bake in a
moderate oven.

=Maraschino sauce for iced pudding.= One-half pint of cream, one pony of
maraschino, one-quarter of a pound of sugar. Beat all together until a
little thick, and serve very cold.


MARCH 21

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal and cream
       Broiled kippered herring
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape St. Francis
       Eggs, Careme
       Hot buckwurst with potato salad
       Limburger cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Eliza
       Terrapin, Maryland
       Beef tongue, Parisian style
       Potatoes Ritz
       Beans, Normandy
       Hearts of lettuce
       Savarin au kirsch
       Coffee

=Broiled kippered herring.= Kippered herring may be obtained in cans.
Dip in oil and broil very lightly, cover with maitre d'hotel sauce, and
garnish with lemon and parsley.

=Eggs, Careme.= Butter a shirred egg dish, crack two eggs into it, and
season with salt and pepper. Slice a truffle and a few canned mushrooms,
mix with a little cream sauce, and pour over the eggs. Bake in oven.

=Hot buckwurst.= Secure the buckwurst from your butcher, lay them in
boiling water for ten minutes, but do not let the water boil after they
have been put in it.

=Potage Eliza.= Same as potage sante.

=How to boil terrapin.= Put two live terrapin into boiling water and
leave for two minutes. Then remove the outer skin from the feet, neck
and head, with a towel. Put the terrapin in a kettle with two quarts of
cold water, an onion, a carrot, a bay leaf, and one clove, and boil
until the feet are soft. The time required depends upon the age of the
terrapin, some being cooked in fifteen minutes, and others requiring two
or three hours. When done open the shell, take out all the meat, and the
liver, removing the gall from the latter with scissors. Remove the tail
and claws and head. Cut up the legs in inch-long pieces, or at the
joints, as preferred. Reduce the broth by boiling down to about a
cupful, and put in a jar with the meat, and add a whiskey glass of
sherry wine. The terrapin is then ready to prepare in any style desired.

=Terrapin, Maryland.= Put one cup of terrapin, prepared as above, in a
flat pan, add a little grated nutmeg, salt and pepper, and half a glass
of dry sherry. Boil until half reduced, then add a cup of thick cream,
boil, and thicken with the yolks of two eggs, a quarter of a cup of
thick cream and an ounce of butter beaten together. Heat, but do not
boil. Serve in chafing dish, with dry sherry, and toast on the side.

=Terrapin, Jockey club.= Same as Terrapin, Maryland. Before serving add
two ponies of Cognac and six slices of truffles.

=Terrapin, Baltimore.= One cup of the prepared terrapin without the
liver. Put in saucepan with salt, pepper, nutmeg, celery salt, and a
glass of dry sherry. Boil for five minutes. Mash the liver in a salad
bowl, add the yolks of two raw eggs, one ounce of sweet butter, and
strain through a fine sieve. Add a cup of brown sauce to the simmering
terrapin, then add the liver prepared as above, pouring in gradually.
Heat barely enough to thicken. Before serving add half a glass of dry
sherry.


MARCH 22

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Scrambled eggs with smoked beef
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit en supreme
       Crab meat, Monza
       Loin of pork, baker's oven style
       Field salad
       Prune souffle      Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       White bean soup
       Salt codfish, Nova Scotia
       Fried chicken, Vienna style
       Corn fritters      Mashed potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Diplomate pudding, glace      Coffee

=Crab in chafing dish.= Mince a shallot onion and brown slightly with
two spoonfuls of butter. Add a spoonful of flour, mixing well, then add
a half pint of sweet milk, and stir to a smooth cream. Add the meat of a
California crab (or six eastern crabs) and a tablespoonful of sherry.
Place toast, cut in fancy shapes, on a deep platter, and cover with the
crab. This is a favorite way of preparing crab.

=Crab meat au gratin.= Shred the meat of one crab, mix with a cup of
cream sauce and a little paprika, or Cayenne; or if this is too strong
use white pepper. Fill individual baking dishes, and sprinkle the top
liberally with grated Parmesan cheese. Bake in an oven until the top is
an even brown.

=Crab meat, Gourmet.= Put a quarter of a pound of picked shrimps in a
saucepan, add one ounce of butter and one-half whiskey-glassful of dry
sherry wine. Simmer for five minutes, then add the meat of one crab,
prepared Monza.

=Crab meat, Suzette.= Bake four good-sized potatoes, and cut off one
side like the cover of a box. Scoop the insides out with a spoon, and
fill with the meat of one crab prepared in cream. Sprinkle some grated
Parmesan or Swiss cheese on top, and bake in oven until nice and brown.
Serve on napkins, garnished with parsley in branches and quartered
lemons.

=Oysters or crab, a la Poulette.= If for oysters, boil them in their own
liquid for about five minutes. If the small California oysters are used
boil for half that time. Into this liquid of, say, a pint of oysters,
stir a heaping teaspoonful of corn starch mixed with a half pint of
white wine. Then beat the yolks of two eggs with half a cup of cream,
and stir slowly into the above, add two large spoonfuls of butter, and
keep on the stove but do not let it boil. Finally squeeze in the juice
of half a small lemon. If crab is used, cut the meat in small pieces,
and make the sauce in the same manner, but instead of beginning with the
juice of oysters for the foundation of the sauce, begin with a cup and a
half of cream and water in equal proportions, thicken with corn starch,
then add the yolks of eggs, etc., as above. The oysters or the crab meat
should be added last.

=Crab meat, a la Louise.= Have the crab meat thoroughly chilled, and
allow one crab to three or four people, according to the size of the
fish. Use small fancy fish plates, or salad plates. Lay on each plate
some slices of the white hearts of firm heads of lettuce. Lay on top
some canned Spanish pimentos, using the brilliant red variety, which is
sweet. On top of this place the crab meat, taking care not to break it
too small. Over all pour French dressing made with tarragon vinegar,
well-seasoned with freshly-ground black pepper.


MARCH 23

     BREAKFAST
       Hominy and cream
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Sardines with lemon
       Clam broth in cups
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Plain boiled potatoes
       Asparagus, vinaigrette
       Edam cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Coquelin
       Radishes and olives
       Broiled pompano, Havanaise
       Leg of mutton, Clamart
       Rissolees potatoes
       Lettuce and tomato salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Eggs Pocahontas

=Eggs Pocahontas.= Fry six strips of bacon, and two dozen California, or
one dozen Blue Point, oysters. Scramble ten eggs and mix with the above.
Season well.

=Potage Coquelin.= Garnish puree of pea soup with chicken and leeks cut
Julienne style, and boiled in broth.

=Broiled pompano, Havanaise.= Serve broiled pompano with a Colbert
sauce, to which has been added two red peppers (pimentos), cut Julienne
style. Pour the sauce over the fish, or serve separate, as desired.

=Leg of mutton, Clamart.= Roast leg of mutton garnished with puree of
peas. Serve brown gravy.

=Lettuce and tomato salad.= Put the leaves of a head of lettuce in a
salad bowl. In the center place four peeled and sliced, or quartered,
tomatoes. Pour one-half cup of French dressing or mayonnaise over the
tomatoes.

=Crab meat, Belle Helene.= Put six whole tomatoes in hot water for
fifteen seconds, then cool immediately, and remove the skins. Cut a hole
in the tops the size of a quarter of a dollar, scoop out the insides,
season the inside of the shells with salt and pepper, fill with crab
meat Monza, and bake in oven for ten minutes. Serve on platters,
garnished with parsley and quartered lemons.

=Prune souffle.= Wash a cupful of prunes thoroughly, and soak them over
night. Boil them in the water in which they were soaked, flavoring with
half of a vanilla bean, and sweetened with a cupful of sugar. When done
pour off and save the juice. Strain the pulp through a colander or wire
sieve, making a good firm puree, and about a cupful in quantity. Whip
the whites of six eggs until dry, then whip in the prune pulp, and bake
in the same manner as an omelette souffle. Bake on a platter, formed
into a symmetrical mound; or in a buttered pudding mould. Serve hot or
cold, with a sauce made of the flavored juice in which the prunes were
cooked, or it may be served with whipped cream. Other fruit may be
prepared in the same manner, if desired.

=Salt codfish, Nova Scotia.= Soak two pounds of salt codfish in cold
water for six hours. Then put in casserole in one pint of water, boil
for ten minutes, drain, add one pint of Creole sauce, boil slowly for
five minutes, and serve hot with fresh-boiled rice.


MARCH 24

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Crab cocktail, Victor
       Broiled shad roe, ravigote
       Tripe saute, Lyonnaise
       Chateau potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Caroline cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Clam chowder, Boston style
       Fillet of sole, under glass
       Roast chicken
       Julienne potatoes
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Baked Alaska
       Coffee

=Broiled shad roe, ravigote.= Broil the roe, place on a platter, and
cover with a sauce made by mixing one-half cup of maitre d'hotel sauce
with two chopped vinegar pickles and one teaspoonful of French mustard.

=Fillet of sole under glass.= Cut the fillets into pieces two inches
square. Into a buttered shirred egg dish put a piece of toast; on top of
this place the fish, season with salt and pepper, put three fresh
mushroom heads on each portion of fish, add a piece of butter about the
size of an egg, and over all squeeze the juice of half a lemon, and
sprinkle with finely-chopped parsley. Cover with a glass cover, such as
used for mushrooms, put in a moderate oven and cook for twenty minutes;
being careful that the oven is not hot enough to burn the toast. Then
take from the oven, pour veloute sauce and a spoonful of white wine over
each portion, and return, to cook for another five minutes. Any other
fish may be substituted for sole, if desired.

=Clam chowder, Boston style.= Put fifty clams, with their liquid, into a
saucepan and boil for three minutes. Then set the clams aside, strain
the broth and return to the fire. Chop fine, a medium-sized onion, and
cut into dice four slices of salt pork. Put a piece of butter into a
pan, and fry the pork and onion until light brown in color; stir in two
tablespoonfuls of flour and cook thoroughly, add the clam juice, a half
pint of rich soup stock, and the same amount of cream, a couple of diced
potatoes, and a bit of thyme if the flavor is liked. Cook for about ten
minutes. Chop the clams, and add last of all, as they do not require
much cooking. Just before serving add a few hard crackers broken into
bits.

=Crab cocktail, Victor.= Place a boiled crab on ice and chill
thoroughly, then remove the meat, taking care not to break the pieces
more than necessary. Make a sauce with three-quarters of a cup of tomato
ketchup, a teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, two tablespoonfuls of
tarragon vinegar, and a good pinch of freshly-ground pepper. Mix with
the crab meat, fill the cocktail glasses, place them in cracked ice, and
serve.

=Baked Alaska.= (Individual). Slice some sponge cake about one-half inch
thick, and cut with a round cutter two inches in diameter. Place the
discs of cake on a silver platter, put a ball of vanilla cream in the
center of each, and cover with meringue paste. Make the meringue with
the whites of four eggs, beaten well and mixed with one-half pound of
powdered sugar. Use a pastry bag with a fancy tube, and cover carefully;
dust with powdered sugar, and bake in a very hot oven for a couple of
minutes. Put a French cherry on top of each before serving.


MARCH 25

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Bacon with eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Chicken broth with rice
       Crab meat, Gourmet
       Rolled veal, Huguenin
       Onions, Hongroise
       Camembert cheese, crackers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Toke Points on half shell
       Potage Esau
       Shrimps with mushrooms
       Rack of lamb, mint sauce
       String beans      Potato croquettes
       Chiffonnade salad
       Peach Melba
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Rolled veal, Huguenin.= Cut four thin slices of veal and flatten out
smoothly. Chop fine two young green onions and two slices of bacon; and
crush and chop fine, half of a clove of garlic, add a little pepper, and
spread over the veal, roll up tight and tie with a string. In a saucepan
put a piece of butter the size of an egg, and the veal, and simmer for
three-quarters of an hour, basting frequently. Before serving season
with salt and sprinkle with parsley.

=Shrimps with mushrooms.= Fry two cups of shrimps and half a cup of
fresh mushrooms in plenty of butter. Season with nutmeg, salt and
pepper, and the juice of half a lemon. Add two spoonfuls of tomato
sauce, half a cup of stock, and a few bread crumbs. Sprinkle with
chopped parsley.

=Onions, Hongroise.= Chop fine a large Bermuda onion, cover with water,
and cook until tender. Drain, add half a pound of fresh cream cheese, a
pint of sweet cream, a large can of pimentos, and a teaspoonful of
paprika. Serve in a chafing dish. Do not salt.

=Peach Melba.= Peel some large fresh peaches, and cook them whole in a
light syrup; or use whole preserved peaches. From vanilla ice cream,
that is frozen very hard, cut some round pieces about three inches in
diameter and an inch thick. Place the ice cream on plates, place a peach
on the center of each, and pour Melba sauce over them.

=Raspberry Melba sauce.= Mix well a half pint of strained raspberry
pulp, the juice of one lemon, and half a pound of powdered sugar; place
in an earthen pot and let it set over night. Then pack in ice, stir
well, add a cup of powdered sugar, and stir every half hour until smooth
and thick. Keep in ice until used.

=Potage Esau.= Same as puree of lentils.

=Diplomate pudding glace.= Mix in a bowl one pint of preserved fruit; or
fresh fruit that has been cooked in syrup; cut in small dices, add a
pony of kirsch and one of maraschino, and allow to macerate for one
hour. Beat the yolks of four eggs with a quarter of a pound of sugar and
half of a split vanilla bean, over the fire, until light and creamy;
then remove from the fire and continue beating until cold. Then add one
pint of whipped cream and the prepared fruit, and mix well together. Put
in a pudding mould, pack in ice and rock salt, and freeze for about two
hours. Serve with cold brandy sauce with chopped fruit in it.


MARCH 26

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs
       Omelet with tomatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Broiled rump steak
       French fried potatoes
       Smothered onions
       Romaine salad
       Eclairs      Coffee

     DINNER
       Viennese bean soup
       Crab meat en Bellevue
       Chicken, Tyrolienne
       Boiled rice
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Strawberry pie      Coffee

=Viennese bean soup.= Wash a pint of beans, then put them in water and
let them soak over night. Then put in a vessel with three quarts of
water and a quarter of a pound of lean salt pork, and cook slowly for
three hours, by which time the beans should be done. Meanwhile mince an
onion, a large carrot, and a stalk of celery; fry them in butter, but do
not brown. Add a spoonful of flour and two cups of the beans, making a
thick sauce; add this to the beans in the pot, and cook slowly for
another hour. Season to taste, and sprinkle with chopped parsley before
serving. Cut the pork in very thin slices, and serve one slice to each
plate.

=Chicken, Tyrolienne.= Joint a tender fowl, and dust lightly with flour.
Put into a pan with plenty of butter, and simmer slowly for about
fifteen minutes, turning frequently so it will become brown on all
sides. Then sprinkle liberally with salt and pepper, add a spoonful of
sherry and half a cup of brown gravy, a slice of boiled ham diced fine,
and one large tomato cut in small pieces. Simmer slowly again for ten
minutes. Dish up on a platter, sprinkle with chopped parsley, and
garnish with apples fried in butter.

=Peach pie.= Slice about five peaches for each pie, add sugar and
cinnamon to taste, cover, and finish in the same manner as apple pie.
For preserved peaches very little sugar is required.

=Apricot, pear and pineapple pies.= Make in the same manner as peach
pie.

=Strawberry pie.= Clean and wash the berries, and add three ounces of
sugar for each pie. Line the pie plate with dough, and put a handful of
biscuit crumbs on the bottom, before putting in the berries. The crumbs
will prevent the juice from running.

=Raspberry, blackberry, huckleberry, gooseberry, currant, grape and
cherry pies=, prepare in the same manner as strawberry pie.

=English gooseberry pie.= Fill a deep china vegetable dish with
gooseberries, add one-quarter pound of sugar and two cloves to each
individual dish, wet the edges of the dish, cover with pie dough, wash
the top with eggs, and bake. When done dust the top with powdered sugar,
allow to cool, and serve cream separate.

=English huckleberry or currant pie=, same as English gooseberry pie.

=English rhubarb pie.= Remove the outer skin from rhubarb, cut in small
pieces, and prepare the same as English gooseberry pie.

=English grape pie.= Same as gooseberry but use a little less sugar.


MARCH 27

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced oranges
       Omelet with kidneys
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Indian canape
       Rack of lamb, jardiniere
       Lettuce salad
       Floating island
       Lady fingers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of chicken, a la Reine      Queen olives
       Fillet of rock cod, Nantaise
       Sweetbreads braise, Henri IV
       Julienne potatoes
       Fresh artichokes, sauce mousseline
       Pate de foie gras      Lettuce salad
       Pudding a la Rossini      Coffee

=Omelet with kidneys.= Make a plain omelet, and before turning over on
platter put a small spoonful of kidney stew (see kidney stew), in the
center. Put some stewed kidneys at each end of the omelet.

=Rack of lamb.= Have the butcher cut a rack of lamb consisting of about
ten chops. Season with salt and pepper, and put in a small roasting pan
with a sliced onion and carrot, and two ounces of butter. Put in a hot
oven to roast, basting every few seconds so it will not become dry. If
necessary, add a spoonful of water to prevent the vegetables from
burning. After twenty minutes remove the lamb to a platter, and add a
spoonful of flour to the pan, and simmer for five minutes; then add one
cup of stock or hot water, and one spoonful of meat extract. Season,
strain, and pour over the rack of lamb. Garnish with fresh watercress.

=Rack of lamb, jardiniere.= Garnish the rack of lamb with a bouquet of
peas, and a bouquet of string beans, cauliflower, spring carrots in
butter, or any kind of fresh vegetables. Some kind of potatoes, such as
Parisian, Julienne, etc., may be added, if desired.

=Sweetbreads braise, Henry IV.= Braised sweetbreads with sauce
Bearnaise, garnished with Julienne potatoes, and sliced truffles cut in
triangles, placed on top of the sweetbreads.

=Pudding a la Rossini.= Cut six large thin pancakes in strips one inch
wide, and line a buttered pudding mould with them, one overlapping the
other. Boil a pint of milk, add one-quarter of a pound of flour to it,
and stir well to a thick batter; then remove from the fire, whip in
one-quarter pound of sugar and two ounces of butter, two ounces of
grated cocoanut, the rind of a lemon, and the yolks of six eggs. Beat
the whites of six eggs very stiff and add, mixing lightly. Fill the
lined pudding mould, and bake in a slow oven for about forty minutes.
Serve hot, with orange sauce.

=Orange sauce.= Boil together one pint of water, one-half pound of
sugar, and the grated rind of an orange. While boiling, stir in one
teaspoonful of corn starch dissolved in a little cold water, boil for a
few minutes, remove from the fire and add the juice of one or two
oranges. Strain.

=Lemon sauce.= Same as orange sauce, using lemons instead of oranges,
and in the same proportions.

=Fillet of rock cod, Nantaise.= Season four fillets of rock cod with
salt and pepper, dip in oil and broil. When done place on platter and
cover with the following butter: Press six sardines through a fine
sieve, mix with two ounces of butter, the juice of two lemons, and some
chopped parsley.


MARCH 28

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Matjes herring, potato salad
       Chicken croquettes, cream sauce
       Asparagus tips
       Tapioca pudding
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Giblet soup, a l'Anglaise
       Radishes
       Terrapin, Jockey Club
       Baby lamb steak, horticulture
       Escarole salad
       Bavarois noisettes
       Alsatian wafers
       Coffee

=Matjes herring.= This is an imported salted herring. Lay six herrings
in cold water for an hour, and then clean. Put them in a stone pot, add
a sliced onion, one-quarter cup of whole black pepper berries, two bay
leaves, four cloves, one-half cup of vinegar, two cups of cream, and a
little salt if necessary. Allow to stand for a couple of days, and then
serve on lettuce leaves, with its own sauce, and with sliced lemon on
top.

=Baby lamb steak, horticulture.= Cut a steak from the leg of a spring
lamb, season with salt and pepper, roll in oil, and broil. When done
dish up on a platter, cover with Madeira sauce, and garnish with
different vegetables, such as peas, carrots, stuffed tomatoes, stuffed
peppers, string beans, cauliflower, asparagus tips, artichokes, etc.
Arrange the vegetables in bouquets, and use as many kinds as you desire.

=Bavarois noisette.= The yolks of eight eggs, one quart of milk,
one-half of a split vanilla bean, one-half pound of sugar, one-quarter
pound of ground hazelnuts, one pint of whipped cream, and five sheets of
French gelatine. Boil the milk with the vanilla. Roast the hazelnuts,
grind, or chop them very fine, and mix with the yolks of eggs and sugar.
Add the boiling milk, and stir over the fire until it thickens, but do
not let it boil. Remove from the fire and add the gelatine (which has
been washed) in cold water, and stir with a spoon until melted. Allow to
become cold, remove the vanilla bean, add the whipped cream, mix well,
put in a fancy mould, and set in the ice box for two hours. Serve with
whipped cream with chopped hazelnuts in it.

=Indian Canape.= Use one hard-boiled egg for each person to be served,
and force through a sieve. For six eggs add a quarter of a pound of
sweet butter, a half teaspoonful of curry, and beat into a smooth paste.
Toward the last add a tablespoonful of cream. Spread over toast, and
place a little chopped chutney on top of each.

=Pommes d'arbre, 1915 (apple, 1915).= Peel and core six apples and cook
them in syrup, with the addition of half of a vanilla bean. Drain, and
allow to become cold. Make a cream sauce with half a pint of cream, two
ounces of sugar, and two sheets of gelatine, and pour over the apples,
coating them nice and smooth. Sprinkle the top with nonpareil candies,
and place in ice box. Serve in supreme glasses, with vanilla cream in
the bottom of the glass.


MARCH 29

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal and cream
       Broiled kippered herrings
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Rolls
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Omelet with soft clams
       Blood pudding
       Mashed turnips
       Mashed potatoes
       Roquefort cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       German lentil soup
       Salted almonds
       Crab meat, au gratin
       Tournedos, Rossini
       Chateau potatoes
       Chiffonade salad
       Pommes d'arbre, 1915
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=German lentil soup.= To a puree of lentils, add before serving, some
sliced Frankfurter sausages, and a little bacon cut in small strips and
fried.

=Quince jelly.= To each pound of cut-up quinces add a cup of water, put
in a kettle and stew until soft. Then put in a jelly bag to drain, but
do not crush. Add a pound of sugar to each pint of liquor, boil gently
until the sugar is dissolved, then boil more quickly. Pour into glasses,
and when cold cover with paraffine.

=Preserved pears.= Peel, halve, and remove the cores from Bartlett or
Seckle pears. Allow one pound of sugar to each pound of fruit. Put the
sugar on to melt, with a few spoonfuls of water. Stick a clove in each
piece of fruit, and boil in the sugar until thoroughly done. Put the
fruit in glass jars, cover with the syrup, and seal. The rind of one
lemon to every five pounds of fruit may be used instead of the cloves,
if desired, or both may be used.

=Pineapple preserves.= Pare and slice the pineapples, then weigh out one
pound of cane sugar to each pound of fruit. Put a layer of the slices in
a stone jar, sprinkle with the sugar, continue until fruit and sugar are
used up, and allow to stand over night. Then remove the pineapple and
cook the syrup until it thickens, add the fruit, and boil for fifteen
minutes, remove the fruit and let it cool, then put in jars and pour the
syrup over it. A very little ginger root boiled in the syrup will
improve it.

=Citron preserves.= Pare some sound fruit, divide into quarters, remove
the seeds, and cut in small pieces. To every pound of fruit allow
one-half pound of granulated cane sugar. Cook the citron in water until
quite clear, then drain through a colander. Melt the sugar with a few
spoonfuls of water, and boil until very clear, then put in the drained
citron, add two sliced large lemons, a small piece of ginger root, and
cook for about fifteen minutes. Fill the jars with the citron, and cover
with the syrup.


MARCH 30

     BREAKFAST
       Honey in comb
       Scrambled eggs with chives
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of fresh Astrachan caviar
       Saddle of hare, sour cream sauce
       Palestine potatoes
       Spatzle
       Green peas au beurre
       French pastry      Coffee

     DINNER
       Lobster chowder
       Ripe California olives
       Broiled barracouda
       Roast leg of lamb, mint sauce
       String beans
       Alsatian potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Biscuit Tortoni
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with chives.= Make some plain scrambled eggs, and just
before serving add some finely-cut chives, mix, and season well.

=Sweet potato croquettes.= Boil four large potatoes in salt water, when
soft, peel, and pass through a sieve. Then put in a casserole, add two
ounces of butter, the yolks of three eggs, season with salt and pepper,
and mix well. When cold, roll in flour, shape in the form of a large
cork, then roll in beaten eggs and bread crumbs, and fry in very hot
swimming lard. When nice and brown serve on a napkin.

=Palestine potatoes.= Sweet potato croquettes formed in the shape of a
small pear. When fried, dress on a napkin with the pointed end up, and
stick a sprig of parsley in the top.

=Alsatian potatoes.= Put in a casserole two ounces of butter and one
chopped onion, and simmer until golden yellow. Add four potatoes cut in
small dices, one bay leaf, one clove, one cup of water, and season with
salt and pepper. Cover, and simmer slowly for thirty minutes. Add fresh
chopped parsley before serving.

=Biscuit Tortoni.= Same as biscuit glace, with the addition of a pony of
good maraschino and two ounces of macaroon crumbs. To make the crumbs,
crush some dry macaroons and pass through a sieve or colander. Put in
round paper cases, filling above the edge, and allow to set in ice box
for several hours until frozen. Dip the top of the biscuit in macaroon
crumbs before serving.

=Saddle of hare, sour cream sauce.= Remove the skins from the saddles of
two hares, and lard them with thin strips of larding pork. Put them in
an agate pan, add a little salt, and one-half cup of whole black peppers
wrapped in cheese cloth. Cover with from two to three quarts of sour
cream, and stand in a cool place for forty-eight hours. Then put the
saddles in a roasting pan with a sliced onion and carrot, and a little
butter on top, and roast in a hot oven for about ten minutes, or until
brown. Then strain the sour cream, and add little by little to the
saddles, while roasting. Baste continually, and after forty minutes you
should have a nice brown sauce. Remove the saddles to a platter, reduce
the sauce one-half, season with salt if necessary, and a little paprika,
strain part over the saddles, and serve the remainder in a bowl.


MARCH 31

     BREAKFAST
       Hothouse raspberries with cream
       Browned corned beef hash
       Poached eggs on toast
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Frogs' legs, saute a sec
       Lamb chops
       Watercress salad
       French fried potatoes
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Petite marmite
       Radishes
       Crab a la Louis
       Boiled beef, horseradish sauce
       Boiled potatoes
       Stuffed cabbage
       Hearts of lettuce salad
       Apple water ice
       Cakes
       Coffee

=Corned beef hash.= Chop an onion very fine and put in a casserole with
two ounces of butter. Simmer until the onion is cooked, then add two
pounds of boiled corned beef cut in small dices, and one pound of boiled
potatoes cut very small, or chopped. Mix well, season with a little
pepper, and salt if necessary, add one cup of bouillon, and simmer for
ten minutes. Before serving add a little chopped parsley.

=Browned corned beef hash.= Same as above, but use only one-half cup of
bouillon. Before serving put the hash in a frying pan with two ounces of
butter, and allow it to brown. Serve in the shape of an omelet.

=Corned beef hash au gratin.= Make a corned beef hash and put in a
buttered, deep, silver vegetable dish, sprinkle with bread crumbs, put a
small piece of butter on top, and bake in oven until brown.

=Lamb cutlets in papers.= Fry the cutlets in a saute pan, in melted fat
pork, turning frequently. Brown only slightly, allowing them to remain
rare. Then remove the cutlets, and in the fat simmer some minced onions,
mushrooms and parsley for a few minutes. When nearly done add some
shredded lean ham. Now prepare some oiled paper, tearing it
heart-shaped, lay the cutlet on one half, surrounding it with the minced
herbs, with a little on top also; then fold over the paper, creasing the
edges together like a hem. Lay on a buttered dish, and set in oven until
nicely colored.

=Puree of onions (Soubise).= Peel and slice one dozen large white
onions, put in a casserole with one-quarter pound of butter, cover, and
put in oven for about forty-five minutes, or until soft; but do not
allow them to become brown. Then drain off the butter and add one pint
of thick cream sauce, season well with salt and white pepper, and strain
through a fine sieve.

=Apple water ice.= See Normandy water ice.


APRIL 1

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Romanoff
       Eggs, Voltaire
       Tripe a la mode de Caen
       Baked potatoes
       Coffee eclairs      Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Cream of chicken, Reine Hortense
       Ripe olives
       Terrapin Baltimore
       Roast saddle of mutton      Chateau potatoes
       Braised sweetbreads, Marie Louise
       Lettuce salad
       Pears in syrup
       Lady fingers      Coffee

     SUPPER
       Venetian egg in chafing dish

=Venetian egg in chafing dish.= Mince an onion and cook in saute pan in
two ounces of butter, then add half a can of firm tomatoes and cook for
twenty minutes. Add a pound of eastern cheese, broken into small bits;
season with salt, paprika, a little Worcestershire sauce, and half a
teaspoonful of mustard. Stir continuously. Last, add three lightly
beaten eggs, and stir until thick. It should be of the same consistency
as a Welsh rabbit. Serve either with, or on, toast or toasted crackers.

=Eggs, Voltaire.= In the bottom of a buttered cocotte or egg dish place
a spoonful of chicken hash, on top break a raw egg, and season. Cover
with cream sauce and grated cheese. Bake until the tops are brown.

=Cream of chicken, Reine Hortense.= Make a cream of chicken soup in the
usual way. Take a cup of peeled almonds to each quart of the soup, pound
into a pulp in a mortar, pulverizing thoroughly; mix with milk, strain,
and add to the soup.

=Canape Romanoff.= Mix a boxful of smoked Norwegian sardines with three
ounces of hot butter, mash fine, and force through a sieve. Stir in four
spoonfuls of cream, and spread over toast cut in fancy shapes. Garnish
with ripe and green olives. Serve as a fancy sandwich at tea or bridge
parties, or as an appetiser for dinner.

=Braised sweetbreads, Marie Louise.= Soak the sweetbreads in cold water
for no less than three hours, changing the water two or three times.
This draws all the blood from the sweetbreads. Then put into a large
pot, with plenty of cold water, and bring to the boiling point; then
drench with cold water to cool. In a saucepan put a sliced carrot, a
sliced onion, a bay leaf, a clove, parsley in branches, a piece of salt
pork rind, butter the size of half an egg, and one cup of stock or broth
of any kind. Place the sweetbreads on top, and place in oven and cook
for half an hour, basting frequently. The sweetbreads should turn an
even yellow. Trim some artichoke bottoms, cut in half, and place the
sweetbreads on top. Mix the juice from the baked sweetbreads with a cup
of cream sauce and a sherry glassful of dry sherry. Pour this over the
top, sprinkle with chopped parsley, and return to oven for two minutes.

=Pears in syrup.= Make a syrup with a cup of sugar, and water enough to
cover. Add the juice or rind of a lemon, a few cloves, and a stick of
cinnamon. Quarter the pears, remove the cores, and cook in the syrup for
eight or ten minutes, or until tender. Old hard pears may require a half
an hour or more before they are sufficiently cooked. A little claret or
white wine may be added, if desired.


APRIL 2

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs with cream
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Terrine de foie gras a la gelee
       Eggs, Texas clover
       Broiled squab with fresh mushrooms
       French fried potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Brie cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Blue Point oysters on half shell
       Clear green turtle soup, au Madere
       Queen olives
       Crab poulette
       Roast chicken
       Fresh asparagus, Hollandaise
       Rissolee potatoes
       Sliced tomatoes, French dressing
       Omelette Robespierre
       Coffee

=Eggs, Texas clover.= Chop a green pepper, put in casserole with one
ounce of butter, and simmer until the peppers are soft; then add ten
beaten eggs, season with salt and pepper, and scramble. Before serving
add a dozen parboiled oysters, a little cream, and a piece of fresh
butter.

=Terrine de foie gras a la gelee.= Serve as an appetiser, cold, with
meat jelly. The foie gras comes from Europe, being a particular
specialty of Strasbourg, Alsace. It is a goose liver pie, baked in
terrines.

=Broiled squab.= Split the squab, season well, roll in oil and broil.
Serve on a piece of freshly-made toast, cover with maitre d'hotel sauce,
and garnish with half a lemon and watercress.

=Broiled squab with fresh mushrooms.= Prepare as above, with the
addition of four broiled heads of fresh mushrooms on top of the squab.

=Clear green turtle soup.= May be made from live turtle, or the Florida
canned turtle, which is the most common for home use. Put a can of green
turtle meat in a pot and bring to a boil, then drain off the broth, and
save. Cut the meat in one-half inch squares. In a casserole put one
sprig of thyme, one sprig of sweet basilic herb, one glass of sherry,
and reduce until nearly dry. Then add two quarts of strong consomme,
bring to a boil, and thicken with a soupspoonful of arrowroot diluted
with a little cold water. Add the arrowroot while the consomme is
boiling. After boiling for five minutes strain through a fine cloth, put
back in the casserole, add the turtle meat, and season with salt and
Cayenne pepper. Before serving add a glass of very old Madeira and the
turtle juice.

=Omelette Robespierre.= Take six canned apricots, or six fresh apricots
boiled in syrup, and cut in one-quarter inch squares. Make an omelette
with ten eggs, and with very little salt. Make the omelet soft. Put on a
platter, sprinkle with plenty of powdered sugar, and burn with a red-hot
poker. Warm the apricots, and put at both ends of the omelet; pour two
ponies of absinthe over the top, and light before bringing to the table.
Anisette liqueur may be used in place of the absinthe if more
convenient.


APRIL 3

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Broiled Yarmouth bloaters
       Potatoes hashed in cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs, St. Laurent
       Clam broth in cups
       Planked shad and roe
       Chicory and beet salad
       Cream puffs      Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Oyster soup, family style
       Radishes
       Fillet of turbot, Nesles      Fondante potatoes
       Salmon steak, Chambord sauce
       Peas au cerfeuil
       Hot baked apples
       Macaroons      Coffee

=Poached eggs, St. Laurent.= Put four slices of smoked salmon on four
pieces of toast, and set in oven for a minute, to warm the salmon. Then
lay a poached egg on each piece, and cover with cream sauce.

=Planked shad and roe.= Split a shad and lay on a buttered plank, with
the roe on the side. Season with salt and pepper and bits of butter, and
put in a moderate oven. After fifteen minutes turn over the roe, and
leave in the oven for another two minutes. Then take out and make a
border around the fish with potato croquette preparation, and bake again
until the border is brown. Serve with maitre d'hotel butter, and garnish
with quartered lemons and parsley in branches.

=Fillet of turbot, Nesles.= Put four fillets of turbot in a buttered
pan, season with salt and a little Cayenne pepper, add a cup of cream,
and boil for twelve minutes. Then remove the fillets to a platter, add
to the cream in the pan a cup of cream sauce, bring to the boiling
point, then add two spoonfuls of grated cheese, and pour over the fish.
Have the sauce well seasoned.

=Fondante potatoes.= Cut a quart of small potatoes to the size of
pigeons' eggs, put in a casserole and cover with cold water, add a pinch
of salt, and bring to a boil. Then drain off the water and put the
potatoes in a flat saute pan with two ounces of butter, and simmer very
slowly until they are golden yellow. Then add a spoonful of chicken
broth and simmer again until nearly dry. Sprinkle with fresh-chopped
parsley, season with salt and pepper.

=Chicken saute, chasseur.= Joint a chicken, and season with salt and
pepper. In a saute pan put one ounce of butter and a spoonful of olive
oil, heat, and then add the chicken. When the chicken is golden yellow
add three chopped shallots, and simmer, but not enough to color the
shallots. Then add one gill of white wine and boil for two minutes; add
one peeled and chopped tomato and half of a can of French mushrooms, and
boil for ten minutes more. Finally add half a dozen small onions glace,
and then dress the chicken on a platter. Season the sauce well, reduce
one-half, add a little chopped parsley, and pour over the chicken.

=Roast saddle of mutton.= Secure the saddle from the butcher ready
prepared for roasting. Put a sliced onion and carrot in a roasting pan,
place the saddle on top, season well with salt and pepper, put a piece
of butter on top, and place in hot oven. Bast frequently. It will
require from thirty-five to forty-five minutes to roast, depending upon
the thickness. When done, place the saddle on a platter, drain off the
fat in the pan, add a half cup of stock and a spoonful of meat extract,
and bring to a boil. Strain and pour over the saddle. Serve hot.


APRIL 4

     BREAKFAST
       Guava jelly
       Oatmeal with cream
       Rolls
       Cocoa with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit and orange en surprise
       Eggs, Crossy
       Chicken saute, chasseur
       Parisian potatoes
       Endives salad
       Souffle au fromage
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Solferino
       Ripe olives
       Brook trout, saute meuniere
       Roast leg of lamb, mint sauce
       Stewed asparagus
       Rissolees potatoes
       Neapolitan ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs, Crossy.= Make a cupful of puree of spinach and spread on four
round pieces of toast, lay a poached egg on top of each, and pour a
little brown gravy around them.

=Souffle au fromage.= Heat a pint of milk in a double boiler. Mix a
quarter of a pound of butter with a quarter of a pound of flour, working
them well together, then add to the boiling milk and cook until it
thickens. Remove from the fire and add the yolks of six eggs, whipping
slightly. Then add a quarter of a pound of grated Parmesan cheese,
season with salt and pepper, and stir in the whites of the six eggs,
which have been whipped dry. Put into large, or individual, buttered
moulds, sprinkle with cheese, and bake for twenty minutes.

=Potage Solferino.= Cut six fresh tomatoes in pieces and cook in half a
cup of consomme until well done. Strain through a fine sieve, and add to
two quarts of consomme. Garnish with small squares of carrots and
potatoes that have been cooked separately, and peas and chervil.

=Brook trout, saute meuniere.= Clean and wash well six small brook
trout, season with salt and pepper, and roll in flour. Put three ounces
of butter in a frying pan, melt, add the fish and saute till nice and
brown. When done put the fish on a platter, sprinkle with chopped
parsley and the juice of two lemons. Melt two ounces of fresh butter in
the frying pan and pour over the fish. Garnish with quartered lemons and
parsley in branches.

=Stewed asparagus.= Cut off two pounds of tips about one inch in length,
from fresh asparagus. Put in casserole and cover with a cup of bouillon,
season with salt and pepper, cover, and boil slowly for about eighteen
minutes. Then mix half a cupful of water and a spoonful of flour, and
pour slowly into the boiling asparagus. Add a little chopped parsley
before serving.

=Neapolitan ice cream.= Fill a brick-shaped mould with three layers of
different ices, such as pistache, vanilla and strawberry ice cream, or
lemon water ice, strawberry and pistache, or chocolate, ice cream. Cover
mould well, and pack in ice and salt, and let stand for an hour. To
serve, dip the mould in warm water and remove the ice cream, cut in
slices about one inch thick, and crossways of the brick, to show the
different colors.


APRIL 5

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Waffles with maple syrup
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, Jeanne d'Arc
       Breaded pork chops, cream sauce
       Spaghetti Caruso
       Field salad
       Roquefort cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potato soup a la Faubonne
       Radishes and salted almonds
       Clams with port wine
       Sweetbreads braise, Clamart
       Roast chicken
       Sybil potatoes
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Almond cake
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Sandwich Careme

=Sandwiches, Careme.= Mince fine one-half dozen sweet mixed pickles.
Shred the meat of one lobster, and mix with the pickles, season with
salt and pepper, and add a whiskey glass of tarragon. Let stand for a
few minutes, then squeeze out the vinegar and add half a cup of
mayonnaise. Spread over toast or salted crackers. The above may be mixed
with three hard-boiled eggs, and served on lettuce leaves as a salad.

=Clams with wine sauce.= Take as many large clams as you desire to use.
Remove from the shells, cut away the neck, retaining only the bellies.
Cook in Madeira wine for two or three minutes, then put in half as much
sweet cream as you have wine, and heat to boiling. If for six persons,
thicken with the yolks of three eggs, add another half cup of rich
cream, and season with Cayenne pepper and salt. Serve in a chafing dish,
with small thin bits of toast on the side.

=Potato soup, Faubonne.= Put one quart of puree of potato soup and one
quart of consomme Julienne in a casserole and bring to a boil. Bind with
the yolks of three eggs mixed with a cup of cream. Serve with a little
chopped parsley and chervil.

=Sweetbreads braise, Clamart.= Place four sweetbreads braise on a
platter, garnish with a puree of fresh or canned peas, and pour brown
gravy around the bottom.

=Almond cake.= Mix three-quarters of a pound of almond paste, one-half
pound of sugar, and four whole eggs, and work until creamy and smooth.
Add the yolks of sixteen eggs, one by one, stirring all the while, and
flavor with the rind of a lemon. Beat the whites of eight eggs very
stiff, and add to the mixture lightly, stirring in at the same time
one-half pound of sifted flour. Bake in a cake pan or mould, in a
moderate oven. When cold finish with white frosting, and decorate with
split almonds.

=Almond cream cake.= Cut an almond cake in three or four layers and
spread between with whipped cream sweetened with vanilla sugar, and
mixed with fine-chopped roasted almonds. Cover with white frosting, and
decorate with whipped cream and split almonds.

=Eggs, Jeanne d'Arc.= Place four very soft poached eggs on a buttered
dish, cover with a thick tomato sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese, put
small bits of butter on top, and bake in a hot oven for two minutes.


APRIL 6

     BREAKFAST
       Orange juice
       Buckwheat cakes with maple syrup
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Tartine Russe
       Consomme parfait
       Crab en brochette
       Chow chow
       Chocolate macaroons
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Reine Mogador
       Queen olives
       Catfish saute, meuniere
       Roast loin of lamb, au jus
       Timbale of croquette potatoes
       Chiffonnade salad
       Saxony pudding
       Coffee

=Tartine Russe.= Toasted rye bread, buttered, spread with caviar, and
garnished around the edges with chopped boiled eggs, and some chopped
beets in the center.

=Consomme parfait.= To a pint of cold consomme tapioca add three raw
eggs and two additional yolks, put in a buttered mould and cook in a
bain marie. When done allow to cool, slice, and serve in hot consomme.
(This is tapioca royal).

=Crab en brochette.= Alternate on a skewer a crab leg, then a piece of
broiled bacon, and so on, until the skewer is full. Season with salt and
pepper, roll in oil and fresh bread crumbs, and broil. When done place
on toast, cover with maitre d'hotel sauce, and garnish with lemon and
parsley.

=Chocolate macaroons.= One pound of almond paste, one pound of
granulated sugar, two ounces of melted cocoa, one spoonful of flour, and
the whites of five eggs. Mix the almond paste with the sugar, add the
whites of eggs, and work well. Then add the cocoa and flour, mix well,
and dress on paper, in the same manner as ordinary macaroons. Moisten
the tops with a brush, and bake in a moderate oven.

=Saxony pudding.= Sift one-half pound of flour into a sauce pan, and add
a pint of boiling milk and four ounces of butter. Stir with a wooden
spoon until the flour is free from the bottom of the pan. Then remove
from the fire and add four ounces of sugar and the yolks of eight eggs,
four ounces of candied fruit chopped fine, and the whites of six eggs
beaten very hard. Put in a mould and cook in bain marie in a moderate
oven. When done remove from mould and serve with apricot sauce flavored
with kirschwasser. Make the sauce in the same manner as brandy sauce,
but use kirschwasser in place of brandy.

=Potage Reine Mogador.= Half cream of chicken and half puree of
potatoes. Bind with the yolks of two eggs and half a cup of cream.

=Catfish saute, meuniere.= Clean six catfish, season with salt and
pepper, roll in milk and then in flour. Melt three ounces of butter in a
frying pan, add the fish, and saute until nice and brown. Then put on a
platter, sprinkle with chopped parsley and the juice of two lemons. Add
to the sauce in the pan two ounces of fresh butter, and cook until
hazelnut brown, then pour over the fish. Garnish with parsley and
quartered lemons.


APRIL 7

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Yarmouth bloaters in oil
       Poached eggs, Talleyrand
       Fricandeau of veal, au jus
       Sorrel      Mashed potatoes
       Pont l'eveque cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Saxe
       Lyon sausages and radishes
       Curried crab
       Sirloin steak, Dickinson      Souffle potatoes
       Cauliflower au gratin
       Hearts of romaine, roquefort dressing
       Vanilla and chocolate ice cream
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Yarmouth bloaters in oil.= Skin and split four Yarmouth bloaters, and
remove the bones. Lay them in an earthen pot, add the juice of one
lemon, one-half cup of olive oil, four bay leaves, two cloves and one
spoonful of whole black peppers. Allow to stand for twenty-four hours.
Serve on lettuce leaves with a little of its juice.

=Poached eggs, Talleyrand.= On four round pieces of toast spread some
foie gras, lay a poached egg on top of each piece, and cover with sauce
Perigueux.

=Fricandeau of veal, au jus.= Obtain from the butcher the nut of a leg
of veal and lard it with thin strips of larding pork. Put in a saute pan
a sliced onion and carrot, some parsley in branches, one bay leaf, one
clove, and six pepper berries. Place the veal on top, season with salt
and pepper, put three ounces of butter on top of all, and roast in a hot
oven, basting frequently. Add a little water when necessary, so the
vegetables will not burn. It will require from fifty minutes to one hour
to cook. When done place the fricandeau on a platter, and boil the
gravy; if necessary add a little stock or bouillon, season well, and
strain over the veal.

=Potage Saxe.= To two quarts of boiling consomme add the bread crumbs
made from a small loaf of bread, two beaten eggs, and some chopped
chervil. Stir well, boil and serve.

=Sirloin steak, Dickinson.= Broil a steak and place on a platter.
Parboil six slices of beef marrow in salt water, and lay on top of the
steak. Heat a pimento, cut in triangles, and place on top of the marrow.
Cover all with sauce Colbert with sliced truffle in it.

=Curried crab.= Cut the crab meat into small pieces. Put in a frying pan
a piece of butter the size of an egg, and a teaspoonful of chopped onion
or shallot, and fry until golden brown. Add a heaping teaspoonful of
flour and a small teaspoonful of curry powder, and stir into the butter
and onion until thoroughly mixed. Add a cup of hot soup stock and a cup
of cream, and boil for three minutes. Then add the crab meat and simmer
slowly for about five minutes. Serve with boiled rice.

=Spaghetti Caruso.= Boil a pound of whole spaghetti in salt water. Soak
one pound of dried mushrooms over night. Heat in a casserole two ounces
of butter, add a chopped shallot and a little garlic. When hot add the
mushrooms and three peeled and cut up tomatoes, and simmer for five
minutes. Then add the cooked spaghetti and two cups of grated parmesan
cheese, season with salt and white pepper, and serve very hot.


APRIL 8

     BREAKFAST
       Hominy with cream
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit a l'anisette
       Oyster broth in cups
       Crackers
       Broiled brook trout with bacon
       Cucumber salad
       Lamb chops, grilled
       Julienne potatoes
       Chicory salad
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Viennoise
       Curried oysters with boiled rice
       Saddle of mutton with currant jelly
       String beans a l'Alsacienne
       Laurette potatoes
       Dandelion salad
       Gastaner pudding
       Coffee

=Grapefruit a l'anisette.= Cut the grapefruit in half and loosen the
inside from the skin with a pointed knife. Put a teaspoonful of powdered
sugar and a half pony of anisette on each half. Serve on cracked ice.

=Oyster broth.= In a casserole put two dozen oysters with their own
juice, and one quart of water. Add a bouquet garni and put on the fire.
When boiling remove the bouquet garni, and strain the broth through a
napkin, season with salt and a little Cayenne pepper, and serve in cups.
The oysters may be saved for other purposes.

=Curried oysters.= In a casserole melt three ounces of butter, then add
two spoonfuls of flour, one spoonful of curry powder, and one pint of
oyster broth. Boil for a minute, then add one apple fried in butter, one
tablespoonful of chutney sauce, one teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce,
and a little salt and Cayenne pepper. Boil for five minutes, and bind
with the yolk of an egg and a spoonful of cream. Strain the sauce, and
add two dozen well-seasoned parboiled oysters.

=Pudding a la Gastaner.= Decorate the bottoms of buttered moulds with
chopped pastry cherries and angelique, arranging in alternating lines of
green and red. Cut some lady fingers to fit the depth of the mould, and
moisten them well with Curacao. Stand them up around the inside of the
mould one-half inch apart. Cook four ounces of farina in one quart of
milk, and mix with the rind and juice of a lemon, five eggs, four ounces
of sugar, and one cup of apricot pulp, and fill the moulds with same.
Serve with strawberry sauce flavored with a pony of brandy.

=Broiled brook trout with bacon.= Clean and wash well, one-half dozen
brook trout, and dry them on a towel or napkin. Season with salt and
pepper, roll in oil, and broil. When done put on a platter with maitre
d'hotel sauce. Lay six slices of broiled bacon on top. Garnish with
quartered lemons and parsley in branches.

=Potage Viennoise.= Cream of barley with royal cut in small squares as
garnishing.

=Potage Venitienne.= Half veloute of chicken soup and half consomme
tapioca. Add a little chopped chives.


APRIL 9

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit marmalade
       Shirred eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs St. George
       Lamb cutlets in papers
       Cold asparagus, mayonnaise
       Brown Betty pudding
       Coffee

     AFTERNOON TEA
       Oysters poulette, or sweetbreads Monza      Salted almonds
       Windsor sandwiches
       Cream of almond sandwiches
       Olive sandwiches
       Shrimp salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Pound cake      Fruit cake
       Apple tarts
       Salted pecans
       Creole sandwiches
       Dubney sandwiches
       Bread and butter sandwiches
       Chicken salad
       Pineapple water ice
       Strawberry pie
       Chocolate, coffee or tea
       Rolls      Toast Melba
       Assorted cakes

     DINNER
       Potage Venitienne
       Crab in chafing dish
       Roast duckling, apple sauce
       Sweet potato croquettes
       Artichokes, mustard sauce
       Lemon water ice
       Cocoa cake      Coffee

=Cocoa cake.= Half a cup of butter, a cup of sugar, three eggs, a
teaspoonful of vanilla, three-fourths of a cup of milk, six level
tablespoonfuls of cocoa, two teaspoonfuls of baking powder, and one and
three-fourth cups of sifted flour. Cream the butter, adding the sugar
gradually, then add the eggs one by one, whipping vigorously. Sift
together half of the flour, the cocoa and the baking powder, then add
the milk and the rest of the flour, making a mixture that will drop from
the spoon. When all is mixed together put in a pan or mould, and bake
for thirty-five minutes. Cover the cake with a plain icing. A cake is
baked when it shrinks from the pan, or if, when you press it, it springs
back.

=Dubney sandwiches.= To a cupful of chopped chicken or turkey meat add a
spoonful of mayonnaise, a teaspoonful of minced onion, two minced
shallots, a pinch of chopped chives, and season with salt and pepper.
Spread on well-buttered warm toast.

=Cream of almond sandwiches.= Mix a soft cream cheese with a cup of
crushed salted almonds, and a liqueur glassful of kirsch. Spread on thin
slices of brown bread.

=Olive sandwiches.= Chop equal parts of olives and onions together, add
a few drops of olive oil and a little pepper, but no salt, as the olives
have enough. Spread on thin slices of buttered bread.

=Windsor sandwiches.= Chop enough chicken or turkey to make a cup of
meat, add half as much chopped ham, and half a dozen chopped olives.
Bind together with mayonnaise. Spread on white and on brown buttered
bread.

=Creole sandwiches.= Chop some fresh or canned sweet peppers, bind
together with mayonnaise, and add a bit of minced parsley. Spread on
both white and brown bread. Always make the sandwiches dainty and thin.

=Brown Betty.= Pull half a loaf of white bread to bits, or use bread
crumbs. The pulled bread makes the lighter pudding. Butter the inside of
a pudding dish liberally, put in a layer of crumbs, then twice as much
sliced apple or other fruit, sprinkle with sugar, nutmeg and bits of
butter, add another layer of crumbs, and so on, for about three layers,
having the crumbs last. Bake until brown, and the fruit well done, or
about twenty minutes. Serve with cream.

=Eggs St. George.= Butter four cocotte dishes, put puree of onions on
bottom, a poached egg on top, cover with cream sauce, and sprinkle with
grated cheese. Bake in hot oven to color only.


APRIL 10

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Toast
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Kieler sprotten
       Omelette Schofield
       Mixed vegetable salad
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Fish chowder
       Ripe olives
       Fillet of sole, Bretonne
       Planked shad and roe
       Lettuce salad
       Hot asparagus with melted butter
       Coffee custard
       Demi tasse

=Kieler sprotten.= This is a canned fish. Serve cold on lettuce leaves,
garnished with quartered lemons.

=Omelette Schofield.= Boil a shad roe in salt water for ten minutes.
Allow to cool, and cut in dices one-quarter inch square. Heat a cup of
cream sauce, add the roe, and season with salt and Cayenne pepper. When
making the omelet place a little of the roe in the center; dress on a
platter, and pour the roe and cream sauce around the edge.

=Fish chowder.= Cut a pound of some white fish, such as bass, codfish,
or sole, in dices about one-quarter inch square, and free from skin and
bones. Put the bones of the fish in a casserole and add three quarts of
water, one bouquet garni, and two tablespoonfuls of salt. Boil for
thirty minutes, and strain. Cut two pounds of potatoes in quarter inch
squares, and boil in the fish stock until soft, then add the fish and
boil for five minutes, then add one pint of boiling-hot cream, and
season well with salt and white pepper. Before serving add a little
chopped parsley. Serve broken crackers separate.

=Fillet of sole, Bretonne.= Boil four fillets of sole in a little salt
water. Dish up on a platter and cover with equal parts of Hollandaise
and tomato sauce mixed. Garnish with rings of fried onions.

=Coffee custard.= Grind fine (but not pulverized), a half pound of Java
or other mildly flavored coffee. Put it into a quart of boiling milk and
let it infuse on the back of the stove for a half hour, then strain
through cheese cloth. Beat the yolks of six eggs with six ounces of
sugar, add a spoonful of cream, and stir into the hot milk, which has
been heated again after straining off the coffee. Let it cream, but do
not boil; and then add the beaten whites of three eggs. Use any
flavoring desired, a dash of brandy or cognac being very good. Fill the
moulds, stand them in hot water, and place in a moderate oven. When
done, cool, serve with English cream, apricot juice or just plain cream.

=Grapefruit marmalade.= Shave two clean whole grapefruit very thin,
rejecting nothing but the seeds and cores. Measure the fruit, and add
three times the quantity of water, and let it stand in an earthenware
dish over night. Then boil for ten minutes, and let it stand another
night. Then add an equal quantity of sugar, and boil briskly until the
mixture jells.


APRIL 11

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Omelet with fine herbs
       Crescents
       Chocolate

     LUNCHEON
       Scrambled eggs with truffles
       Lamb chops, sauce Soubise
       Julienne potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       Raspberry shortcake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Chatelaine
       Radishes
       Crab meat au gratin
       Roast chicken
       Mashed potatoes
       Cold asparagus, mayonnaise
       Vanilla ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Omelet with fine herbs.= Mix equal parts of chopped parsley, chervil,
and chives with the beaten eggs, season well with salt and white pepper,
and make the omelet in the usual manner.

=Lamb chops, sauce Soubise.= Season the chops well, roll in oil, then in
bread crumbs, and broil. Put a cupful of sauce Soubise on a platter, and
lay the broiled chops on top.

=Strawberry shortcake.= Bake two layers of sponge cake (see layer cake).
Place on top of one some well-sweetened strawberries, put the other cake
on top, and press well together. Cut in individual portions, put some
selected berries on top, and decorate with sweetened whipped cream.
Serve cream separate.

=Old fashioned strawberry shortcake.= Make some biscuit dough as
follows: Mix three-quarters of a pound of flour, one ounce of baking
powder, two ounces of sugar, two ounces of butter, and a pinch of salt.
Mix to a dough with half a pint of milk. Roll out about one-half inch
thick, and bake. When cold split in two, place on one layer some crushed
strawberries, and spread some sugar over them. Put the other layer on
top and cut in squares. Serve with well-sweetened crushed strawberries
on top, and plain cream separate.

=Raspberry shortcake.= Prepare in the same manner as either of the
above, using raspberries in place of strawberries.

=Potage Chatelaine.= Simmer in two ounces of butter one onion, one-half
stalk of celery, and one leek, all chopped very fine. Then add one-half
pound of lean beef cut in small squares, sprinkle with three ounces of
flour, and simmer until well browned. Then add two quarts of stock or
bouillon and boil for an hour. Season with salt and fresh-ground black
pepper, and add a glass of good sherry wine before serving.

=String beans, Alsacienne.= Simmer in a casserole in three ounces of
butter one chopped onion. When just colored golden yellow, add one
spoonful of flour, one quart of bouillon, stock, or chicken broth, and
three pounds of cleaned and well-washed string beans. Season with salt
and pepper, cover, and simmer for forty minutes. Then add one-half glass
of white wine and cook for fifteen minutes. Do not add the wine to the
beans until they are soft. Sprinkle with chopped parsley before serving.


APRIL 12

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Waffles
       Honey in comb
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, Virginia
       Minced tenderloin of beef, a l'Estragon
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Port de Salut cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Portugaise
       Salted pecans
       Fillet of turbot, Sarcey
       Boiled ham with spinach
       Hollandaise potatoes
       Lallah Rookh
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Boiled ham with spinach.= Soak an eight-pound ham in water over night.
Then put on fire, in a pot, covered with cold water, and bring to a
boil. Then set to side of stove where it will simmer, but not boil, for
about three and one-half hours, when the ham should be done. Try to pull
off the skin. If it comes off easily the ham is cooked. Serve with plain
spinach, and with either champagne or Madeira sauce, or plain bouillon.

=Dandelion salad.= Clean and wash the dandelion well, and dry in a
towel. Put in a salad bowl, lay two hard-boiled eggs cut in four, on
top, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and one-third vinegar to two-thirds
of olive oil. Mix just before serving.

=Dandelion salad, German style.= Put the salad in a bowl. Cut six slices
of bacon in small dices, and fry until crisp. Pour the hot fat and bacon
over the salad, add a spoonful of vinegar, salt if necessary, and a
little fresh-ground black pepper. Mix well.

=Poached eggs, Virginia.= Put four corn fritters on a platter, lay a
poached egg on each, and cover with tomato sauce.

=Potage Portugaise.= Mix one quart of tomato sauce with one quart of
consomme and bring to a boil. Season with salt and pepper, and add a cup
of boiled rice before serving.

=Fillet of turbot, Sarcey.= This is fillet of sole au vin blanc. Before
serving lay three slices of truffle on each fillet.

=Lallah Rookh.= To a quart of vanilla ice cream add a pony of Jamaica
rum, and mix well. Serve flat in glasses with a little rum on top.

=Apple sauce.= Peel and core six apples and cut in small pieces. Put
into a vessel, add a pony of white wine, two ounces of water, one ounce
of sweet butter, two ounces of sugar, and a small stick of cinnamon.
Cover, boil for thirty minutes, and strain through a fine sieve.

=Rump of beef, Windsor.= Larded rump of beef, braise, with its own
gravy, garnished with Parisian potatoes, fresh green peas, and beets
Frouard.

=Virginia ham and eggs.= Broil or fry two slices of Virginia ham and
place on platter. Lay two fried eggs on top.


APRIL 13

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Bacon and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Crab, Portola (cold)
       Eggs, Coquelin
       Calf's head, sauce piquante
       Fondante potatoes
       Apple strudel      Coffee

     DINNER
       Blue Points on half shell
       Creme Parisienne (soup)
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Roast tenderloin of beef
       Summer squash
       Potatoes rissolees
       Chartreuse jelly
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Eggs, Coquelin.= Cut in two, six hard-boiled eggs. Mix the yolks with a
cupful of well-seasoned puree of mushrooms, and fill the half eggs. Set
them on a buttered china platter, cover with cream, and put in the oven
to bake. When very hot remove, lay twelve fillets of anchovies over the
eggs, and serve.

=Calf's head, sauce piquante.= Boiled calf's head served on a napkin,
with the brain and tongue. Garnish with parsley in branches, sliced
pickles, sliced pickled beets, and lemon in halves. Serve sauce piquante
separate.

=Apple strudel.= Roll out some puff paste about one-eighth inch thick
and eight inches wide. On it spread some sliced apples mixed with sugar
and powdered cinnamon. Wet the edges and fold up both sides, forming a
roll. Place on a baking pan, wash the top with egg, and bake in a hot
oven. When done cut in slices about two inches wide, and serve hot, with
hard and brandy sauces.

=Crab, Portola.= Remove the boiled crab meat from the shell, taking care
to keep as entire as possible. On a salad plate arrange hearts of
lettuce, cut into eighths. On the lettuce lay a whole sweet red pimento,
using the canned ones which come ready for use. On top of the pepper
place three spoonfuls of crab meat. Cover all with French dressing made
with tarragon vinegar, using one spoonful to three of olive oil;
seasoned with salt and some fresh-ground pepper.

=Creme Parisienne.= Cream of chicken and cream of chicory soups mixed.
Serve bread cut in small squares and fried in butter.

=Stuffed tomatoes with anchovies.= Chop the contents of one bottle of
anchovies in oil, in small pieces, add two hard-boiled eggs chopped
fine, a little fresh-ground pepper, and two spoonfuls of mayonnaise.
Peel six tomatoes, cut off the tops and scoop out the insides with a
spoon. Then fill with the prepared anchovies, cover with the piece cut
from the top, and serve on leaves of lettuce garnished with quartered
lemons and parsley in branches.

=Brook trout saute, Miller style.= Clean four brook trout and dry in a
napkin. Season with salt and pepper, roll in flour, put in a frying pan
with two spoonfuls of butter and the grease from two slices of salt pork
that have been fried in their own fat. Fry the trout on both sides,
place on platter, and lay the fried pork on top. Then put in the same
frying pan two ounces of butter, and cook until the color of chestnuts.
Pour over the fish, and sprinkle with some chopped parsley and the juice
of two lemons. Garnish with parsley in branches.


APRIL 14

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit juice
       Wheatcakes
       Breakfast sausages
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Sardines with lemon
       Scrambled eggs, Raspail
       Fillet mignon, Trianon
       Peas
       Pineapple, Creole
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme aux quenelles
       Fillet of sole, Voisin
       Sweetbreads braise, ancienne
       Roast rack of mutton
       Fresh string beans
       Potato croquettes
       Alligator pear salad
       Punch Palermitaine
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs, Raspail.= Cut a stalk of celery in small dices, wash
well, and boil in salt water. When soft drain off the water. In a pot
put two ounces of butter and two peeled tomatoes cut in small dices.
Simmer for five minutes, add ten beaten eggs and the celery, season with
salt and pepper, and add one-half cup of thick cream. Cook and serve.

=Fillet mignon.= A very small tenderloin steak. Broil or saute in pan
with butter. Serve with maitre d'hotel sauce, and garnish with
watercress and half of lemon.

=Fillet mignon, Trianon.= Dress the fillet on a platter and cover with
Bearnaise sauce. Lay three triangular shaped pieces of truffle on top
and garnish with Julienne potatoes.

=Pineapple, Creole.= Cook a quarter pound of rice in a quart of milk.
Add a quarter pound of sugar and one cup chopped fresh or canned
pineapple, and mix well. Dress on a platter and decorate the top with
sliced pineapple and candied cherries. Serve hot with apricot sauce
poured over all.

=Consomme aux quenelles.= Make small chicken dumplings from chicken
force meat, boil them in, and serve with, consomme. These small
dumplings are called in French, quenelles.

=Fillet of sole, Voisin.= In a buttered sauce pan put four fillets of
sole, sprinkle with one-half teaspoonful of very finely chopped onions,
a little chopped parsley, chives, chervil, and one peeled and finely
chopped tomato. Season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of white
wine, cover, and put in oven for fifteen minutes. Then remove the fish
to a platter, and put in the same saute pan one pint of white wine; cook
and mix well, and pour over the fish.

=Sweetbreads braise, ancienne.= Dish up on a platter four sweetbreads
braise, and garnish with four croustades financiere. Pour sauce Madere
around the sweetbreads on platter.

=Roast rack of mutton.= Secure from the butcher a rack of mutton of ten
chops, season well with salt and pepper, place in a roasting pan with
sliced carrots, onions, a spoonful of pepper berries, and a small piece
of butter on top; and roast, basting well, for ten minutes. Then put the
rack on a platter; drain off the grease and add to the pan one-half cup
of stock and a spoonful of meat extract, season well, bring to a boil,
and strain over the roast.


APRIL 15

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit en supreme, with kirsch
       Eggs, Lorraine
       Corned beef hash
       French pastry
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Puree St. Germain
       Salmon Mirabeau
       Fillet of beef, Charcutiere
       Stewed canned corn
       Baked potatoes
       Endives salad
       Floating island
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Grapefruit en supreme with kirsch.= Add to sliced grapefruit, for each
person, a spoonful of powdered sugar and one pony of kirschwasser. Mix
well and serve in supreme glasses.

=Eggs, Lorraine.= Same as eggs Chipolata with the addition of a strip of
bacon across the top.

=Puree St. Germain.= Add to a puree of peas some fresh-cooked green or
canned peas.

=Salmon Mirabeau.= Put in a buttered flat pan two thick slices of
salmon, season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of claret or
white wine, cover, and cook until done. Put on a platter, cover with
tarragon sauce (sauce a l'estragon), garnish with stuffed olives, and
lay six fillets of anchovies on top of each slice of fish.

=Tarragon sauce (Sauce a l'estragon).= Chop some tarragon very fine, add
one-half glass of claret or white wine, and reduce by boiling until
nearly dry. Then add one pint of brown gravy and boil for five minutes.
Season with salt and pepper, add two ounces of fresh butter and whip
well into the hot sauce. Serve with fish or meats.

=Fillet of beef, Charcutiere.= Roast tenderloin of beef. Serve with
brown gravy (sauce Madere), to which has been added twelve small glaceed
onions, six sliced sour pickles, and twelve heads of French mushrooms or
fresh mushrooms saute in butter. Before serving add a cup of tomato
sauce, and season well with salt and pepper.

=Stewed canned corn.= Empty a can of corn into a sauce pan, add one
ounce of fresh butter, season with salt and pepper, and boil. If too
thick add a spoonful of thick cream.

=Punch Palermitaine.= Serve orange water ice in glasses with a little
Curacao on top.

=Scalloped halibut with cheese.= Prepare one quart of cream sauce. Take
four pounds of halibut, clear of bones and skin, and cut in thin slices
about one-quarter inch thick, and two inches square. Butter a shallow
earthen dish, put some cream sauce in the bottom, sprinkle with grated
cheese, then put in a layer of halibut, season with salt and pepper;
then sauce, cheese and fish in turn; and continue for about five layers,
with cream and sauce on top. Put bits of butter on top and bake in a
moderate oven for from forty-five minutes to one hour, or until fish is
done and top is nicely browned.


APRIL 16

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Codfish cakes
       Broiled bacon
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres assorted
       Poached eggs, Paulus
       Filet mignon, maitre d'hotel
       Potatoes hashed in cream
       Cold asparagus, vinaigrette
       Fruit salad, Chantilly
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Daumont
       Baked shad, with raisins
       Chicken saute, Austin
       Jeanette potatoes
       Carrots, Vichy
       Lettuce salad
       Charlotte Russe
       Coffee

=Codfish cakes.= Prepare the fish as for codfish balls. Form into flat
cakes about one inch thick and two and one-half inches in diameter. Roll
in flour and fry in melted butter. Serve on napkin with lemon and
parsley in branches.

=Poached eggs, Paulus.= Put four very soft poached eggs on four slices
of toast, cover with cream sauce with sliced truffles, sprinkle with
grated cheese, and bake in hot oven just long enough to become slightly
brown.

=Consomme Daumont.= To some chicken force meat add some truffles chopped
fine, mix well and form into small dumplings. Cook the dumplings in
consomme. Cut two turnips in small squares and boil in salt water. When
done add to the consomme, with one-half cup of boiled rice, and croutons
souffles prepared with grated cheese.

=Chicken saute, Austin.= Joint a chicken, season well with salt and
pepper, put in saute pan with two ounces of hot melted butter, and fry
until brown on both sides. Then add one cup of brown gravy, two sliced
truffles, and one spoonful of chopped tarragon. Boil for five minutes.

=Jeanette potatoes.= Prepare the potatoes as for croquettes, put into a
pastry bag with a large star tube, and press through onto a buttered
pan, in the form and size of a large rose. Brush the top with yolks of
eggs, and bake in oven until brown. Serve on a napkin.

=Charlotte Russe. (I).= Line a pudding mould with lady fingers, fill
with sweetened whipped cream, unmould on a plate and decorate with
whipped cream.

=(II).= Whip to a frost one pint of cream, add one-quarter pound of
sugar and a glass of sherry wine. Dissolve two sheets of gelatine in a
little hot water, strain, and pour into the cream, heating well. Line a
pudding mould with lady fingers and fill with the prepared cream. Allow
to stand in the ice box for an hour and a half before serving. Decorate
with whipped cream.

=Baked shad with raisins.= Split the fish and lay at full length on a
long buttered dish. Cover the top of the fish with slices of tomato. Put
bits of butter on top of the tomato; for a medium sized shad using a
lump of butter the size of an egg. Sprinkle chopped parsley over all,
and strew seedless raisins around the fish. Then add a half glass of
wine, and put in a moderate oven to bake. The fish will be very tender
when thoroughly done, but the time required will depend upon the
thickness of the fish. From thirty to forty-five minutes is usually
sufficient.


APRIL 17

     BREAKFAST
       Orange juice
       Hominy with cream
       Crescents
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Oysters mignonette
       Eggs a la tripe
       Small tenderloin steak, Demidoff
       Saute potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Mongol
       Perch saute, meuniere
       Roast leg of mutton
       String beans with butter
       Potatoes au gratin
       Field salad
       Roman punch
       Pound cake
       Coffee

=Oysters mignonette.= Put six oysters on half shell on cracked or shaved
ice, with a small glass or hollow green pepper filled with mignonette
sauce, in the center.

=Small tenderloin steak, Demidoff.= Put four small broiled tenderloin
steaks on a platter, and cover with brown gravy containing olives and
sliced canned mushrooms. Garnish both ends of the platter with asparagus
tips.

=Roman punch.= Dress lemon water ice in glasses in pointed shapes, and
pour a little rum on top.

=Beets, Frouard.= Cut some boiled beets with a Parisian spoon into the
shape of olives, put in a saute pan with melted butter, season with salt
and pepper, and heat through. Serve in a vegetable dish, or use for
garnishing.

=Deviled crab in shells.= Secure some empty shells from a first-class
grocer. Allow one shell to each person and fill with the following: Take
the meat of one crab, which is sufficient for four persons, shred it,
add a cup of veloute sauce, a teaspoonful of English mustard, a
soupspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, a half-teaspoonful of finely
chopped parsley, salt, pepper and a bit of Cayenne. Mix well. Fill the
shells, covering evenly. Make a paste of a teaspoonful each of English
and French mustard and two spoonfuls of melted butter. Spread this over
the top, and cover with bread crumbs. Bake for about ten minutes, or
until the top is browned.

=Roast leg of reindeer.= Put in a roasting pan a sliced onion, a sliced
carrot, a piece of skin of salt pork, a stalk of celery, some parsley in
branches, two bay leaves, two cloves, and one sprig of thyme. Season the
leg of reindeer well and lay on top. Put three ounces of butter on the
leg, and place in the oven to roast. Baste continually, adding a little
water or stock from time to time, to prevent the vegetables from
burning. When the roast is done remove to a platter, and make a brown
gravy with the contents of the pan by adding a spoonful of flour,
simmer, add one cup of stock, season well, and strain over the meat.
Some may be reserved to serve in a bowl, separate. Also serve currant
jelly and port wine sauce.

=Asparagus tips au gratin.= Cut the tips from fresh-cooked asparagus,
place in a buttered dish, season with salt and pepper, cover with cream
sauce, sprinkle with grated Swiss cheese, put small bits of butter on
top, and bake in oven until brown.


APRIL 18

     BREAKFAST
       Rice cakes
       Apricot marmalade
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Epicurienne
       Tripe and oysters in cream
       Baked potatoes
       Strawberries Romanoff
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Consomme Sevigne, II.
       Ripe California olives
       Fillet of sole, St. Cloud
       Roast chicken
       Sybil potatoes
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Fruit salad glace
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs Epicurienne.= Shirr the eggs. When nearly done add a brown gravy to
which has been added some small pieces of terrine de foie gras, four
slices of truffle, and one sliced canned mushroom.

=Strawberries Romanoff.= Put some nice ripe strawberries into a bowl,
pour some Curacao over them, and serve with well-sweetened whipped
cream, flavored with vanilla, on top. Serve very cold.

=Consomme Sevigne, II.= Consomme Brunoise with small quenelles (chicken
dumplings). Add some chopped chervil and a little Cayenne pepper. Serve
very hot.

=Flannel cakes.= One pound of flour, one ounce of baking powder, two
ounces of sugar, two ounces of butter, two eggs, and a pinch of mace.
Mix all together with sufficient milk to make a medium dough, or batter.
Beat until smooth, and bake on a hot griddle.

=Rice cakes.= Boil one-quarter pound of well-washed rice in water for
five minutes. Drain off the water and add one pint of milk, cook until
rice is soft, drain off the milk and add the rice to a flannel cake
batter. Bake in the usual manner.

=Fillet of sole, St. Cloud.= In a buttered saute pan put four fillets of
sole, season with salt and white pepper, add one-half glass of white
wine and a little stock, and boil for ten minutes. Make a white wine
sauce and add the following to it: Two dozen boiled mussels and one
dozen boiled oysters removed from the shells, six heads of canned
mushrooms and twelve slices of truffle. Put the fish on a platter and
cover with the sauce.

=Fruit salad glace.= One sliced orange and one sliced grapefruit, six
slices of pineapple, one banana, one dozen strawberries and a handful of
raspberries. Put all in bowl, add two spoonfuls of sugar, a glassful of
maraschino and a pony of kirschwasser. Allow to stand in the ice box for
an hour. Serve in small individual dishes with a spoonful of vanilla ice
cream on top.

=Grapefruit cocktail.= Slice one grapefruit and one-half orange and put
in bowl with a spoonful of sugar and a pony of kirschwasser. Allow to
stand for an hour. Serve in grapefruit supreme glasses, decorated on top
with brandied cherries.


APRIL 19

     BREAKFAST
       Raspberries with cream
       Plain omelet
       Rolls
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Fillet of mariniert herring
       Potato salad
       Consomme in cups
       Sweetbread patties in cream
       Cold artichokes, vinaigrette
       Roquefort cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree of spinach
       Crab meat, Suzette
       Roast tenderloin of beef, Cubaine
       Gendarme potatoes
       Peas and carrots in cream
       Lettuce and alligator pear salad
       Frozen egg nogg
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Sweetbread patties in cream.= Soak two pounds of sweetbreads in cold
water for two hours, to cause the blood to flow out. Then put them on
the fire in one quart of water and two ounces of salt, bring to a boil,
and then allow to become cold. Pull off the skin and cut the sweetbreads
in pieces one-half inch square. Put in vessel with one cup of bouillon,
and boil till soft. Then add a cup of cream, season with salt and a
little Cayenne pepper, and boil for five minutes. Knead one ounce of
butter with one ounce of flour, and use for thickening. Boil again for
five minutes. Serve in hot patty shells, on napkin, garnished with
parsley in branches. (Patty shells, Jan. 25).

=Puree of spinach (Soup).= Bring to a boil two quarts of chicken broth,
add one peck of well-washed spinach and two ounces of butter, and boil
for an hour. Strain through a fine sieve, and put back in the casserole.
It should now be of the thickness of a puree of pea soup. Season well
with salt and pepper, and stir in, while boiling, one-quarter pound of
sweet butter. Serve with small squares of bread fried in butter.

=Roast tenderloin of beef, Cubaine.= Roast the beef in the usual manner.
Serve with sauce Madere, and garnish with stuffed green or red peppers.

=Candied sweet potatoes.= Boil four sweet potatoes, remove the skins,
and cut in egg shapes. Put in saute pan with two ounces of butter, and
roast slowly. When nearly brown add a spoonful of powdered sugar and
continue roasting till sugar and potatoes are brown.

=Cole slaw, ravigote.= Slice a white cabbage very thin and put in a
salad bowl. Cover with highly seasoned sauce Tartar, and mix thoroughly.

=Frozen egg nogg.= One quart of milk, six eggs, one-half pound of sugar,
one pony of brandy, one pony of rum, and one-half teaspoonful of grated
nutmeg. Mix well, strain, and freeze. Serve in glasses.


APRIL 20

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Plain shirred eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit cocktail
       Eggs en cocotte, Valentine
       Roast loin of pork, apple sauce
       Candied sweet potatoes
       Cole slaw, ravigote
       Vanilla custard pie
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Theodora
       Scalloped halibut with cheese
       Rump of beef
       Peas
       Parisian potatoes
       Beets Frouard
       Chocolate ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs en cocotte, Valentine.= Mix some crab meat with a little
well-seasoned cream sauce. Put a spoonful in the bottom of a buttered
cocotte dish, break an egg on top, salt and pepper the egg, put a little
more crab meat and cream on top, sprinkle with grated Parmesan cheese,
put some bits of butter on top, and bake in oven for five minutes.

=Consomme Theodora.= Put in the consomme, equal parts of small chicken
dumplings, royal, and boiled asparagus tips. Before serving add some
chopped chervil.

=Vanilla custard pie.= Six eggs, one quart of milk, one-quarter pound of
sugar, one-half of a vanilla bean. Boil the milk with the vanilla bean.
Mix the eggs with the sugar and add to the milk. Strain, and fill a
large pie dish lined with a thin pie dough, and bake in a moderate oven
until set.

=Lemon custard pie.= Same as vanilla custard pie, except use the grated
rind and the juice of two lemons instead of the vanilla bean.

=Orange custard pie.= Same as lemon custard pie, but use two oranges
instead of the lemons.

=Cocoanut custard pie.= Same as vanilla custard pie, but put a handful
of shredded cocoanut in the bottom of the pie before filling.

=Vanilla meringue pie.= Same as vanilla custard pie, but when baked,
cover, and ornament the top with meringue paste, dust with powdered
sugar, and put back in oven to color.

=Meringue paste for pie.= The whites of four eggs beaten firm and stiff;
then add one-half pound of powdered sugar and mix well. Flavor to taste.

=Lemon meringue pie.= Same as lemon custard pie, but cover and ornament
with meringue paste, and bake until colored.

=Orange meringue pie.= Same directions as for lemon meringue pie.

=Lemon pie, special.= The yolks of eight eggs, six ounces of sugar,
three lemons, the whites of four eggs. Mix the yolks, sugar, and the
grated rinds and the juice of the lemons, and beat over a fire until
thick. Then add the whites of eggs well beaten, and pour into a large
pie dish lined with thin pie dough. Bake slowly. Serve with powdered
sugar on top.

=Cocoanut meringue pie.= Same as cocoanut custard pie, but cover with
meringue paste, and bake until colored.


APRIL 21

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberries with cream
       Virginia ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Cocoa with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Antipasto
       Fried smelts, sauce remoulade
       Spring lamb Irish stew
       Chiffonnade salad
       Old fashioned raspberry shortcake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Toke Points on half shell
       Potage sante
       Boiled salmon, Villers
       Roast capon, au jus
       Parsnips with cream
       Duchesse potatoes
       Endive salad, Victor dressing
       Frankfort pudding, sauce Sabayon
       Coffee

=Boiled salmon, Villers.= Cut two slices of salmon about one and
one-half inch thick. Put in vessel with one quart of water, a bouquet
garni, one spoonful of salt, a teaspoonful of whole black peppers, and
one spoonful of white wine vinegar. Boil slowly for twenty minutes. In a
casserole put two ounces of butter, heat, and then add two ounces of
flour. When the flour is hot add a pint and a half of the fish broth
from the salmon, and boil for five minutes. Then add the yolk of one egg
and one cup of cream, mix well, season with salt and pepper, and strain.
Add to the sauce one can of sliced mushrooms and half a pound of picked
shrimps. Place the salmon on a platter and pour the sauce over it.

=Frankfort pudding.= One-quarter pound of butter, one-quarter pound of
sugar, the yolks of seven eggs, six ounces of cake crumbs, the whites of
six eggs, and some vanilla flavoring. Mix the butter with the sugar, and
work well with a wooden spoon until creamy, then add the yolks, one by
one, and mix thoroughly. Add the cake crumbs; which are made by passing
left-over cake through a colander with large holes; flavor with the
vanilla extract, and mix well. Beat the whites to snow, and add to the
batter, mixing very lightly. Put in a buttered pudding mould and bake.
Serve hot Sabayon sauce separate, or pour over the pudding.

=Sabayon sauce.= In a copper kettle put six yolks of eggs and six ounces
of powdered sugar. Set on a slow fire, or bain-marie, and beat until
warm. Add a glass of Marsala or sherry wine and whip until it thickens.
Serve either hot or cold.

=Boiled parsnips.= Peel a half dozen parsnips, wash, and boil whole in
salt water. When done cut in slices, or some fancy shape, and put in
sauce pan with two ounces of butter. Heat through. Season with salt and
pepper.

=Parsnips in cream.= Cut boiled parsnips in pieces two inches long, put
in sauce pan with one cup of cream sauce, season with salt and white
pepper. Serve in deep vegetable dish, and very hot.

=Victor dressing.= Two pinches of salt, one pinch of fresh-ground black
pepper, one spoonful of tarragon vinegar, two spoonfuls of olive oil,
and one teaspoonful of chopped chervil.


APRIL 22

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh cherries
       Flannel cakes with maple syrup
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with chestnuts
       Austrian chicken fritters
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Lemon pie, special
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Soubise
       Ripe olives with garlic and oil
       Deviled crabs in shells
       Tenderloin of beef, Cumberland
       Stuffed cucumbers
       Sweet potatoes, Southern style, II.
       California sherbet
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Consomme Soubise.= Mix one cup of puree of onions, one pint of cold
chicken broth, three whole eggs and the yolks of three eggs; season with
salt, pepper, and a little grated nutmeg. Strain through a fine sieve,
put in buttered moulds, and cook in bain-marie. Allow to set, slice, and
serve in hot consomme.

=Ripe olives with garlic and oil.= Rub an olive dish or salad bowl with
garlic. Put the olives in the dish, add a spoonful of olive oil, and
roll the olives in the dish for a few minutes.

=Austrian chicken fritters.= Chop the meat of a boiled or baked fowl,
season with salt, pepper, nutmeg and herbs; place in a saucepan, and add
enough cream or white sauce to moisten. To each cup of the meat and
cream add the yolk of one egg. Cut some sandwich bread into thick
slices. Mix a pint of milk with two well-beaten eggs. Spread the
sandwich bread with a thick layer of the creamed chicken, press two
pieces of the bread together, as if making a sandwich, dip this in the
egg and milk mixture, then roll in sifted bread crumbs, and fry in hot
lard to an even brown color; and in the same manner as for pancakes.

=Sweet potatoes, Southern, II.= Peel some sweet potatoes and cut
lengthwise into strips about an eighth of an inch thick. Put some butter
into a saute pan, and the potatoes, and sprinkle them with brown sugar.
Then place on top another layer of potatoes, sprinkle them with sugar,
and so on, filling the pan. Add hot water, cover the dish, and set in
the oven and bake until soft.

=California sherbet.= Fill glasses with orange water ice, and on top
place five strawberries that have been soaked in California brandy.

=Tenderloin of beef, Cumberland.= Roast tenderloin of beef, sauce
poivrade, garnished with stuffed cucumbers.

=Stuffed cucumbers.= Peel two cucumbers and cut in pieces one and
one-half inches thick. Put in casserole and cover with a quart of water,
season with a pinch of salt, bring to a boil, and cool off. With a round
cutter remove the inside from the cucumbers, leaving firm rings. Place
these on a buttered saute pan and fill with the following stuffing: Mix
a cup of bread crumbs with a cup of puree of fresh mushrooms; season
with salt and pepper, add the yolks of two raw eggs, and some
fresh-chopped parsley. Mix well, and fill the cucumbers. Cover with
buttered manilla paper, put a cup of bouillon in the bottom of the pan,
and bake in oven for twenty minutes. Serve as a garnishing for entrees,
or fish; or as a vegetable course, on a platter, with tomato sauce or
meat gravy.


APRIL 23

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Oysters marine
       Clam broth in cups      Cheese straws
       English chuck steak, maitre d'hotel
       White beans with tomatoes
       French fried potatoes
       Cocoanut meringue pie      Coffee

     DINNER
       Potato soup, Dieppoise
       Broiled herring, cream sauce
       Hollandaise potatoes
       Roast leg of reindeer, port wine sauce
       Sweet potatoes flambe with rum
       Asparagus tips au gratin
       Vanilla charlotte glacee      Demi tasse

=English chuck steak, maitre d'hotel.= This steak is cut from the end of
the saddle, near the legs. It should be cut all the way across the
saddle, and about an inch and a half thick. Season with salt and pepper,
dip in oil, and broil. When done put on a platter, cover with maitre
d'hotel sauce, and garnish with lemon and watercress.

=White beans and tomatoes.= Soak two pounds of white beans in cold
water, over night. Then put the beans in a vessel with three quarts of
water, a ham bone, a bouquet garni, and a handful of salt. Bring to the
boiling point, skim, cover, and boil until well done. Remove the ham
bone and the bouquet, and drain off the water. In a casserole put two
ounces of butter and a chopped onion, and simmer until nice and yellow.
Then add four peeled and chopped fresh tomatoes, or a quart of canned
tomatoes, and simmer for thirty minutes. Then add the beans, season with
salt and pepper, and simmer all together for fifteen minutes.

=Oysters, marine.= Same as pickled oysters.

=Potato soup, Dieppoise.= In a sauce pan put three ounces of butter, one
sliced celery root, two leeks, a half dozen sliced parsley roots, and
simmer for five minutes. Then add two pounds of potatoes sliced very
thin, and two quarts of bouillon. Season with salt and pepper, and boil
for forty-five minutes. Just before serving add two rolls that have been
sliced thin and toasted in the oven, and a little fresh-chopped parsley.

=Sweet potatoes flambe with rum.= Boil and peel four sweet potatoes, and
cut in egg shapes. Put in pan with two ounces of butter and roast until
nice and yellow. Then add a little salt and a teaspoonful of sugar,
heat, and then put in chafing dish. Pour two ponies of rum on top,
light, and bring to the table flaming.

=Vanilla charlotte glacee.= Line a pudding mould with lady fingers, fill
with vanilla ice cream, unmould, and decorate with whipped cream and
glace cherries.

=Dartois Chantilly.= Roll some puff paste with six turns, and about
one-quarter inch thick. Cut in strips two inches wide and four inches
long. Place them in a wet pan about one-half inch apart, and let them
set for a few minutes, then brush over with egg, and with the point of a
small knife mark a line about one-eighth inch deep all around the cakes,
and about one-quarter inch from the edges. Bake in rather hot oven for
about twenty-five minutes. Remove the top while hot, and empty the cake,
leaving only the dry crust. Fill with sweetened whipped cream, vanilla
flavor, after cooling.


APRIL 24

     BREAKFAST
       Orange marmalade
       Finnan haddie in cream
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Oolong tea

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs en cocotte, plain
       Ripe California olives
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Cold asparagus, vinaigrette
       Strawberry short cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little neck clams
       Burned farina soup
       Radishes
       Fillet of sole, sauce cardinal
       Olivette potatoes
       Roast shad and roe, a l'Americaine
       Artichokes, Hollandaise
       Lettuce salad
       English rice pudding
       Coffee

=Eggs en cocotte, plain.= Break one or two eggs in a buttered cocotte
dish, season with salt and pepper, put a little butter on top, and bake
in oven for a few minutes. Serve on napkin or paper doily.

=Burned farina soup.= Melt in a casserole one-half pound of butter; when
hot add three-quarters of a pound of farina, and roast on top of the
range, stirring with a wooden spoon so it will not stick to the bottom.
Cook until the color of a chestnut, then add two quarts of boiling
water, season with salt and pepper, and boil for one hour. This is a
good soup for Friday.

=Fillet of sole, cardinal.= In a buttered saute pan put four fillets of
sole, season with salt and white pepper, add one-half glass of white
wine, cover with buttered paper, and bake in oven for ten minutes.
Remove the fillets to a platter, and to the saute pan add one pint of
white wine sauce. Bring to a boil and then stir in two tablespoonfuls of
lobster butter. When the butter is melted strain the sauce over the
fish.

=Roast shad and roe, a l'Americaine.= Secure from the fish dealer a
fresh shad with the roe inside, and without the belly cut open. In a
roasting pan put four ounces of butter, one chopped onion, a carrot cut
in very small dices, a spoonful of chopped parsley, and a bay leaf,
clove, and a garlic clove, all chopped fine. Place the fish on top,
season well with salt and pepper, put a few bits of butter on top of the
fish, and place in the oven. Baste continually, and if the pan becomes
too dry, add one-half glass of white wine, baste, and then add one-half
glass of water. Bake for about an hour in a moderate oven. When done
place on a platter and pour the sauce in the pan over the fish. A
spoonful of Worcestershire sauce, and the juice of a lemon or two, may
be added to the sauce if desired.

=English rice pudding.= Three pints of milk, one-quarter of a pound of
rice, one-quarter of a pound of sugar, and one-half of a vanilla bean
split in two. Boil the milk with the vanilla bean, then add the washed
rice, and cook for about forty minutes. Add the sugar and boil again for
a few minutes, turning carefully with a wooden spoon, so it will not
stick to the bottom. Then remove from the fire, add one cup of thick
cream, and pour into deep china vegetable dishes, and bake in a hot oven
until brown on top. Use one large dish for baking, or individual ones,
as desired.


APRIL 25

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit a la Rose
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Consomme in cup
       Fillets of sand dabs, sauce verte
       Leberkloese (liver dumplings)
       Sauerkraut
       Boiled potatoes
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Port de Salut cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of potatoes
       Pickles
       Tenderloin steak, a la Polonaise
       Spinach with eggs
       Mashed potatoes
       Lettuce and alligator pear salad
       Orange custard pie
       Coffee

=Grapefruit a la Rose.= Peel and slice two grapefruit and put in salad
bowl. Mix one-half cup of fresh strawberries and one-half cup of fresh
raspberries and two spoonfuls of powdered sugar, and strain through a
fine colander. Have all very cold. Put the grapefruit in glasses and
pour the fresh fruit sauce over it.

=Fillet of sand dabs, fried.= Cut the fillets from four sand dabs,
season with salt and pepper, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, then in
bread crumbs, and fry in hot swimming lard. When done serve on napkins
with fried parsley and quartered lemons. Serve sauce Tartar or sauce
verte separate.

=Sauce verte.= In a mortar mash equal parts of chives, chervil and
parsley. When very fine add some mayonnaise sauce, mix well, and strain
through a cheese cloth. Season well before serving.

=Leberkloese (liver dumplings).= Remove the skin from a calf's liver of
good size, and scrape well with a fork to remove all the nerves. Then
put in a bowl and add four cups of fresh bread crumbs, three eggs, a
little salt, pepper, grated nutmeg, chopped parsley, chopped garlic, one
chopped onion and four chopped shallots fried in butter, a teaspoonful
of chopped thyme leaves, and one bay leaf chopped almost to a powder.
Mix all well together, and drop with a soupspoon into boiling bouillon
or salt water, and cook slowly for about twelve minutes. Place on a
platter with a little brown gravy; or, in a pan put three ounces of
butter with one cup of bread cut in small squares and fry until nice and
yellow, then pour over the dumplings, and sprinkle chopped parsley on
top.

=Tenderloin steak, Polonaise.= Broil the steak, put on a platter, cover
with maitre d'hotel sauce, and garnish with cauliflower Polonaise.


APRIL 26

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced oranges
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs gourmet
       Honeycomb tripe with cream and peppers
       Baked potatoes
       Fresh vegetable salad
       Imperial pancake
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme a la Russe
       Salted Brazil nuts
       Frogs' legs, saute a sec
       Breast of tame duck, Virginia style
       Fried apples
       Wax beans in butter
       Romaine salad
       Neapolitan ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Angels on horseback
       Chicken a la King
       Coffee

=Eggs gourmet.= Spread some terrine de foie gras on four pieces of
toast, lay a poached egg on top of each piece, and cover with sauce
Perigord.

=Honeycomb tripe with cream and peppers.= Cut three pounds of tripe in
strips about two inches long and one-half inch wide, and put in
casserole with cold water and a spoonful of salt. Bring to a boil and
cook for ten minutes. Then drain off the water, add one pint of milk,
season with salt, and boil for thirty minutes. Cut six green peppers in
small squares, and put in casserole with three ounces of butter, simmer
until done, then add one pint of cream sauce, boil for a minute, and add
to the tripe. Boil together for five minutes.

=Imperial pancakes.= Make some thin pancakes, and cut in circular shapes
with a three-inch round cutter. With the same cutter cut some sponge
cake, and about one-half inch thick. Put some apple sauce on top of the
cake, then one of the round pieces of pancake, and repeat until you have
four layers with the pancake on top. Decorate with meringue paste, with
a pastry bag and a fancy tube, and form in the shape of a crown on top.
Put in oven to give a light color.

=Consomme a la Russe.= To consomme brunoise add a spoonful of boiled
barley and a few squares of boiled smoked beef tongue for each person.

=Breast of tame duck.= Cut the breasts from a tame duck, season with
salt and pepper. Put a piece of butter in a saute pan, add the breasts
and saute for about fifteen minutes if the duck is a young one. Serve on
a platter covered with sauce Colbert.

=Breast of duck, Virginia style.= Broil two slices of Virginia ham and
lay on top of the breasts prepared as above.

=Boiled wax beans.= Cut the strings from both sides of the beans, and
cut the beans in two. Boil in salted water until done, then drain off
the water, and to each pound of beans add two ounces of butter and a
little salt and pepper. Simmer for a few minutes, and sprinkle with
chopped parsley before serving.

=Angels on horseback.= Select large eastern oysters, wrap a slice of
thin raw bacon around each oyster, and fasten with a wooden toothpick.
Dip them in beaten eggs mixed with a little Worcestershire and English
mustard, then roll in fresh bread crumbs, and place in a buttered saute
pan with bits of butter on top of each oyster. Bake in hot oven for
about eight minutes, and serve on toast. Pour maitre d'hotel sauce on
top, and garnish with parsley in branches and halves of lemon.


APRIL 27

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit juice
       Oatmeal and cream
       Rolls
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, d'Artois
       Turkey hash in cream
       Alligator pear salad
       Vanilla meringue pie
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Puree of green asparagus
       Lyon sausage.      Radishes
       Fillet of turbot, Windsor
       Leg of mutton, Choiseul
       O'Brien potatoes
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Jam roll pudding
       Coffee

=Poached eggs, d'Artois.= Place the poached eggs on toast and pour thick
tomato sauce over them.

=Puree of green asparagus.= Heat in a casserole three ounces of butter,
then add three ounces of flour and four pounds of green asparagus cut in
small pieces, one quart of milk, one quart of chicken broth or bouillon,
a bouquet garni, a little salt, and one teaspoonful of sugar. Boil for
an hour, and strain through a very fine sieve. Then put back in
casserole and add the yolks of two eggs mixed with one cup of cream. Cut
some bread in small squares, fry in butter, and add just before serving.

=Fillet of turbot, Windsor.= Cut six fillets of fish, put in a buttered
saute pan, season with salt and white pepper, add one-half glass of
white wine and one-half glass of stock, cover with buttered manilla
paper, and boil until done. Make a white wine sauce and add to it one
dozen parboiled oysters and the tail of a lobster cut in slices. Place
the fillets on a platter, pour the sauce over them, and garnish with six
fried shrimps.

=Leg of mutton, Choiseul.= Roast leg of mutton, sauce Madere, garnished
with small croustades of puree of peas and puree of spinach, and fresh
mushrooms saute in butter.

=Jam roll pudding.= Mince fine one pound of suet, add a pound of flour,
a pinch of salt and a cup of milk, making a rather hard dough. Roll out
to the thickness of a quarter of an inch or less. Cover evenly with a
layer of any kind of fruit jam, then roll up like a sausage, wrap in a
wet cloth, tie with a string so it will not become loose, and steam for
an hour. Cut into individual pieces, and serve warm, with hard and soft
sauces.

=Peach Norelli.= Fill two meringue shells with a small tablespoonful of
vanilla ice cream. On a fancy plate place an ice cold whole preserved
peach, or a fresh peach that has been cooked in syrup. On two sides of
the peach press the filled meringue shells, decorate the center with
whipped cream, and on the top place a whole marron glace.


APRIL 28

     BREAKFAST
       Honey in comb
       Plain scrambled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Stuffed tomatoes with anchovies
       Clam broth in cups
       Cheese straws
       Planked shad and roe
       Cucumber salad
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Celestine
       Brook trout saute, miller style
       Larded tenderloin of beef, Montpasson
       Onion glaces
       Quartered artichokes
       Parisian potatoes
       Field salad
       Meringue glacee au chocolat
       Coffee

=Consomme Celestine.= Make some thin pancakes, cut in strips like
matches, and serve in consomme.

=Larded tenderloin of beef.= Lard a tenderloin of beef, after removing
the fat and skin. Put in a roasting pan with a sliced onion, carrot,
celery, a little leek, parsley, one bay leaf, six cloves, and one
spoonful of whole black peppers. Put some small bits of butter on top of
the tenderloin, season with salt and pepper, and place in a hot oven.
Baste frequently. After the fillet is done remove to a platter, place
the pan on top of the stove and take off the fat except about one
spoonful. Then add one spoonful of flour, stir well, and add two cups of
stock and a spoonful of meat extract, season with salt and pepper, boil
for five minutes, and strain. Add one-half glass of good Madeira wine,
pour half of the sauce over the tenderloin, and serve the rest in a
sauceboat.

=Larded tenderloin of beef, Montbasson.= Cook the tenderloin as above,
but serve with sauce Madere, and garnish with a bouquet of quartered
artichokes, glaced onions, and Parisian potatoes.

=Quartered artichokes.= Cut four large artichokes in quarters, remove
the fuzzy parts on the inside, and immediately rub the quarters with
lemon so they will not become black. Boil in salt water until soft.

=Pears Bourdaloue.= Peel and cook some nice pears in a light syrup,
which can be made of one pint of water and one pound of sugar. Mix a
half pound of sugar with the yolks of eight eggs and two ounces of
flour. Boil one quart of milk with half of a vanilla bean, and pour into
the yolks and sugar, and cook until it thickens. Add two ounces of sweet
butter and mix well, making a nice smooth cream. Put some of this cream
on a plate and put the cooked pears on top. The pears may be cut in half
and cored, if desired. Cover the pears with the rest of the cream,
sprinkle some macaroon crumbs on top, and put in a hot oven to brown.
Serve very hot.


APRIL 29

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberries with cream
       Fried hominy
       Country sausages
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Pickled salmon, St. Francis
       Eggs, Commodore
       Hashed fillet of beef, Sam Ward
       Cocoanut custard pie
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Cream of parsnips
       Ripe olives
       Tomcods, Montmorency
       Chicken saute, Madeleine
       Alligator pear salad
       Omelette au cognac      Coffee

=Pickled salmon, St. Francis.= Cut in small pieces two pounds of raw
salmon and put in saute pan, add a can of sliced cepes, a cupful of
sliced sour pickles, one-half cup of sliced green olives, a glass of
white wine, a pint of tomato ketchup, one spoonful of salt, one
tablespoonful of paprika, and four peeled tomatoes, squeezed and cut in
small pieces. Put on fire, bring to the boiling point, set on back of
the stove and let stand for a half hour. Then put in earthen jar and
place in ice box. Serve cold.

=Eggs, Commodore.= Cook the eggs en cocotte, just before serving pour a
little Bearnaise sauce on top.

=Hashed fillet of beef, Sam Ward.= Take the unused portions of roasted
or larded tenderloin of beef and cut in small squares. Also an equal
amount of boiled potatoes cut in the same way. In a saute pan put one
chopped onion and two green peppers cut in small dices, with two ounces
of butter. Simmer until soft, then add the potato and meat, one cup of
bouillon, or two cups, if necessary, season with salt, cover, put in
oven and cook for thirty minutes. Serve on platter with chopped parsley
on top, and garnished with small pieces of toast.

=Cream of parsnips.= Peel and slice six parsnips and put in vessel with
one pint of chicken broth, boil, and when soft add one pint of cream
sauce. Boil for ten minutes and then pass through a fine sieve. Put back
in vessel, add one pint of thick cream, season with salt and pepper, and
add two ounces of sweet butter before serving.

=Tomcods, Montmorency.= Put four tomcods on a buttered flat saute pan,
season with salt and pepper, put four canned heads of mushrooms on top
of each fish, cover with Italian sauce, sprinkle with a little grated
cheese, put small bits of butter on top, and bake in a moderate oven for
twenty minutes. Before serving pour the juice of two lemons over the
fish, sprinkle with chopped parsley, and serve in same pan.

=Chicken saute, Madeleine.= Joint two spring chickens and put in saute
pan with three ounces of butter, season with salt and pepper, and then
simmer for five minutes. Then sprinkle two spoonfuls of sifted flour
over the chicken and simmer for two minutes. Add one pint of boiling
milk and boil for ten minutes. Then remove the chicken to a platter,
bring the sauce to a boil, add one cup of cream, and strain over the
chicken. See that the sauce is well seasoned. Sprinkle about one and
one-half cupfuls of macedoine vegetables over all.

=Omelet au cognac.= Sprinkle a plain omelet with plenty of powdered
sugar, burn with a red-hot poker, pour two ponies of cognac around the
omelet, and set afire before bringing to the table.


APRIL 30

     BREAKFAST
       Raspberries with cream
       Waffles
       Chocolate with whipped cream
       Crescents

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit en supreme
       Eggs a la Turque
       Chickens' legs, deviled
       Asparagus Hollandaise
       Gauffrette potatoes
       Apple pie
       American cheese
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme printanier royal
       Salted almonds
       Halibut, Richmond
       Roast tame duck with olive sauce
       Sweet potatoes, country style
       Stewed tomatoes, family fashion.
       Cold asparagus, mayonnaise
       Biscuit Tortoni
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs a la Turque.= To shirred eggs add a few chickens' livers saute, in
brown gravy. Place a slice of truffle on top of each egg.

=Deviled chickens' legs.= Left over boiled or broiled chickens' legs may
be utilized. Season with salt and pepper, spread with a little French
mustard mixed with a little powdered mustard and Worcestershire sauce.
Roll in fresh bread crumbs, and broil over a slow fire. When done serve
on a platter with devil sauce, or sauce poivrade.

=Devil sauce.= In a casserole put one chopped shallot and one ounce of
butter, and merely warm, then add the juice of a lemon, one spoonful of
French mustard, one spoonful of Worcestershire sauce, and one pint of
brown gravy. Season with salt and pepper, boil for five minutes, and
strain.

=Consomme printanier.= Cut all kinds of spring vegetables in fancy or
dice shapes, boil in salt water, and serve in hot consomme. Just before
serving add some small leaves of chervil. The vegetables commonly used
are carrots, turnips, peas, string beans, small green asparagus tips,
small flowers of cauliflower, etc.

=Halibut, Richmond.= Make a border with a potato croquette preparation,
around a silver platter. Remove the skin and bones from two pounds of
halibut and boil in salt water for ten minutes. Then put in vessel, add
one-half pint of cream and one pint of cream sauce, season with salt and
Cayenne pepper, and boil together for five minutes. Then place inside
the border on the silver platter, sprinkle with grated cheese, put small
bits of butter on top, and bake in oven until nicely colored.

=Olive sauce.= Remove the stones from twenty-four green olives, cut the
olives in two, and put in a casserole with a glass of sherry or Madeira
wine, and boil until nearly dry. Then add one pint of brown gravy,
season with salt and a little Cayenne pepper, and boil for five minutes.
Serve with any meat.

=Stewed tomatoes, family fashion.= Peel six tomatoes and cut each in
eight pieces. Put in a casserole with three ounces of butter, season
with salt and pepper, add a pinch of sugar and two slices of bread cut
in small squares, cover, and simmer on a slow fire for about forty
minutes.


MAY 1

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Melba toast
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Little Neck clam cocktail
       Broiled striped bass, maitre d'hotel
       Potatoes natural
       Lettuce and tomato salad
       French pancakes
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Bisque of crabs
       Radishes
       Fillet of sole, Marguery
       Vol au vent of salmon, Genoise
       Planked shad and roe
       Cucumber salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Alsatian wafers
       Demi tasse

     SUPPER
       Canape of sardines
       Yorkshire buck
       Coffee

=Fillet of sole, Marguery.= Put four fillets of sole in a buttered saute
pan. Season each fillet with salt and a little Cayenne pepper, add
one-half glass of white wine, and cover with buttered manilla paper. Put
in oven and cook for six minutes. Remove the fillets to a buttered
silver platter, place six boiled mussels and one head of canned
mushrooms on top of each fillet. Now add to what wine is left in the
sauce pan, one spoonful of white wine sauce, and bring to a boil, and
bind with the yolks of two eggs and two ounces of butter. Stir well so
the butter will be thoroughly melted. Strain and pour over the fish,
sprinkle with grated bread crusts, and bake in a very hot oven just long
enough to acquire a light golden color.

=Vol au vent of salmon, Genoise.= Make one large, or four individual,
vol au vent shells. Boil one pound of salmon in salted water; when done
cut in pieces one inch square, put in casserole, cover with one-half
pint of Genoise sauce, add eight heads of canned mushrooms, season well,
and fill the shells.

=Chicken saute, Montpensier.= Joint a spring chicken and season with
salt and pepper. Melt in a saute pan one ounce of butter; when hot add
the chicken and saute until nice and brown. Then sprinkle with one-half
spoonful of flour and let that get brown; add one-half cup of bouillon
and a spoonful of meat extract, and simmer without being covered for
five minutes. Then remove the chicken to a platter, season the sauce
well and pour over it. Garnish with quartered tomatoes sauteed in
butter, and chopped parsley and chives, and also with small pieces of
bread cut in heart shapes and fried in butter.

=Yorkshire buck.= Welsh rabbit on anchovy toast with a poached egg and
two strips of broiled bacon on top.


MAY 2

     BREAKFAST
       Cherries
       Omelet with bacon
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Stuffed eggs, mayonnaise sauce
       Broiled spareribs with lentils
       Breast of squab, sauce Perigord
       Potato croquettes
       Port de Salut cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Farina soup, Francis Joseph
       Fillet of flounder, Pompadour
       Larded sirloin of beef, D'Orsay
       Artichokes jardiniere
       Rissolees potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Burgundy wine jelly
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Breast of squab, Perigord.= Cut the breasts from four squabs, season
with salt and pepper, roll in flour, and fry in saute pan in three
ounces of butter. When done place on toast and cover with sauce
Perigord.

=Fillet of flounder, Pompadour.= Cut the fillets from a flounder and
place them on a china platter, season with salt, pepper, the juice of a
lemon, and a spoonful of olive oil. Set in the ice box for twelve hours;
then take out and roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in
bread crumbs, and fry in swimming lard. When done place on a platter on
a napkin, and garnish with fried parsley and quartered lemons. Make a
sauce of six fillets of anchovies cut in small slices, mixed with sauce
Tartare, well seasoned, and serve separate.

=Artichokes jardiniere.= Boiled artichoke bottoms filled with macedoine
of vegetables.

=Farina soup, Francis Joseph.= Roast a pheasant in the oven for five
minutes to obtain a slight color, then put in fresh-prepared consomme
and boil until soft. Then strain the consomme, bring to a boil, add
three pints of farina and boil for fifteen minutes. Then bind with the
yolks of two eggs and one-half cup of cream, add a glass of sherry wine,
one spoonful of grated cheese; season with salt, a little cayenne pepper
and the juice of a lemon. Cut the breast of the pheasant in thin slices
and put in the soup tureen and pour the soup over it; give it a sprinkle
of chopped parsley, and serve hot.


MAY 3

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Buckwheat cakes, maple syrup
       Rolls
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Supreme of oysters, St. Francis
       Eggs Malakoff
       Broiled chicken
       Souffle potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       Old fashioned strawberry shortcake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme chiffonnade
       Ripe California olives
       Fillet of smelts, Stanley
       Chicken saute, Demidoff
       Turnips glaces
       Potato croquettes
       Endives salad
       Biscuit glace, au peppermint
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Supreme of oysters, St. Francis.= For about eight people. Use twenty
California oysters or seven Eastern oysters for each person. Serve like
an oyster cocktail in grapefruit supreme glasses in the following sauce:
Mix one cup of tomato ketchup, a short cup of cream, one teaspoonful of
Worcestershire sauce, one teaspoonful of lemon juice, season with salt,
a dash of tobasco, and paprika. The cream should be added last. Keep the
sauce on ice until needed.

=Eggs, Malakoff.= Spread some fresh caviar on four pieces of toast, lay
a poached egg on each, and cover the eggs with horseradish sauce and
cream.

=Consomme chiffonnade.= Cut equal parts of lettuce and sorrel in
Julienne style, put in casserole, cover with water, bring to a boil,
then drain off water and allow to become cool. Then put back in
casserole, add two quarts of consomme, and boil very slowly for about
thirty minutes. Before serving add a little chopped parsley and chervil.

=Fillet of smelts, Stanley.= Split six smelts, remove the bones, season
with salt and pepper, place in a buttered saute pan, add one-half glass
of white wine, and cover with buttered paper. Bake in oven for five
minutes, and then place the fillets on a platter. Make a cardinal sauce
but add to it the tail of a lobster cut in small squares, twelve slices
of truffles, and six heads of canned mushrooms, sliced. Pour over the
fish.

=Cardinal sauce.= One pint of sauce au vin blanc; bring to a boil and
stir in two spoonfuls of lobster butter.

=Chicken saute, Demidoff.= Joint a spring chicken, season with salt and
pepper and put in saute pan with two ounces of butter. Heat, add the
chicken, and saute on both sides for fifteen minutes. Then add a cup of
Madeira sauce, and dress on a platter with sauce over it. Garnish the
platter with turnips glace; onions glace; queen olives with the stones
removed, and warmed in sherry wine; and French carrots.


MAY 4

     BREAKFAST
       Raspberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Riga
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Ox tail braise
       Noodles Polonaise
       Cole slaw, 1,000 Island dressing
       Lemon custard pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree of red kidney beans
       Radishes
       Fillet of halibut, Bristol
       Sweetbreads braise, Zurich
       New peas, au cerfeuil
       Julienne potatoes
       Roast chicken, au jus
       Lettuce and grapefruit salad
       Savarin Mirabelle
       Coffee

=Ox tail braise.= Cut two ox tails in pieces three inches long, wash
well and dry with a towel or cloth. Season with salt and pepper. In a
casserole put three ounces of butter, put on the stove, and when hot add
the ox tail. Saute until nice and brown, then add three spoonfuls of
flour, and let that become brown also. Then add one quart of boiling
water, a bouquet garni, a little salt, one-half can of tomatoes, or four
chopped fresh tomatoes, one piece of garlic, an onion and a carrot.
Cover the casserole and put in the oven until the ox tail is soft. It
will require two or three hours. When done remove the ox tail to a
platter, reduce the sauce, season well, and strain over the ox tail on
the platter.

=Puree of kidney beans.= Soak three pounds of dry red kidney beans in
cold water over night. Then put on fire with two quarts of cold water, a
handful of salt, a ham bone, an onion, a carrot and a bouquet garni.
Skim well, and when it boils, cover and cook until soft. Remove the ham
bone, carrot, onion, and bouquet garni, and strain the beans through a
fine sieve. Put back in casserole, boil again, then season with salt and
pepper, and add three ounces of butter, little by little, and stir well
until thoroughly melted. Serve with bread cut in small squares and fried
in butter.

=Fillet of halibut, Bristol.= Put four fillets of halibut in a buttered
saute pan, season with salt and pepper, cover with buttered paper, add
one-half glass of milk and water mixed, and cook. When done place the
fish on a buttered platter, garnish with two dozen parboiled oysters,
and cover all with cream sauce. Sprinkle with grated cheese, put small
bits of butter on top, put in oven and bake until colored.

=Sweetbreads braise, Zurich.= Put some braised sweetbreads on a platter
and garnish with croustades financiere and sauce Madere.


MAY 5

     BREAKFAST
       Gooseberries in cream
       Waffles
       Honey in comb
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Oranges en supreme au Curacao
       Clam broth in cups
       Cheese straws
       Broiled squab on toast
       Olivette potatoes
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Chocolate eclairs
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme croute au pot
       Crab legs, Josephine
       Fillet of beef, Cendrillon
       Pate de foie gras
       Hearts of lettuce
       Omelet with fresh strawberries
       Demi tasse

=Oranges en supreme au Curacao.= Slice two oranges, sprinkle with a
spoonful of powdered sugar, and add one pony of Curacao. Have well iced,
and serve in large supreme glasses.

=Consomme croute au pot.= Cut carrots, turnips, cabbage and leeks in
small thin squares, parboil, and finish cooking in consomme. Serve with
sliced French bread browned in oven.

=Crab legs, Josephine.= Bread the crab legs with fresh bread crumbs, and
fry in a pan, with butter. Dish up on a round platter, with sliced fresh
mushrooms saute in butter in center. Serve sauce Colbert separate.

=Fillet of beef, Cendrillon.= Roast tenderloin of beef, sauce Madere,
garnished with the following: Shape some potato croquettes in the form
of small patties, about one and one-half inch in diameter and one inch
high. Roll in flour, beaten eggs, and bread crumbs. Mark about an eighth
inch deep on top with a small round cutter, and fry in swimming lard.
Then lay out on a towel, lift out the cover formed by the cutter, and
save. Scoop out the center, fill with a soubise (puree of onions), and
replace the cover.


MAY 6

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberries and raspberries, with cream
       Scrambled eggs
       Rolls
       Oolong tea

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Eggs Chateaubriand
       Breaded lamb chops, reforme
       Endives salad
       Roquefort cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Lamb broth a la Grecque
       Ripe California olives
       Lake Tahoe trout, maitre d'hotel
       Calf's head, Providence
       Roast chicken
       Peas
       Potatoes au gratin
       Watercress salad
       French pastry
       Coffee

=Eggs Chateaubriand.= Spread some foie gras on a piece of toast, lay a
poached egg on top, and cover with tomato sauce.

=Breaded lamb chops, reforme.= Mix the crumbs made from one loaf of
bread with two slices of chopped ham and one spoonful of chopped
parsley. Season eight chops with salt and pepper, roll in flour, then in
beaten eggs, and finally in the crumbs mixed as above. Fry in hot
butter, and when done place on a platter and pour around them the
following sauce: Cut in small strips, and in equal parts, some gherkins,
beets, fresh mushrooms saute in butter, or canned mushrooms, smoked beef
tongue, and the whites of hard-boiled eggs. Add one pint of good meat
gravy and a spoonful of melted currant jelly. Season with salt and
Cayenne pepper. Serve some of the sauce separate.

=Lamb broth, a la Grecque.= Cut a pound of raw lamb, from the shoulder
or leg, in dices about one-half inch square. In a casserole put three
ounces of butter and set on the stove. When hot add the lamb and one
chopped onion and simmer together for ten or fifteen minutes. Then add
two spoonfuls of flour and one spoonful of curry powder, and simmer for
five minutes, then add two quarts of stock, bouillon or hot water. If
water is used add a bouquet garni. Bring to a boil and cook for fifteen
minutes, then add a cup of washed rice and boil until soft. Season with
salt and pepper, remove the bouquet garni if used, add one tablespoonful
of Worcestershire sauce and a teaspoonful of sugar. Serve with a little
chopped parsley.

=Calf's head, Providence.= Boil a calf's head with the brain and tongue.
Place one piece of each, for each person, on a platter, cover with sauce
Madere with mushrooms and olives.


MAY 7

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced bananas with cream
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Crab salad, Louis
       Braised mutton chops with string beans
       Gendarme potatoes
       Orange meringue pie
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Consomme Vivieurs
       Fillet of sole, Suchet
       Sweetbreads braise, Godard
       Roast leg of reindeer, au jus
       Sweet potatoes, Southern style
       Puree of salad (vegetable)
       Vanilla ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Crab salad, Louis.= Arrange lettuce leaves around the inside of a salad
bowl, with a few sliced leaves on the bottom. Put crab meat on top of
the sliced leaves, and a few sliced hard-boiled eggs and sliced chives
on top of the crab meat. In another bowl mix one-half cup of French
dressing with one-half cup of Chili sauce, two spoonfuls of mayonnaise,
salt, pepper, and one teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce. Pour over the
salad, and serve very cold.

=Braised mutton chops.= Have six chops cut one and one-half inches
thick, season with salt and pepper. In a saute pan on the stove put one
spoonful of fat or lard, and when hot add the chops and fry on both
sides until brown. Then drain off the fat, add two ounces of butter,
sprinkle with a spoonful of flour, add one pint of stock, one crushed
tomato, one bay leaf, one clove; and then simmer slowly for an hour and
a half. When done place the chops on a platter, season the sauce well,
and strain over the chops.

=Consomme Vivieurs.= Make a Julienne of beets, leeks and celery, in
equal parts, parboil in salt water, and finish cooking in consomme. Then
add the breast of a boiled chicken also cut Julienne. Chop a raw beet,
press out the juice and add to the consomme. This will give it a nice
reddish color. Serve croutons diable separate.

=Croutons diable (for soup).= Use either white or rye bread, and cut in
round pieces the size of a quarter of a dollar. Mix some grated Parmesan
cheese with Cayenne pepper, and put on the round pieces of bread. Place
on a flat pan and bake in oven until brown. Serve on a napkin.

=Fillet of sole, Suchet.= Make a Julienne of vegetables in the same
manner as for consomme. Prepare a fillet of sole, au vin blanc. When the
sole is done add the Julienne of vegetables to the white wine sauce,
together with a little chopped tarragon, and pour over the fish. Have
the sauce well seasoned.

=Sweetbreads braise, Godard.= Braise the sweetbreads and dish up on a
platter. Garnish with whole truffles heated in sherry wine, and whole
heads of mushrooms fried in butter, rooster combs, rooster fries, and
sauce Madere around the platter.


MAY 8

     BREAKFAST
       Guava jelly
       Rice cakes
       Breakfast sausages
       Chocolate with whipped cream
       Rolls

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit en supreme au marasquin
       Consomme in cups
       Finnan haddie in cream
       Baked potatoes
       Italian salad
       Camembert cheese
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme with royal and carrots
       Ripe California olives
       Crab meat, Belle Helene
       Tournedos Bordelaise
       Julienne potatoes
       Cauliflower au gratin
       Fresh strawberry coupe
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Consomme with royal and carrots.= Boil one quart of French carrots in
salted water. When done, drain off the water and pass the carrots
through a fine sieve. Take a cup of this carrot puree and mix with two
whole eggs and one yolk, season with salt and pepper, and strain again.
Put in a small buttered pudding mould and cook in a bain-marie. When
set, allow to become cool, remove from mould, and cut in any fancy shape
desired. Serve in hot consomme.

=Tournedos Bordelaise.= Either fry in butter or broil a small tenderloin
steak. Dish up on a platter, put some sliced parboiled beef marrow on
top, and cover with Bordelaise sauce.

=Fresh strawberry coupe.= Select some nice strawberries and put them in
a bowl with powdered sugar and a little maraschino, and mix well. Fill
some coupe glasses about half full, pour some of the juice over each,
and fill the remainder of the glass with vanilla ice cream. Decorate the
top with selected strawberries.

=Fresh raspberry coupe.= Use raspberries, and prepare as above.

=Banana coupe.= Use sliced bananas, and prepare in the same manner as
for strawberries.

=Orange coupe.= Use sliced oranges, and prepare as above.

=Grapefruit coupe.= Same as orange coupe, but use a little more sugar.


MAY 9

     BREAKFAST
       Orange juice
       Omelet with cepes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Crab ravigote
       Consomme in cups
       Chicken a la King
       Knickerbocker salad
       Baba au rhum
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree of white beans, Soubise
       Fillet of bass, Duglere
       Rack of lamb, Montjo
       Sybil potatoes
       Artichokes, Hollandaise
       Chiffonnade salad
       Peach Norelli
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Knickerbocker salad.= On a long leaf of romaine salad put one slice of
grapefruit, then one slice of orange, and so on until the leaf is full.
Then put four fresh strawberries on top, cover with French dressing and
garnish with whipped cream. Serve on individual plates.

=Puree of white beans, Soubise.= Soak two pounds of white beans in cold
water over night. Then put on fire with two quarts of water, six whole
white onions, one bouquet garni, one ham bone, and two pounds of veal
bones. Season with salt; and skim when it comes to a boil. When the
beans are soft remove the bouquet garni, ham and veal bones, strain the
rest through a fine sieve, and put back on the fire. Bring to a boil,
and stir in three ounces of butter, adding it little by little. Season
with salt and pepper, and if too thick add a little bouillon. Serve
separate, some small squares of bread fried in butter.

=Crab ravigote.= Mix the meat of one boiled crab with a cup of Tartar
sauce and a little Cayenne pepper. With this fill four Eastern crab
shells. These shells are smaller and daintier than the Pacific Coast
variety, and can be obtained from first-class grocers. Sprinkle the tops
with finely chopped parsley, then lay a band of pimento across the
center, parallel this with chopped yolk of egg on one side, and with
chopped whites on the other, and fringe the whole with chopped parsley.
Serve with quartered lemon and parsley.

=Fillet of bass, Duglere.= On a buttered platter put four fillets of
bass, and season with salt and pepper. Sprinkle with a half of an onion,
chopped fine, and a little chopped parsley, tarragon and chervil. Peel
and chop two tomatoes and spread over the top of the fish. Put around
the platter a little brown gravy and one-half glass of white wine. A
spoonful of meat extract diluted with warm water may be used in place of
the gravy if desired. Put a small piece of butter on top of each fillet,
then place the platter in a moderate oven and bake for about thirty-five
minutes. Serve on the same platter.

=Rack of lamb, Montjo.= Roast a rack of lamb, and serve with sauce
Madere, to which has been added a can of French mushrooms and some
stuffed olives.

=Omelet with cepes.= Melt two ounces of butter in an omelet pan, then
add a can of sliced cepes, season with salt and pepper, and fry them.
Then add twelve beaten eggs, and make the omelet. Pour some brown gravy
around the omelet. Cream or tomato sauce may be used, if desired.


MAY 10

     BREAKFAST
       Cherries
       Poached eggs on toast
       Broiled bacon
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Crab meat in cream
       Radishes
       Loin of lamb chops, jardiniere
       Souffle potatoes
       Cold artichokes, mustard sauce
       Assorted cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Valentienne
       Salted almonds
       Lake Tahoe trout, meuniere
       Chicken saute, Montpensier
       Duchesse potatoes
       Jets de houblons
       Dandelion salad
       Dartois Chantilly
       Coffee

=Loin of lamb chops, jardiniere.= Season four lamb chops with salt and
pepper, roll in oil, and broil. Then place on a platter, cover with
Madeira sauce, and garnish with bouquets of fresh vegetables; such as
peas in butter, cauliflower Hollandaise; or asparagus tips, string
beans, young carrots, etc. Also add some kind of potatoes.

=Consomme Valentienne.= Make some small dumplings of cream puff paste
and boil in salt water for two minutes. Cook some lettuce, cut Julienne
style, in consomme. Boil some Italian paste. Serve equal parts of each
in boiling consomme.

=Suggestions and recipes for preserves, jellies and pickles.= For jelly
select your fruit before it is too ripe, as the flavor will then be much
better. Put it on the stove and bring to a heat, to facilitate the easy
extraction of the juice. Have a funnel-shaped bag made of flannel, to
strain the juice through. The first time it is strained use a wire sieve
with a revolving wire to crush the fruit. The juice should always be
strained twice, and the second time if the flannel bag is used, and it
is allowed to hang over night and drip, it will be much clearer. Put on
the juice over a good fire and allow it to come to a heat, then add the
sugar, which should be first heated in the oven. Boil rapidly in a pan
with a very large bottom, so that as much surface can be on the stove as
possible. If it is desired that the color be light add a little
gelatine. From fifteen to twenty minutes is long enough to boil it, but
it should not stop boiling during this time. Better success will
probably be had if the jelly is cooked in small quantities. After
pouring the jelly in glasses set in the hot sun until set, and then
cover with melted paraffine.

If corn starch be put in the juice before adding the sugar it will make
it clearer. Use two teaspoonfuls in two tablespoonfuls of water, to
three pints of juice. A teaspoonful of sugar on top of jelly, in the
glass, prevents moulding. (To one pint of juice 11/2 lbs. sugar).

=Preserves.= Small stone jars are best for preserves. If glass jars are
used they should be wrapped in paper to exclude the light. To prevent
preserves from sugaring add a little tartaric acid after they are
cooked.

=Pickles.= Cider vinegar is best for pickles. If vinegar is too strong
dilute it with water. The pickles should be tightly sealed to prevent
the air reaching the vinegar, as this kills it. The vinegar should
always be poured on hot, just as it comes to the first scald--never
allowing it to boil.

Never put up pickles in anything that has held grease; and never let
them freeze. If pickles are put into brine it should be strong enough to
bear an egg. To make the brine, use a heaping pint of salt to each
gallon of water. Put the pickles in bottles, and seal while the brine is
hot. A half bushel of grape leaves added to the barrel of salt pickles
will keep them sound and firm. A slice of horseradish added to each jar
or bottle of vinegar pickles will keep the vinegar clear.


MAY 11

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Sardines in oil
       Chicken broth in cups
       Fried tomcods, Tartar sauce
       Broiled honeycomb tripe, Chili sauce
       Browned mashed potatoes
       Field and beet salad
       Lemon meringue pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage sante
       Crab meat, Suzette
       Roast ribs of beef, Yorkshire pudding
       Stewed corn
       French peas
       Chiffonnade salad
       Grapefruit coupe
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Broiled honeycomb tripe, Chili sauce.= Roll four pieces of well
seasoned boiled tripe in oil, then in fresh bread crumbs, and then
broil. Heat one-half bottle of Chili sauce, pour on a platter and lay
the tripe on top.

=Preserves. Amount of fruit required.= Seven and one-half pounds of
cherries and seven and one-half pounds of sugar will make one gallon of
preserves.

Fourteen pounds of berries and fourteen pounds of sugar will make five
quarts of jam.

Two quarts of stemmed currants will make two pints of juice. Added to
two pounds of sugar it will make three tumblers of jelly.

Always wash strawberries before removing the hulls, and then put in a
colander to drain. Always select strawberries for their flavor rather
than for their size.

=Strawberry preserves.= Prepare a small quantity at a time to secure the
best results. Make a syrup in a kettle with two pounds of cane sugar and
half a cup of water. Drop the berries into it and cook rapidly for
twenty minutes. Do not stir, but remove any scum which may arise. After
twenty minutes remove the berries and put in tumblers. Cook the syrup
to a jelly and fill up the tumblers with it. Allow to become cold before
covering.

=Blackberry jam.= Four quarts of blackberries, two quarts of nice cooked
apples, four quarts of cane sugar. Boil for twenty-five or thirty
minutes.

=Raspberry or loganberry jam.= In making raspberry jam, if two-thirds
red raspberries and one-third currants are used the jam will be better,
as the berries alone do not contain enough acid. Loganberries are
sufficiently acid. Mash the fruit well, and boil it for twenty minutes.
Weigh, and to every pound of fruit use three-quarters of a pound of
sugar. Boil until when some is placed on a saucer no juice will gather
around it. Put in small jars or glasses, in the same manner as jelly.

=Canned strawberries.= Wash well before hulling. Weigh, and to each
pound of berries add one-quarter pound of cane sugar. Boil for fifteen
minutes. Put in pint jars and seal while hot.

=Apple jelly.= Take ripe Belleflower, or other fine-flavored cooking
apples. Cut in quarters and remove the cores. Drop in water as fast as
cut, to prevent them from turning black. Add a little lemon juice to the
water. When all are ready drain off the water, and put the apples in a
copper preserving kettle. Pour a little water over them and cook until
soft, then strain through a flannel bag. Boil the juice with an equal
weight of sugar, until it jells, and pour while hot into jelly glasses.

=Blackberry jelly.= Heat the berries to the boiling point, mash, and
strain through a flannel bag. Add an equal weight of sugar to the juice,
and boil briskly for twenty-five minutes. Pour into glasses while hot.


MAY 12

     BREAKFAST
       Nutmeg melon
       Shirred eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Ecrevisses en buisson
       Chicken patties, Toulouse
       Broiled Virginia ham
       French fried potatoes
       Panachee salad
       Savarin with strawberries
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Ravioli
       Queen olives
       Shad roe, Bordelaise
       Fillet of beef, Lombarde
       Cold asparagus, vinaigrette
       Souffle pudding, Dame Blanche
       Coffee

=Chicken patties, Toulouse.= Fill some patty shells with Toulouse
filling, prepared in the same manner as for Vol au vent Toulouse.

=Broiled Virginia ham.= Use either boiled or raw Virginia ham. Cut in
thin slices, broil, and serve on platter, garnished with parsley in
branches.

=Panachee salad.= This is a mixed salad of two kinds of vegetables such as
beans and flageolets, peas and carrots, potatoes and lettuce, beets and
field, etc.

=Consomme Ravioli.= Make some small raviolis and boil them for five or
ten minutes in consomme.

=Shad roe, Bordelaise.= Season four roes with salt and pepper, roll in
oil, and broil; when done put on a platter. Parboil one-half pound of
beef marrow, slice very thin, and lay on top of the broiled roe. Cover
with Bordelaise sauce.

=Fillet of beef, Lombarde.= Roast tenderloin of beef, sauce Madere,
garnished with stuffed tomatoes and potato croquettes.

=Souffle pudding, Dame Blanche.= One-quarter pound of butter,
one-quarter pound of sugar, three ounces of flour, one pint of milk, the
yolks of eight eggs, the whites of eight eggs, and three ounces of
ground blanched almonds. Put the almonds in boiling water for one
second, then immediately put them into cold water, then remove the
skins, and chop them very fine. Mix the butter, flour and sugar into a
hard batter. Put the milk and the almonds on the stove to boil, then add
the batter, and stir until it becomes a creamy mixture. Then remove from
the fire, and add the yolks one by one, mixing well. Beat the whites of
eggs to snow, and mix with the rest. Put in a buttered mould and bake in
a moderate oven for about forty minutes. Serve hot, with cream sauce to
which chopped almonds have been added.


MAY 13

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apple with cream
       Griddle cakes
       Maple syrup
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Strained onion soup
       Croutons Parmesanne
       Pickelsteiner stew
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Turinoise      Salted Brazil nuts
       Sand dabs, David
       Chicken saute, au Madere
       String beans in butter
       Persillade potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Peaches Bordaloue
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Croutons Parmesanne.= Four yolks of eggs, two ounces of grated Parmesan
cheese, one-half ounce of salt, a pinch of Cayenne pepper, and the
whites of three eggs. Beat well together the yolks of eggs, grated
cheese, salt and Cayenne pepper. Then add the whites of eggs, beaten
very hard. Put in a buttered pan and bake in a moderate oven. Cut in
diamond shapes while warm.

=Pickelsteiner stew.= Two pounds of veal, two pounds of shoulder of
lamb, and two pounds of pork cut in pieces one and one-half inches
square. Put in a saute pan with two ounces of butter, season with salt
and pepper, and cook until brown; then put in casserole with an onion
chopped fine, and let it become brown, then add one-half cup of flour;
one pint of puree of tomatoes; one quart of bouillon, stock, or hot
water, and a bouquet garni. Cover, and cook for half an hour; then add
two pounds of potatoes cut in one inch squares, and cook until soft.
Serve in casserole, or individual cocotte dishes.

=Potage Turinoise.= One quart of puree of tomatoes and two quarts of
consomme, mixed. Garnish with cooked spaghetti cut one inch long. Serve
about two cupfuls of grated cheese separate.

=Salted Brazil nuts.= Roast in oven one pound of shelled Brazil nuts
until they are brown. Then rub them together to loosen the second skin,
which should be removed. Wet them with a little melted gum Arabic, and
sprinkle with about an ounce of fine table salt. Stir until dry.

=Sand dabs, David.= Salt and pepper four sand dabs, roll in flour, and
fry in butter. Then place on platter and sprinkle with chopped parsley
and the juice of one lemon. Put two ounces of fresh butter in the frying
pan, add one-half cup of fresh bread crumbs, and fry until golden
yellow. Pour over the fish.

=Chicken saute, au Madere.= Joint a spring chicken, season with salt and
pepper. Put a small piece of butter in a frying pan, heat, and add the
chicken. When nice and brown sprinkle with a spoonful of flour and brown
again. Then add a half glass of Madeira wine, simmer a few minutes, add
a cupful of stock or bouillon, and a spoonful of meat extract, and boil
for five minutes. Dress the chicken on a platter, reduce the sauce one
half, season well, and strain through a fine cloth or sieve. Before
pouring over the chicken add a spoonful of dry sherry wine.

=Peaches Bourdaloue.= Prepare in the same manner as Pears Bourdaloue.


MAY 14

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberry preserves
       Scrambled eggs, asparagus tips
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Alligator pear cocktail
       Broiled Alaska black codfish
       Maitre d'hotel potatoes
       Fricadellen
       Spinach with eggs
       Banana coupe
       Macaroons
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Diable
       Ripe California olives
       Boiled salmon, Fidgi
       Saddle of lamb, Carnot
       Watercress salad
       Omelette soufflee a la vanille
       Coffee

=Alligator pear cocktail.= Scoop out the inside of one large, or two
small, ripe alligator pears and cut in small pieces. Add one-half cup of
tomato ketchup, one-half teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, one-half
teaspoonful of lemon juice, a little salt and paprika, a dash of Tabasco
sauce, and last of all, one-half cup of cream. Mix lightly, and serve in
glasses set in ice. The cocktails should be very cold.

=Fricadellen (Balls of cooked meat).= Use any kind of meat that may be
left over, such as boiled beef, roast lamb, etc. Chop very fine. To each
two pounds of meat add one chopped onion fried in butter, one cup of
bread crumbs, two whole eggs, and some chopped parsley. Season with salt
and pepper and a little grated nutmeg. Mix well, and make into small
balls, like Hamburger. Roll them in bread crumbs, and fry in pan, with
melted butter. When well browned serve on a platter with any kind of
brown gravy, or tomato sauce, or brown butter.

=Consomme Diable.= Cut three thin slices of bread, as for sandwiches,
and spread with two cups of grated Parmesan or Swiss cheese, that has
been mixed with the yolks of two eggs and plenty of Cayenne pepper. Bake
in a hot oven until brown. Cut in small squares or circles, and serve on
a napkin on a platter. Serve the consomme very hot.

=Boiled salmon, Fidgi.= Boil the salmon and serve on a napkin, garnished
with small round boiled potatoes, quartered lemons, and parsley in
branches. Serve sauce Fidgi separate.

=Sauce Fidgi.= One cup of sauce Hollandaise and one cup of sauce Riche,
mixed with one spoonful of melted meat extract. Season well.

=Saddle of lamb, Carnot.= Roast saddle of lamb, with sauce Madere.
Garnish the saddle with six stuffed fresh mushrooms and Parisian
potatoes.


MAY 15

     BREAKFAST
       Cantaloupe
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs ministerielle
       Koenigsberger klobs
       Mashed potatoes
       Stewed tomatoes
       Ginger snaps
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Fontange
       Radishes
       Fillet of sole, Doria
       Tenderloin of beef, Brillat Savarin
       Spinach in cream
       Lettuce salad
       Strawberry ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Koenigsberger klobs.= With a medium-fine meat chopper cut six ounces of
shoulder of lamb, six ounces of shoulder of veal, and ten ounces of fat
and lean pork. Simmer one chopped onion and six shallots in butter, and
add to the meat. Season with salt, pepper, a little grated nutmeg and
Cayenne pepper, and chopped parsley. Add a glassful of water, one dozen
chopped anchovies, a little chopped garlic, two raw eggs, and some
chives, chopped fine. Roll into small round balls about one inch in
diameter. Bring two quarts of thin caper sauce to a boil, and boil the
meat balls in it for about a half hour. Serve in a deep dish with the
sauce.

=Ginger snaps.= Work one-half pound of sugar and one-quarter pound of
butter together until creamy. Then add one egg, and work well again. Add
one gill of molasses, one teaspoonful of powdered ginger, one-half ounce
of soda dissolved in a gill of water; and mix in lightly one pound of
flour. Roll out about one-eighth inch thick, and cut with a round cutter
the size desired. Put them in a buttered pan, brush with egg, and bake
in a moderate oven.

=Potage Fontange.= Make a puree of white beans. Simmer some sliced
sorrel in butter, and add to the soup before serving.

=Fillet of sole, Doria.= Put four fillets of sole in a buttered saute
pan, season with salt and pepper, add a half glass of claret, and cover
with buttered paper. Bake in oven, and when done remove the fish to a
platter. Put in a casserole one ounce of butter, and heat same. Add to
the hot butter one ounce of flour, one cup of stock or bouillon, the
remainder of the claret used in cooking the fish, and one spoonful of
meat extract. Season with salt, pepper, and a teaspoonful of
Worcestershire sauce, boil for five minutes, and strain. Cut some
cucumbers in round balls and simmer in butter. Add to the sauce, and
pour over the fish.

=Tenderloin of beef, Brillat Savarin.= Roast tenderloin of beef, sauce
Madere, garnished with stuffed fresh mushrooms and stuffed tomatoes.


MAY 16

     BREAKFAST
       Blackberry jam
       Buckwheat cakes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape St. Francis
       Eggs Mirabel
       Sour schmorrbraten
       Noodles
       Roquefort cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Tosca
       Lyon sausage and pimentos
       Crab meat in chafing dish
       Chicken saute, Amphitian
       Timbale of rice, Creole
       Parisian potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Savarin au kirsch
       Demi tasse

=Eggs Mirabel.= Spread some foie gras on four pieces of toast, lay a
poached egg on top of each piece, and cover with sauce Perigueux.

=Sour schmorrbraten.= Rub a six pound piece of rump of beef with salt
and pepper, and a piece of garlic. Place in an earthern pot, add one
sliced onion, one carrot, a little celery, leeks, parsley, two bay
leaves, one sprig of thyme, and two cloves. Boil one quart of white wine
vinegar, pour over all in the earthen jar, and allow to stand in the ice
box from thirty-six to forty-eight hours. Then put two ounces of butter
in a casserole and heat. When hot put in the piece of meat and fry on
all sides until nice and brown, and then remove. Then put two spoonfuls
of flour in the casserole and allow to brown, add one glass of the
vinegar used to pickle the beef, and one and one-half quarts of bouillon
or stock. Then put in the beef again, bring to a boil, and add three
chopped tomatoes. When the beef is soft, slice fine. Reduce the sauce,
season well, and strain over the beef.

=Consomme Tosca.= Peel and cut a cucumber in small squares, boil in salt
water until soft, and then allow to become cool. Cut one-half stalk of
celery Julienne style, and cook in salt water until soft. Cook one-half
pound of large barley in salt water for two hours, and cool. Boil two
quarts of consomme, add two peeled tomatoes cut in small squares, and
boil for two minutes. Add the cucumber, celery and barley, and serve.

=Chicken saute Amphitian.= Joint a chicken, season with salt and pepper,
and saute in butter. When done place on a platter. Slice four heads of
fresh mushrooms, put in a casserole with one ounce of butter, season
with salt and pepper, and simmer till soft. Then add two sliced
truffles, and one-half glass of sherry wine, and boil for five minutes.
Then add one cup of brown gravy (meat or chicken gravy); and pour over
the chicken. Garnish the platter with four timbales of rice, a la
Creole.

=Timbales of rice, Creole.= Prepare some rice Creole, as described
December 23. Butter four timbale moulds, fill with the rice, and then
turn them out. Serve as a garnish, or as a vegetable with tomato sauce.


MAY 17

     BREAKFAST
       Apple jelly
       Omelet with onions
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, St. Pierre
       Sand dabs, miller style
       Lamb hash with peppers
       Chow chow
       Neapolitan sandwich (ice cream)
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

     DINNER
       Creme Bagration      Salted Jordan almonds
       Fillet of flounder, Circassienne
       Tournedos Nicoise      Duchesse potatoes
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Cherry pie      Coffee

=Omelet with onions.= Chop an onion very fine. Simmer slowly until soft,
in an omelet pan in one ounce of butter. Then add eight beaten eggs,
season with salt and pepper; and make the omelet in the usual manner.

=Poached eggs, St. Pierre.= Lay four poached eggs on four pieces of
anchovy toast, and cover with anchovy sauce.

=Anchovy toast. 1.= Mix one spoonful of anchovy paste with one spoonful
of butter, and spread on toast.

=2.= Soak two dozen salt anchovies in cold water for fifteen minutes.
Then dry them and force them through a fine sieve. Mix with two ounces
of butter, and spread on toast.

=Lamb hash with peppers.= Chop an onion and two green peppers, and put
in a casserole with two ounces of butter. Simmer till soft, then add two
pounds of roast or boiled lamb, cut in small squares, and one pound of
chopped boiled potatoes, one cup of bouillon or stock, a little salt and
pepper, and six red peppers (pimentos) cut in small squares. Mix well,
cover, and simmer in oven for forty minutes. Serve on a platter,
garnished with toast cut in triangles, and with chopped parsley on top.
If desired, a spoonful of Worcestershire sauce may be added when mixing
the hash.

=Neapolitan sandwich.= In a brick-shaped mould put three layers of ice
cream of different colors, such as pistache, vanilla and strawberry.
Freeze very hard. Make a layer of sponge cake about one-half inch thick.
Put the brick of ice cream on top of a slice of the cake, and lay
another slice of cake on top of the ice cream. Serve in slices about one
inch thick. The cake should be trimmed to the size of the brick, and
should be cut through crosswise to serve.

=Creme Bagration.= Cream of chicken with small pieces of boiled macaroni
served in it.

=Fillet of flounder, Circassienne.= Put four fillets of flounders in a
flat buttered pan, season with salt and pepper. Lay a slice of cucumber
on top of each fillet, then one slice of peeled tomatoes, then a few
slices of pickles and a teaspoonful of capers. Season with salt and
pepper again, add a glass of white wine, and one-half ounce of butter on
top of each piece of fish, and bake in the oven. Serve hot, direct from
the oven.

=Tournedos Nicoise.= Broil, or saute in butter, a small tenderloin
steak. Dish up on a platter, with Madeira sauce with stuffed olives.

=Stuffed olives.= Cut the stones out of a dozen large green olives, and
fill with chicken force meat (chicken dumplings). Boil in bouillon,
stock, water, white sauce, or any other kind of sauce. Stuffed olives
are used principally in sauces, or as a garnish for meats and fish.


MAY 18

     BREAKFAST
       California marmalade
       Boiled eggs
       Butter toast
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Assorted hors d'oeuvres
       Clam broth, Bellevue
       Crab meat, au gratin
       Broiled mutton chops
       French fried potatoes
       Sliced tomatoes, French dressing
       Lillian Russell
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme aux eclairs
       Fillet of sole, Lord Curzon
       Roast chicken
       Potato croquettes
       Cold artichokes, mustard sauce
       Broiled fresh mushrooms on toast
       Orange coupe
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=California marmalade.= One grapefruit, one orange, and two lemons.
Shave the fruit very thin, discarding the seeds only. Pack lightly into
an earthern vessel, add just water enough to cover, and allow to stand
from twelve to twenty-four hours. Then bring to a boil, and simmer for
fifteen minutes. Return to the earthern vessel and allow to stand for
another twenty-four hours. Then measure, and add an equal quantity of
sugar, return to stove and boil until it jells. Put up in jelly glasses.

=Lillian Russell.= Cut a nice cantaloupe in half, remove the seeds, and
set each half in cracked ice. Fill with ice cream, with a sprinkle of
maraschino on top.

=Consomme aux eclairs.= Make some small eclairs about one inch long.
Chop a little white meat of chicken very fine, add some salt and a
little whipped cream, and mix well. Split the eclairs and fill with the
prepared chicken meat. Serve on a napkin. Have the consomme very hot,
with a little Cayenne pepper in it.

=Fillet of sole, Lord Curzon.= Cut one green pepper, three heads of
fresh mushrooms, and one peeled tomato in small squares. Put in a saute
pan with one ounce of butter, and simmer. Lay four fillets of flounder
in a frying pan, season with salt and pepper and a chopped shallot,
spread the simmered vegetables on top, add one glass of white wine,
sprinkle with a spoonful of curry powder, cover, and bake ten minutes.
Then remove the fish to a platter. To the pan add one cupful of
Hollandaise sauce and one and one-half cupfuls of tomato sauce. Mix well
and pour over the fish. Now place the platter with the fish and sauce in
a very hot oven and brown slightly.


MAY 19

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Waffles
       Honey in the comb
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Eggs, Waterloo
       Breaded pork chops, tomato sauce
       Lorraine potatoes
       Cole slaw
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Veloutine aurore
       Lake Tahoe trout, meuniere
       Cucumber salad
       Leg of lamb, Renaissance
       Chateau potatoes
       Millionaire punch
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs, Waterloo.= Spread some foie gras on four pieces of toast; place a
poached egg on each, and cover with Bearnaise sauce.

=Veloutine aurore.= Mix two pints of veloute of chicken soup with one
pint of puree of tomatoes.

=Leg of lamb, Renaissance.= Garnish a roast leg of lamb with small
croustades filled with chickens' livers saute au Madere, and artichokes
bottoms filled with macedoine of vegetables. Serve sauce Perigueux
separate.

=Millionaire punch.= Sliced mixed fruits and a few berries soaked in
Chartreuse. Serve in punch glasses with lemon water ice on top.

=Raspberry juice.= Mash some clean ripe raspberries to a pulp, and allow
to stand over night. Then strain through a jelly bag, and to each pint
of juice add one cupful of granulated sugar. Boil for three minutes, and
seal hermetically in bottles, while hot. Other berries or fruit may be
prepared in the same manner. This is a good substitute for brandy or
wine, for puddings or sauces. It also makes a nice drink when added to a
glass of ice water.

=Boiled cider.= Put five quarts of sweet newly-made cider, before
fermentation has set in, in a granite kettle, put on the fire and boil
slowly until reduced to one quart. Seal in a bottle while hot. For mince
pies, fruit cake, etc., use about a gill to a quart of mince meat, or
cake dough.

=Peach with brandy sauce.= Bring one pint of water and one pound of
sugar to the boiling point, add four peeled peaches, and cook slowly
until they are soft. Remove the peaches to a bowl. Reduce the syrup
one-half, add a large pony of brandy, and pour over the peaches.


MAY 20

     BREAKFAST
       Quince jelly
       Oatmeal with cream
       Crescents
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Eggs en cocotte, Porto Rico
       Filet mignon, Marechale
       New peas
       Lettuce salad
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Consomme Sarah Bernhardt
       Ripe California olives
       Boiled Tahoe trout, Vatchette
       Broiled Porterhouse steak, Bercy
       French fried potatoes
       String beans
       Sliced tomatoes, mayonnaise
       Peaches, brandy sauce
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs en cocotte, Porto Rico.= Butter four cocotte dishes. Cut a peeled
tomato in small squares and distribute in the four dishes, season with
salt and pepper, and simmer for two minutes. Then add a slice of boiled
ham cut in small dices, and a few fresh-cooked asparagus tips. Break an
egg in each dish, season with salt and pepper, put a small piece of
butter on top, and bake in oven for about five minutes.

=Filet mignon, Marechale.= Broil or saute four small tenderloin of beef
steaks, and season well. Slice four heads of fresh mushrooms and chop
four shallots. Put them in a casserole and simmer until done, then add
two truffles sliced fine, and a small glass of sherry wine, and reduce
until nearly dry. Then add two cupfuls of brown gravy, and cook again
for five minutes, season with salt and Cayenne pepper, and pour over the
fillets, on a platter.

=Consomme Sarah Bernhardt.= Consomme tapioca with small lobster
dumplings. Cook a few leaves of fresh tarragon in clear consomme, and
strain into the consomme tapioca before serving.

=Boiled Tahoe trout, Vatchette.= Put two nice Lake Tahoe trout in cold
water, with a little salt, one sliced onion, one carrot, a bay leaf and
a clove, some parsley and chervil. Bring to the boiling point, then set
on side of the range for fifteen minutes. Serve on a napkin, with small
round boiled potatoes, parsley in branches, and quartered lemons. Serve
separate a sauce formed by mixing one cup of Hollandaise sauce, one and
one-half cupfuls of tomato sauce, and a few chopped truffles.

=Broiled Porterhouse steak, Bercy.= Season a four pound Porterhouse
steak with salt and pepper, roll it in oil, and broil. When nearly done
place on a china platter and put on top a mixture of three ounces of
butter, four shallots chopped very fine, a spoonful of chopped parsley,
a little chives sliced very fine, a spoonful of meat extract, and the
juice of two lemons. Put in oven and cook for five minutes. Garnish with
plenty of well-washed watercress, and three lemons cut in half.


MAY 21

     BREAKFAST
       Pineapple preserves
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Antipasto
       Consomme in cups
       Beef a la mode
       Baked potatoes
       Hearts of romaine salad
       Strawberry cream pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree Camelia
       Radishes.      Salted almonds
       Boiled salmon, Hollandaise
       Potatoes natural
       Roast tame duckling
       Apple sauce
       Potatoes au gratin
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Chocolate ice cream
       Lady fingers      Coffee

=Puree Camelia.= Boil two pounds of green peas in one quart of chicken
broth; with the addition of a bouquet garni. When the peas are soft
remove the bouquet, and strain the soup through a fine sieve. Put back
in casserole, bring to a boil, season with salt and white pepper; and
add three ounces of sweet butter, stirring well to ensure its being
melted.

=Beef a la mode.= Take about five pounds of rump of beef and lard it
with a special larding needle with fresh larding pork. Season with salt
and pepper, and lay in earthen pot. Cover with half claret and half
water, add one sliced onion, one sliced carrot, one bouquet garni; and
allow to stand for twenty-four hours. In a casserole put one spoonful of
melted butter, and when the casserole is hot put the piece of beef in it
and fry brown on both sides. Put the beef on a platter, and add to the
casserole one ounce of fresh butter and two spoonfuls of flour, let it
become brown, then add the wine, water and vegetables used in the
earthen pot, bring to the boiling point, put the beef in it and simmer
until the beef is soft. Place the beef on a platter, and strain the
sauce through a fine sieve. Garnish the beef with carrots, onions
glaces, peas and potatoes.


MAY 22

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh blackberries with cream
       Scrambled eggs with bacon
       Southern corn pone
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of raw beef
       Clam broth en Bellevue
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Potatoes au gratin
       Chiffonnade salad
       Strawberries Parisienne
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme, quenelles Doria
       Broiled halibut, Alcide
       Smoked beef tongue with spinach
       Baked potatoes
       Sorbet Eau de Vie de Dantzig
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Canape of raw beef.= Chop one-half pound of lean fresh beef very fine,
and season with salt and pepper. Spread four slices of rye bread, first
with sweet butter, and then with the chopped beef. Place on a napkin and
garnish with lettuce leaves filled with chopped onions, sliced pickles,
ripe olives, and two lemons cut in half.

=Strawberries, Parisienne.= Put some nice ripe strawberries in a bowl
and put in the ice box until very cold. Make a sauce by mixing one-half
pint of strawberry pulp, made by passing some strawberries through a
fine strainer or sieve; one-quarter pound of powdered sugar, the juice
of one lemon, and a half pint of whipped cream. Do not whip the cream
too hard. When well mixed pour over the strawberries, and serve on
cracked ice.

=Consomme, quenelles Doria.= Make a cream puff paste. When cold, form
into small balls the size of a pea, and fry in swimming lard. Serve on a
napkin with hot consomme.

=Broiled halibut, Alcide.= Cut the halibut in slices one and one-half
inches thick, season with salt and pepper, roll them in oil, and broil.
To a Colbert sauce add two chopped hard-boiled eggs, and pour over the
fish; which has been placed on a platter. Garnish with six small fried
smelts.

=Southern corn pone.= Mix one quart of yellow corn meal with cold water,
into a soft dough. Add one teaspoonful of salt, a little melted lard,
and a little sugar. Shape with the hands into oval cakes, so that the
impression of the fingers will show. Bake in a well-greased pan in a
very hot oven.

=Smoked beef tongue with spinach.= Put a smoked tongue in a casserole
and cover with cold water, bring to a boil, and then set at the side of
the stove and simmer slowly until soft. Cook some spinach English style,
and place on platter. Slice the beef tongue and place on top of the
spinach. Serve with it either sauce Madere, Champagne sauce, or plain
bouillon.

=Sorbet Eau de Vie de Dantzig.= One pound of sugar, three pints of
water, the juice of two lemons and one orange, and the whites of two
eggs beaten with one gill of maraschino. Freeze, and serve in sorbet
glasses, with Eau de Vie de Dantzig on top. Pour the Eau de Vie on
immediately before serving, so the silver leaves will show.


MAY 23

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced apricots with cream
       Plain shirred eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Hongroise
       Calf's liver saute, sauce Robert
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       String bean salad
       Raspberry cream pie
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Cooper soup
       Queen olives
       Crab meat, Suzette
       Roast capon, au jus
       Potato croquettes
       Cold artichokes, mayonnaise
       Caramel ice cream
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Eggs, Hongroise.= Boil a cup of rice, and spread on a platter, lay four
poached eggs on top. Place some chickens' livers, that have been cooked
saute in butter, around the rice; and cover all with sauce Perigueux.

=Calf's liver saute, sauce Robert.= Slice some calf's liver
three-quarters of an inch thick. Season with salt and pepper, roll in
flour, and fry in melted butter. Place on a platter and cover with sauce
Robert.

=Sauce Robert.= Slice two onions very fine and put in casserole with two
ounces of butter. Simmer slowly until soft; then add a spoonful of flour
and simmer again. Then add one pint of bouillon, one spoonful of
vinegar, two spoonfuls of French mustard, one spoonful of meat extract,
and some salt and pepper. Cook for thirty minutes. Before serving add
some chopped parsley. Serve with boiled beef, tongue, etc.

=String bean salad.= Boil two quarts of cleaned string beans in salt
water. Allow to become cool, place in salad bowl, season with salt and
pepper, add two spoonfuls of white wine vinegar, five of olive oil, and
a little chopped parsley. Mix well.

=Strawberry cream pie.= Line a plate with pie dough and bake it. (Put
some white beans in the pie so it will not lose its shape while baking.
When done remove the beans.) Place a handful of biscuit crumbs in the
bottom, and fill with strawberries. Dust with powdered sugar, and
garnish with whipped cream on top.

=Raspberry cream pie.= Make in the same manner as strawberry cream pie.

=Banana cream pie.= Use sliced bananas, and make in the same manner as
strawberry cream pie.

=Cooper soup.= Slice three large onions and put in casserole with two
ounces of butter. Cover, and simmer until the onions are done. Then add
one and one-half quarts of bouillon, consomme or chicken broth; season
with salt and pepper, and boil for thirty minutes. Strain. Serve toasted
French bread and grated Parmesan cheese separate.

=Caramel ice cream.= Boil one and one-half pounds of sugar with one pint
of water until slightly brown. Add two quarts of milk and stir until the
sugar is dissolved. Mix one pint of milk with the yolks of eight eggs
and stir gradually into the boiling milk until well mixed. Remove from
the fire, add one quart of cream, and freeze.


MAY 24

     BREAKFAST
       Pineapple preserves
       Breakfast sausages
       Flannel cakes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Fried smelts, Tartar sauce
       English mutton chops, XX Century Club
       Celery root, beet and field salad
       Cottage cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme aux perles de Nizam
       Fillet of perch, St. Charles
       Shoulder of lamb, baker's oven style
       Romaine salad
       Baba au rhum
       Coffee

=English mutton chop, XX Century Club.= Secure from the butcher four
English mutton chops with the kidneys. Season with salt and pepper, roll
in oil, and broil. Place on a platter and cover with sauce Madere.
Garnish with four red peppers (pimentos) stuffed with puree of sweet
potatoes.

=Cottage cheese.= Let two quarts of milk become sour. Put in a cheese
cloth and allow to hang for twenty-four hours, so all the water can
drain out. Then put the curd in a salad bowl, season with salt and
pepper, mix well until smooth; or strain it through a fine sieve; then
add a cup of sweet cream, and some chives cut very fine.

=Consomme aux perles de Nizam.= Perles de Nizam is large pearl tapioca.
Boil two quarts of consomme, then add slowly one-half pound of pearl
tapioca, and cook slowly until soft.

=Fillet of perch, St. Charles.= Cut four fillets of perch and place in
saute pan with butter, salt, white pepper, and one-half glass of white
wine. Cover with buttered paper and simmer for ten minutes, then remove
the fish to a platter. Put in the same saute pan one pint of white wine
sauce, and boil for five minutes. Strain, and add a few slices of
truffle, and the tail of a lobster cut in thin slices. Pour over the
fish, and sprinkle some chopped lobster corals over all.

=Shoulder of lamb, baker's oven style.= Season a shoulder of lamb with
salt and pepper, and rub with a piece of garlic. Then place in a deep
earthen flat pan, or a roasting pan about two inches deep. Slice eight
potatoes to the size of a silver dollar, and slice six onions very fine.
Mix together and put on top and around the piece of lamb. Add a bay leaf
and two cloves to the pan, sprinkle with salt, fresh-ground pepper, and
some chopped parsley, add two quarts of water, and put in a baker's
oven; or in the stove oven; and simmer slowly for about two and one-half
hours. Do not cover while cooking, and if the stove oven is used do not
have it too hot. Serve from the pan in which it was cooked.


MAY 25

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Scrambled eggs, Marseillaise
       Crab meat, Louise
       Corned beef hash, au gratin
       Lettuce salad with French dressing
       Banana cream pie
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Cream soup, a l'Algerienne
       Salted pecans
       Sole, Colbert
       Filet mignon, Cheron
       Olivette potatoes
       Chicory salad
       Victoria punch
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs, Marseillaise.= Peel and slice two fresh tomatoes and
put in casserole with two ounces of butter. Simmer for five minutes. Rub
the inside of a bowl with garlic, break twelve eggs in the bowl and beat
them. Add salt and pepper and half a cup of cream, pour into the
casserole and scramble in the usual manner.

=Cream soup, a l'Algerienne.= Boil two sweet potatoes, and force through
a fine sieve. Add two quarts of cream of chicken soup. If too thick add
a little plain chicken broth, or boiling milk, season well, and strain.
Before serving add two cups of boiled rice.

=Sole, Colbert.= Cut off the head of a large sole, and pull off the
black skin. Lift off the four fillets complete, spreading the two sides
apart with two toothpicks, so they will not touch. Dip in milk, then in
flour, and then in beaten eggs and fresh bread crumbs, the lower side
only. Dip the top side in milk and flour. Season well with salt and
pepper, and place in a pan with butter, and two ounces of butter on top
of the fish. Bake in the oven, basting continually until done. Then put
the sole on a platter, remove the toothpicks and fill the space with two
ounces of butter that has been mixed with salt, pepper, a little chopped
parsley, one spoonful of meat extract, and the juice of one lemon. Place
the platter in the oven just long enough to melt the butter. Garnish
with parsley in branches and lemons cut in half. The whole sole may be
fried in swimming lard instead of baking, if desired. This way is
easier, but is not the correct one.

=Filet mignon, Cheron.= Sprinkle four small tenderloin steaks with salt
and pepper, roll in oil, and broil; or saute in pan with butter. Place
on a platter, cover with Bearnaise sauce, lay a slice of truffle on top
of each, and have for each fillet one artichoke bottom filled with
macedoine of vegetables.

=Victoria punch.= Two pounds of sugar, two quarts of water, and the
juice of six oranges, mixed. Then add a small glass of rhum, a small
glass of kirsch, and a glass of sauternes. Freeze. Serve in glasses,
covered with a meringue made with the white of three eggs and one-half
pound of sugar.


MAY 26

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved pears
       Broiled salt mackerel with melted butter
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Poached Eggs, Vanderbilt
       Breaded veal cutlets, tomato sauce
       Spaghetti in cream
       Allumettes (cake)
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme aux pluches
       Ripe California olives
       Fillet of halibut, sauce Venitienne
       Roast tame duck, apple sauce
       Asparagus Hollandaise
       Potatoes au gratin
       Lettuce and grapefruit salad
       Souffle glace
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Poached eggs, Vanderbilt.= Make a puree of fresh mushrooms and spread
over toast. Lay a poached egg on top, and cover with sauce Madere.

=Breaded veal cutlets, tomato sauce.= Have your butcher cut four veal
cutlets from the leg, and about one-third of an inch thick. Season with
salt and pepper, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in
fresh bread crumbs. Heat a half cup of melted butter in a frying pan,
and fry the cutlets. Serve on a platter with tomato sauce.

=Spaghetti in cream.= Boil half a pound of spaghetti in two quarts of
water seasoned with a little salt, and when soft drain off the water.
Melt an ounce of butter in a casserole, add one-half spoonful of flour,
one-half cup of boiling milk, and one-half cup of cream, season with
salt and pepper, and boil for five minutes. Pour over the spaghetti,
adding a half cup of grated Parmesan or Swiss cheese.

=Consomme aux pluches.= Slice a head of lettuce and two leaves of
tarragon very fine. Boil in two quarts of consomme for thirty minutes.
Add some chervil before serving.

=Fillet of halibut, sauce Venitienne.= Put four fillets of halibut in a
buttered saute pan, season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of
white wine, cover with buttered manilla paper, and bake in the oven for
fifteen minutes. Then place the fish on a platter, put in the saute pan
one pint of white wine sauce, and simmer for a few minutes. Then add two
spoonfuls of green coloring, and strain over fish.

=Sauce Venitienne.= Use any kind of white meat or fish sauce, depending
upon what it is to be used with, and color with green vegetable
coloring. Use enough color to make the sauce bright green.

=Souffle glace (plain).= Whip a pint of rich cream. Beat the yolks of
four eggs with one-quarter pound of sugar, until very light, then add
the cream to it. Beat the whites of five eggs very stiff, and add to the
cream. Put into fancy paper cases, specially made for this purpose, and
freeze in the ice cream box. If you have no ice cream box, put them in a
thin vessel, cover tightly, and pack in cracked ice with rock salt mixed
with it.


MAY 27

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Shirred eggs with bananas
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs, presidential
       Frogs' legs, Greenway
       Broiled squab chicken on toast
       Souffle potatoes
       Hearts of romaine, Roquefort dressing
       Strawberries a la mode
       Lady fingers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Creme cardinal
       Radishes
       Crab meat, gourmet
       Small tenderloin steak, Fedora
       Artichokes, sauce mousseline
       Watercress, salad
       Wine jelly, au Chartreuse
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Shirred eggs with bananas.= Peel a banana and slice it very fine. Put
half and half in two buttered shirred egg dishes, and allow to become
hot. Then put two eggs in each dish, season with salt and pepper, put in
oven and cook.

=Eggs, presidential.= Boil until quite soft some left-over roasted or
boiled chicken, mix with a little cream sauce, season well, and pass
through a fine sieve. Place on artichoke bottoms, put on a buttered
dish, and set in oven to get hot. Then lay a poached egg on top, cover
with well-seasoned cream sauce, and put two slices of truffle on top.

=Frogs' legs, Greenway.= Cut a dozen frogs' legs in two, and sprinkle
with salt and pepper. Melt two ounces of butter in a saute pan, add the
frogs' legs and simmer for five minutes, then add a spoonful of flour
and simmer again for a few minutes. Then add one-half glass of white
wine, one cup of chicken broth, or any kind of clear white broth, some
chopped chives, parsley and chervil, and cook for five minutes. Before
serving season well, and bind with the yolk of one egg and one-half cup
of cream.

=Strawberries, a la mode.= Selected strawberries with vanilla ice cream
on top.

=Raspberries, a la mode.= Prepare in the same manner as strawberries a
la mode.

=Creme cardinal.= Pound the shells of two lobsters very fine, in a
mortar. Then put in a casserole with three ounces of butter, a sliced
onion and carrot, one leek and a little celery, and simmer for twenty
minutes. Take care that it does not burn, and simmer slowly. Then add
three ounces of flour, mix well, add two quarts of milk, season well
with salt and a little Cayenne pepper, boil for half an hour, and then
strain through a fine sieve or cheese cloth. Return to the casserole,
bring to a boil, and bind with the yolks of two eggs and one-half cup of
cream. Put in a soup tureen. Cut the tail of a lobster and two truffles
in small dices, put them in a casserole, season with salt and a little
Cayenne pepper, add a pony of good brandy and a pony of dry sherry,
bring to a boil, and pour into the soup.

=Small tenderloin steak, Fedora.= Season four small tenderloin steaks
with salt and pepper, roll in oil, and broil; or saute in butter. When
done place on top of a thin slice of heated, or fresh-boiled, ham, and
cover with Bordelaise sauce.


MAY 28

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberry jam
       Calf's liver and bacon
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with chestnuts
       Eggs, Columbus
       Broiled pig's feet, tomato sauce
       Mashed turnips
       Cannelons a la creme
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme, profiteroles
       Lyons sausage
       Sand dabs, Grenobloise
       Broiled chicken, Tyrolienne
       Potatoes chateau
       String beans in butter
       Chiffonnade salad
       Fresh raspberry cup
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Eggs, Columbus.= Put some green peppers in hot, swimming lard for a
minute. Then peel and cut in orange shape. Cut some pimentos in orange
shape. Heat both in warm butter, lay two of each on each poached egg on
toast.

=Cannelons a la creme.= Roll out half a pound of puff paste, that was
made with six turns, to about one-eighth inch thick. Cut in strips eight
inches long and one inch wide. Wash with egg, and roll on buttered
sticks about one inch in diameter. Place on pan and bake in moderate
oven. Remove the sticks while hot. When cold fill with sweetened whipped
cream.

=Cornets a la creme.= Same as for cannelons, but roll the strips around
cornecopia shaped sticks, or tins.

=Consomme, profiteroles.= Make a cupful of cream puff paste, add two
spoonfuls of grated cheese, put in pastry bag with round tube, and dress
on pan. Make very small, about the size of a pea. Put in oven and bake.
Serve separate with hot consomme.

=Sand dabs, Grenobloise.= Remove the skins from four sand dabs, dry with
a towel, season with salt and pepper, roll in flour, and fry in pan with
butter. Remove to a platter. Put two ounces of butter in the pan, cook
until the color of hazelnuts, and pour over the fish. Sprinkle with
chopped parsley, and lay two slices of lemon on top of each fish.

=Broiled chicken, Tyrolienne.= Cut a spring chicken in four, lay in a
deep porcelain dish, sprinkle with salt and pepper, add one shallot or
small onion, chopped fine, a little chopped parsley and tarragon, two
cloves, and half a cup of olive oil. Let it stand for one hour. Then
take out the chicken and roll in freshly made bread crumbs, and broil
slowly for fifteen minutes. Place on a platter and garnish with two
lemons cut in half, and parsley in branches. Serve remoulade sauce
separate.


MAY 29

     BREAKFAST
       Gooseberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Toast Melba
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Assorted hors d'oeuvres
       Clam broth in cups
       Fried smelts, sauce Tartar
       Asparagus Polonaise
       Cornet a la creme
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Albert
       Sardines on toast
       Boiled Lake Tahoe trout, pepper sauce
       Hollandaise potatoes
       Shad roe, Bordelaise
       Peas and carrots in cream
       Lettuce and grapefruit salad
       Jelly roll
       Demi tasse

=Potage, Albert.= Two-thirds puree of potato soup and one-third very
thick Consomme Julienne.

=Boiled lake trout, pepper sauce.= Put two trout in a fish kettle filled
with water. Season with salt, add a sliced onion, one carrot, a bouquet
garni, and a spoonful of whole black peppers tied in a cheese cloth.
Boil until done. Put the fish on a napkin, and garnish with small round
boiled potatoes, parsley in branches, and quartered lemons. Serve pepper
sauce separate.

=Pepper sauce.= Crush with a bottle on a hardwood table or marble one
spoonful of whole black peppers. Put the crushed peppers in a casserole
with a glass of white wine. Boil until nearly dry, add a pint of cream
sauce, boil a minute, and strain through a cheese cloth. Season with
salt.

=Shad roe, Bordelaise.= Place four shad roe in a buttered pan, season
with salt and pepper, put a few pieces of butter on top, put in oven and
cook for five minutes, basting all the time. Then sprinkle with three
very finely chopped shallots, a little chopped parsley, chervil and
chives, and the juice of one lemon. Bake in oven, and serve on platter
with its own sauce.

=Jelly roll.= One-half pound of flour, six eggs, one-half ounce of
baking powder, and some vanilla flavoring. Sift the flour and baking
powder together. Beat the sugar and eggs together until light, then add
the flour and flavoring, and mix. Spread very thin on paper, place in
pan and bake. When done turn over on a paper that has been dusted with
sugar. Peel the paper from the bottom of the cake at once. Spread with
some jelly or marmalade, and roll up tightly. When cold cut in slices.


MAY 30

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Fried eggs with chives
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Frogs' legs saute a sec
       Blood pudding, sauce Robert
       Mashed potatoes
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Apple turnover
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Venitienne
       Fillet of halibut, Lilloise
       Tournedos, Bayard
       Jets de houblons
       Potatoes a la Reine
       Green corn
       Hearts of romaine, egg dressing
       Mousse au chocolat
       Small cakes      Coffee

=Fried eggs with chives.= Put an ounce of butter in a frying pan, break
four eggs into the pan, season with salt and pepper, sprinkle some
chives, chopped very fine, on top of the eggs, and fry.

=Blood pudding, sauce Robert.= Get two pounds of blood pudding from the
butcher, put in frying pan with one ounce of melted butter, and fry for
about fifteen minutes. Serve on a platter covered with sauce Robert.

=Apple turnovers.= Roll out some puff paste about one-eighth inch thick.
Cut with a round cutter about four inches in diameter. Wet the edges
with water, place a spoonful of chopped apples mixed with sugar and a
little cinnamon on the center, and fold over, bringing the edges
together, press a little, wash the top with beaten eggs and bake. When
nearly done dust some powdered sugar on top, and return to oven until
glaceed.

=Consomme Venitienne.= In a bowl mix one and one-half spoonfuls of flour
with three whole eggs and a little salt. Let this run through a colander
into a quart of boiling consomme. Continue boiling for two minutes.

=Fillet of halibut, Lilloise.= Place four fillets of halibut in a
buttered pan, season with salt and pepper, add a half glass of white
wine, cover with buttered paper, and set in oven for ten minutes. Then
put the fillets on a platter, and put in the fish pan one-half pint of
white wine sauce and one-half pint of tomato sauce. Bring to a boil, and
strain. Cut two slices of bacon in strips like matches (Julienne style),
fry, and put in the sauce. Also add six leaves of tarragon chopped fine,
season well, and pour over the fish.

=Tournedos, Bayard.= Season four small tenderloin steaks with salt and
pepper. Heat two ounces of butter in a saute pan, and saute the fillets.
Dress on toast spread with foie gras. Pour over them sauce Madere, to
which has been added some sliced fresh mushrooms saute in butter.
Garnish with small round chicken croquettes, about one inch in diameter.

=Mousse au cafe.= Mix the yolks of six eggs with one-quarter pound of
syrup at about twenty-eight degrees. Put in a basin in bain-marie and
cook until it thickens. Remove from the fire and beat until cold. Add
one-half cup of strong coffee and one pint of whipped cream. Mix well,
put in mould and freeze. Serve decorated with sweetened whipped cream.

=Mousse au chocolat.= Same as above, but flavor with two ounces of
melted cocoa or chocolate, instead of coffee.


MAY 31

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Breakfast sausages with apple sauce
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Norway
       Eggs Biarritz
       English mutton chops, tavern
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Creme Congalaise
       Bass, Nicoise
       Potatoes nature
       Chicken saute, demi-deuil
       Timbale of rice
       Flageolets in butter
       Alligator pear salad
       Peach, Bourdaloue
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Canape Norway.= Spread four pieces of toast with butter, lay thin
slices of smoked salmon on top, trim to diamond shape, and dress on
napkin. Garnish with parsley and lemon.

=Eggs, Biarritz.= Spread four pieces of toast with anchovy butter, lay
on each piece a hard-boiled egg cut in two. Put a stuffed olive on each
half of egg.

=Creme Congalaise.= Add a spoonful of curry powder to a cream of chicken
soup. Also add the breast of a boiled chicken cut in small dices.

=Bass, Nicoise.= Cut a three-pound bass in slices about one inch thick.
Put in a buttered fish pan, season with salt and pepper, spread over the
top one-half teaspoonful of chopped garlic, four peeled and chopped
tomatoes, some chopped parsley, and three ounces of butter in small
bits. Put in oven and bake for twenty minutes. Serve from pan, direct
from the oven. Other large fish may be prepared in the same manner.

=Chicken saute, demi-deuil.= Cut a spring chicken in four, season with
salt and pepper, put in a saute pan with two ounces of butter, and
simmer for five minutes, without allowing to get color. Then sprinkle
with a spoonful of flour, and simmer again. Then add a cup of chicken
broth or white bouillon, and boil for ten minutes. Then remove the
chicken to a platter. Mix one-half cup of thick cream and the yolks of
two eggs, and let it run into the boiling sauce. Season well, and
strain. Slice one-half can of French mushrooms and two truffles, and add
to the sauce. Heat, and pour over the chicken.

=Timbale of rice.= Make a risotto. Butter four timbale moulds, fill with
risotto, and turn over on a platter. Serve with any desired sauce, such
as supreme, cream, tomato, Madeira, etc. Or serve plain, as a garnish.


JUNE 1

     BREAKFAST
       Blackberry jelly
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Little Neck clams on half shell
       Consomme in cups
       Cheese straws
       Fried calf's brains, tomato sauce
       Potatoes au gratin
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Raspberries a la mode
       Sponge cake      Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Rocol soup, a la Russe
       Boiled salmon, sauce diplomate
       Larded tenderloin of beef, St. Martin
       Green corn
       Fresh Lima beans
       Potatoes Marquise
       Chicory salad with a chapon
       Vanilla plombiere
       Macaroons      Coffee

=Fried calf's brains, tomato sauce.= Cut two cold boiled calf's brains
in two lengthwise, season with salt and pepper, roll in flour, then in
beaten eggs, and then in fresh bread crumbs. Fry in very hot swimming
fat, and serve on napkin with parsley and lemon. Serve tomato sauce
separate.

=Boiled calf's brains.= Let two fresh calf's brains soak in cold water
for an hour, so the blood will run out. Then remove the skin with the
fingers. Put in a casserole, cover with cold water, add salt, a bouquet
garni, one-half of an onion, sliced, one-half of a carrot, sliced, and
one-half of a wine-glassful of vinegar. Bring to the boiling point,
skim, and let slowly simmer for ten minutes. Remove from the water and
serve on napkin, with parsley and lemon. Serve melted butter, or other
sauce, separate.

=Rocol soup a la Russe.= In a casserole put one veal knuckle, one pound
of shin of beef, two slices of raw bacon, two slices of raw ham, and one
soup hen. Cover with four quarts of water, add a spoonful of salt, bring
to a boil, and skim well. Then add two carrots, two onions, two turnips,
and a bouquet garni. As the meats become soft remove and cut in small
squares. Then strain the broth through a cheese cloth into another
casserole. Take off the fat from the top and bring to a boil. While it
is boiling let one-half pound of farina run slowly into it. Cook for
fifteen minutes, add the meats, season with salt, pepper, and a little
chopped parsley and fennel.

=Boiled salmon, sauce diplomate.= Serve boiled salmon on a napkin, with
small round boiled potatoes, parsley in branches, and quartered lemons.
Serve sauce diplomate separate.

=Sauce diplomate.= To a pint of cream sauce add a spoonful of lobster
butter and a spoonful of anchovy paste. Stir well, add a little Cayenne
pepper, and three ounces of butter, little by little. Strain and serve.

=Larded tenderloin of beef, St. Martin.= Roast a larded tenderloin, and
make a brown gravy. Put the tenderloin on a platter, and cut one slice
for each person, leaving the remainder whole. Garnish with chickens'
livers saute in butter on each side of the platter. Add three sliced
truffles and one-half glass of Madeira to the brown gravy, and boil for
ten or fifteen minutes. Season well, and pour over the beef.

=Potatoes Marquise.= Same as Duchesse potatoes.


JUNE 2

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Eggs, Fedora
       Lamb chops, Bradford
       Sybil potatoes
       String bean salad
       Strawberry cream pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Caroline
       Ripe California olives in oil and garlic
       Fillet of trout, Rachel
       Roast duckling, apple sauce
       Artichoke bottoms, au gratin
       Fresh asparagus, Hollandaise
       Escarole salad
       Mousse au cafe
       Demi tasse

=Eggs, Fedora.= Cut four hard-boiled eggs in two, lengthwise, remove the
yolks and mash with a fork, in a bowl. Then add one-half cup of fresh
bread crumbs, salt, pepper, the raw yolk of an egg, a little chopped
chives and parsley, and one ounce of butter. Mix well, and fill the
boiled whites with the mixture. Then roll in the beaten whites of eggs,
and then in bread crumbs, and fry in hot swimming fat. Serve on a
napkin, with fried parsley. Serve cream of tomato sauce separate.

=Lamb chops, Bradford.= Broil eight nice lamb chops, place on a platter,
and garnish with stuffed hot olives. Pour sauce Madere, to which has
been added whole fresh mushrooms saute in butter, over the chops.

=Consomme, Caroline.= Make a royal with eight eggs to a quart of milk,
or four eggs to a pint; add a little salt, pepper, and some grated
nutmeg. Strain into a buttered mould, set in a bain-marie and boil. When
set, and cold, remove from the mould and cut in small squares. Serve in
very hot consomme with one spoonful of boiled rice to each person.

=Fillet of trout, Rachel.= Cut the fillets from two Tahoe trout. Use the
bones and head to make a sauce Genoise. Put the fillets in a buttered
fish pan, season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of claret, and
one-half glass of fish stock, bouillon or water, cover, and simmer for
ten minutes. Remove the fish to a platter. Add to the sauce half of the
tail of a lobster, one truffle, six heads of canned mushrooms cut in
small squares, and one dozen small fish dumplings. Pour over the fish.

=Chicory salad with chapon.= Serve the salad with French dressing.
Chapon is a crust of French bread rubbed with garlic, and added to the
salad to flavor same.


JUNE 3

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved pears
       Omelet with parsley
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Crab legs, a la Stock
       Eggs en cocotte, D'Uxelles
       English rump steak, maitre d'hotel
       French fried potatoes
       Wax beans in butter
       Sliced peaches with whipped cream
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Cream of green corn
       Salted almonds
       Ecrevisses, Lafayette
       Roast leg of mutton, au jus
       Mashed summer squash
       Potatoes, St. Francis
       Field salad
       Burgundy punch
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Crab legs, Stock.= For four persons, put two leaves of lettuce on each
dinner plate. Slice fine a head of lettuce and put on top of the lettuce
leaves. Add to each plate one slice of peeled tomatoes, and on top place
four legs of crab, or some crab meat, and two fillets of anchovies on
top of the crab. Put in a salad bowl one spoonful of vinegar, one of
tomato ketchup, one of Chili sauce, two of olive oil, one-half
teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, one teaspoonful of salt, a little
paprika, and some chopped chives. Mix well, and pour over the salad on
the plates. Serve very cold.

=Eggs, D'Uxelles.= For individual portions, put in a buttered cocotte
dish one spoonful of D'Uxelles (Jan. 11), break an egg on top, season
with salt and pepper, put a little more D'Uxelles on top of the egg,
then a little grated cheese and small bits of butter, and bake in oven
until egg is set. Serve on a napkin.

=Omelet with parsley.= Beat eight eggs, season with salt, pepper and
chopped parsley, add a spoonful of thick cream, and cook in the usual
manner.

=Burgundy punch.= Two pounds of sugar, two quarts of water, the juice of
six lemons and the rind of one, and one piece of cinnamon stick. Let the
mixture infuse for about two hours. Freeze, and then add one pint of
claret, a small glass of cognac, and a drop of red coloring.

=Whipped cream.= Put one-half pint of double cream into a bowl and whip
until quite stiff, then add two ounces of powdered sugar and a few drops
of vanilla extract. Mix well, and keep in a cool place until needed.

=Sliced peaches with whipped cream.= Peel and slice some ripe peaches,
and sprinkle with a little sugar. Serve in individual dishes with a
spoonful of whipped cream on the side.

=Sliced bananas with whipped cream.= Prepare in the same manner as
peaches.

=Sliced fruits with whipped cream.= Prepare oranges, pears, figs, etc.,
in the same manner as peaches.

=Berries of all kinds with whipped cream.= Hull and wash the berries,
dry in cheesecloth, and prepare in the same manner as peaches.

=Cream of green corn.= Put two pounds of veal bones in a casserole,
cover with cold water, bring to a boil, and cool off in cold water. Put
the bones back in the vessel in from three to four quarts of fresh
water, add a little salt and a bouquet garni, bring to the boiling
point, and skim. Cook for about one hour, then add eight ears of green
corn and one pint of milk, and boil for ten minutes. Then take out the
ears, cut off the grains and chop very fine, or mash in a mortar. Heat
three ounces of butter in a casserole, then add three spoonfuls of
flour, and when heated add two quarts of the strained veal and corn
stock. Bring to a boil, stirring well with a whip. Let it boil slowly,
add the corn, and cook for about thirty minutes. Strain through a fine
sieve or cheesecloth, put back in the casserole, season to taste with
salt and a little Cayenne pepper, stir in two ounces of sweet butter,
and serve hot.

=Ecrevisses, Lafayette.= Ecrevisses, crawfish and crayfish are the same.
Take the tails of twenty-four of the fish and put in saute pan with two
ounces of butter, season with salt and pepper, and simmer for five
minutes. Then add a half glass of sherry wine and simmer until nearly
dry; then add one and one-half cups of thick cream, and boil for five
minutes. Thicken with the yolks of three eggs mixed with one-half cup of
cream. Do not let it quite reach the boiling point after the yolks of
eggs are added. Add a pony of very dry sherry wine, and serve in chafing
dish.

=Mashed summer squash.= Peel three pounds of summer squash, cut in half,
and put in casserole with two ounces of butter, season with salt and
pepper, cover, and cook in oven for thirty minutes. Then strain through
a fine sieve, put back in casserole, add two additional ounces of
butter, and if too thick add a spoonful of thick cream.


JUNE 4

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced figs with cream
       Bacon and eggs
       Chocolate with whipped cream
       Rolls

     LUNCHEON
       Cold eggs, Danoise
       Broiled sea bass, maitre d'hotel
       Breast of squab, saute in butter
       Summer squash, Native Son
       Potatoes saute
       Watermelon
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Japonnaise
       Radishes
       Shad roe, en bordure
       Cucumber salad
       Tenderloin of beef, Voisin
       Potatoes allumette
       Lettuce and alligator pear salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Sliced figs with cream.= Peel and slice some fresh figs and serve on a
compotier, with powdered sugar and cream separate.

=Cold eggs, Danoise.= Make four pieces of anchovy toast, and lay on each
a hard-boiled egg cut in two lengthwise. Cover the eggs with mayonnaise
sauce.

=Breast of squab, saute in butter.= Cut out the breasts of four raw
squabs, season with salt and pepper, and roll in flour. Heat two ounces
of butter in a saute pan, add the squab breast and cook for about ten
minutes, or until brown on both sides. Place on a platter, pour butter
sauce over them, sprinkle with a little chopped parsley, and garnish
with watercress and two lemons cut in half.

=Summer squash, Native Son.= Cut off the corn from four ears. Peel one
pound of summer squash, and cut in one inch squares. Put them, with the
corn, in a bowl and add three peeled tomatoes cut in squares. In a
casserole put one chopped onion with two ounces of butter, and simmer
until yellow, then add the corn, tomato and squash, season with salt and
pepper, cover, and simmer for thirty minutes.

=Consomme Japonnaise.= Consomme aux perles de Nizam colored with yellow
Breton coloring.

=Shad roe, en Bordure.= Butter a plank, lay four shad roe on top, season
with salt and pepper, put small bits of butter on top of each roe, and
set in oven. After ten minutes turn the roes over, make a bordure of
potato croquette mixture around the plank, and return to oven to cook
until done. Pour a little maitre d'hotel sauce on top, and garnish with
parsley in branches and quartered lemons.

=Tenderloin of beef, Voisin.= Roast tenderloin of beef, garnished with
fresh artichoke bottoms filled with tomatoes cut in small squares,
sauteed in butter, and well seasoned. Serve sauce Choron separate.

=Potatoes, allumette.= Cut four potatoes in the form of matches, dry
with a napkin, and fry in hot swimming lard until yellow and crisp.
Remove, salt well, and serve on a napkin.


JUNE 5

     BREAKFAST
       Raspberry jam
       Salted salmon belly, melted butter
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Shirred eggs, Monaco
       Lake Tahoe trout, meuniere
       Potatoes O'Brien
       Tomatoes, Mayonnaise
       Cream fritters
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams on shell
       Sorrel soup, a l'eau
       Salted hazelnuts
       Terrapin saute, au beurre noisette
       Fillet of bass, 1905
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Waldorf salad
       French pastry
       Coffee

=Salted salmon belly, melted butter.= Soak a salted salmon belly in cold
water over night. Then place in vessel and cover with fresh cold water,
bring to a boil, and then set at side of the range for twenty minutes.
Dish up on a napkin on a platter, garnish with parsley in branches and
quartered lemons. Serve melted butter separate.

=Shirred eggs, Monaco.= Put six chopped shallots in a casserole with one
ounce of butter. Heat slightly, then add six sliced fresh mushrooms and
one peeled and sliced tomato; season with salt and pepper, and simmer
for ten minutes. Butter four individual shirred egg dishes, pour in the
above preparation, break two eggs in each, season with salt and pepper,
and cook in oven for five minutes.

=Cream fritters.= Mix two ounces of corn starch, four ounces of sugar,
the yolks of four eggs, and half of the peel of a lemon, and warm up in
a double boiler. Bring one-half pint of milk to the boiling point and
add it to the mixture. Continue boiling, and stir all the time until it
becomes thick. Then spread it on a platter about a half inch thick, and
allow to become cold. Cut in pieces about two inches square, roll in
flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in bread crumbs, and fry in
swimming lard, or in frying pan with plenty of melted butter. Dress on a
napkin, and serve vanilla cream sauce separate.

=Sorrel soup, a l'eau.= Clean one pound of sorrel, wash well, and slice
very thin. Put in casserole with two ounces of butter, cover, and simmer
for five minutes. Then add two quarts of water, season with salt and
pepper, add three sliced rolls, or one-half loaf of sliced French bread,
and boil slowly for one hour. Put the yolks of three eggs in a large cup
and fill with cream, mix, and let it run into the boiling soup. Serve at
once.


JUNE 6

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberries with cream
       Broiled mutton chops
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Antipasto
       Eggs, Belmont
       Chickens' livers, au Madere
       Risotto
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Marchand
       Pim olas
       Fillet of sole, Mantane
       Roast chicken
       Corn au gratin
       Stewed tomatoes
       Potato croquettes
       Escarole salad
       Souffle glace, Pavlowa
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs, Belmont.= Butter four timbale moulds, put in each a spoonful of
D'Uxelles, break an egg on top, season with salt and pepper, put in
bain-marie, and bake until the eggs are set. Then turn out on a platter
and cover with tomato sauce, to which a little chopped truffle has been
added.

=Consomme, Marchand.= Cut a truffle Julienne style; also the breast of a
boiled fowl and a few slices of smoked beef tongue. Serve in one quart
of boiling well-seasoned consomme.

=Pim olas.= Pim olas are small green olives stuffed with red peppers
(pimentos). They may be obtained in bottles of any grocer.

=Fillet of sole, Mantane.= Cut and trim four fillets of sole, fold over,
season with salt and pepper, lay in a buttered saute pan, add one-half
glass of white wine, cover with buttered manilla paper, put in oven and
bake for twelve minutes. Serve on a platter covered with Bearnaise
sauce.

=Souffle glace, Pavlowa.= Whip a pint of rich cream until thick. Beat
the yolks of four eggs with one-quarter pound of sugar, until very
light. Then add it to the cream, with a pony of maraschino. Whip the
whites of five eggs very hard, and add them to the mixture, mixing
lightly. Then fill fancy paper cases until about one inch higher than
the edges, and set to freeze. When hard, and just before serving, dip
the tops in grated chocolate.

=Souffle glace, St. Francis.= Make a souffle glace Pavlowa mixture,
dress in fancy paper cases, using a pastry bag with a fancy tube.
Sprinkle some chopped pistache nuts on top, and freeze.


JUNE 7

     BREAKFAST
       Blackberries with cream
       Plain scrambled eggs
       Dry toast
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Baked beans, Boston style
       Brown bread
       Citron preserves
       Kisses
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Soft clam soup, Salem
       California ripe olives
       Boiled Tahoe trout, sauce mousseline
       Potatoes nature
       Cucumber salad
       Vol au vent Toulouse
       Stuffed capon, St. Antoine
       Peas a la Francaise
       Cardon a la moelle
       Hearts of lettuce, French dressing
       Coupe Orientale
       Allumettes
       Coffee

=Soft clam soup, Salem.= Remove the bellies from two dozen clams and put
the remainder, with their juice, in a casserole. Add a quart of water, a
bouquet garni, and some salt; bring to a boil, and strain over the clam
bellies, which have been placed in a vessel. Bring to a boil again and
add one pint of thick cream and two ounces of sweet butter. When butter
is melted, season with salt and a little Cayenne pepper, and serve in a
tureen. Serve broken crackers separate.

=Boiled Tahoe trout, sauce mousseline.= Put two Tahoe trout in a vessel
in cold water, add one-half glassful of white wine vinegar, half of an
onion and half of a carrot sliced, a bouquet garni, and a small handful
of salt. Bring to a boil, and set on side of the range for twenty
minutes. Serve on a platter on a napkin, garnished with small round
boiled potatoes, lemons cut in two, and parsley in branches. Serve sauce
mousseline separate. The potatoes may be served separate if desired.

=Kisses.= One pound of sugar, the whites of seven eggs, and some vanilla
flavoring. Mix the sugar with a little water and boil until it is thick
and sticky when cooled on a saucer. Beat the whites of the eggs until
very stiff and dry, then add the hot sugar and continue beating until it
becomes cold. Add a few drops of vanilla extract, and dress in a fancy
shape on a buttered pan. Use a pastry bag with a fancy tube for forming
them. When dry bake in a nearly cool oven.

=Allumettes.= Roll out some puff paste that was made with six turns,
until it is about one-eighth inch thick. Spread with royal icing, and
cut in strips about three-quarters of an inch wide and three inches
long. Place on a wet baking pan, with a little space between, and bake
in a moderate oven.

=Royal icing (glace royal).= Put one-half pound of icing sugar in a bowl
with the whites of two eggs and a couple of drops of lemon juice. Beat
with a wooden spoon until very light and firm. While beating be careful
that it does not dry on the sides of the bowl, and when finished cover
immediately with a damp cloth. This icing may be used for frosting
cakes, or for ornamental work.


JUNE 8

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Chipped beef on toast
       Crescents and rolls
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Shirred eggs, Argenteuil
       Sweetbreads braise, St. George
       Flageolet beans, au cerfeuil
       Puree of potato salad
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Colbert
       Salted almonds
       Boiled turbot, Jean Bart
       Potatoes, nature
       Filet mignon, Rossini
       Green corn
       Broiled egg plant
       Hearts of romaine, Roquefort dressing
       Champagne punch
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

=Chipped beef on toast.= Cut one pound of smoked beef in very thin
chips, put in hot water and bring to a boil. Then drain off the water
and add a cup of very thick cream, boil again, and thicken with the
yolks of two eggs and half a cup of thick cream. Let it come nearly to a
boil, taste to see if sufficiently salt, add a little white pepper, and
serve on four pieces of dry toast.

=Shirred eggs, Argenteuil.= Cut the tips, about one and one-half inch
long, from one pound of asparagus, put in salted water and boil until
soft, then drain off the water. Butter well four shirred egg dishes, and
put the asparagus tips in them in equal portions. Crack two eggs in each
dish, season with salt and pepper, put small bits of butter on top, and
cook in oven for five minutes.

=Sweetbreads braise, St. George.= Braise some sweetbreads, place on a
platter, and garnish with okra and tomatoes saute and green peppers cut
like matches and sauteed in butter. Serve sauce Choron separate.

=Okra and tomatoes saute.= Cut both ends off of one pound of okra, put
in cold water and bring to a boil, then drain off the water. Peel and
cut in quarters two or three large tomatoes, place them in a casserole
with two ounces of butter, heat through, add the okra, season with salt
and pepper, cover, and allow to simmer slowly for twenty minutes. Serve
as a vegetable course, or as a garnish.

=Flageolet beans, au cerfeuil.= Put in a casserole two cans of flageolet
beans and one quart of fresh water, bring to a boil, and drain. Return
the beans to the casserole, add two ounces of sweet butter, a little
salt and pepper, and one spoonful of chopped chervil. Simmer for five
minutes.

=Puree of potato salad.= Boil four white potatoes in salted water, and
pass through a fine sieve. Add one spoonful of vinegar, two spoonfuls of
olive oil, a little Cayenne pepper, and salt if necessary. Set in ice
box until cold. Then mix well with a wooden spoon. If too thick stir in
a little hot bouillon or water. Be sure it is hot, as cold will not do.
Serve in a salad bowl with finely chopped parsley on top.

=Fillet of turbot, Jean Bart.= Place four trimmed fillets of turbot in a
buttered saute pan, and season with salt and pepper. Place on each
fillet a well-washed head of fresh mushroom and two leaves of tarragon;
add one-half glass of white wine and one-half cup of water. Cover with
buttered paper, bring to a boil, and set in oven for fifteen minutes.
Then remove the fillets to a platter, and put one pint of white wine
sauce in the saute pan, reduce to normal thickness of a fish sauce, and
strain over the fillets. Have the sauce well seasoned.

=Green corn.= Put three gallons of water, one pint of milk, and a
handful of salt on the fire and bring to a boil. Then add one dozen
clean ears of green corn, bring to a boil, cover the vessel, and set to
side of range for ten minutes, where it will remain at boiling heat
without actually boiling. Serve on a napkin, with corn holders, and
sweet butter separate.

=Champagne punch (sorbet).= One pint of water, one-half pint of
champagne, one-half pound of sugar, the juice of three lemons and the
juice of half an orange. Dissolve the sugar in the water, add the lemon
and orange juice, strain and freeze. When nearly frozen add the
champagne, and finish. Finally stir in an Italian meringue (see Italian
meringue) made with the whites of three eggs, and serve in sherbet
glasses.

=Broiled egg plant.= Peel an egg plant, and cut in slices three-quarters
of an inch thick. Season with salt and pepper, roll in oil, and broil.
Serve on a platter with a little melted butter poured over it, and
garnish with parsley in branches.


JUNE 9

     BREAKFAST
       Cherries
       Omelet with egg plant
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Assorted hors d'oeuvres
       Consomme in cups
       Broiled sirloin steak, Cliff House
       French fried potatoes
       Baked tomatoes
       Brie cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Lamb broth, Olympic Club
       Salted pecans
       Frogs' legs, Jerusalem
       Broiled chicken, maitre d'hotel
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Potato croquettes
       Alligator pear, French dressing
       Meringue glacee, au chocolat
       Demi tasse

=Omelet with egg plant.= Use any broiled egg plant that may be left
over, or fresh egg plant, and cut in small squares about one-half inch
in diameter. Put in saute pan with a little butter and simmer until
soft. Then put the omelet pan on the fire with a small piece of sweet
butter in it, add twelve beaten eggs, season with salt and pepper, add
the egg plant, and then cook the omelet in the usual manner.

=Broiled sirloin steak, Cliff House.= Season a two-pound steak with salt
and pepper, roll in oil, broil, and when done place on a platter. Cut
the steak in slices, but do not place them apart. Sprinkle with one
teaspoonful of paprika, one tablespoonful of dry English mustard, one
teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, three chopped shallots, a little
chopped chives, and two ounces of butter in small bits. Set in oven
until butter is melted.

=Baked tomatoes.= Peel four large tomatoes and place on a buttered dish.
Season with salt and pepper, put small pieces of butter on top, and set
in oven to bake. When done place on platter and pour tomato sauce around
them, or serve with their own butter.

=Lamb broth, Olympic Club.= Put a shoulder of lamb in a roasting pan,
season with salt and pepper, add an onion and a carrot, put small bits
of butter on top, and roast in oven until done. Then remove the meat
from the bones and cut in small squares about one-quarter inch thick.
Put the bones and trimmings in a casserole, add an additional two pounds
of lamb bones, one turnip, two leeks, two leaves of celery, one spoonful
of pepper berries, one bay leaf, two cloves, a little parsley in
branches, one gallon of water, and a handful of salt. Bring to a boil,
skim, and let simmer for two hours. Then strain through fine cheese
cloth, put back in casserole, add the cut-up lamb and one-half pound of
boiled rice, give one boil, and serve.


JUNE 10

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh currants
       Oatmeal with cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       California oyster cocktails
       Eggs Agostini
       Calf's head, vinaigrette
       Boiled potatoes
       Sliced bananas with whipped cream
       Macaroons
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Turbigo
       Black bass, saute meuniere
       Tenderloin of beef, Parisienne
       Spinach in cream
       Artichokes, sauce mousseline
       Watercress salad
       Plombiere a la vanille
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs Agostini.= Put one-quarter pound of boiled rice on a platter, lay
four poached eggs on top, and cover with tomato sauce.

=Consomme Turbigo.= Boil one-quarter pound of noodles in salt water.
Boil a carrot, cut in the form of matches, in salt water until soft. Cut
the breast of a soup hen or chicken in Julienne shape. Add all to two
quarts of hot and well-seasoned consomme.

=Plombiere a la vanille (ice cream).= The yolks of eight eggs, one-half
pound of sugar, one quart of milk, and one vanilla bean. Mix the yolks
of eggs with the sugar. Split the vanilla bean and boil it in the milk.
Then pour the milk, the yolks and sugar together, set on the fire, and
stir with a wooden spoon until it thickens. Do not let it come to a
boil. Strain and freeze, put in moulds, and set in ice box until very
hard. Serve with whipped cream.

=Plombiere aux marrons.= Same as vanilla plombiere, but add some broken
marrons glaces soaked in a little rum, when ready to put in the moulds
to harden. Serve with whipped cream, and a whole marron glace on top of
each portion.

=Plombiere aux fruits.= Prepare in the same manner as for plombiere aux
marrons, but use chopped mixed glace fruit instead of the marrons.


JUNE 11

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced fresh figs with cream
       Scrambled eggs with bacon
       Buttered toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Eggs au fondu
       Broiled squab on toast
       Julienne potatoes
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Oregon cream cheese with crackers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Cream of artichokes
       Ripe olives
       Fillet of flounder, Piombino
       Sweetbreads braise, Montebello
       Souffle potatoes
       Roast chicken, au jus
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Souffle glace aux fraises
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs au fondu.= Poached eggs on toast, covered with Welsh rabbit. Serve
hot.

=Cream of artichokes.= Make three quarts of very light stock veal or
chicken broth, strain and add to it four whole artichokes. Boil until
the artichokes are soft, then remove and separate the bottoms from the
leaves, cut the bottoms in small squares, and place in soup tureen. Then
pass the leaves through a fine sieve, and put back in the broth. Melt
three ounces of butter in a casserole, add three spoonfuls of flour,
heat through, add the broth and boil for ten minutes. Then add a pint of
thick cream, bring to a boil, season well with salt and pepper, and
strain over the cut-up artichoke bottoms in the tureen.

=Fillet of flounder, Piombino.= Cut four fillets from one large
flounder, place in a buttered pan, season with salt and pepper, add a
glassful of claret and one-half cup of water, cover with buttered paper,
put in oven and bake until done. Then place the fish on a platter. Make
a sauce Genoise from the head and bones of the flounder, add the tail of
a lobster cut Julienne style, and four heads of fresh mushrooms cut in
the same manner and sauteed in butter. Pour the sauce over the fish. If
fresh mushrooms are not available canned ones may be used.

=Sweetbreads braise, Montebello.= Put some braised sweetbreads on a
platter with their own gravy, and garnish with artichoke bottoms filled
with puree of fresh mushrooms. Serve sauce Bearnaise separate; or poured
over the sweetbreads, as desired.

=Souffle glace aux fraises.= Mix one pint of whipped cream, one-half
pint of fresh strawberry juice, the yolks of four eggs beaten lightly,
and four ounces of powdered sugar. Whip separately the whites of five
eggs, and add to the mixture. Put in paper cases, and freeze. Serve with
a dot of whipped cream on top, and a nice large fresh strawberry on top
of the cream.

=Souffle glace with raspberries.= Prepare in the same manner as souffle
glace aux fraises, but substitute raspberries for the strawberries.


JUNE 12

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved pears
       Griddle cakes with honey
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Carciofini
       Ecrevisses en buisson
       Braised beef
       Noodles
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Ditalini
       Fillet of sole, St. Nazaire
       Leg of mutton, currant jelly
       String beans
       Green corn
       Hashed potatoes in cream
       Field salad
       Apricot pie
       Coffee

=Braised beef.= Have the butcher cut an eight pound piece of rump or
brisket of beef. Season with salt and pepper, and rub with a small piece
of garlic. Melt in a pot about two ounces of butter, and when hot add
the beef and roast on top of the range until it is brown on all sides.
Then remove the beef, add one ounce of fresh butter to the gravy already
in the pot, and when hot add two large spoonfuls of flour, and allow it
to brown. Then add three pints of water, bring to a boil, and then put
in the beef again. Add two calf's feet, one onion, one carrot, a large
bouquet garni, four chopped tomatoes, salt, and a spoonful of whole
black peppers. When boiling season well, cover, and put in oven. It will
require from three to four hours to become well done. Then remove the
beef to a platter, and reduce the sauce one-half. Taste to see if more
seasoning is required, and then strain. Pour some of the sauce over the
beef, and serve the remainder in a sauceboat. Garnish the beef with the
carrot that was cooked with it. Cut the carrot in thin slices.

=Larded rump of beef.= Lard a piece of rump of beef, and then prepare in
the same manner as braised beef.

=Fillet of sole, St. Nazaire.= Cook four fillets of Sole a la Normande,
and garnish with a dozen fried oysters.

=Currant jelly.= Strip the currants from their stems, and wash them. Put
them on to cook, and when they become hot mash them. Boil for
twenty-five minutes, then pour into jelly bag and let them drip without
squeezing. Measure the juice and return it to the kettle. After it has
boiled about ten minutes add heated sugar, allowing a pound of sugar to
a pint of juice. Cook until it jells when a little is poured on a
saucer. Pour into moulds, and seal when cold.


JUNE 13

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Broiled veal kidneys, English style
       Baked potato
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, Colbert
       Ombrelle d'Ostende
       Potato croquettes
       Celery Victor
       Compote of pineapple
       Sponge cake
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage Arlequin
       Ripe California olives
       Pompano, Vatel
       Chicken saute, Archiduc
       Duchesse potatoes
       Jets de houblons
       Chiffonnade salad
       Peach ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Broiled veal kidneys, English style.= Leave a little fat on two veal
kidneys, split them, season with salt and pepper, and sprinkle with a
tablespoonful of dry English mustard. Then sprinkle with olive oil, and
broil. When done place them on four pieces of dry toast. Mix two ounces
of butter with the juice of a lemon, one tablespoonful of Worcestershire
sauce, a little salt, pepper, grated nutmeg, chopped parsley, and one
spoonful of meat extract. Mix well, and pour over the kidneys. Garnish
with watercress.

=Poached eggs, Colbert.= Put some poached eggs on toast, and cover with
sauce Colbert.

=Ombrelle d'Ostende.= Put four pieces of toast on a platter and place on
each a large broiled fresh mushroom, head down. Put two broiled oysters
on top of the mushrooms, pour maitre d'hotel sauce over them, and lay
two strips of broiled bacon across the top of each. Garnish with parsley
in branches and quartered lemons.

=Compote of pineapple.= Pare and core a pineapple, and cut in slices.
Make a syrup with one-half pound of sugar and half a pint of water, and
stew the pineapple in it until tender, and the syrup is clear. Serve
cold, with a few drops of kirschwasser or maraschino sprinkled over it,
and a little of its syrup.

=Potage Arlequin.= Slice two carrots, two beets, two turnips, and add a
pound of shelled new peas. Put all in a casserole, cover with two quarts
of water, season with salt, add about three pounds of cut-up veal bones,
bring to a boil, and skim. Then cover, and cook until soft. Remove the
veal bones, and strain the remainder through a fine sieve. Then return
to casserole, and if too thick add a little bouillon, chicken broth or
stock. Bring to a boil, season with salt and pepper, and stir in three
ounces of sweet butter. Serve with bread cut in small squares and fried
in butter.

=Pompano, Vatel.= Use four whole California pompano; or the four fillets
from one Florida fish. Put them in a buttered saute pan, season with
salt and pepper, add one-half glass of stock and the juice of a lemon,
and cook in oven until done. Then place the fish on a platter. Bring
one-half pint of tomato sauce to a boil, add one-half pint of cream
sauce, one spoonful of chopped truffles, season well with salt and
pepper, and pour over the fish.


JUNE 14

     BREAKFAST
       Raspberries with cream
       Scrambled eggs with cheese
       Rolls
       Oolong tea

     LUNCHEON
       Half of grapefruit with cherries
       Baked beans, Boston style
       Brown bread
       Beignets souffles
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams on half shell
       Consomme Ab-del-cader
       Aiguillettes of turbot, Bayard
       Roast sirloin of beef, fermiere
       Lettuce salad
       Souffle glace, St. Francis
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with cheese.= Mix ten eggs with one-half cup of cream,
and one-half cup of grated Parmesan or Swiss cheese; season with salt
and pepper to taste. Melt two ounces of butter in a casserole, add the
eggs, and scramble.

=Beignets souffles.= One pint of water, one-quarter pound of butter,
one-half pound of flour, nine eggs, and a pinch of salt. Put the butter
and salt in the water and bring to a boil. Stir in the flour with a
wooden spoon, and work well until it is a smooth paste. Remove from the
fire and work in the eggs, one by one. Form in the size of a walnut, and
drop into hot lard with a soupspoon, and fry until well browned. The
fritters will turn by themselves while frying. When done roll in
powdered sugar to which has been added a little cinnamon, and serve on a
napkin.

=Consomme Ab-del-cader.= Cut some carrots and turnips in half-moon
shape, and boil in salted water. Cut some royal in the same shape. Also
have some profiteroles. Put equal quantities of each in hot consomme,
and also one poached yolk of an egg for each person. Have the consomme
well seasoned.

=Aiguillettes of turbot, Bayard.= Cut four fillets of turbot lengthwise,
and about four inches long and two inches wide. Place in a buttered pan,
season with salt and white pepper, add one-half glass of white wine and
one-half cup of fish stock, or water; cover with buttered paper, and
cook in oven for ten minutes. Then place the fish on a platter, reduce
the broth until nearly dry, add a pint of lobster sauce to which has
been added the tail of a lobster, six heads of French canned mushrooms,
and two truffles, all cut Julienne style. Pour the sauce over the fish
before serving.

=Roast sirloin of beef, fermiere.= Roast sirloin of beef, sauce Madere,
garnished with string beans in butter, carrots in butter, and chateau
potatoes.

=Chicken saute, Archiduc.= Joint a chicken, and season with salt and
pepper. Melt two ounces of butter in a saute pan; when hot add the
chicken and saute for five minutes. Then add two sliced green peppers,
and saute until the chicken is done. Then place the chicken on a
platter, and add another ounce of butter to the saute pan. When the
butter is nice and brown pour the gravy over the chicken, sprinkle with
chopped parsley, and garnish with lemons cut in half.


JUNE 15

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs a la Reine
       Cold sirloin of beef
       Rachel salad
       Baked apple roll
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cabbage soup, Normande
       Radishes
       Salmon steak, Hongroise
       Roast chicken
       Fresh asparagus, Hollandaise
       Georgette potatoes
       Chicory salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Bouchettes
       Demi tasse

=Rachel salad.= Cut some artichoke bottoms, boiled celery, potatoes and
asparagus tips, and two truffles, in Julienne shape. Arrange the
vegetables in a salad bowl in bouquets, place the truffles in the
center, and pour some French dressing over all.

=Baked apple roll.= Roll out one pound of puff paste until it is about
one-eighth inch thick. Spread with chopped apples mixed with a little
powdered sugar and powdered allspice. Wet the edges of the paste with
water and roll up in the form of a big stick. Put in a pan, wash the top
with beaten eggs, and bake in a rather hot oven. When done cut in
slices, and serve with hard and brandy sauces. Plain cream may be served
separate.

=Baked apricot roll, blackberry roll, huckleberry roll, or loganberry
roll.= Prepare in the same manner as apple roll, using the fruit
desired.

=Cabbage soup, Normande.= Separate the outside leaves and the core of a
head of cabbage. Put both the leaves and core in a casserole with five
pounds of beef bones, one onion, one carrot, a bouquet garni, and a
handful of salt. Bring to a boil, season, and boil for two and one-half
hours. Slice the rest of the cabbage very thin, place in another
casserole, add three ounces of butter, and fry until the moisture is
out. Then drain off the butter, and strain the beef and cabbage broth
over it. Let it boil slowly for an hour. Season with salt and pepper,
and add some bread crust cut in small squares and fried in butter.

=Salmon steak, Hongroise.= Cut two slices of salmon one and one-half
inches thick; season with salt and pepper, roll in oil, and broil on
both sides until colored. Then place on a platter, put two ounces of
butter on top, and put in oven to finish cooking. When done place on a
platter and cover with tomato sauce to which a tablespoonful of paprika
has been added.

=Bouchettes.= Make a mixture as for lady fingers. Put it into a pastry
bag, and press out on paper in dots the size of a "quarter." Bake in a
moderate oven. Allow to become cold, spread some jam or marmalade on the
bottom of one and press another one on the jam, making a ball, and so
on. Coat them with a white or pink icing.

=Chocolate bouchettes.= Make as above, coat with chocolate icing.

=Coffee bouchettes.= Make as above, coat with coffee icing.


JUNE 16

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced figs with cream
       Boiled salt mackerel
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit en supreme
       Shirred eggs, Antoine
       Hamburg steak
       Lorraine potatoes
       Field salad
       Vanilla blanc mange
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Andalouse
       Queen olives
       Frogs' legs, saute a sec
       Filet mignon, Athenienne
       Potatoes au gratin
       Sliced cucumbers and tomatoes
       Plombiere aux marrons
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Shirred eggs, Antoine.= Plain shirred eggs with broiled strips of bacon
on top.

=Vanilla blanc mange.= One pint of milk, one pint of cream, six ounces
of sugar, one ounce of gelatine, and one-half of a vanilla bean. Soak
the gelatine in cold water. Put the milk and the vanilla bean on the
fire together and let them come nearly to a boil. Then remove from the
fire, add the soaked gelatine, and work with a wooden spoon until
melted. Strain, and allow to become nearly cold. Then add the cream, and
beat, on ice, until it begins to thicken. Then put in moulds and set in
ice box for one hour. Turn out of moulds to serve.

=Chocolate blanc mange.= Use two ounces of chocolate instead of vanilla
bean.

=Coffee blanc mange.= Use a cup of strong coffee instead of vanilla
bean.

=Blanc mange aux fruits.= Make a vanilla blanc mange, and just before
putting in moulds mix in one-quarter pound of chopped candied fruits.

=Blanc mange aux liqueurs.= Add to a vanilla blanc mange a glass of
liqueur, such as maraschino, kirschwasser, kummel, rum, or other
liqueur. Add the liqueur just before putting into the mould.

=Consomme Andalouse.= To consomme vermicelli, add just before serving,
one peeled raw tomato cut in very small squares.

=Filet mignon, Athenienne.= Season four small fillets of beef with salt
and pepper, broil or saute them, and serve on a piece of toast with a
slice of broiled ham on top. Cover with sauce Hussarde, and garnish with
peas in butter.

=Sauce Hussarde.= Bring to a boil one pint of sauce Madere, or brown
gravy; add one-half cup of fresh bread crumbs and boil for two minutes.
Then add one ounce of good butter, a little chopped parsley, salt and
Cayenne pepper.


JUNE 17

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Oatmeal
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, Blanchard
       Spring lamb tenderloin, Thomas
       Lettuce salad
       Sliced fruit with whipped cream
       Cakes
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of parsnips
       Ripe olives
       Fillet of bass, Argentina
       Roast duckling, apple sauce
       Green corn
       Cauliflower, Hollandaise
       Romaine salad, Roquefort dressing
       Raspberry water ice
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Poached eggs, Blanchard.= Cut two English muffins in half, toast them,
and lay a slice of broiled ham on each. Put a poached egg on top of the
ham, and cover with cream sauce.

=Cream of parsnips, II.= Put three pounds of veal bones in a casserole,
add three quarts of water and a handful of salt, bring to a boil, and
skim. Then add six sliced parsnips and a bouquet garni, and boil for an
hour; then remove the bones and the bouquet. Put three ounces of butter
in another vessel, heat, then add three spoonfuls of flour, and when hot
add the broth and parsnips. Boil for half an hour, then strain through a
fine sieve, put back in the casserole, season with salt and pepper, and
add a pint of boiling cream.

=Fillet of bass, Argentina.= Put two ounces of butter in a casserole,
add a sliced onion and a sliced carrot, and simmer until done. Then add
a can of sliced French mushrooms, one-half can of sliced pimentos, four
peeled and sliced tomatoes, one cupful of tomato sauce, and a little
salt and pepper. Boil for ten minutes. Place four fillets of bass in a
buttered pan, season with salt and pepper, cover with the above sauce,
and bake in oven until done. Serve the fish from a platter with the
sauce over it.

=Cranberry jelly.= To three quarts of cranberries add two pounds of
granulated sugar and one quart of water. Cook thoroughly, and force
through a fine sieve. Cook the juice for fifteen minutes, and then pour
into individual moulds.

=Crab apple jelly, and marmalade.= To eight quarts of crab apples add
three quarts of water. Boil slowly for an hour, adding more water to
make up for evaporation. Strain through a flannel bag, but do not
squeeze. Measure the juice and add an equal amount of sugar. Boil for
twenty minutes, pour into glasses, and seal when cold. Make a marmalade
of the remainder of the apples left in the bag, by pressing through a
sieve, and then adding an equal amount of cane sugar. Cook until well
done. Flavor with lemon or cinnamon.

=Apricot and peach marmalade.= Cut some firm ripe apricots in half and
remove the stones. Add a few spoonfuls of water and cook until soft.
Strain through a sieve, and add three-quarters of a pound of cane sugar
to every pound of fruit. Crack some of the stones and add the kernels to
the fruit. Continue to stir and cook until it thickens. Then pour
immediately into hot glasses. Allow to become thoroughly cold before
covering. Peach marmalade may be prepared in the same manner.

=Brandied cherries.= Select some fine Queen Anne cherries and cut off
about half of the stem with scissors. Arrange the cherries in glass jars
or bottles. Melt two and one-half pounds of granulated cane sugar with a
very little water, being very careful not to let it scorch. Remove from
the fire and add half a vanilla bean, then add slowly one gallon of
brandy. When cold pour over the cherries, seal well, and keep in a cool
place.

=Brandied peaches.= Rub some sound white peaches with a crash towel to
remove the down. Prick all over with a needle, drop in cold water,
drain, put in a kettle, cover with fresh cold water, and add a small
piece of alum the size of a hazelnut. Place over a fire, stir
occasionally, and as they float to the surface of the liquid take them
out and place in a pan of cold water. Drain, and arrange in quart glass
jars. Pour over brandy enough to cover the peaches.

Seal and put away in a cool place, and let stand for two weeks. Then
drain off brandy into a kettle, and allow three pounds of sugar to each
gallon of brandy. Stir well to melt the sugar. Pour this over the
peaches, seal hermetically, and put away in a cool place.

=Preserved cherries.= To each pound of stoned cherries allow one pound
of granulated cane sugar. Crack some of the stones and tie the kernels
in a piece of gauze, so they may be removed after the boiling. Then put
all in a preserving kettle, boil, and skim, until the syrup is clear.
Then put the cherries in jars; boil the syrup a little longer, and pour
over the fruit.

=Preserved green gage plums.= Use a pound of sugar for each pound of
plums. Have the fruit clean and dry, and prick all over to keep the
skins from breaking. Melt the sugar with as little water as possible,
and when boiling add the plums, a layer at a time. Boil for a few
minutes, then lift out with a skimmer and place singly on a dish to
cool. Continue in this way until the plums are removed. When the last
layer is finished return the first ones cooked to the kettle, and
continue in reverse order, and boil until transparent. Then take out and
arrange closely in glass jars. When all are in the jars pour the hot
syrup over them, and seal.


JUNE 18

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Boiled eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Pompano saute, meuniere
       Cold duckling and ham
       Orloff salad
       Camembert cheese
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Irma
       Lyon sausage
       Fillet of sole, Talleyrand
       Saddle of lamb, Souvaroff
       String beans in butter
       Mashed potatoes
       Chiffonnade salad
       Angel cake
       Demi tasse

=Orloff salad.= Cut out the flesh from two cantaloupes and cut in
one-half inch squares. Arrange in a circle in a salad bowl, and in the
center put four buttons of artichokes cut in the same manner. Pour
one-half cup of French dressing over all.

=Consomme Irma.= Boil one calf's brains, cut in small squares, and add
to a quart of well-seasoned consomme.

=Fillet of sole, Talleyrand.= Lay four fillets of sole flat on the table
and spread with fish force meat (Feb. 11), and sprinkle with a little
chopped truffles. On top of each lay another thin fillet, season well
with salt and pepper, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in
fresh bread crumbs. Fry in swimming lard for about ten minutes. Serve on
a napkin garnished with parsley in branches and quartered lemons; and
with Tartar sauce separate.

=Saddle of lamb, Souvaroff.= Roast a saddle of lamb, place on a platter,
and garnish with a canful of cepes saute, and raw horseradish root
shaved or scraped with a knife. Cover with brown gravy made from the
lamb gravy.

=Angel cake, or angel food.= One pint of whites of eggs (it will require
about sixteen), one pound of sugar, ten ounces of flour sifted with
one-half teaspoonful of cream of tartar, and the flavor desired. Beat or
whip the whites of eggs very stiff, then gradually put in the sugar and
vanilla, lemon or orange flavor; and finally stir in the flour. Put in
mould and bake in a very slow oven. When cold glace with white icing.


JUNE 19

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Broiled honeycomb tripe
       Saratoga chips
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs, Oudinot
       Fried smelts, Tartar sauce
       Paprika schnitzel
       Boiled rice
       Baked apricot roll
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage paysanne
       Aiguillettes of flounder, Rochefoucault
       Roast squab chicken
       Artichokes, sauce mousseline
       Carrots, Vichy
       Potato croquettes
       Alligator pear salad
       Blackberry pie
       Coffee

=Eggs, Oudinot.= Cut four hard-boiled eggs in two lengthwise. Take out
the yolks and put in a salad bowl, add one-half cup of fresh bread
crumbs, one raw egg yolk, and season with salt, pepper, and a little
chopped parsley. Mix well, and then stuff the whites of eggs. Place on a
buttered dish, cover with cream sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese, put
small bits of butter all over the top, and bake in oven until brown.

=Potage paysanne.= Cut a carrot, white turnip, parsnip, and a small head
of green cabbage in round slices the size of a silver half dollar. Put
in a casserole with three ounces of butter, salt and a pinch of sugar.
Cover casserole and put in oven and simmer until vegetables are done. Be
careful not to burn, and when turning do not break the vegetables. When
the vegetables are cooked add two quarts of bouillon, stock, or chicken
or beef broth, and cook for half an hour. Before serving add chopped
chervil, and season with salt and pepper.

=Aiguillettes of flounder, Rochefoucault.= Place four flat fillets of
flounder in a buttered pan, lay some sliced lobster on top, season with
salt and pepper, add one-half glass of white wine and one-half glass of
water, cover with buttered paper, and put in oven for ten minutes. Then
remove the fillets to a platter. Reduce the broth, add one pint of white
wine sauce, and strain. To the sauce add one-half can of French
mushrooms sliced, and two sliced truffles. Pour the sauce over the fish.

=Pompano, Bateliere.= Roll four small California pompano in flour, and
season with salt and pepper. Put three ounces of butter in a frying pan,
heat, add the fish, and saute until nice and brown. Then put the fish on
a platter; and in the pan put two ounces of butter, heat until the color
of hazelnuts, and pour over the fish. Sprinkle with chopped parsley, and
garnish with two lemons cut in half.


JUNE 20

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Waffles, special, with maple syrup
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, Bombay
       Imported Frankfort sausages
       Potato salad
       Brie cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Valencienne
       Carciofini.      Queen olives
       Frogs' legs, saute, Dilloise
       Porterhouse steak, Jolly
       Fresh Lima beans
       Julienne potatoes
       Endives salad
       Chocolate and coffee bouchettes
       Demi tasse

=Waffles, special.= One-half pound of flour, one teaspoonful of baking
powder, one spoonful of sugar, one ounce of melted butter, one-half pint
of milk, one pinch of salt, three yolks and three whites of eggs. Mix
the baking powder with the flour, then add the sugar, salt, yolks of
eggs, butter and milk, and make a batter that should not be too stiff
and hard. Beat the whites of eggs very hard, add to the batter, and mix
well. Bake in a well-greased hot iron. (If possible use sour milk.)

=Poached eggs, Bombay.= Put some boiled rice on a platter, lay four
poached eggs on top, and cover with curry sauce.

=Consomme Valencienne.= Boil one-half pound of rice in salted water,
cool; and serve in one quart of hot and well-seasoned consomme. Before
serving add some small leaves of chervil, which should be specially
selected. Grated Swiss cheese should be served separate.

=Frogs' legs, Dilloise.= Cut two dozen frogs' legs in two, season with
salt and pepper, put in saute pan with one ounce of butter, and two
ounces of bacon cut in small squares. Fry for a few minutes until the
bacon is nearly crisp, then add the legs, and simmer for five minutes.
Then add one pint of tomato sauce and boil for ten minutes, very slowly.
Add a few dashes of Tabasco sauce, and season well.

=Porterhouse steak, Jolly.= Get from the butcher a nice porterhouse
steak, about four pounds in weight. Season with salt and pepper, roll in
oil, and broil. When done place on a platter, and cover with sauce
Bordelaise with beef marrow. Place a dozen heads of broiled fresh
mushrooms on top, and sprinkle with chopped parsley.


JUNE 21

     BREAKFAST
       Cantaloupe
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Uncolored Japan tea

     LUNCHEON
       Antipasto
       Shirred eggs, Amiral
       Broiled pig's feet, Chili sauce
       String bean salad
       Italian meringue, with whipped cream
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams on half shell
       Puree of cucumber soup
       Pompano saute, Bateliere
       Rissolees potatoes
       Roast chicken
       Peas a la Francaise
       Lettuce salad
       Raspberry shortcake with plain cream
       Coffee

=Shirred eggs, Amiral.= Put two eggs in a buttered shirred egg dish and
cook. When nearly done put on top a spoonful of white wine sauce with a
little chopped lobster, mushrooms and truffles in it. Finish cooking,
and season well with salt and pepper.

=Puree of cucumbers.= Peel four cucumbers, and cut in slices. Put them
in a casserole with two quarts of cold water, season with salt, and
bring to a boil. Then drain off the water, cool in cold fresh water, and
drain again. Put three ounces of butter in a casserole, add the
cucumbers, cover, and simmer in the oven for thirty minutes. Then remove
from oven, set on top of range, add three spoonfuls of flour, simmer,
then add one quart of boiling milk and one quart of chicken broth, and
boil for twenty minutes. Strain through a fine sieve, put back in
casserole, season with salt, pepper and a pinch of sugar, add two ounces
of sweet butter and a cupful of heated cream. When butter is melted add
some bread that has been cut in small squares and fried in butter, and
serve.

=Italian meringue.= Put one pound of sugar and one gill of water into a
copper kettle (copper inside and out) and cook to a blow. (See below).
Beat six whites of eggs very hard and dry, and then pour into the cooked
sugar, stirring constantly, and beat well until cold. It will then be a
very smooth meringue paste, which can be used for meringue with whipped
cream, or sherbet, or to make small fancy cakes, or for use in
decorating cakes, pies, tarts, etc.

=How to cook sugar to a blow.= Dissolve one pound of sugar in one gill
of water, and put on fire to cook. After about five minutes of good
boiling dip a skimmer into it and remove immediately. Let the syrup
drain a little, and then blow through. If small air bubbles fly out the
sugar is cooked to a blow. If no air bubbles fly continue cooking until
they do. It may possibly require some time to get it right.

=Peas a la Francaise.= In a casserole put two ounces of butter and a
head of lettuce sliced very fine. Simmer for five minutes, then add two
pounds of shelled peas, six small raw French carrots and one dozen raw
fresh asparagus tips. Season with salt and a pinch of sugar, add one
pint of chicken broth, cover, and simmer for one hour. Serve with
fresh-chopped chervil on top.


JUNE 22

     BREAKFAST
       Baked pears
       Bacon and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Riga
       Sweetbreads, Lavaliere
       Cold roast beef
       Field salad
       Lemon water ice
       Langues de chat
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Allemande
       California ripe olives
       Perch au bleu
       Potatoes nature
       Larded tenderloin of beef, Vigo
       String beans in butter
       Green corn on cob
       Lettuce salad, Russian dressing
       Chocolate blanc mange
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Baked pears.= Core one dozen pears, but leave the stems on. Put in a
pan with half a pint of water and half a pound of sugar, and bake in
medium hot oven until soft. Serve either hot or cold, with sauce
separate.

=Baked peaches.= Prick one dozen peaches all over with a fork, and set
them close together in a pan. Sprinkle with one-quarter pound of
granulated sugar, and add just water enough to cover the bottom of the
pan. Bake until soft. Serve cream separate.

=Sweetbreads, Lavaliere.= Prepare some sweetbreads braise, place on a
platter, garnish with peas in butter, and onions glaces. In the gravy
put pieces of parboiled salt pork cut in small dices, and cook for ten
minutes. Pour over the sweetbreads.

=Consomme Allemande.= Mix in a bowl three-quarters of a cupful of sifted
flour, one-quarter of a cupful of milk, two whole eggs, and a little
salt. Let it run through a colander into three pints of boiling
consomme, and boil for five minutes.

=Consomme Xavier.= Same as Consomme Allemande, with the addition of a
little chopped chervil just before serving.

=Perch au bleu.= Put four fresh-killed perch on a platter, and pour a
glassful of white wine vinegar over them. Put in a fish kettle on the
fire, some water, a handful of salt; and one sliced onion, one carrot, a
bay leaf, clove and parsley tied in a bouquet. Boil for five minutes,
then add the fish and vinegar, bring to a boil, and then set on side of
the range for fifteen minutes. Serve on a napkin garnished with small
boiled potatoes, parsley in branches, and lemons cut in half. Serve
Hollandaise sauce separate.

=Larded tenderloin of beef, Vigo.= Lard and roast the tenderloin as
given elsewhere. Serve on a platter garnished with stuffed tomatoes,
Creole. Cover with its own brown gravy.

=Stuffed tomatoes, Creole.= Make a rice Creole (Dec. 23). Peel four
sliced tomatoes, scoop out the insides, season with salt and pepper both
inside and out, and fill with the rice. Place on a buttered pan, put a
small piece of butter on top of each, and bake in oven for ten minutes,
or until the tomatoes are soft. Test with your finger. Serve with tomato
sauce around them; or use as a garnish for entrees.


JUNE 23

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Omelet with potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs, Basque
       Frogs' legs, Tartar sauce
       Broiled chicken on toast
       Souffle potatoes
       Cold artichokes, vinaigrette
       Peach compote
       Honey cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Mongol
       Radishes
       Planked shad and roe
       Roast loin of veal, au jus
       Carrots, Vichy
       Flageolets in butter
       Endives salad
       German almond strips
       Demi tasse

=Omelet with potatoes.= Use left-over cold baked or boiled potatoes.
Chop up a cupful and put in an omelet pan with two ounces of butter and
fry until golden yellow. Season with salt and pepper, and then add a
dozen beaten and seasoned eggs. Cook the omelet in the usual manner.

=Eggs, Basque.= Put in very hot swimming fat four whole large green
peppers, and fry for one minute. Then take out and remove the skin, cut
the bottoms off, take out the seeds, and place each pepper in a buttered
cup, with the open end up. Then crack an egg in each pepper, season with
salt, and place the cups in a pan in a little water, and put in oven to
bake. Put some boiled rice on a platter and turn out the peppers with
eggs on top, so they will look like stuffed green peppers. Pour some
brown meat gravy, or tomato sauce, or cream sauce, around them.

=Roast loin of veal, au jus.= See veal kidney roast, Dec. 20.

=Russian dressing, for salads.= Mix in a large bowl one cup of
mayonnaise sauce, three soupspoonfuls of French dressing, two
soupspoonfuls of Chili sauce, two soupspoonfuls of chopped pimentos, one
soupspoonful of chopped green olives, one teaspoonful of Worcestershire
sauce, and season with salt and pepper, if necessary.

=Peach compote.= Peel a dozen peaches and place them in a sauce pan, add
a quart of water, one-half pound of sugar, and one-half of a vanilla
bean. Boil slowly until soft. Strain off the syrup, return to the fire,
and reduce one-half. Pour the syrup over the peaches, and serve when
cold. The peaches may be prepared whole, or cut in half.

=Fruit compotes.= Apple, nectarine, apricot, prune or plum compote may
be prepared in the same manner as peach compote.

=Langue de chat, I.= Work a quarter pound of butter with a quarter pound
of sugar until creamy. Then add four eggs, one by one, and keep on
working until very smooth. Add a few drops of vanilla extract and a
quarter pound of flour, and mix lightly. Put into a pastry bag and dress
on a buttered pan in the shape of small thin lady fingers. Bake for a
few minutes in a rather hot oven.

=II.= One-quarter pound of sugar, one-quarter pound of butter,
one-quarter pound of flour, the whites of three eggs, and a little
vanilla flavor. Mix the sugar and butter until creamy; add the whites of
eggs that have been well whipped to snow; add the flour and flavoring,
and mix lightly. Dress on buttered pan like lady fingers, but smaller.
Bake and remove from pan while hot.

=German almond strips.= One-half pound of sugar, one-half pound of
butter, ten ounces of flour, three eggs, one-half pound of ground
almonds, and the grated rind of a lemon. Work the sugar with the butter
until creamy, add the lemon rind, and work in the egg. Then add the
flour and almonds, and mix lightly. Set in the ice box for an hour to
harden. Then roll out in thin sheets and cut in strips two inches long
and one-half inch wide. Wash the tops with egg, sprinkle with chopped
almonds, put on a pan and bake in a moderate oven.

=Honey cake.= One-half pound of honey, seven ounces of brown sugar, one
pony of water, one-half teaspoonful of soda, six ounces of
finely-chopped almonds, one pinch of cloves and allspice, three-quarters
of a pound of flour, and two ounces of lemon and orange peel chopped
fine. Boil the sugar, honey and water; then take off the fire and allow
to cool to blood heat; then mix in the flour, spices, and the soda
dissolved in a little water; then add the almonds and the peel. Roll out
about one-half inch thick, and cut in small cakes about one inch by
three; and bake in a moderate oven. When done glace with a very thin
icing.


JUNE 24

     BREAKFAST
       Apricot marmalade
       Buckwheat cakes
       Breakfast sausages
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cold poached eggs, a l'estragon
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       German huckleberry cake
       American dairy cheese
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Creole
       Salt codfish, Biscayenne
       Braised sweetbreads, sauce Soubise
       Roast squab
       Boiled onions
       Broiled fresh mushrooms
       Chateau potatoes
       Lettuce and grapefruit salad
       Baked blackberry roll
       Coffee

=Cold poached eggs, a l'estragon.= Select four nice lettuce leaves and
place a cold poached egg on each. Cover with sauce mayonnaise, and lay
four leaves of tarragon crosswise over each egg.

=German huckleberry cake.= Line a cake pan, that will hold enough for
six persons, with thin dough. (See dough for German cake). Fill with
cleaned huckleberries, sprinkle on a handful of sugar mixed with a
little powdered cinnamon, and bake. Then mix one-quarter pound of sugar
with one pint of milk and three eggs, and strain. Pour this over the
cake when it is nearly done, and set back in oven for a few minutes
until the custard is set. When cold dust with powdered sugar.

=Consomme Creole.= Peel and cut in small squares, two raw tomatoes, and
add to a quart of boiling consomme. Also add a cupful of boiled rice,
and season with a little Cayenne pepper.

=Salt codfish, Biscayenne.= Soak two pounds of salted codfish in cold
water over night. Then drain off the water. Heat two tablespoonfuls of
olive oil in a casserole, add six shallots chopped very fine, and allow
them to become warmed through, but not colored. Then add six pieces of
chopped garlic and half of the codfish. On top of the codfish lay two
raw potatoes that have been sliced very thin, season with salt, lay two
peeled and sliced tomatoes on top of the potatoes, then add the
remainder of the codfish, and half a cup of water, cover, and cook in
the oven for an hour. Fresh codfish may be used if desired, with the
addition of a little more salt.

=Braised sweetbreads, sauce Soubise.= Braise the sweetbreads in the
usual manner. Put some sauce Soubise on a platter, lay the sweetbreads
on top, and garnish with fleurons.


JUNE 25

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Cendrillon salad
       Small tenderloin steak, Marseillaise
       Gnocchis a la Romaine
       Camembert cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream Countess
       Salami sausage.      Radishes
       Fillet of kingfish, Ubsala
       Roast tame duck, apple sauce
       Carrots and peas in cream
       German fried potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Plombiere aux fruits
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Salad Cendrillon.= Scoop out four cold baked potatoes, fill with
Russian salad, and serve on a napkin, garnished with parsley in branches
and canapes of anchovies.

=Small tenderloin steak, Marseillaise.= Chop six shallots and two pieces
of garlic, and simmer in two ounces of butter. Then add a peeled tomato
cut in small squares, and six chopped anchovies, and simmer for twenty
minutes. Then add two cups of brown gravy (sauce Madere), boil for two
minutes, add two ounces of butter, stir until melted, and season with
salt and Cayenne pepper to taste.

=Gnocchis a la Romaine.= Put three-quarters of a pound of farina in one
quart of boiling milk, and boil slowly for fifteen minutes. Then remove
from the fire and bind with the yolks of six eggs and a half cup of
cream. Season with salt and white pepper, and set to cool. Then cut in
one and one-half inch squares, or in other desired shapes; place on a
buttered pan, or deep dish, or individual shirred egg dish; sprinkle
with grated Parmesan cheese, put small bits of butter on top, and bake
in oven until brown.

=Gnocchis au gratin.= Same as above, except pour sour cream over them,
sprinkle with cheese, add butter on top, and bake until brown.

=Cream Countess.= Make a cream of asparagus soup, and before serving
bind with the yolk of one egg for each person. Color with green spinach
coloring.

=Kingfish, Ubsala.= Put four cleaned kingfish on a buttered pan, season
with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of white wine and one-half cup
of fish stock, bouillon or water, and bake in an oven. Then place the
fish on a platter, add one pint of white wine sauce to the juice of the
fish in the pan, and reduce by boiling to the thickness of a good sauce.
Strain over the fish. Garnish with fleurons.


JUNE 26

     BREAKFAST
       Apricot marmalade
       Waffles
       Buttermilk
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs, Celestine
       Fried chicken, Villeroi
       Flageolet beans
       Mashed potato salad
       French pastry
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Magador
       Ripe olives
       Salmon, Concourt
       Fillet of beef saute, Balzag
       Artichokes, Hollandaise
       Green corn
       Potato croquettes
       Romaine salad, Roquefort dressing
       Blanc mange, aux liqueurs
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Eggs, Celestine.= Put four pieces of toast on a buttered platter, lay a
slice of broiled ham on top of each, and a poached egg on top of each
slice of ham. Cover with cream sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese, put a
little butter on each, and bake in a hot oven until brown.

=Fried chicken, Villeroi.= Joint a chicken, season with salt and pepper,
roll in flour, then in beaten eggs and fresh bread crumbs. Put one-half
cup of melted butter in a pan, heat, and then fry the chicken. Make a
pint of sauce Allemande (March 4), add one cup of fresh-boiled new peas,
and season well. Put some of the sauce on a platter, lay the chicken on
top, and serve the remainder of the sauce in a sauceboat.

=Consomme Magador.= Wash a stalk of celery and cut in small dices, boil
in salted water until soft. Then add to three pints of boiling consomme;
season well, and serve with chopped chervil.

=Salmon, Concourt.= Cut the salmon in slices one inch thick, season with
salt and pepper, roll in melted butter, then in fresh bread crumbs, and
broil. When done place on a platter, and garnish with parsley in
branches and lemons cut in half. Serve sauce Colbert separate.

=Fillet of beef saute, Balzag.= Season four small tenderloin steaks with
salt and pepper, and saute in butter. Then place on a platter. Make a
pint of sauce Madere, and add to it one dozen small chicken dumplings,
one dozen stuffed olives and two sliced truffles. Pour over the fillets.


JUNE 27

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberries with cream
       Scrambled eggs with chives
       Crescents and rolls
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Cold Virginia ham
       Bretonne salad
       Lillian Russell
       Macaroons
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Chicken soup, Bresilienne
       Celery
       Striped bass, Buena Vista
       Chicken fricassee, a l'ancienne
       Asparagus, sauce mousseline
       Pate de foie gras, a la gelee
       Lettuce salad
       Pancakes, Lieb
       Coffee

=Salad Bretonne.= Soak one pound of white beans in cold water over
night. Then put on fire in two quarts of water, add a little salt, one
carrot, one onion, and a bouquet garni. Cover, and boil until soft. Then
remove the vegetables, drain off the water, and set the beans in a cool
place. When cold put them in a salad bowl, and in the center place two
tomatoes peeled and cut in small squares. Sprinkle with one teaspoonful
of salt, one-half teaspoonful of fresh-ground black pepper, one-third
cup of white wine vinegar, two-thirds of a cup of olive oil, and a
little chopped parsley. Some chopped chives may also be added if
desired. Mix on the table.

=Chicken soup, Bresilienne.= One pint of consomme tapioca, one pint of
thick consomme brunoise, and the breast of a fowl cut in small squares.
Bring to a boil, and serve.

=Striped bass, Buena Vista.= Put in a wide copper fish pan one cup of
olive oil, two sliced onions, two sliced green peppers, and then fry.
When done add four cloves of chopped garlic and let it set in the hot
oil for a second; then add a pint of claret, one dozen sliced fresh
mushrooms, six peeled and sliced tomatoes, and one-half canful of sliced
pimentos. Bring to a boil, and then add five pounds of striped bass cut
in slices two inches thick. Season with salt, pepper, and a little
paprika; cover, and simmer for thirty minutes. Cut eight slices of bread
the same thickness as for toasting, and fry in hot oil. Rub the fried
bread with a piece of garlic, lay on a deep platter, put the fish on top
of the toast, pour sauce over the fish, and sprinkle with chopped
parsley.

=Chicken fricassee, a l'ancienne.= Cut a young roasting chicken in eight
pieces, wash well, and put in a pot in one quart of cold water. Season
with salt, bring to a boil, and skim. Then add one-half pint of small
peeled white onions, one pint of small round raw Parisian potatoes, one
pound of parboiled salt pork cut in small dices, and one bouquet garni.
Boil until done; then remove the bouquet garni, and take off the fat on
top of the broth. Mix in a bowl two spoonfuls of flour and one-half cup
of water, and let it run into the boiling fricassee. Boil for five
minutes; then bind with the yolks of two eggs and one-half cup of cream.
When serving sprinkle with chopped parsley.


JUNE 28

     BREAKFAST
       Crab apple marmalade
       Shirred eggs, plain
       Melba toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Omelette Argentine
       Turkey hash, Chateau de Madrid
       Julienne potatoes
       Brie cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Bohemienne
       Queen olives and salted almonds
       Baked lobster, Lincoln
       Roast Imperial squab
       Baked potatoes
       Cold artichokes, mustard sauce
       Baked huckleberry roll
       Coffee

=Omelette Argentine.= Cut one-quarter pound of egg plant in one-half
inch squares. Put in omelet pan with one ounce of butter and fry until
cooked. Then add eight beaten eggs, season with salt and pepper, and
cook in the usual manner. Serve the omelet on a platter with sauce
Colbert around it.

=Turkey hash, Chateau de Madrid.= Cut the breast of a boiled turkey in
small squares. Put in a saute pan with one pint of thick cream sauce,
season with salt and pepper, heat, and fill as many red peppers
(pimentos) as possible. Place the filled peppers on a buttered platter,
so they will have the appearance of little red caps. Put in the oven and
cook for a few minutes. Serve with sauce Creole poured around them.

=Consomme Bohemienne.= Make three thin pancakes, and when cold cut in
Julienne shape. Cut the breast of a boiled fowl also in Julienne shape.
Chop a raw peeled tomato; and add all the above with a cup of fresh
peas, to three pints of boiling consomme, and serve.

=Baked lobster, Lincoln.= Boil two lobsters. When cold, cut in two
lengthwise, remove the meat, and slice it. Put in a casserole two ounces
of butter, and heat; then add two chopped shallots, and two cloves of
garlic chopped fine. Heat slightly and then add six sliced fresh
mushrooms, and simmer for five minutes. Then add one cup of cream sauce,
one teaspoonful of English mustard mixed with one tablespoonful of
Worcestershire sauce, and a little chopped parsley and tarragon. Cook
for ten minutes, then add the lobster, and season with salt and pepper.
Fill the half lobster shells with the mixture, sprinkle with grated
cheese, put small bits of butter on top, and bake in oven until well
browned. Serve on a napkin, with parsley in branches, and two lemons cut
in half.


JUNE 29

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh sliced peaches with cream
       Griddle cakes
       Kidneys saute, au Madere
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cold fish a la Michels
       Lemon pie
       Buttermilk
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Sorrel soup, with rice
       Lyon sausages
       Frogs' legs, saute a sec
       Tournedos, Vaudeville
       Sybil potatoes
       Watercress salad
       Compote of gooseberries
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Cold fish a la Michels.= Put in a casserole one spoonful of olive oil
and a small onion chopped very fine. Fry until yellow, and then add one
chopped clove of garlic and a spoonful of flour. Cook this until yellow;
then add two and one-half cups of water, season with salt and pepper,
and boil for two minutes. Then add about two pounds of any kind of fish
cut in pieces about two inches square, and some chopped parsley, and
boil for thirty minutes. Put the fish in a deep porcelain dish, pour the
sauce over it, and serve when cold.

=Sorrel soup with rice.= Wash a large handful of sorrel, remove the
stems, and slice very thin. Put two ounces of butter and three ounces of
rice in a casserole, and heat. Then add the sorrel and simmer for five
minutes. Then add two quarts of bouillon, chicken broth or stock, season
with salt and pepper, and boil slowly for thirty minutes. When rice is
soft it is ready to serve.

=Tournedos, Vaudeville.= Season four small tenderloin steaks with salt
and pepper, and broil; or saute in pan with butter. When done place on a
platter, lay on each a fresh poached egg; and garnish with four stuffed
tomatoes, Creole. Cover the tournedos with sauce Madere.

=Compote of gooseberries.= To each pint of well-cleaned gooseberries add
one-half pound of sugar and one gill of water. Cook slowly until the
berries are soft.


JUNE 30

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved green gage plums
       Boiled eggs
       Doughnuts
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Clam broth en bellevue
       Chicken saute a sec
       French fried potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Sierra cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Xavier
       Pim olas
       Boiled salmon steak with peas
       Roast saddle of lamb, mint sauce
       Green corn
       Stewed tomatoes
       Lettuce and grapefruit salad
       Berliner pfannenkuchen
       Coffee

=Doughnuts--with baking powder.= One pound of flour, one-half ounce
baking powder, two ounces of butter, three ounces of sugar, the yolks of
four eggs, one whole egg, one-half gill of milk, and the rind of a
lemon. Sift the baking powder into the flour. Mix the sugar, butter and
eggs; add the milk and flour, and the lemon rind flavoring. Roll out,
and cut with a doughnut cutter, and fry in hot lard or butter. Dust with
powdered sugar with a little cinnamon in it, before serving.

=Doughnuts--with yeast.= One pound of flour, one ounce of yeast, two
eggs, two ounces of butter, two ounces of sugar, one pinch of salt and
the rind and juice of a lemon. Sift the flour into a bowl; add the egg,
and the yeast dissolved in a little milk, and one gill of milk; making a
medium stiff dough. Cover with a cloth, and allow to rise to double its
original volume. It will require about an hour. Then work in the butter,
salt, and flavoring, mix well, and let it rise again. Then fold the
dough together, roll out to about one-quarter inch thick, cut with a
doughnut cutter, allow to rise for half an hour, and fry. Dust with
powdered sugar and cinnamon before serving.

=Crullers.= Use either the baking powder or yeast doughnut dough, cut
with a cruller cutter, and fry in the same manner as doughnuts.

=Coffee cake dough.= One pound of flour, one ounce of yeast, two eggs,
two ounces of butter, two ounces of sugar, one pinch of salt, the rind
and juice of a lemon, and a little nutmeg. Put the flour into a bowl.
Dissolve the yeast in a gill of luke-warm milk, and add to the flour,
with the eggs. Work to a medium stiff dough. Cover with a cloth and let
it rise to double its original size. Then work in the butter, sugar,
salt and lemon flavoring, and mix well. Let it rise again for about an
hour; when the dough will be ready to use. This dough is the foundation
for all kinds of coffee cake.

=Berliner pfannenkuchen.= Make a coffee cake dough. Roll out some balls
about the size of an egg, flatten them a little and put one-half
teaspoonful of any kind of jam on top. Pinch up the dough over the jam.
Lay them on a cloth, smooth side up, cover, and allow to raise to nearly
double in size. Fry in swimming hot lard or clarified butter. When done
dust with granulated sugar and powdered cinnamon.


JULY 1

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced figs with cream
       Baked beans, Boston style
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Imperial salad
       Broiled lamb chops
       Red kidney beans
       Souffle potatoes
       St. Francis cheese, with crackers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage St. Marceau
       Fillet of sole, Montmorency
       Sweetbreads braise, Princess
       Chateau potatoes
       Roast chicken
       Chiffonnade salad
       Corn starch pudding
       Coffee

=Imperial salad.= Equal parts of sliced tomatoes, sliced artichoke
bottoms, and fresh peas. Put them in a salad bowl, cover with mayonnaise
sauce, and lay some sliced truffles on top.

=St. Francis cheese.= Scrape the skin from three Camembert cheeses, and
put in a copper casserole. Add one-quarter pound of good Roquefort
cheese, one-half pound of the best table butter, two tablespoonfuls of
sifted flour, and one pint of the best cream. Cook until melted, and the
whole becomes thick; then strain through cheese cloth. Put in an
earthern pot and allow to become cool. The cheese will keep for two
weeks if kept in the ice box.

=Potage St. Marceau.= Mix one quart of puree of split pea soup with one
pint of consomme Julienne.

=Fillet of sole, Montmorency.= Place four fillets of sole in a buttered
pan, season with salt and pepper, and lay on each fillet four heads of
canned French mushrooms. Cover all with one pint of sauce Italienne,
sprinkle with grated cheese, put small bits of butter on top, and bake
in oven for fifteen minutes. Then remove from the oven, squeeze the
juice of a lemon on top, and sprinkle with chopped parsley. Serve from
the pan used in cooking, which may be placed on a platter.

=Sweetbreads braise, Princess.= Braise four nice sweetbreads, and place
them on fresh artichoke bottoms on a platter. Garnish with boiled
cauliflower with a little Bearnaise sauce poured over it; and over the
sweetbreads pour the gravy left after braising. Saute the livers of four
chickens in butter, season well with salt and pepper, and lay them
around the cauliflower.

=Corn starch pudding.= One quart of milk, three ounces of corn starch,
five ounces of sugar, four yolks and four whites of eggs, one ounce of
butter, and flavoring. Dissolve the corn starch in a little cold milk.
Put the rest of the milk and the sugar on the stove, and when near
boiling add the dissolved corn starch and stir well. Boil for a few
minutes, then take off the fire, add the butter, the yolks of eggs, and
the flavoring. Beat the whites to snow, and add, mixing lightly. Put
into buttered moulds and bake for about twenty minutes. Serve with fruit
or cream sauce.


JULY 2

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved cherries
       Bacon and eggs
       Rolls
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Crab cocktail, Cremiere
       Pig's feet, St. Menehould
       Cottage fried potatoes      Succotash
       Coffee blanc mange
       Assorted cakes      Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Consomme Marie Louise
       Ripe olives.       Salted pecans
       Halibut, Boitel
       Larded sirloin of beef, Lili
       Potato pancakes
       Wax beans in butter
       Celery Victor
       Brandied peaches
       Vanilla ice cream
       Macaroons      Coffee

=Crab cocktail, Cremiere.= Same as Crab cocktail, Victor (see March 24),
with the addition of a little whipped cream on top.

=Cottage fried potatoes.= Slice three potatoes of medium size in pieces
the size and shape of a silver dollar. Heat two ounces of butter in a
frying pan, add the potatoes, season with salt and pepper, and fry
slowly. When done add a spoonful of grated cheese, and put in the oven
for a few minutes. Then dish up, sprinkled with chopped parsley.

=Pig's feet, St. Menehould.= Split two boiled pigs' feet, roll in melted
butter and then in fresh bread crumbs. Broil. When done dish up on a
platter, and garnish with parsley in branches and two lemons cut in
half. Serve tomato sauce separate, and cream sauce with chopped truffles
in it.

=Succotash.= If canned succotash is used empty it into a casserole, add
a small piece of butter, season with salt and pepper, and serve very
hot.

=Fresh succotash.= Put two ounces of butter in a casserole, add the corn
cut from six fresh ears, and simmer for ten minutes. Then add one pound
of boiled fresh Lima beans, season with salt and pepper, add one
spoonful of cream sauce and one spoonful of cream, and cook for five
minutes.

=Consomme Marie Louise.= To consomme royal add a cupful of fresh boiled
green peas.

=Halibut, Boitel.= Cut four fillets of halibut, place them in a buttered
pan, season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of white wine and
one-half cup of stock or water, cover, and simmer for ten minutes. Then
remove the fish to a platter, and to the pan add one can of chopped
French mushrooms, and two cups of cream sauce. Season well, and boil for
five minutes. Pour over the fish, and sprinkle with chopped parsley.

=Larded tenderloin of beef, Lili.= Roast a larded tenderloin of beef,
and serve with sauce Madere, to which has been added six sliced heads of
fresh mushrooms sauteed in butter, and two sliced truffles. Garnish with
six peeled and quartered tomatoes sauteed in butter.

=Potato pancakes.= Mix one egg, one-half cup of milk, one-half cup of
flour, and salt and pepper. Grate one and one-half cups of raw potato
and add immediately, otherwise it will turn black. Fry in melted butter,
and form the cakes by putting in a spoonful of the batter at a time.
Left over boiled or baked potatoes may be used instead of the raw
potatoes if desired.


JULY 3

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced bananas with cream
       Flannel cakes with maple syrup
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Fresh caviar
       Dry toast
       Clams en cocotte, Californienne
       Omelet with fresh strawberries
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Croute Bretonne
       Boiled Lake Tahoe trout, Hollandaise
       Potatoes nature
       Chicken saute, Viennoise
       Green peas
       Roast leg of mutton, currant jelly
       Endive salad
       Biscuit glace, mapleine
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Clams en cocotte, Californienne.= Remove three dozen Little Neck clams
from their shells and put in an earthern casserole or cocotte dish with
two ounces of butter. Then add one-half cup of raw fine-chopped celery,
two heads of fresh mushrooms chopped very fine, and a little chives
sliced very fine, and some chopped parsley. Season with salt and pepper,
put two more ounces of butter on top, and place in oven to bake. Cook
for twenty minutes, and serve from the cocotte, direct from the oven.

=Croute Bretonne.= Put two pounds of beef shin and five pounds of beef
bones in a casserole or soup kettle. Add one gallon of cold water, bring
slowly to a boil, and skim well. Then add one spoonful of salt, a
bouquet garni, half of a small head of cabbage or kale, two turnips, two
carrots, one parsnip and an onion. Boil for three hours; then strain the
broth into a soup tureen. Chop the vegetables very fine, put in salad
bowl, season with salt, pepper, and a little grated nutmeg, and add a
little chopped parsley and one-half cup of grated cheese. Cut some bread
in round pieces the size of a silver half dollar, and toast on one side.
Put the puree of vegetables on the toasted side of the croutons, place
on a buttered pan and bake in the oven until brown. Serve on a napkin
with the broth.

=Chicken saute, Viennoise.= Joint a spring chicken, season with salt and
pepper, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in bread crumbs.
Fry in melted butter. When done place on a platter, pour cream sauce
around it, and garnish with new peas cooked in butter.

=German coffee cake.= One pound of flour, one ounce of yeast, six ounces
of butter, three ounces of sugar, three eggs, and the rind of a lemon.
Prepare and raise the dough in the same manner as for coffee cake. Roll
out until about one-half inch thick, or thicker, if desired. Brush over
with egg, and spread some Streusel on top (see Streusel cake). Allow to
raise, and bake in a moderate oven.

=Streusel cake.= One-half pound of flour, six ounces of sugar, four
ounces of melted butter, one-half ounce of cinnamon, the juice of one
lemon, and the yolk of one egg. Mix all together, and pass through a
coarse sieve. Make a coffee cake dough, roll out, and spread the above
mixture over the top. Allow to raise, and then bake. (This cake is the
same as German coffee cake.)

=Cinnamon cake.= Roll out some German coffee cake dough about one-half
inch thick. Brush over with melted butter, and spread granulated sugar
mixed with powdered cinnamon, on top. Allow to raise, and then bake.

=Coffee fruit cake.= Add to German coffee cake mixture three ounces of
currants, three ounces of raisins, two ounces of lemon peel, and two
ounces of citron chopped fine. Roll out to about one-half inch thick,
allow to rise, and bake. When done ice over with very thin lemon icing.

=Coffee cream cake.= Roll out some German coffee cake dough very thin.
Spread over with pastry cream (see pastry cream). And cover with another
thin sheet of coffee cake dough. Brush over with egg, spread some
Streusel over the top, allow to raise, and bake.


JULY 4

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced pineapple
       Farina with cream
       Uncolored Japan tea
       Crescents

     LUNCHEON
       Canape thon marine
       Poached eggs, Creole
       Lamb chops, Robinson
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Corn saute in butter
       Orange compote
       Snails (cake)
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Florentine
       Ripe olives.       Celery
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Broiled baby turkey, cranberry sauce
       Baked sweet potatoes
       Summer squash
       Lettuce salad, egg dressing
       Coupe St. Jacques
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Poached eggs, Creole.= Put some boiled rice on a platter, lay four
poached eggs on top, and cover with Creole sauce.

=Lamb chops, Robinson.= Broil eight lamb chops, and lay them on a
platter. Clean a dozen chicken livers, cut in four, season with salt and
pepper, put in a frying pan with two ounces of hot melted butter, and
saute for three minutes. Then sprinkle with a spoonful of flour, add a
cup of bouillon or broth, boil for a minute, add a little dry sherry
wine, and pour over the chops.

=Corn saute in butter.= Cut the corn from eight ears, put in a saute pan
with two ounces of butter, season with salt and pepper, and cook for ten
minutes.

=Orange compote.= Take the outside yellow skin from six oranges cut very
fine in Julienne style. Cook for thirty minutes in water, changing about
three times. Changing the water takes away the bitter taste. Now peel
the fine skin of the six oranges very clean, and cut in two, crosswise.
In a sauce pan put one pound of sugar, a gill of water, and a drop of
red coloring, and boil for ten minutes. Add the cooked skins to the
syrup and boil again for fifteen minutes. Put the oranges in a deep bowl
and pour the syrup over them.

=Consomme Florentine.= Add to consomme printanier two pancakes cut
Julienne style, and some chervil.

=Broiled baby turkey.= Split a young turkey through from the back, wash
well, and dry with a towel. Season with salt and pepper, roll in oil,
and broil. When done place on four pieces of buttered toast, pour a cup
of maitre d'hotel sauce over it, and garnish with watercress and two
lemons cut in half.

=Snails (cake).= Take some German coffee cake dough and roll out into a
square sheet, about one-quarter inch thick. Brush over with melted
butter, and spread with some currants, citron chopped fine, sugar and
cinnamon. Roll the sheet of dough into a roll, and cut in slices about
one-quarter inch thick. Lay them on a buttered pan and allow to raise
until nearly double in size. Bake in moderate oven, and when done, and
still hot, coat over with thin lemon icing.


JULY 5

     BREAKFAST
       Iced grapefruit juice
       Scrambled eggs with Swiss cheese
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cold stuffed eggs, with anchovies
       Terrine de foie gras
       Hearts of lettuce
       Assorted French pastry
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Chicken soup, Portugaise
       Salted almonds
       Fillet of bass, Brighton
       Paprika schnitzel
       Gnocchis au gratin
       Chiffonnade salad
       Artichokes, Hollandaise
       Strawberry water ice
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with Swiss cheese.= Cut one-quarter pound of Swiss
cheese in very small squares. Put an ounce of butter in a casserole with
the cheese, and heat slightly; then add ten beaten eggs, one-half cup of
cream, season with salt and pepper, and scramble in the usual manner.

=Chicken soup, Portugaise.= Put a soup hen on the fire in three quarts
of water, bring to a boil, and skim well. Then add a tablespoonful of
salt, two carrots, one onion, and a bouquet garni, and boil slowly until
the fowl is done. Then skim the broth, and cut the carrots and the onion
in small squares, and return to the soup. Peel four tomatoes, squeeze
out the juice, cut in small squares, and also add to the soup. Bring to
a boil, add a cup of boiled rice, and serve.

=Fillet of bass, Brighton.= Place four fillets of bass in a buttered
pan, season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of white wine,
cover with buttered paper, and set in oven for five minutes. Then place
the fillets on a platter; and put what remains in the pan in a
casserole, add one pint of well-seasoned sauce Italienne, bring to a
boil, and pour over the fish. Sprinkle with grated cheese, put small
bits of butter on top, and bake in oven for fifteen minutes. Sprinkle
with fresh-chopped parsley and the juice of a lemon.

=Fillet of fish au gratin, a l'Italienne.= Use any kind of fish cut in
fillets; large fish cut in slices; or whole small fish. Prepare in the
same manner as Fillet of Bass, Brighton.

=Cold stuffed eggs, with anchovies.= Boil six eggs until hard, remove
the shells, and cut in two lengthwise. Pass the yolks through a fine
sieve, and mix with one dozen anchovies in oil cut in small squares, a
little pepper, and a teaspoonful of mayonnaise sauce. Fill the whites of
the eggs with this mixture, and serve on a napkin with parsley in
branches and two lemons cut in four.


JULY 6

     BREAKFAST
       Boiled farina in milk
       Mixed fruit compote
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Scrambled eggs, Caroline
       Veal chop saute, in butter
       Mixed flageolet and string beans
       Mashed potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme, Nicoise
       Queen olives
       Frogs' legs saute, aux fines herbes
       Larded tenderloin of beef, jardiniere
       Duchesse potatoes
       Alligator pear, French dressing
       Sherbet au rhum
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Boiled farina in milk.= Bring a quart of milk to a boil, add a small
pinch of salt, and pour a half pound of farina into it slowly so dough
balls will not form. Cook for fifteen minutes.

=Scrambled eggs, Caroline.= Cut two boiled artichoke bottoms and two
slices of boiled ham in small squares. In a casserole put the ham with
two ounces of butter, heat, and then add ten beaten eggs, season with
salt and pepper, add one-half cup of cream, and scramble in the usual
manner. Just before finishing add the artichokes.

=Consomme, Nicoise.= To consomme vermicelli add a peeled tomato cut in
small squares. Bring to a boil, and serve with grated cheese, separate.

=Watermelon preserves.= Select a melon with a thick rind, and cut in any
shape desired. Lay the pieces in strong salt water for two or three
days; then soak in clear water for twenty-four hours, changing the water
frequently. Then put in alum water for two hours to harden. To every
pound of fruit use one pound of sugar. Make a syrup of the sugar and a
few pieces of ginger root and one lemon sliced thin. After boiling for a
few minutes, remove the lemon and ginger, add the melon, and boil until
transparent. Lift carefully, and place in glass jars. Fill the jars with
the syrup.

=Canned pears.= Peel, halve and core ten pounds of pears. Put in a
vessel with five pounds of granulated sugar, one sliced lemon, one
teaspoonful of ground cinnamon, a little grated nutmeg, and a small
piece of ginger root. Tie the cinnamon and nutmeg loosely in a piece of
gauze. Cook all together until the pears turn pink. Put in jars, and
seal while still hot.

=Canned peaches.= Pare twelve pounds of peaches, cut in half, and lay in
cold water until needed. Put on the stove three pounds of sugar with
nine pints of water. Boil to a syrup. Set the jars on a cloth in hot
water. Fill the jars with the cold peaches, putting a generous layer of
sugar between them. When the jars are full fill up with the hot syrup,
and seal immediately. Twelve pounds of fruit and three pounds of sugar
will fill six quart jars.

=Canned apples and quinces.= Pare and cut equal quantities of apples
and quinces. First cook the quinces in just sufficient water to cover.
Then remove, and cook the apples in the same water. In a vessel put a
layer of quinces, then a layer of apples, and so on until all are used.
Pour over them a syrup made of half a pound of sugar for each pound of
fruit; and allow to stand over night. Then boil for five minutes, and
seal in jars.

=Tomato preserves.= Scald and peel carefully some small, pear-shaped,
half ripe tomatoes. Prick with a needle to prevent their bursting, and
put their weight in sugar over them. Let them set overnight, then pour
off the liquid into a preserving kettle, and boil until it is a thick
syrup. Clarify with the white of an egg, add the tomatoes, and boil
until transparent. A small piece of ginger root; or a lemon sliced very
thin, to each pound of fruit, and cooked in the syrup, improves it.

=Apple butter.= To three gallons of cooked apples add one quart of
cider, five pounds of brown sugar, and several sticks of cinnamon. Boil
down to about two gallons.


JULY 7

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Cold consomme in cups
       Cold larded tenderloin of beef
       Cauliflower salad
       Floating island
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage Honolulu
       Radishes
       Stuffed clams
       Chicken saute, Lafitte
       Beets a la Russe
       Green corn saute
       Gauffrette potatoes
       Biscuit glace, pistachio
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Cauliflower salad.= Boil two heads of cauliflower in salt water for ten
minutes. Allow to become cold, and serve in salad bowl with French
dressing, or mayonnaise sauce.

=Potage Honolulu.= Put on the fire a soup hen, in three quarts of water;
season with a tablespoonful of salt, and bring to a boil. Then add one
bouquet garni, three onions, three green peppers, and three-quarters of
a pound of rice. When the hen is boiled soft remove it, with the bouquet
garni and the peppers. Strain the rice, onions and broth through a fine
sieve, and put back in the casserole. Bring to a boil, and bind with the
yolks of two eggs mixed with a cup of cream. Season well with salt and
Cayenne pepper, and add three canned red peppers cut in small squares,
before serving.

=Stuffed clams.= Remove the clams from twenty-four large Little Necks.
Wash the shells very clean, so there will be no sand in them. Chop the
clams, and mix with three fresh mushrooms chopped fine, one truffle, a
little chopped parsley and three ounces of butter. Season with salt and
pepper, and then fill the shells. Place on a pan, sprinkle with grated
cheese, put a small piece of butter on top of each, and bake in the oven
for fifteen minutes. Serve on a napkin, with parsley, and lemons cut in
half.

=Chicken saute, Lafitte.= Cut a spring chicken in four, and season with
salt and pepper. Put two ounces of butter in a saute pan, heat, and then
add the chicken. Cook until golden yellow, then sprinkle with a
tablespoonful of flour and cook until the flour is yellow. Then add half
a glass of claret and a cup of stock, bouillon or chicken broth. In
another frying pan put a spoonful of olive oil, heat, then add a can of
cepes, toss them while cooking slightly, and add to the chicken. Peel
one tomato, cut in eight, and also add to the chicken. Simmer together
for twenty minutes. Then place the chicken on a platter; boil the sauce
for five minutes more, season well with salt and pepper, add some
chopped parsley, and pour over the chicken. Lay six fleurons around the
platter.

=Beets a la Russe.= Slice a dozen boiled beets, put in a saute pan with
two ounces of butter, season with salt and pepper, and simmer for about
five minutes. Just before serving add six leaves of fresh mint chopped
very fine.


JULY 8

     BREAKFAST
       Apricots
       Shirred eggs with peppers
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Beef marrow, Princess
       Eggs, Garcia
       Bread custard pudding
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Charles Quint
       Broiled salmon, a la Russe
       Noisettes of lamb, Montpensier
       Roast duckling, apple sauce
       Fried sweet potatoes
       Green corn
       Chicory salad
       Philadelphia vanilla ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Shirred eggs with peppers.= Cut four whole green peppers in small
squares. Take four individual shirred egg dishes and put a teaspoonful
of butter in each. Divide the chopped peppers equally among the four
dishes, and simmer until nearly cooked; then break two eggs in each
dish, season with salt and a little pepper, and cook again until the
eggs are done.

=Beef marrow, Princess.= Have the butcher take the marrow out of four
beef shin bones. Lay them whole in cold water for an hour, so the blood
will run out. Then put the marrow in a casserole, in two quarts of cold
water; add a tablespoonful of salt, bring to a boil, and let the marrow
stand for half an hour in the boiling water. Then place it on four
pieces of dry toast, and cover with well-seasoned Bordelaise sauce. When
making the Bordelaise sauce omit the marrow.

=Bread custard pudding.= Over half a pound of bread crumbs pour a
custard made of one quart of milk, the yolks of three eggs, three whole
eggs, four ounces of sugar, and the grated rind of a lemon. Put in small
moulds, and bake in a bain-marie. Serve with a cream sauce.

=Cocoanut pudding.= One-quarter pound of grated cocoanut, one-quarter
pound of bread crumbs, and custard same as for bread custard pudding.
Bake in the same way, and serve with cream sauce.

=Consomme Charles Quint.= Serve in hot consomme equal parts of chicken
dumplings and asparagus tips. Add some picked chervil leaves.

=Broiled salmon a la Russe.= Cut two slices of salmon about one and
one-half inches thick, and season well. Roll in oil, and broil. When
done place on a platter, and spread two tablespoonfuls of anchovy butter
on top. Serve separate Hollandaise sauce to which has been added two
tablespoonfuls of fresh caviar.

=Anchovy butter.= Mix two tablespoonfuls of butter with two
tablespoonfuls of essence of anchovies, the juice of a lemon, and a
little chopped parsley. Anchovies in salt, soaked in cold water for an
hour; or anchovies in oil; forced through a fine sieve, may be used if
desired. Use in the same proportion as given for the essence.

=Noisettes of lamb, Montpensier.= Season four noisettes of lamb with
salt and pepper, roll in oil, and broil. Then place on a platter; put on
one side four artichoke bottoms filled with French peas in butter, and
on the other side Parisian potatoes. Put a spoonful of Bearnaise sauce
on top of each noisette, and serve.


JULY 9

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced figs with cream
       Boiled salt mackerel
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Clam broth in cups
       Scrambled eggs, Havemeyer
       Roast rack of mutton
       String beans
       Potato salad
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Coburg
       Ripe California olives
       Lobster, Becker
       Roast saddle of venison, currant jelly
       Red cabbage
       Potatoes, nature
       Knickerbocker salad
       Cocoanut pudding
       Demi tasse

=Scrambled eggs, Havemeyer.= Peel two tomatoes, cut in half, squeeze out
the juice, and cut in small squares. Put in a sauce pot one ounce of
butter, heat, add the tomatoes, and simmer for two minutes. Then add
eight beaten eggs, and one-half cup of cream. Season with salt and
pepper. Scramble in the usual manner.

=Potage Coburg.= Mix one quart of mock turtle soup with one pint of
consomme tapioca; and just before serving add one-half cup of very small
gnocchis.

=Lobster, Becker.= Put in a saute pan two ounces of butter, heat, add
the tails of two boiled lobsters cut in slices, season with salt and
pepper, and toss in pan for five minutes. Then add one-half glass of
sherry wine, and boil for five minutes. Then add a cupful of very thick
table cream, and boil again for five minutes. Then bind with the yolks
of two eggs mixed with two ponies of very dry sherry wine. Before
serving add a dozen slices of truffle.

=Roast saddle of venison.= Cook the saddle larded or plain, as desired.
In a roasting pan put one sliced onion, one carrot, a small piece of
celery, a sprig of thyme, two bay leaves, two cloves, and a spoonful of
pepper berries. Season the saddle well, and lay in the pan, with two
ounces of butter on top of the venison. Put in the oven and baste
continually. When the saddle is done take out of the pan, and drain off
the fat. Then put in the pan one-half glass of sherry wine, and reduce
by boiling until nearly dry. Then add one cup of beef or chicken stock,
one spoonful of meat extract, season with salt and pepper, and boil
until reduced one-half. Pour over the saddle, or serve separate, as
desired.


JULY 10

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit, cardinal
       Cold consomme in cups
       Cold pheasant pie with meat jelly
       Chiffonnade salad
       Lemon water ice
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage Dagobert
       Radishes
       Fillet of sole, a la Francaise
       Tournedos, Porte Maillot
       Roast chicken
       Lettuce salad
       Strawberry ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Grapefruit, Cardinal.= Peel four grapefruit and slice them. Drain off
the juice, and put the slices in supreme glasses. Force two small
baskets of fresh raspberries through a fine sieve, put in a bowl, add
two spoonfuls of powdered sugar and one pony of kirschwasser, mix well,
and pour over the grapefruit.

=Cold pheasant pie.= Cut the breasts from two pheasants, and trim
carefully. Put all of the trimmings and the meat of the legs without the
bones, in an earthern jar; add three chopped shallots, and a bouquet
garni, cover with sherry wine, and allow to stand for two days. Simmer
the bones, with an onion, carrot, and a little celery, in two ounces of
butter, until slightly brown. Then cover with a quart of stock, and cook
slowly until reduced one-half. Keep this to mix with the forcemeat. Pass
through a fine meat chopper one pound of veal, and one pound of
not-too-fat pork; and season with salt, pepper and a little allspice.
Have a special game pie or pate form lined with pate dough. Put a layer
of forcemeat in the bottom, then a few pieces of the breasts cut in long
narrow strips, and a strip of larding pork cut the same size. Lay the
strips lengthwise of the pie. Add a few peeled blanched or parboiled
pistachio nuts, then another layer of forcemeat, and so continue until
the form is full. Cover the top with thin layer of larding pork, and
then cover all with dough. Moisten the edges where the dough comes
together, and close carefully, so there will be no leak. Cut a round
hole in the center and insert a little chimney made of a small piece of
stiff paper; otherwise the dough will close while cooking. Put in the
oven and cook for one and one-half hours. Then allow to become cold,
remove the paper chimney, fill the hole with meat jelly, and put in ice
box until set. Cut in thin slices.

=Pate dough.= One pound of flour, one-quarter pound of butter, three
eggs, one-half pony of water. Mix the butter and flour between the
hands, then add the eggs and water, and season with a little salt. Let
the dough set in the ice box a few hours before using.

=Potage Dagobert.= Mix one quart of puree of peas, one pint of consomme
Julienne, and one pint of consomme aux perles de Nizam.

=Tournedos, Porte Maillot.= Season four small tenderloin steaks with
salt and pepper; roll in oil, and broil. Place on a platter, and
garnish with carrots and turnips cut in small balls, boiled and tossed
in butter, salt and pepper. Also four potatoes cut in the shape of
wooden shoes, fried in hot swimming lard, and filled with puree of
spinach. Pour sauce Madere over the meat.

=Fillet of sole, a la Francaise.= Lay four fillets of sole flat on a
table, spread with fish forcemeat (see Timbale of bass), roll up and
place in a buttered pan. Season with salt and white pepper, add one-half
glass of white wine and one-half cup of fish stock, bouillon or water.
Cover with buttered paper, and set in oven for fifteen minutes. Then
take out and place the fillets on a platter. Add to the pan one pint of
white wine sauce, boil for two minutes, and strain. Then add to the
sauce a spoonful of well-seasoned lobster butter, one dozen French
mushrooms, and two sliced truffles. Pour the sauce over the fish, and
garnish with four ecrevisses en buisson.


JULY 11

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh grapes
       Omelet with bacon
       Crescents
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Canape St. Francis
       Poached eggs, gourmet
       Calf's head, vinaigrette
       Boiled potatoes
       Apple cottage pudding
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Cameroni
       Celery
       Black bass, Tournon
       Roast loin of veal, Nivernaise
       Maitre d'hotel potatoes
       Summer squash with butter
       Field salad
       Biscuit glace au chocolat
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Canape St. Francis.= Put four nice leaves of yellow lettuce on four
dessert plates. Cut four round pieces of toast, two and one-half inches
in diameter, spread with fresh caviar, and place on top of the lettuce.
Peel two ripe tomatoes and cut in four nice slices, and lay on top of
the caviar. Sprinkle each piece with one third white wine vinegar and
two-thirds olive oil, and a little salt and fresh ground black pepper
mixed together. Lay two fillets of anchovies crosswise over each, and
finally sprinkle some fine-chopped chervil over all. Serve cold.

=Poached eggs, gourmet.= Spread some pate de foie gras on four pieces of
toast, lay a poached egg on top of each, and cover with Bearnaise sauce.

=Apple cottage pudding.= One-half pound of sugar, one-half pound of
butter, eight eggs, one pint of milk, one and one-half pounds of flour,
one ounce of baking powder, two grated rinds of lemons, one pinch of
powdered mace, and four nice apples cut in thin slices. Mix the butter
and the sugar well together, then add the eggs and the milk. Sift the
baking powder and the flour together, and add, mixing lightly. Then add
the grated rinds, mace and apples. Bake in a buttered pan, and serve
with a thin apple sauce.

=Cottage pudding.= Make an Apple cottage pudding batter, and add chopped
candied fruits and raisins, instead of the apples. Serve with fruit
sauce.

=Boston brown pudding.= Same as cottage pudding with the addition of a
cup of molasses.

=Consomme Cameroni.= Add to a quart of consomme brunoise one-quarter
pound of boiled spaghetti cut in pieces one-quarter inch long. Serve
grated cheese separate.

=Black bass, Tournon.= Season two black bass with salt and pepper, roll
in melted butter, and broil. Then place on a platter, garnish with
parsley in branches and two lemons cut in half. Serve Colbert sauce, to
which a little chopped tarragon has been added.

=Roast loin of veal, Nivernaise.= Same as Veal Kidney Roast. (Dec. 20).
Garnish with carrots cooked in butter.


JULY 12

     BREAKFAST
       Orange juice
       Oatmeal with cream
       Buttered toasted rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Calf's foot jelly in cups
       Eggs, Moscow
       Terrine de foie gras en aspic
       Lettuce salad
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Lord Mayor
       Queen olives.      Salted almonds
       Boiled Lake Tahoe trout, Hollandaise
       Potatoes, natural
       Roast ribs of beef
       Cauliflower au gratin
       Rissolee potatoes
       Sliced tomatoes
       Coffee ice cream
       Macaroons
       Demi tasse

=Calf's foot jelly.= Parboil four calf's feet; allow to become cool; put
back in vessel with an onion and a carrot, a piece of leek, a piece of
celery, one clove, a bay leaf, a sprig of thyme, a spoonful of whole
black peppers, a gallon of water, a quart of white wine, and a small
handful of salt. Boil until the feet are soft. Then strain the broth,
let it stand for a couple of minutes, and then remove all the fat from
the top. Put a spoonful of the broth on a plate and set on ice. If it
sets too hard add a little water, if it is too soft boil down until it
is thick enough to set. Then put six whites of eggs in a casserole, beat
with a whip, add slowly to the broth, put on a slow fire and bring to
the boiling point. This serves to clarify the broth. Then strain, and
set to cool. If the broth is for invalids omit the spices and
vegetables, use but a little salt, and do not clarify. The cooked calf's
feet may be used for an entree, or for soup or salad.

=Eggs, Moscow.= Poach six eggs, and set in ice box until cold. Then
remove the yolks carefully by making a very small hole, and letting the
soft yolks run out. Fill the eggs with fresh caviar, roll in flour, then
in beaten eggs, and finally in bread crumbs; fry in very hot swimming
lard or melted butter for a few seconds only; or until the crumbs are
yellow. Serve immediately on a napkin, with fried parsley, and two
lemons cut in half.

=Terrine de foie gras en aspic.= Use a jelly mould that will contain as
much as six small individual moulds. Put a little melted, but not hot,
meat jelly in the bottom, and set on cracked ice until it is firm. Cut
some foie gras from a terrine with a spoon, and lay in the mould, then
cover with a little more melted jelly, then another layer of foie gras,
and so continue until the mould is full. Set in the ice box for an hour;
and serve on a napkin, with parsley in branches.


JULY 13

     BREAKFAST
       Mixed fresh fruit
       Eggs au beurre noir
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Martha
       Cold roast beef
       Bresilienne salad
       French pastry
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Palestine
       Radishes.      Lyon sausages
       Fillet of flounder, St. Avertin
       Roast tenderloin of beef, Berthieu
       Escarole salad
       Cottage pudding
       Coffee

=Consomme Palestine.= Add to hot well-seasoned consomme equal parts of
peas, flageolet beans, and carrots and turnips cut in small round balls;
and all boiled in salted water.

=Bresilienne salad.= One-third boiled fresh Lima beans, one-third sliced
green peppers, and one-third celery cut Julienne style. Place in a salad
bowl, separately. In the center put some French dressing. Sprinkle with
chopped parsley and chervil.

=Fillet of flounder, St. Avertin.= Put four fillets of flounder in a
pan, cover with water, add a spoonful of salt and the juice of a lemon,
and boil for seven minutes. Then place on a platter, and cover with a
pint of Hollandaise sauce to which has been added a spoonful of French
mustard. Garnish with four or eight round potato croquettes.

=Roast tenderloin of beef, Berthieu.= Garnish the roasted tenderloin
with stuffed cucumbers, stuffed olives, peas au beurre, and potatoes
chateau. Serve sauce Madere separate.

=Potage Lord Mayor.= Put two pounds of veal bones in a roasting pan with
one onion, one carrot, a little celery, leek and parsley in branches,
and two ounces of butter. Roast in oven until nicely browned, then drain
off the fat, put in casserole, add two fresh pig's feet, one soup hen,
and three pounds of shin of beef, one bouquet garni, a handful of salt,
and two gallons of water. Cook until the hen and beef are soft, when
they may be removed. When the pig's feet are done take out the bone, the
fat and the lean meat, so nothing is left but the skin. Cut the skin in
small squares, or round pieces the size of a dime. Cut some carrots in
the same shape, and boil in salted water until soft. Put one pound of
chopped beef in a casserole, add the whites of six eggs, stir well, add
slowly the strained broth, and bring to a boil. This will clarify it.
Season with salt and Cayenne pepper to taste. Boil for fifteen minutes,
strain through a cheese cloth into another pot, bring to a boil, and
reduce slowly for half an hour. Mix two spoonfuls of arrow root and a
cup of sherry wine well together, and let run slowly into the boiling
broth. Boil again for ten minutes. Before serving add a glass of dry
amontillado. The beef and the soup hen then may be used for salads,
croquettes, or other purposes.


JULY 14

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Kidney stew
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs, Bienvenue
       Kalter aufschnitt
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Chicken mulligatawney soup
       Ripe California olives
       Fried smelts, Tartar sauce
       Roast chicken
       Artichokes, Hollandaise
       Summer squash
       Rissolee potatoes
       Field salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Eggs, Bienvenue.= Butter four individual shirred egg dishes. Make a
border of mashed (croquette) potato around each dish. Put in the bottom
a spoonful of puree of fresh tomatoes. Break two eggs in each dish,
season with salt and pepper, and bake in oven.

=Kalter aufschnitt.= Assorted cold meats, such as roast beef, ham,
tongue, lamb, etc. Garnish with a lettuce leaf filled with potato salad,
for each person.

=Chicken mulligatawney soup.= Cut the breast from an uncooked soup hen,
and cut in small squares of about one-quarter inch. Make about two
quarts of broth from the bones and trimmings. Heat three ounces of
butter in a casserole, add the cut-up breast of chicken, and simmer for
five minutes. Then add an onion chopped very fine, and simmer again
until yellow. Then add two spoonfuls of flour and one spoonful of curry
powder, and heat through. Now pour in the strained chicken broth and a
cup of rice, and boil slowly until the rice is cooked. Cut two apples in
quarter inch squares, and simmer in butter until cooked, and add to the
soup. Season with salt and pepper.

=To preserve limes.= Remove the cores from the limes with a small tin
tube made for the purpose. Then cover with salad water, using a large
handful of salt to the gallon. Soak for four or five hours; then drain
off the water, and throw the limes into boiling water. As soon as they
are soft take them out, one by one, and drop them into cold water.
Change the cold water several times. To turn the limes green again put
two gallons of water in a copper pan, add two large handfuls of cooking
salt, one cup of vinegar, and several handfuls of fresh spinach. Put the
pan on the fire and boil for a few minutes, then put the limes in the
pan, and boil up several times. Remove from the fire, and allow to stand
until cold; when the limes will have resumed their natural color. Drain
off the liquid and let the limes soak in fresh water for about fourteen
hours, changing the water frequently. Prepare a fifteen degree syrup,
testing with a syrup gauge or cooking thermometer; and when boiling
throw the limes into this, boil up, and then put into a vessel and leave
for twelve hours. Then pour off the syrup, and boil it to sixteen
degrees, pour it over the limes again, leaving it for twelve hours. Then
drain and boil again to twenty degrees, pour over the limes, stand for
twelve hours, and continue every twelve hours until thirty-two degrees
are reached. Then boil for two minutes, and pour into small stone jars.
Seal hermetically when cool.

=Jellied cherries.= Stone three pounds of cherries. Crush a handful of
the cherry stones, and tie in a gauze bag. Put a pound of currant juice
on the fire, add the crushed cherry stones, and steep. Put the cherries
in a copper pan over a slow fire, and reduce one-half. Then add three
pounds of granulated cane sugar and the currant juice, after the gauze
bag has been removed; and boil steadily until a little tried on a saucer
will not spread. Add half a gill of kirschwasser, and pour at once into
jelly glasses. Place in a cool place, and when cold pour melted
paraffine over the top and cover tightly.

=Candied lemon or orange peels.= Put a sufficient quantity of lemon or
orange peels on the fire with enough water to cover. Boil until soft to
the touch, then drain, and put in cold water and soak for twenty-four
hours, changing the water often. Then pour off the water, and put the
peels in an earthern jar, covering with a fifteen degree boiling syrup.
Use a syrup gauge or cooking thermometer to determine the density. Let
the peels stand for twelve hours, then pour off the syrup and boil it up
to eighteen degrees. Pour again over the peels and let it set for twelve
hours. Repeat this operation six or seven times, gradually increasing
the density of the syrup until it reaches thirty-two degrees. The last
time prepare a fresh thirty-two degree syrup. Drain the old syrup from
the peels, add them to the fresh boiling syrup, and boil up once. Then
put the peels in stone jars or pots, cover with the syrup, and seal when
cold.

=Fig jam.= Select large white firm figs, remove the stems, and cut in
quarters. Dissolve a half pound of sugar in a little water for each
pound of figs. Bring to a boil, then add the figs and boil steadily
until the marmalade coats the spoon and drops from it in beads. Then
pour into hot jelly glasses.

=Blackberry cordial, for medicinal purposes.= Heat and strain through
fine cheese cloth some ripe blackberries. To one pint of juice add one
pound of granulated sugar, one-fourth ounce of powdered cinnamon,
one-fourth ounce of mace, and one teaspoonful of cloves. Boil all
together for twenty minutes, strain, and to each pint add a jill of
French brandy. Put up in small bottles.

=Vanilla brandy.= Cut some vanilla beans very fine, pound in a mortar,
put in bottles and cover with strong brandy. This is much better than
ordinary vanilla extract.


JULY 15

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Russian caravan tea

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Chicken jelly in cups
       Cold beef a la mode
       Potato salad
       Boiled custard
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Garibaldi
       Salami
       Sand dabs, saute meuniere
       Mutton chops, maison d'or
       String beans in butter
       Stewed tomatoes
       Mashed potatoes
       Roast squab
       Lettuce salad
       French pastry
       Assorted fruit
       Coffee

=Chicken jelly.= Clarify three quarts of good chicken broth with the
whites of six eggs. Soak two leaves of gelatine in water, and add to the
broth. Boil for twenty minutes, and strain. Set in ice box to become
firm.

=Cold beef a la mode.= Take two pieces of rump of beef weighing about
six pounds each, season with salt and pepper, place in a vessel with a
spoonful of fat or butter, and roast until nice and brown all over. Then
sprinkle with two spoonfuls of flour, and cook until flour is brown.
Then add one quart of boiling water and a pint of claret, one bouquet
garni, twenty-four small raw French carrots, twenty-four small white
onions fried in butter, and four quartered tomatoes. Cover, and boil in
the oven. Remove the carrots and onions when soft, and continue cooking
the beef until well done. Put the beef in an earthern pot and lay the
carrots and onions around it. Reduce the sauce, by boiling, to half its
volume, and strain over the beef. Prepare the day before using, so it
will have sufficient time to become cold.

=Boiled custard.= The yolks of four eggs, three whole eggs, one ounce of
corn starch, one quart of milk, and flavoring. Put all of the eggs, corn
starch, half of the sugar, and a few drops of the milk into a bowl and
mix well together. Boil the remainder of the milk and the other half of
the sugar; pour over the egg mixture, and cook until it thickens. Then
take off the fire, add the flavoring, mix well, and serve either in cups
or saucers.

=Tipsy parsons.= Cut some slices of sponge cake about one-half inch
thick. Soak them in sherry wine, and place them in saucers. Cover the
top with boiling custard, and serve.

=Vanilla custard with meringue.= Make some boiled custard flavored with
vanilla. Pour in saucers, place a half meringue shell on each, and
serve.

=Macaronade Celestine.= Soak some macaroons in maraschino. Place in a
saucer and pour boiling custard over them.

=Bouchettes Palmyra.= Soak some bouchettes in kummel, place them on
saucers, and pour boiling custard over them.

=Consomme Garibaldi.= Boil one-quarter pound of spaghetti and cut in
pieces one inch long. Cut a dozen green queen olives Julienne style, and
add, with the spaghetti, to three pints of hot consomme. Serve grated
cheese separate.

=Mutton chops, maison d'or.= Broil four mutton chops on one side; and
then set to become cold. Make a forcemeat from the breast of a chicken,
and add to it some chopped truffles. Place the forcemeat on the broiled
side of the chops in pyramid form, sprinkle with fresh bread crumbs, set
on a buttered pan, put a small piece of butter on top of each, and cook
in the oven for ten or twelve minutes. Serve on a platter, with sauce
Madere.

=Lamb chops, maison d'or.= Prepare in the same manner as mutton chops,
maison d'or.


JULY 16

     BREAKFAST
       Baked Bartlett pears with cream
       Omelet with asparagus tips
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Shrimp salad
       Eggs, Marlborough
       Cold squab and Virginia ham
       Alligator pear salad
       Compote of apricots
       German coffee cake
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Chicken soup, Piedmontaise
       Pim olas.      Radishes
       Black bass, Heydenreich
       Sweetbreads, poulette
       Roast leg of venison
       Red cabbage
       Boiled potatoes
       Lettuce and grapefruit salad
       Apple cobbler
       Coffee

=Eggs, Marlborough.= Place four poached eggs on four pieces of anchovy
toast, cover with sauce Perigueux, and lay a strip of broiled bacon
across each.

=Chicken soup, Piedmontaise.= Mix a pint of chicken broth with a pint of
puree of tomato soup, add a quarter pound of macaroni cut in one-quarter
inch pieces, and the breast of a boiled chicken cut in small squares.

=Black bass, Heydenreich.= Place two black bass in a buttered pan, and
season with salt and fresh-ground black pepper. Chop three ounces of
salted almonds, and mix with one-quarter pound of chopped fresh
mushrooms, three ounces of butter, and some chopped parsley. Spread over
the fish, and bake in oven for twenty minutes. Pour the juice of two
lemons over the fish, and serve from the pan in which it was baked.

=Sweetbreads, poulette.= Soak two pounds of sweetbreads in cold water
for two hours, to cause the blood to run out. Then put on the fire in
two quarts of water, add a spoonful of salt, bring to a boil, and then
cool off in cold water. Remove the skins, and cut the sweetbreads in
slices one-half inch thick. Put two ounces of butter in a sauce pan, add
the sweetbreads, and simmer for two minutes. Then add a spoonful of
flour, and heat through. Then add one pint of thick cream, and boil for
ten minutes. Season with salt and Cayenne pepper, add a can of sliced
French mushrooms and a little chopped chives, boil for two minutes, and
thicken with the yolks of two eggs mixed with a little cream. Serve in a
chafing dish.

=Cobblers.= Apple, pear, peach or apricot. Line a deep baking pan with
pie dough, fill with the chopped fruit desired, sweetened with sugar,
and with a little cinnamon added, cover with a sheet of pie crust paste,
brush with egg, and bake. Serve with cream or wine sauce.

=Wine sauce.= Put in a sauce pan one pint of water, one-half pound of
sugar, and the rind and juice of half a lemon. Bring to a boil, and then
thicken with a teaspoonful of corn starch dissolved in a little water,
and again bring to a boil. Flavor with a glassful of any kind of wine;
or a pony of cognac, kirschwasser, or other cordial, as you may desire.
Strain and serve with puddings, cobblers, etc.


JULY 17

     BREAKFAST
       Raspberries with cream
       Broiled fillet of sole, maitre d'hotel
       Hashed browned potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs, St. Catherine
       Boneless squab en aspic
       Majestic salad
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Consomme Talleyrand
       Ripe olives.      Lyon sausage
       Boiled salmon trout, sauce mousseline
       Potatoes, nature
       Planked sirloin steak, St. Francis
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs, St. Catherine.= Cut the tops from four large baked potatoes, and
scoop out the insides. Lay a slice of tomato in the bottom, season with
salt and pepper, break an egg in each, and cover with well-seasoned
cream sauce. Sprinkle with grated cheese, put small bits of butter on
top, and bake in oven for about ten minutes. Serve on napkin, with
parsley in branches.

=Boneless squab en aspic.= Cut the squabs open at the back, and remove
all the bones, being careful not to cut the skin. Spread flat on the
table, season with salt and pepper, fold together and place in a
buttered pan and cook until done, and of a nice color. Allow to become
cold. Set an oval mould in cracked ice, garnish the bottom with sliced
truffles, pour in just enough nearly cold meat jelly to cover the
truffles. Place the cold squab in the mould and fill to the top with
jelly. Keep in the ice box until set. When ready to serve turn over on a
napkin, remove the mould, and garnish with parsley.

=Majestic salad.= Equal parts of celery, raw apple, and green peppers
cut in Julienne style. Serve with mayonnaise dressing.

=Consomme Talleyrand.= Put four grated truffles in a soup tureen, add a
glassful of very dry sherry wine, and a pinch of Cayenne pepper, cover,
and stand for an hour. When ready to serve pour three pints of hot
consomme tapioca over it.

=Planked sirloin steak, St. Francis.= Season a three pound sirloin steak
with salt and pepper, roll in oil and broil. When done place it on a hot
meat-plank sufficiently large so that it may be garnished with a bouquet
of new peas cooked in butter, string beans, asparagus tips with a little
Hollandaise sauce on them, and French carrots in butter. Lay a dozen
fresh mushrooms on top of the steak. Around the steak and vegetables lay
some Parisienne potatoes. Serve sauce Colbert separate.


JULY 18

     BREAKFAST
       Orange and grapefruit juice mixed
       Oatmeal and cream
       Corn muffins
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Chicken salad, Victor
       Vogeleier omelet
       Raspberry water ice
       Streusel kuchen (cake)
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage vert pre
       Smoked eels with rye bread
       Corned beef and cabbage
       Boiled potatoes
       Peach meringue
       Demi tasse

=Potage vert pre.= Mix one pint of consomme tapioca with one quart of
puree of pea soup. Just before serving add some chopped chervil.

=Peach meringue.= Dress some meringue paste (see meringue shells) on
dishes or plates in round forms about three inches in diameter and
three-quarters of an inch deep. Place the dishes on a pan, and set in a
rather cool oven until the meringues are of a nice straw color. Put on
the center of each a spoonful of pastry cream, and on top of this half
of a peach cooked in syrup; or half of a preserved peach.

=Apricot meringue.= Prepare in the same manner as peach meringue.

=Strawberry, blackberry or raspberry meringues.= Prepare in the same
manner as peach meringue, but use fresh uncooked berries.

=Patience (cake).= Beat ten whites of eggs until firm, then add one
pound of powdered sugar, three quarters of a pound of flour, and some
vanilla flavor. Stir until firm and well mixed, and lay out like small
lady fingers on a buttered pan. Set in a dry place until a crust forms
on top, and then bake in a moderate oven.


JULY 19

     BREAKFAST
       Grapes
       Waffles
       Honey in comb
       Toasted rolls
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Sardines
       Scrambled eggs, Lucullus
       Galantine of capon
       Salade Cupid d'Azure
       Port de Salut cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Trianon
       Celery.      Olives.      Salted almonds
       Broiled barracouda, mustard sauce
       Hollandaise potatoes
       Roast leg of veal
       Carrots Vichy
       Spinach with egg
       Pickled beets
       Vanilla ice cream
       Coffee fruit cake      Demi tasse

=Scrambled eggs, Lucullus.= Put in a casserole one ounce of butter, and
three truffles cut in dices about one-eighth inch square. Heat through,
and then add eight beaten eggs, and one-half cup of cream. Season with
salt and pepper, then scramble, and dish up on a china platter. Cut
about a dozen slices of truffle, heat on a plate with the addition of
half a spoonful of meat extract, and lay over the eggs.

=Galantine of capon.= Split open down the back a good-sized fowl or
capon, and remove every bone, being careful not to remove any of the
meat, and not to cut the skin. Lay out flat on the table skinside down,
and season with salt and pepper. Prepare a forcemeat with one pound of
veal, and one and one-half pounds of lean pork. Strain through a sieve,
season with salt and pepper and a little grated nutmeg, and add a pint
of cream. Cut in small squares the tip of a smoked boiled beef tongue,
one-half pound of white fat pork, one-quarter pound of ham, one-quarter
pound of peeled pistache nuts, and four truffles. Mix thoroughly with
the force meat, and put on top of the fowl. Close, by drawing both sides
together, forming a big sausage. Roll very tightly in a towel or napkin,
and tie with a string on both ends and twice around the middle. Cook in
bouillon, stock or salted water slowly for from one and one-half to two
hours. When cooked, untie, remove the cloth, roll tight again and
re-tie. Set in the ice box for at least eight hours. Serve sliced in the
same manner as sausage, and about one-quarter inch thick. Garnish with
meat jelly and parsley in branches. Galantine of chicken, squab, etc.,
may be prepared in the same manner.

=Salade Cupid d'Azure.= Cut alligator pears in slices, lay on a platter,
and sprinkle with one chopped shallot, salt and pepper, one chopped
green pepper, one spoonful of vinegar, and two spoonfuls of olive oil.
Allow to stand for an hour. Cut two heads of well-washed romaine salad
in two, and on each lay a slice of grapefruit, then a slice of alligator
pear, then a slice of grapefruit, and so continue until the romaine is
full. Divide the dressing over the individual salads; and if not
sufficient, finish with French dressing.

=Consomme Trianon.= To each portion of consomme royal add six slices of
truffle cut in triangle shape.

=Mustard sauce.= To one pint of cream sauce add two spoonfuls of French
mustard, and mix well.


JULY 20

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Popover muffins
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Poached eggs, Bar le Duc
       Paprika veal      Boiled rice
       Louise salad
       Surprise fritters.      Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Crab gumbo      California ripe olives
       Boiled codfish, egg sauce
       Small tenderloin steak, Rachel
       Hearts of lettuce
       Apricot cobbler
       Patience      Demi tasse

=Popover muffins.= Five eggs, one-half ounce of salt, one quart of milk,
and one pound of flour. Beat the eggs and salt well together; then beat
in the milk; then add the flour and beat until smooth. This will make a
very thin batter. Fill greased tall muffin moulds only half full, and
bake in medium oven until very crisp.

=Paprika veal.= The remains of a roast leg of veal may be used. Cut in
slices one-half inch thick, and as wide as the meat will allow. Put two
ounces of butter and a chopped onion in a casserole and simmer until the
onion is done. Then add two spoonfuls of flour and one spoonful of
paprika, and simmer again for a few minutes. Then add half a pint of
stock, half a cup of white wine, one spoonful of meat extract, and the
veal. Season well with salt, and simmer for twenty minutes. Should the
sauce be too thick add a little more stock.

=Poached eggs, Bar le Duc.= Place four boiled bottoms of artichokes on
four pieces of toast, and lay four poached eggs on the artichokes. Cover
all with well-seasoned cream sauce, to which has been added a little
chopped fresh tarragon.

=Louise salad.= Raw celery, fresh pineapple, and pimentos in equal
parts, and all cut Julienne style. Place in a salad bowl and cover with
well-seasoned mayonnaise sauce with a dash of dry sherry wine in it.

=Surprise fritters.= One quart of milk, six ounces of butter,
three-quarters of a pound of flour and eight eggs. Make a paste in the
same manner as for cream puffs. Drop with a spoon in a pan of hot
swimming lard and fry until crisp and brown. Fill with currant or other
fruit jelly, dust with powdered sugar, and serve with cream or Sabayon
sauce.

=Crab Gumbo.= Put two ounces of butter, one chopped onion and one
chopped green pepper in a casserole and simmer until done. Then add two
quarts of fish broth and one-half cup of rice, and boil very slowly for
fifteen minutes. Then add three peeled tomatoes cut in small dices, one
spoonful of Worcestershire sauce, the meat of two whole crabs, and a can
of okra; or one pound of fresh okra cut in pieces one inch long. Cook
slowly for twenty minutes, season well with salt and pepper, and
sprinkle with a little chopped parsley.

=Fish broth.= Cover the bones of any kind of fish with water, add a
bouquet garni, one onion, one carrot, and a cupful of white wine if
desired. Cook for thirty minutes, and strain. The broth may be served in
cups as soup; used for chowders; for bisque soups; for white wine sauce;
for cooking fish, or for many other purposes.


JULY 21

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced fresh pineapple
       Pearl grits with cream
       Buttered toast
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Stuffed mangoes
       Scrambled eggs, Mayence
       Steak Tartare
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Sicilienne
       Chow chow.      Carciofini
       Broiled salmon, St. Germain
       Sweetbreads braise, Elizabeth
       Roast leg of mutton, currant jelly
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Cantaloupe baskets
       Almond rocks
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs, Mayence.= Mayence, or Mainz, is a city in Germany
famous for its ham. Cut four slices of Mayence or Westphalia ham in
small squares, put in a casserole with two ounces of butter and simmer
until heated through. Then add ten beaten eggs and one-half cup of
cream, and season with pepper and a very little salt. Scramble in the
usual manner.

=Steak Tartare.= Cut one pound of tenderloin steak very fine, season
with salt and pepper, and form in two oval shaped pats. In the center on
top lay the yolk of a raw egg. Garnish with two lettuce leaves filled
with fine-chopped white onions and some sliced pickles; and two leaves
filled with capers and chopped parsley. Serve raw.

=Consomme Sicilienne.= Roll out very thin a noodle paste, and cut in
lozenge shapes about one inch long. Boil in salt water for about ten
minutes, cool off in fresh cold water, and serve in hot consomme. Serve
grated Parmesan cheese separate.

=Broiled salmon, St. Germain.= Cut two slices of salmon about one and
one-half inches thick, roll in butter, season with salt and pepper, roll
in fresh bread crumbs, and broil slowly. When done place on a platter,
and garnish with Parisian potatoes. Serve sauce Bearnaise separate.

=Sweetbreads braise, Elizabeth.= Braised sweetbreads served with stuffed
tomatoes, stuffed mushrooms, onions glace, and sauce Madere.

=Cantaloupe baskets.= Cut four cantaloupes in the form of baskets, using
part of the rind for the handle. Carefully take out the pulp with a
teaspoon. Fill the baskets with vanilla ice cream mixed with the pulp,
and decorate with whipped cream.

=Orange baskets.= Cut the oranges in the form of baskets, scrape out the
pulp, fill with orange water ice, and decorate with strawberries and
raspberries.

=Almond rocks.= Beat the whites of eight eggs very stiff and dry. Add
one pound of powdered sugar and three-quarters of a pound of shredded
almonds, and one-half spoonful of vanilla extract. Mix lightly, and lay
on a buttered and floured pan, in the shape of rocks, using a fork to
form them. Bake in a slack oven. Serve cold.

=Small tenderloin steak, Rachel.= Broil the steaks and lay on a platter.
Put a slice of terrine de foie gras on top, garnish with peas au beurre
and Julienne potatoes. Serve sauce Madere.


JULY 22

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Virginia ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Tomatoes, surprise
       Clam broth in cups
       Cold Lake Tahoe trout, vinaigrette
       Boston brown pudding
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Cream of watercress
       Pim olas.      Celery
       Fried frog's legs, Espagnole
       Roast squab chicken, Michels
       Peach compote
       Sweet and sour string beans
       Gauffrette potatoes
       Lettuce salad, egg dressing
       Blanc mange aux fruits
       Rolled almonds wafers
       Coffee

=Tomatoes, surprise.= Peel four tomatoes, cut off the top, and scoop out
the insides with a small sharp spoon. Cut a stalk of white celery in
small dices, wash well, and set in ice box to cool. Then mix the celery
with half a cup of thick mayonnaise sauce, season with salt and pepper,
and fill the tomatoes. Sprinkle the tops with chopped parsley, and serve
on lettuce leaves.

=Cream of watercress.= Heat three ounces of butter in a casserole, add
three spoonfuls of flour, one pint of chicken broth, and one pint of
milk; and bring to a boil. Then add one quart of well-washed watercress,
and season with salt and Cayenne pepper. Boil for half an hour, strain,
and put back in casserole. Again bring to a boil, and bind with the
yolks of two eggs mixed with one-half pint of cream. Strain again and
serve.

=Fried frogs' legs, Espagnole.= Season two dozen frogs' legs with salt
and pepper, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and then in fresh bread
crumbs. Fry in swimming hot lard, and serve on a napkin on a platter.
Garnish with fried parsley and two lemons cut in half. Serve Creole
sauce separate.

=Squab chicken, Michels.= Put four well-seasoned squab chickens in a
casserole with three ounces of butter and one onion cut in half. Put in
oven and baste very often. When both chicken and onion are nicely
colored set on top of the stove, add one-half glass of white wine, cover
the pot, and simmer for five minutes. Then place the chicken on a
platter; and put in the pot one-half cup of chicken broth and a spoonful
of meat extract, and boil for five minutes. Pour over the chicken.

=Rolled almond wafers (cigarettes).= Beat the whites of nine eggs, but
not too hard. Stop beating when they begin to get spongy. Then stir in
one-half pound of blanched chopped almonds, ten ounces of sugar, two
ounces of flour, and one pinch of powdered cinnamon. Spread on a
buttered pan, like wafers, and about two inches square. Bake in a hot
oven. When done immediately roll them around a small wooden stick, and
press the ends together. They may be served dry, or filled with whipped
cream.

=Sweet and sour string beans.= Boil two pounds of string beans in salted
water. When cooked place in a casserole, add a cupful of white wine
vinegar, one cupful of brown sugar, one spoonful of meat extract, and a
cupful of chicken broth, or any kind of good bouillon. Season with salt,
and boil for fifteen minutes with the pot uncovered.


JULY 23

     BREAKFAST
       Compote of apricots
       Buckwheat cakes with maple syrup
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Omelette Meissonier
       Pork chops, Badoise
       Schloss cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Chevalier
       Salted Brazil nuts.      Ripe olives
       Fillet of sole, Montmorency
       Broiled spring turkey
       Summer squash
       Lima beans
       Mashed potatoes, au gratin
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Croute aux fruits
       Demi tasse

=Omelette Meissonier.= Cut a carrot and a turnip in one-quarter inch
squares. Boil until soft in salted water, then mix with a spoonful of
cream sauce, and season with salt and pepper. Make an omelet with ten
eggs, in the usual manner and before turning over on the platter place
the vegetables in the center. Pour cream sauce around the omelet.

=Pork chops, Badoise.= Season four pork chops with salt and pepper, roll
in flour, and fry in a pan. When done place on a platter, garnish one
side with noodles and the other side with mashed potato. Pour tomato
sauce around all.

=Consomme Chevalier.= Serve in hot well-seasoned consomme equal parts of
small chicken dumplings, and chicken breast and smoked beef tongue cut
Julienne style.

=Fillet of sole, Montmorency.= Place four flat fillets of sole on a
buttered pan, season with salt and pepper, and lay four heads of French
mushrooms and four slices of truffle on top of each. Cover with sauce
Italienne, sprinkle with grated cheese, put small bits of butter on top,
and bake in oven. When done sprinkle with chopped parsley and the juice
of a lemon, and serve from the pan they were baked in. A silver dish is
preferable for baking.

=Croute aux fruits (fruit crust).= Toast some slices of sponge cake, put
them on a plate or saucer, and put on top different kinds of stewed
fruit, (compote), flavored with a little kirschwasser or maraschino.

=Croute a l'ananas (pineapple crust).= Prepare in the same manner as
croute aux fruits, but use pineapple. Decorate with maraschino cherries.


JULY 24

     BREAKFAST
       Baked pears with cream
       Scrambled eggs with smoked salmon
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Terrine de foie gras en aspic
       Shirred eggs, Nicoise
       Sweetbreads, Marigny
       Lettuce and grapefruit salad
       Blackberry meringue
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Cream of flageolet beans
       Antipasto.      Celery
       Sea bass, Montebello
       Roast tenderloin of beef, vert pre
       Field and beet salad
       Alexandria pudding
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with smoked salmon.= Cut a half pound of raw smoked
salmon in thin slices. In a casserole put the salmon with two ounces of
butter, and heat through. Then add ten beaten eggs, one-half cup of
cream, a little salt and pepper; and scramble in the usual manner.

=Terrine de foie gras en aspic.= Use small round individual moulds; or a
large one for six people; as desired. Melt a little meat jelly just so
it will run, but do not have it hot. Put a little in the bottom of each
mould and set in the ice box to become firm. Cut the foie gras out of
the terrine with a soup spoon, which should be dipped in hot water for
each cut so as to give a nice smooth surface. Put a layer of foie gras
in the bottom of the moulds, cover with a little more jelly, set in ice
box again to become cool, and then repeat until the moulds are full. For
serving dip the form in hot water for a second, and turn out on a napkin
on a platter. Garnish with parsley in branches.

=Shirred eggs, Nicoise.= Shirr some eggs, and before serving pour some
tomato sauce, or puree, over the white of the eggs.

=Sweetbreads, Marigny.= Garnish some braised sweetbreads with an
artichoke bottom filled with French peas, for each person. Serve sauce
Madere.

=Cream of flageolet beans.= Heat three ounces of butter in a casserole,
then add three spoonfuls of flour, and heat through. Then add one pint
of chicken broth, one pint of milk, and two cans of French flageolet
beans. Boil for thirty minutes, strain through a fine sieve, and put
back in the casserole. Bring to a boil, season with salt and Cayenne
pepper and a very little grated nutmeg. Then stir in a pint of boiling
milk and three ounces of sweet butter. Strain again, and serve.

=Sea bass, Montebello.= Cut the fillets from a sea bass in the same
manner as a fillet of sole. Spread a layer of fish forcemeat (see Bass
Timbale) over them, season well, and fold the fillets. Put in a buttered
pan, add one-half cup of fish stock or broth, one-half glass of white
wine, cover with buttered paper, and cook in oven for fifteen minutes.
Place on a platter, and cover with a mixture of two-thirds Bearnaise
sauce and one-third tomato sauce. Garnish with fleurons.

=Roast tenderloin of beef, vert pre.= Roast a tenderloin of beef, and
place on a platter. Garnish with French string beans in butter, and
Julienne potatoes. Pour a little sauce Madere over the tenderloin; and
also serve sauce separate.


JULY 25

     BREAKFAST
       Cantaloupe
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Matjes herring, Krasnapolsky
       Consomme in cups
       Cheese straws
       Broiled squab on toast
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Mixed fruit
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Rice soup, a l'Allemande
       Salted almonds
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Saddle of lamb, jardiniere
       Romaine salad
       Pear cobbler
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Matjes herring, Krasnapolsky.= Get six Matjes herring from the grocer,
and soak in cold water for two hours. Then remove the skins, and place
the herrings on lettuce leaves on a platter. Garnish with small plain
boiled potatoes and dill pickles.

=Rice soup, a l'Allemande.= Put three ounces of butter and two spoonfuls
of raw rice in a casserole and heat through. Then add two spoonfuls of
flour and heat again. Then add two quarts of strained boiling chicken
broth, and boil slowly for an hour. Stir occasionally so the rice will
not burn on the bottom of the pot. Season with salt and white pepper.

=Saddle of lamb, jardiniere.= Prepare in the same manner as rack of
lamb, jardiniere.

=Alexandria pudding.= Ten ounces of bread crumbs, one quart of milk, two
ounces of butter, the grated rind of a lemon, the yolks of eight eggs,
the whites of six eggs, four ounces of browned and chopped almonds, and
six ounces of sugar. Mix the sugar with the butter, and then add the
eggs. Mix the crumbs with the almonds and lemon rind, and add to the
first mixture. Beat the whites of the eggs, and mix in lightly. Bake in
a buttered pan, and serve with strawberry or raspberry sauce.


JULY 26

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Boiled salted salmon belly
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Broiled striped bass
       Sibyl potatoes
       Breast of chicken, en aspic
       Louis salad
       Neufchatel cheese with crackers
       Claret punch
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Consomme Monte Cristo
       Planked shad
       Roast chicken
       Chateau potatoes
       New peas
       Chiffonnade salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Breast of chicken en aspic.= Loosen the legs and skin of a good-sized
chicken, then insert a knife between neck and wing up towards the middle
of the wishbone, loosening all the meat from the breast bone. The whole
side will then be in one piece with the wing attached. Do the same with
the other side. Then season, and fry to a brown color in butter. Set
aside to become cold. Then decorate with the hard-boiled white of eggs
cut in fancy shapes; place in an oval form, cover with almost-cold meat
jelly, and set in ice box to become cold. To remove, dip the form in hot
water for a second, and place on a folded napkin. Garnish with parsley
in branches.

=Louis salad.= Equal parts of raw pineapple, apple, and celery, cut
Julienne style. Season with a sauce made with a cup of mayonnaise, a
spoonful of cream, a spoonful of sherry wine, a dash of vinegar, and a
pinch of paprika. Mix well.

=Claret punch.= One bottle of claret, one bottle of soda water, one-half
pint of plain water, one-half pound of powdered sugar, one lemon cut in
slices, and one pony of brandy. Stir all together until the sugar is
dissolved. Strain, cool on ice, and serve in glasses with a very thin
slice of lemon.

=Consomme Monte Cristo.= Consomme royal and printanier mixed.


JULY 27

     BREAKFAST
       Fig jam
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of sardines
       Cold clam broth
       Broiled honeycomb tripe
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Chiffonnade salad
       Stilton cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage velour
       California ripe olives
       Fillet of turbot, bateliere
       Sweetbreads, Metropolitan Club
       Roast duckling, apple sauce
       Artichokes, Hollandaise
       Waldorf salad
       Strawberry meringue
       Demi tasse

=Potage velour.= Mix two pints of puree of tomato soup with one pint of
consomme aux perles de Nizam.

=Fillet of turbot, bateliere.= Put four fillets of turbot in a buttered
pan, season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of claret and
one-half cup of fish broth, cover, boil for ten minutes, and then place
the fish on a platter. Put one ounce of butter in a small casserole and
heat. Then add one ounce of flour, heat through, add the broth left from
the fish and also another half cup of broth, boil for five minutes, and
strain. Then add slowly two ounces of fresh butter, stir well, and when
butter is melted add one cup of hot shrimps. Season well, and pour over
the fish.

=Sweetbreads, Metropolitan Club.= Let two pounds of sweetbreads soak in
cold water with a little salt in it, for two hours; to cause the blood
to run out. Then put in a casserole with one-half gallon of cold water
and a spoonful of salt, and bring to a boil. Cool off in cold water, and
then trim them free from skin. Put three ounces of butter in a very wide
earthern pot, put the sweetbreads on top, and season with salt and
pepper. Add six small white onions, six heads of fresh mushrooms, and
two green peppers cut in one inch squares. Simmer until nice and brown,
then add one-half glass of white wine and a spoonful of meat extract.
Cook in oven for fifteen minutes, basting continually. Serve from the
casserole in which it was cooked.


JULY 28

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Plain shirred eggs
       Rolls

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Poached eggs, Perigordine
       Mixed grill, special
       French fried potatoes
       Chicory salad
       Rice croquettes
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Clam cocktail
       Consomme Inauguration
       Salted pecans
       Mousse d'ecrevisses (fish)
       Roast ribs of beef, Yorkshire pudding
       Stewed corn
       Green peas
       Mashed potatoes
       Watercress salad
       Chocolate ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Poached eggs, Perigordine.= Spread some pate de foie gras on four
pieces of toast, lay a poached egg on top of each, and cover with sauce
Perigordine.

=Consomme Inauguration.= Equal parts of Julienne, small chicken
dumplings, and Italian paste, served in hot consomme.

=Mousse d'ecrevisses.= Remove the shells from three lobsters and two
dozen ecrevisses (crayfish or crawfish) and smash very fine in a mortar.
Put a cup of water, an ounce of butter, and a little salt and Cayenne
pepper in a vessel and bring to a boil. Then stir in slowly two
tablespoonfuls of flour, and continue stirring until there are no lumps.
Mix this with the ecrevisse and lobster meat and mashed shells. When
cold strain through a very fine sieve. Place in a bowl on ice and mix
with an egg and a pint of thick cream; stirring in carefully so it does
not curdle. Test for seasoning, and if necessary add a little ecrevisse
coloring to give a rose shade. Fill small buttered moulds, and boil in
bain-marie for about fifteen minutes. Turn out on a platter, and pour
ecrevisse sauce over all. The lobster is added for economy and strength
of color. Double the amount of ecrevisses may be used instead.

=Ecrevisse sauce.= Melt two tablespoonfuls of ecrevisse butter in a pint
of sauce Allemande, or sauce au vin blanc. Add a few ecrevisse tails.


JULY 29

     BREAKFAST
       Grapes
       Griddle cakes, maple syrup
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Herring salad
       Hot tomato broth
       Eggs, Suzette
       Cold tongue, meat jelly
       Beet salad
       Peach cobbler
       Anisette cakes      Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage McDonald
       Radishes
       Kingfish, Argentine
       Small sirloin steak, a la Russe
       Summer squash
       Cauliflower, Hollandaise
       Potato croquettes
       Sliced tomatoes
       Orange basket
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Herring salad.= Soak two salted herrings in cold water for an hour,
then remove the skin and cut out the bones. Slice in thin slices, and
mix with one quart of potato salad.

=Hot tomato broth.= Chop three pounds of shin or lean beef. Mix with the
whites of six eggs and one dozen tomatoes chopped very fine. Stir well,
and add slowly one gallon of bouillon or stock. Bring slowly to a boil,
and simmer for an hour. Strain through cheese cloth, season with salt
and pepper. Serve either hot or cold.

=Eggs, Suzette.= Bake four medium-sized potatoes, cut off the tops, and
scoop out the insides. Mash half of the potato that has been removed,
add a little butter, season with salt and pepper, and put back in the
bottom of each potato shell. Break an egg in each, cover with
well-seasoned cream sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese, put small bits
of butter on top, and bake in medium-hot oven for ten minutes.

=Anisette cake.= One-half pound of sugar, five eggs, one-half pound of
flour, and one teaspoonful of anise seed. Beat the sugar with the eggs
until light, then add the flour and anise seeds. Put in a buttered bread
pan and bake. When done allow to become cool; then cut in slices about
one-half inch thick. Lay on a pan and bake until they become of a nice
brown color.

=Potage McDonald.= Heat three ounces of butter in a casserole; then add
two and one-half spoonfuls of flour, and one-half spoonful of curry
powder. Heat through, and then add one pint of bouillon, stock or
chicken broth, and one pint of milk; bring to a boil, and add one
parboiled calf's brains. Boil for thirty minutes, and then strain
through a fine sieve. Heat in another casserole one ounce of butter;
then add half of a chopped onion, and fry until golden yellow. Then add
the soup and boil for ten minutes. Then add the yolks of two eggs mixed
with one cup of cream, stir well, and strain again. Season well with
salt and pepper.

=Kingfish, Argentine.= Put two kingfish on a buttered platter or pan,
season with salt and pepper, add a glass of white wine, put in oven and
bake. Cover with Creole sauce and serve.

=Small sirloin steak a la Russe.= Broiled sirloin steak garnished with
small patty shells filled with fresh caviar. Serve horseradish sauce
separate.


JULY 30

     BREAKFAST
       Apricots
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Lobster salad
       Poached eggs, Piedmontaise
       Birds' nests
       Demi tasse
       Orangeade

     DINNER
       Consomme Vanderbilt
       Salami.      Pim olas
       Striped bass, meuniere
       Leg of veal, au jus
       Spinach with egg
       Laurette potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       Raspberry meringue
       Demi tasse

=Poached eggs, Piedmontaise.= Make a risotto, and place four poached
eggs on top. Cover with cream sauce.

=Birds' nests (puff paste).= Bake small patties as elsewhere described.
Wash with thin royal icing, and sprinkle with plenty of shredded
cocoanut. Set in oven to obtain a little color. Fill the center with
jelly or marmalade, and place three or four blanched almonds on top to
represent the bird's eggs. Small egg-shaped candies may be used instead
if desired.

=Lemonade.= One quart of water, the juice of five lemons, and one-half
pound of powdered sugar. Dissolve the sugar in the water, and then add
the lemon juice. Strain, and cool on ice.

=Orangeade.= One pint of water, one pint of orange juice, the juice of
two lemons, and one-half pound of sugar. Dissolve the sugar in the
water, add the orange and lemon juice, strain, and cool on ice.

=Consomme Vanderbilt.= Equal parts of boiled breast of chicken, boiled
smoked beef tongue, French canned mushrooms and truffles cut in Julienne
style; and one part of fresh or canned peas. Serve in hot, well-seasoned
consomme.


JULY 31

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Plain omelet
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Schlemmerbroedchen
       Scrambled eggs, Pluche
       Westphalian ham
       Red cabbage salad
       Rice croquettes
       Champagne punch
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams on half shell
       Potage Mexicaine
       Ripe California olives
       Fillet of turbot, Tempis
       Roast chicken
       Chateau potatoes
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Tomato salad
       Biscuit glace, au cafe
       Demi tasse

=Schlemmerbroedchen (sandwich).= Spread four slices of rye bread with
butter, cover with one-quarter pound of raw beef chopped very fine, and
seasoned with salt and pepper. Spread some fresh caviar on top of the
beef. Serve on a folded napkin, with two lemons cut in half.

=Red cabbage salad.= Slice a head of red cabbage very thin, put in a
salad bowl, season with salt, pepper, one spoonful of oil, and three
spoonfuls of vinegar. This salad requires more vinegar than oil.

=Rice croquettes.= Cook one-half pound of rice in three pints of milk,
to which has been added half of a vanilla bean. This will make a stiff
batter. Add one-quarter pound of sugar and the yolks of four eggs. Allow
to cool. Shape the rice in croquettes, dip in beaten eggs, then in
macaroon crumbs or powder, and fry in swimming hot lard or butter. Serve
with wine sauce.

=Compote with rice.= Prepare some rice as for croquettes. Put a large
spoonful in the center of a plate and garnish with stewed fruit. Any
kind of stewed fruit may be used, such as peaches, apricots, pears,
etc., either singly or mixed.

=Champagne punch.= One quart of champagne, one quart of white wine, one
bottle of soda water, one spoonful of sugar, and three apples cut in
small dices. Cool, and serve in champagne cup glasses.

=Potage Mexicaine.= Mix one quart of puree of tomato soup with one pint
of well-seasoned consomme tapioca.

=Fillet of turbot, Tempis.= Season four fillets of turbot with salt and
pepper, and roll in flour. Put three ounces of butter in a pan and heat.
Then add the fish and fry for ten minutes on both sides. Place the fish
on a platter; add another ounce of butter to the pan, and cook to the
color of a chestnut, and pour over the fish. Sprinkle with the juice of
a large lemon, and one spoonful of chopped salted almonds.

=Scrambled eggs, Pluche.= Scrambled eggs with chopped herbs; such as
parsley, chervil and chives.


AUGUST 1

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Waffles with maple syrup
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs a la Patti
       Stewed tripe, Blanchard
       Puff paste roses
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Alexandria
       Lyon sausage.      Antipasto
       Boiled brook trout, mousseline
       Potatoes, nature
       Roast saddle of mutton, currant jelly, mint sauce
       String beans in butter
       Broiled tomatoes
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Souffle au fromage
       Coffee

=Eggs a la Patti.= Make a chicken hash in cream and put on a platter.
Lay four poached eggs on top, and one slice of truffle on top of each
egg. Pour sauce Madere around the hash.

=Puff paste roses.= Roll out some puff paste about one-eighth inch
thick, and cut with a star cutter. Brush over with a little water, and
fold the points of the stars to the center. Bake, and when nearly done
dust with powdered sugar, and return to oven to finish baking. The cakes
will puff up like a rose. Fill with jelly and serve.

=Consomme Alexandria.= Add one cupful of boiled white meat of chicken,
cut in small dices, to three pints of consomme brunoise.

=Orange or lemon brandy, for flavoring.= Peel very thin the yellow
outside from oranges or lemons. The inner white skin is not good. Crush
with a little granulated sugar. Put in a bottle and cover with strong
brandy. In the same manner can be prepared the kernels of cherries,
plums, apricots or peaches. Pound the kernels slightly before putting
them in the brandy.

=Glace fruit.= Be very particular in selecting the fruit. Cherries
should be large and not quite ripe, and without blemishes; and the
stones must be removed. Apricots and peaches should be of medium size,
and almost green. Make as small a hole as possible when removing the
stones. Pears should be peeled, and the stems left on. Figs should be
green. Strawberries should be very green, but full grown; wash and dry
well, and leave the stems on. Nectarines should be green, and the stones
removed. Any hard green plums may be used, but leave their stones in.
Cut pineapple in thick slices, remove the core, and any brown outside
spots. All fruit should be thoroughly washed and dried before being
prepared. It is well to make new syrup for each kind of fruit. To make
the syrup boil two pounds of granulated sugar and two gills of water for
eight minutes. Put the fruit in the syrup piece by piece; do not let it
stop boiling; and wait a few seconds between each piece, so the syrup
will boil up over the fruit. Then remove piece by piece in the same
order as placed in the kettle. Use a silver spoon or an aluminum skimmer
to handle the fruit, and under no circumstances use a fork. Place the
fruit on a thick piece of waxed paper, and set in a cool place. Repeat
the process the next day, adding a pound of sugar and a gill of water to
the syrup of the day before. Allow the fruit to boil hard for a minute,
and remove as before. This must be continued for about eight days before
the fruit will have absorbed enough sugar, and not be mushy. When the
fruit is finished line a broad shallow stone jar with waxed paper, lay
the fruit in singly, not allowing the pieces to touch, put waxed paper
between the layers, and cover closely.

=Baked pears, for canning.= Wash as many ripe, firm unspecked pears as
will fill a baking pan. Fill the pan almost full of boiling water.
Sweeten as though for immediate use. Set the pan in the oven, baste
frequently, and turn the pears around so they will brown lightly and
evenly. Add a few cloves and a small stick of cinnamon. When the pears
are very tender and almost candied, pack in hot glass jars, and pour the
boiling syrup over them. Be sure to have enough thick syrup to cover the
fruit. Seal while hot. Should the water evaporate too much while
cooking, add a little more from time to time.


AUGUST 2

     BREAKFAST
       Oregon cherries
       Finnan haddie in cream
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Assorted hors d'oeuvres
       Cold consomme in cups
       Cold saddle of mutton
       White bean salad
       French pastry
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Lamb broth a la Reine
       Queen olives
       Baked whitefish, St. Menehould
       Roast squab
       Artichokes with melted butter
       Broiled potatoes
       Celery root, field and beet salad
       Pumpkin pie
       Coffee

=White bean salad.= Soak a pound of navy beans over night in cold water.
Then boil them in three quarts of water; to which has been added a
little salt, an onion, a carrot, and a bouquet garni. When soft, remove
the onion and carrot, and the bouquet garni, drain off the water, and
set the beans to cool. When cold put in a salad bowl, add two shallots
chopped very fine, a little chopped parsley, a little salt and some
fresh-ground pepper, one spoonful of vinegar and two of olive oil. Mix
well.

=Lamb broth a la Reine.= Put a shoulder of lamb in a roasting pan,
season with salt and pepper, a little fat or a small piece of butter,
and put in the oven to roast. When done remove the lean meat from the
bones and cut in small squares. Put the trimmings in a casserole with
five pounds of lamb bones and three quarts of water. Bring to a boil,
skim well, and then add one sliced onion, one carrot, a bay leaf, six
cloves, a bouquet garni, a stalk of leek and three leaves of celery, a
little salt and a few whole black pepper berries. Boil slowly for one
hour, without being covered, so the broth will stay clear. Strain
through fine cheese cloth, add the lamb cut in small squares, and
one-half pound of boiled rice. Serve hot and well seasoned.

=Pumpkin pie.= Make a custard with five eggs, two ounces of sugar, one
pint of pumpkin pulp, one pony of molasses, three ounces of melted
butter, one pinch of grated nutmeg, one pinch of cinnamon and one pinch
of allspice. Mix to a custard, and finish like a custard pie.

=Pumpkin pulp.= Peel a pumpkin and wash out the seeds. Steam or boil
until soft, and strain through a fine sieve.

=Baked whitefish, St. Menehould.= Take four pounds of whitefish (bass or
other fish may be used), put in a vessel with two quarts of water and a
spoonful of salt, and boil for five minutes. Then drain off the water,
remove the skin and bones, and break the fish in two inch pieces. Make
one quart of cream sauce. In a buttered baking dish put one spoonful of
cream sauce, then one-third of the fish; cover with cream sauce; then
another third of the fish; cover with sauce; and then the remainder of
the fish, and pour the remainder of the sauce on top. The sauce should
be highly seasoned. Sprinkle the top with grated Swiss or Parmesan
cheese, put small bits of butter on top, and bake in oven for fifteen or
twenty minutes. Sprinkle with the juice of two lemons, and serve from
the baking dish.


AUGUST 3

     BREAKFAST
       Loganberries with cream
       Bacon and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Mollet, cream sauce
       Broiled black bass, maitre d'hotel
       Sliced cucumbers, French dressing
       Browned hashed potatoes
       Compote with rice
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Terrapin soup, Southern style
       Pimentos, vinaigrette
       Scalloped clams
       Larded tenderloin of beef, moderne
       Romaine salad
       Biscuit glace, peppermint
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs Mollet, cream sauce.= Eggs Mollet are soft boiled (about four
minutes). Remove the shells, being careful that the eggs do not break.
Put in a deep dish and cover with cream sauce.

=Pimentos, vinaigrette.= Drain the juice from one can of pimentos, lay
them on a platter, and cover with vinaigrette sauce. Serve very cold.

=Scalloped clams.= Put six dozen Little Neck clams in a vessel with
their juice, and bring to a boil. Heat two ounces of butter in a
casserole, then add two spoonfuls of flour, and heat through. Then add
the juice of the clams and half a pint of milk, and season with salt and
pepper. The sauce should then be a little thick. Bind with the yolks of
two eggs mixed with one-half cup of cream. Mix the clams with
three-fourths of the sauce and put in a baking dish. Pour the rest of
the sauce over the top, sprinkle with grated cheese, put small bits of
butter on top, and bake in hot oven until brown. Serve in same dish.

=Tenderloin of beef, moderne.= Roast the tenderloin of beef, place on a
platter, and garnish with several small patties; some of them filled
with string beans, and some filled with peas in butter. Also garnish
with rissolee potatoes. Serve Madeira sauce separate, besides pouring a
little over the tenderloin.

=Terrapin soup, Southern style.= Scald two terrapin, and remove the
shell, skin and intestines. Cut the terrapin in small pieces about
one-quarter inch square. Heat four ounces of butter in a casserole, then
add the terrapin and fry over a quick fire. Sprinkle with three
tablespoonfuls of flour, add three pints of any kind of good broth and
one pint of milk, season with salt and pepper, add a glass of good
sherry wine, and boil until well done. Bind with the yolks of two eggs
mixed with a cup of cream and a glass of dry sherry wine. Set on stove
and let it come nearly to a boil, but not quite.


AUGUST 4

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit
       Oatmeal with cream
       Rolls
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Vilna
       Calf's liver saute, Spanish style
       Boiled rice
       Watermelon
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Rothschild
       California ripe olives
       Broiled striped bass, maitre d'hotel
       Sliced culemo salad
       Roast chicken
       Peas a la Francaise
       Mashed potatoes
       Watercress
       Apricot meringue
       Coffee

=Eggs Vilna.= Spread some fresh caviar on four pieces of toast, lay a
poached egg on top of each, lay four fillets of anchovies crosswise over
the eggs, and garnish with two lemons cut in half, and parsley in
branches.

=Calf's liver, Spanish style.= Cut six slices of calf's liver
three-quarters of an inch thick, season with salt and pepper, roll in
flour, and fry in melted butter. When nearly done place on a platter and
keep hot. Pour one pint of very highly seasoned Creole sauce over the
liver, and put in oven for two minutes. Sprinkle with chopped parsley,
and serve.

=Consomme Rothschild.= Equal parts of breast of boiled fowl, beef tongue
and truffles cut Julienne style, and added to very hot consomme. Add a
little chervil before serving.

=Sliced culemo salad.= Culemo is a sort of cucumber. Peel, slice, and
pour French dressing over it.


AUGUST 5

     BREAKFAST
       Cantaloupe
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Crescents
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Cold eggs with celery
       Cold chicken, with chow chow
       Asparagus, mayonnaise
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Potage Lamballe
       Radishes.      Lyon sausage
       Fillet of sole, Paylord
       Sweetbreads, Egyptienne
       Roast ribs of beef
       Saratoga chip potatoes
       Chiffonnade salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Fruit
       Coffee

=Cold eggs with celery.= Put four cold poached eggs on a platter and
cover with a sauce made of one pinch of salt, a little fresh-ground
black pepper, the heart of a stalk of celery cut in very small dices, a
little chopped parsley, one spoonful of vinegar, and two tablespoonfuls
of olive oil.

=Fillet of sole, Paylord.= Chop very fine one-half of a can of French
mushrooms, put in a napkin and squeeze out the water. Then mix with half
a cup of thick cream sauce. Season four fillets of sole with salt and
pepper, and spread all over with mushroom puree; then roll in fresh
bread crumbs, and fry in swimming hot lard. Dress on a napkin on a
platter, and garnish with fried parsley and quartered lemons. Serve
Tartar sauce separate.

=Sweetbreads, Egyptienne.= Put some braised sweetbreads on a platter and
garnish with stuffed green peppers and croquettes of rice. One of each
to each person. Serve Bordelaise sauce separate.

=Stuffed green peppers.= Dip four green peppers in very hot lard for a
second, then remove the skin, cut off the top, and clean out the
insides. Fill with a puree of fresh mushrooms, sprinkle with bread
crumbs, put small bits of butter on top of each, and bake in oven for
ten minutes. Serve as a garnish; or as a vegetable, with sauce Madere,
or tomato sauce.


AUGUST 6

     BREAKFAST
       Grapes
       Hominy in cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape St. Francis
       Eggs Montebello
       Cold roast beef
       Cosmopolitan salad
       Buttermilk

     DINNER
       Consomme paysanne
       Salted almonds
       Salmon steak, Calcutta
       Parisian potatoes, Hollandaise
       Broiled squab on toast
       Artichokes with melted butter
       Stewed corn
       Hearts of romaine, Roquefort dressing
       Assorted French pastry
       Coffee

=Eggs Montebello.= Poach four eggs, allow them to become cool, roll in
flour, then in bread crumbs, and fry in swimming hot lard or butter.
Serve on a napkin, and garnish with fried parsley. Serve sauce
Montebello separate.

=Sauce Montebello.= Equal parts of Bearnaise and tomato sauce mixed.

=Cosmopolitan salad.= Put in a salad bowl in bouquets such vegetables as
peas, string beans, carrots, cauliflower, asparagus, Brussels sprouts,
etc. There should be at least four different kinds. In the center place
a handful of shelled shrimps or lobster cut in slices, or crab meat.
Serve with French dressing, well seasoned.

=Consomme paysanne.= Cut two leaves of white cabbage in one inch
squares, and put in a casserole. Add one sliced carrot, one sliced
turnip, one leek and two leaves of celery, also sliced. Also add two
ounces of butter, cover, and simmer in oven until soft. Be careful that
it does not burn. Drain off the butter, add one quart of consomme, and
boil for ten minutes. Add a little chopped chervil.

=Salmon steak, Calcutta.= Put two slices of salmon, about one and
one-half inches thick, in a flat buttered pan, season with salt and
pepper, add one-half glass of white wine and one-half cup of fish stock,
cover with buttered paper, and cook in oven for twenty minutes. Then put
the fish on a platter and keep hot. Pour over the fish a sauce made as
follows: Heat two ounces of butter in a casserole, add one spoonful of
flour and one of curry powder, and heat through. Then add the broth the
fish was cooked in, and one pint of fish stock, and boil for ten
minutes. Bind with the yolks of two eggs and one-half cup of cream.
Strain, put back in the casserole, and whip one ounce of fresh butter
into it. When the butter is melted it is ready to pour over the fish.
Garnish the fish with fleurons.

=Parisian potatoes, Hollandaise.= Cut a quart of potatoes with a round
Parisian spoon, put in cold water, add a little salt, and boil very
slowly. When done, drain off the water, and put the potatoes in the oven
to dry. Then put the potatoes in one ounce of melted butter mixed with a
little chopped parsley, roll carefully so they will not break, and
serve.


AUGUST 7

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced nectarines in cream
       Scrambled eggs with smoked beef
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Omelet Levy
       Lamb kidneys en brochette, bacon
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Field salad
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage Cameroni
       Ripe olives
       Sand dabs, saute meuniere
       Sweetbreads, Figaro
       Roast sirloin of beef, Mounet Sully
       Broiled tomatoes
       Escarole salad
       Puff paste basket
       Coffee

=Omelet Levy.= Make a plain omelet with eight eggs, and put on a
quite-large china platter. Garnish with one bouquet of pimentos cut in
small dices and heated in butter; one bouquet of green peppers cut in
the same manner and sauteed in butter; one bouquet of asparagus tips,
and one of chicken hash in cream.

=Lamb kidneys en brochette with bacon.= Remove the skin from two lamb
kidneys, split them open, and put a skewer through them. Season with
salt and pepper, roll in oil, and broil. When done place on a piece of
dry toast, lay two strips of bacon on top. And put a spoonful of maitre
d'hotel butter on top of all.

=Potage Cameroni.= Make one quart of consomme brunoise, add six
chickens' livers cut in small squares and sauteed in butter; and
one-half cup of boiled macaroni cut in half inch pieces. Serve grated
cheese separate.

=Sweetbreads, Figaro.= Braised sweetbreads served with their own gravy,
and garnished with one timbale of spinach for each person. Serve sauce
Figaro separate.

=Sauce Figaro.= Reduce one pint of tomato sauce one half by boiling
slowly. Allow to become cold, add one pint of mayonnaise sauce, mix
well, and season with salt and Cayenne pepper.

=Roast sirloin of beef, Mounet Sully.= Roast a sirloin of beef, place on
a platter, and garnish with fresh artichoke bottoms filled with peas au
beurre, and potatoes Julienne. Serve Bearnaise sauce separate.

=Puff paste basket.= Roll out some puff paste about one-quarter inch
thick. Cut out the paste with an oval cutter. Wash the tops, and then
make a shallow incision in the tops with another oval cutter about
one-half inch smaller. Bake. Remove the soft inside paste, and fill with
sweetened whipped cream. Make a handle out of some candied angelica, and
stick it on the whipped cream, making it look like a basket.


AUGUST 8

     BREAKFAST
       Orange juice
       Kippered Alaska cod in cream
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       California gray shrimps in shell
       Cold consomme in cups
       Cold sirloin of beef, with meat jelly
       Potato and beet salad
       Schloss cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Monaco
       Celery
       Broiled striped bass, maitre d'hotel
       Virginia ham glace, champagne sauce
       Timbale of spinach
       Mashed potatoes
       Watercress salad
       Strawberry ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Kippered Alaska cod in cream.= Kippered Alaska black cod is a delicate
smoked fish. Remove the skin, place in a sauce pan and cover with thick
cream. Bring slowly to a boil, and let stand for about ten minutes at
boiling point. Another method of cooking is to put the fish in a saute
pan, cover with water, and bring to a boil. Then drain off the water,
add some cream sauce and a small piece of butter, season with salt and
pepper, and boil for five minutes.

=Consomme Monaco.= Cut one breast of a boiled chicken or fowl and two
truffles in small dices. Add to one quart of hot well-seasoned consomme.

=Virginia ham, glace.= Soak a Virginia ham in cold water over night.
Then put the ham in a large kettle and cover with cold water, bring to a
boil, and then set at side of stove and allow to simmer for three hours.
The ham is done when the skin is easy to loosen. Then remove the skin,
and put the ham in another pot with one quart of sherry wine, and set in
oven to bake. Baste continually. After twenty minutes dust the top with
powdered sugar, and bake until brown.

=Champagne sauce, I.= Put two ounces of sugar in a casserole and cook to
a brown caramel color, but be careful not to burn. Then add one glass of
vinegar and boil until nearly dry. Then add one pint of sauce Madere and
boil for ten minutes. Strain, and season well.

=II.= Put one quart of champagne in a casserole and reduce until nearly
dry, then add one pint of sauce Madere, season with salt and Cayenne
pepper, boil for ten minutes, and strain.

=Timbale of spinach.= Pass one pint of freshly-chopped spinach through a
fine sieve, season with salt and pepper, add one spoonful of cream sauce
and a raw egg, mix well, and put in small buttered timbale moulds. Cook
for twenty minutes in bain-marie. Serve as a garnish, or as a vegetable
with cream, tomato, or Madeira sauce.


AUGUST 9

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Flannel cakes, maple syrup
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Poached eggs, d'Orleans
       Mutton chops, Argenteuil
       Lettuce salad
       Puff paste sandwich
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Rice soup, Palermo
       Radishes
       Frogs' legs, saute a sec
       Tenderloin of beef, Gambetta
       Romaine salad
       Biscuit glace, mapleine
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Poached eggs, d'Orleans.= Make four round pieces of dry toast, lay a
thin slice of smoked beef tongue on each, and a poached egg on top of
the tongue. Cover with Bearnaise sauce.

=Mutton chops, Argenteuil.= Broil some mutton chops and put on a
platter. Garnish with asparagus tips. Pour a little Hollandaise sauce
over the tips; and a little brown gravy or sauce Madere over the chops.

=Puff paste sandwich (pastry).= Roll out some puff paste into a thin
sheet, and spread with a thick layer of jam. Wash the edges of the
sheet, and place another thin sheet of the same paste on top. Press
together at the edges. Wash the top, and bake. When nearly done dust the
top with powdered sugar, and bake in the oven until the sugar is melted.
Serve cold.

=Rice soup, Palermo.= Heat two ounces of butter in a casserole, add two
ounces of rice and one ounce of flour, and heat through. Then add three
pints of chicken broth, and boil slowly. Keep stirring carefully so it
will not burn on the bottom, but do not break the rice. When the rice is
soft bind the soup with the yolks of three eggs mixed with one pint of
cream. Keep stirring the soup until it nearly comes to a boil; taste to
determine as to seasoning; add a tiny bit of grated nutmeg, a little
Cayenne pepper, and the juice of two lemons, freshly squeezed.

=Tenderloin of beef, Gambetta.= Put a roast tenderloin of beef on a
platter, garnish on one side with onions glaces, and on the other side
with fresh mushrooms saute in butter. Serve sauce Madere on top of the
beef, and also separate in a bowl.


AUGUST 10

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Scrambled eggs with bacon
       Rolls
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Cold fonds d'artichauts, Du Barry
       Cold Virginia ham and tenderloin of beef
       Chilian salad
       Lemon cake
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Oriental
       Ripe California olives
       Fillet of halibut, Cubaine
       Roast chicken
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       New peas in butter
       Duchesse potatoes
       Chiffonnade salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Cold fonds d'artichauts, Du Barry.= Boil four fresh artichoke bottoms
in salt water, to which has been added the juice of a lemon. Also boil a
head of cauliflower. When both are cold fill the bottoms with some of
the cauliflower, and cover with a well-seasoned thick mayonnaise sauce.
Place each artichoke on a leaf of lettuce, and serve.

=Chilian salad.= Place in a salad bowl equal parts of apple, celery and
pimentos, all cut Julienne style. Serve with mayonnaise sauce.

=Lemon cake.= Bake a sponge cake, as described elsewhere. Cut in three
layers, and fill between with lemon butter filling. Glace the top with
thin white icing flavored with lemon juice. Serve when the icing is dry.

=Orange cake.= Same as lemon cake, but fill the cake with orange butter
filling, and glace the top with pink icing flavored with orange. Serve
with a slice of orange on top of each portion of cake.

=Lemon butter filling.= One-half pound of sugar, four ounces of sweet
butter, two lemons, the yolks of two eggs, and two whole eggs. Grate the
lemon rinds into the sugar, squeeze in the juice of the lemons, add the
eggs, yolks and butter, mix well, and stir over a slow fire until it
thickens. Do not let it boil. Use cold.

=Orange butter filling.= Prepare in the same manner as lemon butter
filling, but use oranges.

=Consomme Oriental.= Cut carrots and turnips in the shape of half moons.
Boil in salted water until soft, and serve in hot consomme with an equal
quantity of plain boiled rice.

=Fillet of halibut, Cubaine.= Cut four fillets of halibut, season with
salt and pepper, and roll in flour. Heat two ounces of butter in a
frying pan, then add the fish and saute on both sides until done. Put
the fish on a platter and pour Creole sauce over it. Serve boiled rice
separate.


AUGUST 11

     BREAKFAST
       Grapenuts with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Shrimp patties in cream
       Calf's liver saute, Lyonnaise
       German fried potatoes
       Field salad
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Parmentier
       Pim olas
       Planked striped bass
       Venison chops, port wine sauce
       Hashed brown sweet potatoes
       Artichokes au gratin
       Endive salad
       Strawberry meringue
       Coffee

=Shrimp patties in cream.= Make four patty shells and keep them hot.
Wash one pound of picked shrimps in warm water. Make a pint of cream
sauce, add the shrimps, season with salt and Cayenne pepper, and fill
the patties. Serve on napkins, with parsley in branches, and a lemon cut
in four.

=Calf's liver saute, Lyonnaise.= Cut four slices of calf's liver about
one inch thick. Season with salt and pepper, and roll in flour. Put two
ounces of butter in a frying pan, and heat, add the liver and fry on
both sides. When nearly done remove from the pan and place on a platter.
Slice two onions very thin, put in the pan and fry until yellow. Then
add one spoonful of flour, heat through, add a cupful of stock,
bouillon, or hot water, season with salt and pepper, and add some
chopped parsley and the juice of a lemon. Boil for a few minutes, and
pour over the liver.

=Potage Parmentier.= Cut four stalks of leek and one onion in thin
slices. Put in a casserole with three ounces of butter, cover, and
simmer until done. Then add two pounds of raw white potatoes cut in half
inch squares, two quarts of bouillon or stock, and one quart of water, a
handful of salt, and a bouquet garni. Boil slowly until the potatoes are
done, remove the bouquet, taste to see if salt is needed, and add a
little pepper and chopped parsley.

=Venison steak, port wine sauce.= Cut four venison chops about one and
one-quarter inches thick, and season with salt and pepper. Put a
spoonful of melted butter in a saute pan, heat, then add the chops and
saute until done. Place on a platter and pour port wine sauce over them.

=Port wine sauce.= Make any kind of brown gravy after cooking venison
chops, saddle, or any roast. Melt two spoonfuls of currant jelly in a
casserole, in a wine glassful of port wine, and reduce one-half. Then
add one cup of brown gravy, dish gravy, or sauce Madere, season with
salt and pepper, and boil for five minutes. Serve with game or mutton.


AUGUST 12

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Omelet with fine herbes
       Crescents
       Breakfast rolls
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Eggs, Mollet, Bordelaise
       Broiled lamb chops
       String beans with parsley
       Browned mashed potatoes
       Dandelion salad
       German apple cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme fermiere
       Radishes.      Salted almonds
       Broiled lobster, maitre d'hotel
       Sweetbreads braise, St. Albans
       Roast squab, au jus
       Summer squash, au beurre
       Parisian potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Orange cake
       Coffee

=Eggs Mollet, Bordelaise.= Put four Eggs Mollet (see Eggs) in a deep
dish, and cover with sauce Bordelaise.

=Consomme fermiere.= Put two ounces of butter in a casserole; add equal
parts of carrots, turnips, and cabbage cut in thin round slices the size
of a silver quarter. Simmer until done, then drain off the butter, add
one and one-half quarts of consomme, and boil for fifteen minutes. Serve
with chopped parsley on top, and with bread crusts fried in butter
separate.

=Sweetbreads braise, St. Albans.= Place some braised sweetbreads on a
platter, and garnish with one head of fresh stuffed mushrooms and one
small chicken patty for each person. Make a gravy as described elsewhere
for sweetbreads braise, to which should be added one spoonful of tomato
sauce.

=Grape jelly.= To every eight pounds of fruit add one cup of water,
bring to a boil, crush, and strain through a jelly bag. Measure the
juice, and then measure and set aside an equal quantity of granulated
cane sugar. Then boil the juice for half an hour. Melt the sugar, add to
the juice and boil for ten minutes.

=Gooseberry jam.= To each eight pounds of half-ripe gooseberries add one
teacupful of water. Boil until soft, add eight pounds of heated sugar,
and continue boiling until clear.

=Spiced vinegar, for pickles.= One gallon of cider vinegar, one pound of
brown sugar, two tablespoonfuls each of mustard seed, celery seed and
salt; one tablespoonful each of turmeric powder, black pepper, and mace;
two nutmegs grated; three onions; and one handful of grated horseradish.

=Spiced cherries.= Nine pounds of fruit, four pounds of sugar, one pint
of malt or cider vinegar, one-half ounce of cinnamon bark, and one-half
ounce of whole cloves. Make a syrup of the ingredients, and boil for a
few minutes before adding the fruit. Cook the fruit in the syrup until
the skins break; then take out, and boil the syrup down until thick.
Pour over the fruit while hot.

=Spiced sweet apples.= Take equal parts of sugar and vinegar, add a
dozen cloves and a stick of cinnamon bark, bring to a boil, add sweet
apples, and cook until the apples are tender.

=Spiced tomatoes.= Take red and yellow pear-shaped tomatoes, prick with
a needle to prevent bursting, sprinkle with salt, and let stand over
night. Pack neatly in glass jars, and cover with a vinegar made as
follows: One pint of cider or malt vinegar; one tablespoonful of sugar;
and one teaspoonful each of cloves, allspice, and black pepper. The
spices should be ground. Bring to the boiling point, and pour over the
tomatoes. Seal when cold.


AUGUST 13

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced fresh pineapple
       Oatmeal with cream
       Dry toast
       Oolong tea

     LUNCHEON
       Lobster canape
       Scrambled eggs, Mauresque
       Cold smoked beef tongue
       Romaine salad
       American cheese with crackers
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage Nassau
       Ripe California olives
       Pompano saute, meuniere
       Roast ribs of prime beef
       Stewed tomatoes
       Succotash
       New peas
       Mashed potatoes
       Lettuce and grapefruit salad
       Compote of peaches
       Coffee cream cakes
       Demi tasse

=Lobster canape.= Cut the tail of a lobster in thin slices and lay on
four pieces of toast. Cover with thick well-seasoned mayonnaise, and
garnish the edges with chopped hard-boiled eggs and chopped parsley.
Serve on a folded napkin, and garnish with parsley in branches and two
lemons cut in half.

=Scrambled eggs, Mauresque.= Cut some Lyon sausage and boiled ham in
small dices, put in a casserole with a piece of butter, and heat. Then
add the beaten eggs, cream, and a little salt and pepper. Scramble in
the usual manner, and serve in a deep china dish.

=Potage Nassau.= Peel eight white onions, and put in a casserole with
one quart of water and a little salt. Boil for twenty minutes, and then
drain off the water. Heat three ounces of butter in another casserole;
then add three spoonfuls of flour, heat through; then add one pint of
milk and one quart of bouillon and the onions, and boil for forty
minutes. Strain through a fine sieve, put back in casserole, season with
salt and Cayenne pepper, and stir-in three ounces of sweet butter. When
the butter is melted, serve hot, with small crusts of bread cut in small
squares, and fried in butter.


AUGUST 14

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Broiled salted mackerel
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cold consomme in cups
       Cold salmon, mayonnaise
       Culemo salad
       French pastry
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Pea soup with vermicelli
       Crisp celery
       Codfish steak, a l'Anglaise
       Fillet of beef, Dumas
       Chicory salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Pea soup with vermicelli.= One quart of puree of pea soup mixed with
one pint of consomme vermicelli.

=Codfish steak a l'Anglaise.= Heat two ounces of butter in a saute pan;
add two slices of fresh codfish cut about one and one-half inches thick,
and one sliced onion. Season with salt and pepper, and simmer until the
fish is done. Then remove the fish to a platter; sprinkle a spoonful of
flour in the pan, heat through, add one-half glass of white wine, and
boil for a few minutes. Then add one cup of hot milk and one-half cup of
fish broth, and boil for ten minutes. Season with salt and pepper, add a
little chopped parsley and a chopped hard-boiled egg and the juice of a
lemon, and pour over the fish. Serve hot.

=Fillet of beef, Dumas.= Use a roast tenderloin of beef; or broiled
fillet of beef steaks. Place on a platter, and cover with sauce Madere
to which has been added a slice of boiled ham and a small can of French
mushrooms cut in small dices. Garnish one side of the beef with potatoes
Parisian, and the other side with artichokes cut in quarters and boiled
in salted water.


AUGUST 15

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh grapes
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Casawba melon
       Fried fillet of sole, sauce Tartar
       Cold tenderloin of beef
       Salade Chateau de Madrid
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Dieppoise
       Queen olives.      Radishes
       Broiled fresh mackerel, anchovy butter
       Potatoes Hollandaise
       Sweetbreads, Lieb, with peas
       Roast imperial squab
       Asparagus with melted butter
       Endive and beet salad
       Corn starch blanc mange
       Alsatian wafers
       Coffee

=Salade Chateau de Madrid.= Peel a half dozen fresh mushrooms, and cut
them, raw, in Julienne style. Place them in a salad bowl with equal
parts of green peppers and pimentos, also cut Julienne. In the center
put an equal part of plain boiled rice; and a dressing made with one
spoonful of vinegar, the juice of a lemon, two spoonfuls of olive oil, a
pinch of Cayenne pepper, a little paprika, salt and pepper, and some
chopped parsley and chervil.

=Potage Dieppoise.= Put in a casserole four leaves of white cabbage, and
two stalks of leeks and one of celery cut in thin slices. Add three
ounces of butter, cover, and simmer until done. Then add one pound of
raw potatoes cut in thin slices the size of a silver quarter, and three
pints of bouillon. Season with salt and pepper, and boil until done.

=Broiled fresh mackerel, anchovy butter.= Broil the mackerel and place
on a platter. Pour over it an anchovy butter made as described
elsewhere. Garnish with parsley in branches and quartered lemons.

=Sweetbreads, Lieb.= Soak four sweetbreads in cold water for an hour.
Then put on fire in three pints of cold water and a spoonful of salt.
Bring to a boil, and then cool off in cold water. Then trim the
sweetbreads, season with salt and pepper, roll in oil, and broil. The
sweetbreads must be whole; not split. When done place on a slice of
Virginia ham and cover with sauce Colbert, and garnish with fleurons.
The preceding is for one person only.

=Endives with beets.= Cut endives salad lengthwise, place on a large
china platter, season with salt and pepper, sprinkle with chopped beets
and parsley, and a mixture of one-third of vinegar to two-thirds of
olive oil.


AUGUST 16

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Small sirloin steak
       Broiled bacon
       Browned hashed potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Eggs Buckingham
       Salade Russe
       Vanilla Darioles
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage Italienne
       Salted pecans
       Boiled turbot, nonpareil
       Roast chicken
       Puree of chicory
       Summer squash in butter
       Rissolees potatoes
       Lemon water ice
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Eggs, Buckingham.= Put in a buttered shirred egg dish a slice of toast,
lay a slice of ham on top, and a soft poached egg on top of the ham.
Cover with cream sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese, and bake in a hot
oven until brown on top.

=Vanilla Darioles.= Mix one ounce of flour with three ounces of sugar,
two eggs and five yolks of eggs. Then add one pint of milk and some
vanilla flavoring, and strain. Line about one dozen dariole or small
timbale moulds with very thin tartelette dough. Put a piece of butter
the size of a marble in the bottom of each, and fill with the above
preparation. Bake in a medium-hot oven, and when done unmould; and serve
either hot or cold, with vanilla sauce.

=Orange Darioles.= Same as vanilla darioles, but flavor with the rind
and juice of an orange. Serve with orange sauce.

=Lemon Darioles.= Prepare in the same manner as orange darioles, but use
a lemon to flavor same. Serve with lemon sauce.

=Potage Italienne.= Soak half a pound of dry mushrooms in cold water for
a few hours. Then put in a casserole with one quart of consomme, one
pint of puree of tomatoes, and one-half pound of boiled spaghetti cut in
pieces two inches long. Boil for ten minutes. Crush two pieces of garlic
and fry in a spoonful of oil for a second, add to the soup, season with
salt and pepper, and sprinkle with a little chopped parsley. Serve
grated cheese separate.

=Boiled turbot, nonpareil.= Put the whole turbot in a fish kettle, cover
with cold water, add a glass of white wine, a handful of salt, one
sliced carrot, onion and lemon, and a bouquet garni. Boil slowly for
about ten minutes, then allow to stand for about thirty minutes in the
hot water. Then put the fish on a folded napkin on a platter, and
garnish with parsley in branches and quartered lemons. Serve sauce non
pareil separate.

=Sauce nonpareil.= Put in a casserole the yolks of five eggs and the
juice of a lemon. Set the casserole in a bain-marie, and stir well. Then
add, little by little, three-quarters of a pound of butter, and
one-quarter of a pound of crayfish butter, or lobster butter. Then
strain through a fine cheese cloth, season with salt and pepper, or
Cayenne, add one dozen ecrevisse tails cut in two; or the tail of a
lobster cut in small squares.

=Puree of chicory.= See March 14th, Puree of salad.


AUGUST 17

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Poached eggs, Balti
       Ham croquettes, cream sauce
       Peas a la Francaise
       Schloss cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Montesquieu
       Mortadella
       Pompano, saute meuniere
       Leg of mutton, Mexicaine
       String beans
       Potatoes saute
       Hearts of lettuce
       Thousand Island dressing
       French pastry
       Demi tasse

=Poached eggs, Balti.= Spread some fresh caviar on four pieces of toast,
lay a poached egg on top of each, and cover with sauce Madere.

=Ham croquettes.= Cut about one pound of ham trimmings in very small
squares. Cut a can of French mushrooms in small dices, and squeeze the
water out of them. Heat an ounce of butter in a casserole, add a dozen
shallots chopped fine, and simmer for five minutes. Then add a spoonful
of flour and heat through; then add a cupful of bouillon or stock, and
boil for a minute; then add the mushrooms and the ham, and cook for ten
minutes. Bind with the yolks of two eggs, season with a little Cayenne
pepper, and add some chopped parsley. Then take off the fire and work in
two ounces of good butter. When the butter is dissolved put on a pan or
platter, and allow to become cold. Form the croquettes in any shape
desired, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and then in bread crumbs,
and fry in hot swimming lard. Serve with cream or tomato sauce, or sauce
Madere. The butter is added to prevent the croquettes from being hard,
when cooked.

=Virginia ham croquettes.= Make from Virginia ham; otherwise same as
above.

=Consomme Montesquieu.= Equal parts of boiled ham, breast of chicken,
and French mushrooms, cut Julienne style. Also an equal part of the
small flowers of boiled cauliflower. Serve all in hot, well-seasoned
consomme.

=Leg of mutton, Mexicaine.= Put a leg of mutton in a roasting pan with a
sliced onion and carrot, four leaves of celery, and one Chili pepper.
Season the leg with salt and pepper, and rub with a little garlic; place
a small piece of butter on top, and set in oven to roast. When done
remove the leg to a platter, drain the grease from the pan, add one
spoonful of meat extract, a cup of bouillon or stock, and a little salt,
and boil for a few minutes. Pour a little of the gravy over the mutton
and serve the rest in a bowl. Garnish the leg with one stuffed pimento a
la Creole for each person.

=Stuffed pimentos, Creole.= Make a rice Creole. Fill pimentos with this
rice, place on a buttered pan, put small pieces of butter on top of
each, and bake in a medium-hot oven. Serve as a garnish, or as a
vegetable with tomato sauce.


AUGUST 18

     BREAKFAST
       Orange juice
       Broiled Spanish mackerel
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Mollet, Florentine
       Cold leg of mutton
       Lima bean salad
       Swiss cheese with crackers
       Assorted fruit
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Chicken soup, Fougarmont
       California ripe olives
       Brook trout, Volper
       Louis potatoes
       Roast beef, Jules-Albert
       Stewed tomatoes
       Fried egg plant
       Endives salad, French dressing
       Vanilla ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs Mollet, Florentine.= Put some puree of spinach in a vegetable
dish, place four eggs Mollet on top.

=Chicken soup, Florentine.= Cut a spring chicken, bones and all, in
pieces one inch square. Heat three ounces of butter in a casserole, add
the chicken, and cook until golden yellow; add two spoonfuls of flour
and heat through; add three pints of chicken broth, a bouquet garni, and
one-half cup of raw rice. Boil for one hour, then remove the bouquet
garni, add one pint of boiling milk, and season with salt and pepper and
a little chopped parsley.

=Brook trout, Volper.= Put in a casserole two quarts of cider, one
sliced onion, one carrot, one piece of celery, one piece of leek, a
little parsley, one bay leaf, one clove, and one spoonful of salt. Bring
to a boil, and then add eight brook trout. Set the vessel on the side of
the range, and let stand at boiling point for ten minutes; then remove
the trout to a platter. Serve with the following sauce: Heat two ounces
of butter in a casserole, add two spoonfuls of flour and one and
one-half pints of the cider in which the fish was cooked. Boil for
twenty minutes. Then add two more ounces of fresh butter, season well
with salt and pepper, and strain over the fish. Garnish with bread cut
in heart shapes, and fried in butter. Sprinkle with chopped parsley.

=Louis potatoes.= Cut some potatoes with a small round Parisian spoon,
parboil in water, and finish cooking in just enough cream to cover the
potatoes. Season with a little salt, and serve in a deep dish with the
cream.

=Roast beef, Jules-Albert.= Season a five pound piece of sirloin of beef
with salt and pepper, and rub with garlic. Put in an earthern pot and
pour a glassful of olive oil over it. Let it stand in the ice box for
two days. Then put on fire and roast for about forty minutes, basting
often. Then remove the beef to a platter, and add to the roasting pan
one spoonful of flour; heat; add one cup of bouillon and one-half glass
of white wine, season with salt and pepper, boil for ten minutes, and
strain. Pour a little over the beef, and serve the rest in a sauce boat.


AUGUST 19

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Omelet with chives
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit, cardinal
       Fried eggs, Infante
       Imported Frankfort sausages
       Potato salad
       Limburger cheese with pumpernickel
       Rye bread
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme with celery and rice
       Antipasto
       Fillet of sole, au vin blanc
       Roast chicken
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Potato croquettes
       Romaine salad
       Lemon darioles
       Coffee

=Fried eggs, Infante.= Cook some chickens' livers saute in butter, and
add a little sauce Madere. Pour the livers around some fried eggs.

=Imported Frankfurter sausages.= These sausages can be obtained in cans.
Remove from can immediately upon opening, otherwise they will turn bad.
Put the sausages in water almost at the boiling point, and keep them at
that temperature for twelve minutes, but do not let them boil. Serve on
a platter, garnished with parsley in branches.

=Consomme with celery and rice.= Cut a stalk of celery in small squares,
wash well, and boil in salted water until soft. Boil about one-quarter
of a pound of rice in salted water until soft. Serve both in three pints
of hot well-seasoned consomme.

=Omelet with chives.= Beat eight eggs, season with salt and pepper, add
one spoonful of chives sliced very fine, and cook the omelet in the
usual manner.


AUGUST 20

     BREAKFAST
       Blackberries with cream
       Plain pancakes
       Breakfast sausages
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Eggs, Meyerbeer
       Cold ham and tongue, meat jelly
       Chiffonnade salad
       German prune cake
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage brunoise, with rice
       Carciofini
       Boiled codfish, Flamande
       Potatoes, natural
       Sweetbreads, sans gene
       Roast turkey, cranberry sauce
       Broiled sweet potatoes
       Stewed corn
       Sliced tomatoes, vinaigrette
       Corn starch blanc mange with sabayon
       Coffee

=Eggs Meyerbeer.= Shirred eggs with a broiled split lamb's kidney and a
slice of truffle on top of each one. Pour a little sauce Madere over the
white of the eggs.

=Potage brunoise, with rice.= To three pints of consomme brunoise add
one-quarter of a pound of boiled rice.

=Boiled codfish, Flamande.= Put three slices of fresh codfish, cut about
one and one-half inches thick, in a kettle with water. Season with salt,
add one-half glass of vinegar, bring to a boil, and let stand at the
boiling point for half an hour. Then place on a folded napkin, with
parsley in branches, and two lemons cut in two. Serve sauce Flamande
separate.

=Sauce Flamande.= Heat two ounces of butter in a casserole, add two
spoonfuls of flour, one spoonful of vinegar, one quart of the fish broth
in which the codfish was cooked, one spoonful of French mustard, a
little salt and pepper, one bay leaf, one clove, and a little grated
nutmeg. Boil for twenty minutes, strain through a fine cheese cloth, and
put back in casserole. Then add, little by little, three ounces of good
butter. When the butter is melted add the juice of a lemon and some
fresh-chopped parsley.

=Sweetbreads, sans gene.= Put some braised sweetbreads on a platter, and
garnish with one stuffed head of fresh mushroom to each person. Cover
with sauce Colbert.


AUGUST 21

     BREAKFAST
       Baked pears with cream
       Broiled salted mackerel
       Boiled potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape thon marine
       Cold eggs, Riche
       Broiled lamb chops
       French fried potatoes
       Cold artichokes, vinaigrette
       Cottage cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree of lentils with tapioca
       California ripe olives
       Broiled pompano, fleurette
       Duchesse potatoes
       Boiled fowl, celery sauce
       Spinach, English style
       Orange darioles
       Demi tasse

=Canape thon marine.= Butter four pieces of toast, lay thin slices of
thon marine on top, spread a little mayonnaise over all with a knife,
garnish the edges with chopped boiled eggs and chopped parsley. Serve on
a napkin with parsley in branches, and quartered lemons.

=Cold eggs, Riche.= Make four eggs Mollet. When the eggs have become
cold cut with the point of a knife, and let the yolks run out. Then fill
with a few chopped anchovies, place on a china platter, and cover with
sauce Figaro.

=Puree of lentils with tapioca.= Mix one quart of puree of lentils with
one pint of consomme tapioca.

=Boiled fowl.= Put a soup hen on the fire in two quarts of water, add a
little salt, bring to a boil, and skim. Then add one carrot, one onion,
one leek, one piece of celery and a bouquet garni. Cook until the fowl
is soft. Serve with cream, celery, oyster, or other sauce; as you may
desire.

=Celery sauce.= Warm three ounces of butter in a casserole; add two
stalks of celery, cut in small squares, well-washed and dried; and one
and one-half spoonful of flour. Heat through, and then add two pints of
chicken broth and a little salt. Boil until the celery is soft; then
bind with the yolks of two eggs and a cup of cream.


AUGUST 22

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Oatmeal
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Casawba melon
       Eggs Lenox
       Tripe saute, Lyonnaise
       Mashed potatoes
       Field salad
       Raspberry tartelette
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Colbert
       Radishes      Salted almonds
       Lobster en court bouillon
       Roast leg of lamb
       String beans
       Potatoes au gratin
       Fried egg plant
       Watercress salad
       Whipped cream in cups
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Eggs Lenox.= Boil hard one dozen eggs, remove the shells and cut in
four. Put the eggs in one-half cup of cream sauce, and season with salt
and pepper. Put in a deep buttered earthern dish, pour a cupful of
tomato sauce on top, sprinkle with grated cheese, put small bits of
butter on top, and bake in oven until brown.

=Consomme Colbert.= Add to consomme printanier one poached egg for each
person. Sprinkle with chopped chervil.

=Lobster en court bouillon.= Heat in a saute pan one spoonful of olive
oil and one ounce of butter. Add two leeks and one onion sliced fine.
Fry till crisp and yellow, add one glassful of white wine, one bay leaf,
one clove, one bouquet of tied parsley, one pint of fish broth, one
clove of garlic, some chopped parsley, and two tomatoes cut in four.
Then add two live lobsters cut in pieces one inch thick, including the
shell and claws. Season with salt and pepper and a pinch of Cayenne, and
boil slowly for forty minutes. When done remove the bay leaf, clove and
bouquet of parsley, and serve with the broth and all.

=Whipped cream in cups.= Whip some cream quite stiff, and add a little
powdered sugar and vanilla. Fill some cups; decorate the tops with some
of the same whipped cream, but put on in fancy shape with the aid of a
pastry bag. Serve with lady fingers.


AUGUST 23

     BREAKFAST
       Blackberries with cream
       Plain poached eggs on toast
       Broiled bacon
       Rolls
       Uncolored Japan tea

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Cold consomme in cups
       Omelet Imperatrice
       English mutton chop, tavern
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Assorted fruit
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Puree of white bean soup, Allemande
       Plain celery
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Sugar-cured ham glace, champagne sauce
       Spinach in cream
       Potatoes au gratin
       Wine jelly with whipped cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Omelette Imperatrice.= Slice a breast of boiled chicken, and mix with
half a cup of cream sauce. Season with salt and pepper. Make the omelet,
and before turning over on platter lay the chicken stew in the center.
Pour thin cream sauce around the omelet.

=Puree of white bean soup, Allemande.= Make a puree of white beans as
described elsewhere. Add four Frankfort sausages, peeled and cut in thin
slices.

=Sugar-cured ham glace.= Put a ham in a kettle and cover with cold
water. Bring to a boil, and allow to simmer on side of range, at boiling
point, for about three hours. Then pull the skin from the ham, sprinkle
heavily with powdered sugar, place in a roasting pan, put a pint of
sherry wine in the bottom, set in oven, and roast until brown. Serve on
a platter garnished with watercress. Serve champagne sauce separate.

=Wine jelly with whipped cream.= Make some wine jelly as described
elsewhere. Pour into moulds and set in ice box until firm. Unmould on a
cold dish, and decorate with sweetened whipped cream.


AUGUST 24

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced bananas with cream
       Browned corned beef hash
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Eggs, Opera
       Spring lamb Irish stew
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme with Italian paste
       Lyon sausage
       Stewed striped bass, Americaine
       Hollandaise potatoes
       Roast chicken
       Succotash
       Cauliflower, Polonaise
       Hearts of lettuce salad
       Corn starch blanc mange with berries
       Macaroons
       Demi tasse

=Eggs, Opera.= Garnish some shirred eggs on one side with asparagus tips
in butter, and on the other side with chickens' livers saute au Madere.

=Consomme with Italian paste.= Boil some Italian paste in salted water
for eight minutes. Then drain off water, and cool the paste in cold
water. Serve in hot consomme, with grated cheese separate.

=Stewed striped bass, Americaine.= Cut four pounds of striped bass in
pieces two inches thick. Put them in a buttered saute pan with an onion
chopped fine; season with salt and pepper, add a glassful of white wine,
and one quart of canned tomatoes just as they come from the can; and a
bouquet garni. Cover, and simmer for half an hour. Then remove the fish
to a platter, take out the bouquet garni, and reduce the broth one-half.
Add, little by little, three ounces of sweet butter, stir until the
butter is melted, add a little chopped parsley, and pour over the fish.

=Corn starch blanc mange.= Put a pint of milk on the fire. Moisten three
spoonfuls of corn starch in a little cold milk, and then stir it into
the boiling milk. Add two ounces of sugar and two well-beaten eggs. Cook
for a few minutes, and pour into small moulds. When cold, unmould, and
serve with cold cream.

=Corn starch blanc mange with Sabayon.= Prepare as above, and serve
covered with thick Sabayon sauce.

=Corn starch blanc mange with berries.= Prepare a corn starch blanc
mange, and serve with sweetened strawberries, raspberries, blackberries,
or loganberries, around the edge of the dish.

=Corn starch blanc mange with stewed fruit.= Serve corn starch blanc
mange with cold stewed apples, pears, peaches, plums, or apricots,
around the bottom of the dish.

=Corn starch food.= (For infants or invalids.) Boil one pint of milk.
Add three tablespoonfuls of corn starch diluted with a little cold
water, and two ounces of sugar. Stir into the boiling milk, boil for a
few minutes, and serve hot or cold.


AUGUST 25

     BREAKFAST
       Grapes
       Scrambled eggs with tomatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Tomatoes, surprise
       Eggs, de Lesseps
       Rump steak, Dickinson
       French fried potatoes
       Jerusalem artichokes in cream
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Assorted fruit      Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Puree of turnips, Caroline
       Mortadella.      Salted almonds
       Broiled fillet of sole, maitre d'hotel
       Leg of veal, au jus
       Carrots, Vichy
       Peas in butter
       Chateau potatoes
       Field and beet salad
       Strawberry ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with tomatoes.= Peel four tomatoes, cut in two, and
squeeze out the water. Then cut in small squares, and put in a saute pan
with one ounce of butter, season with salt and pepper, and simmer until
done. Then add eight beaten eggs, one-half cup of cream, one ounce of
butter, a little more salt and pepper; and then scramble with the
tomatoes.

=Tomatoes, surprise.= Peel four tomatoes, cut off the tops, and scoop
out the centers with a small spoon. Season the inner side of the
tomatoes with salt and pepper, and turn upside down so the water will
run out. Cut some celery in small dices, wash well, and mix with
mayonnaise sauce, season with salt and pepper; and then fill the
tomatoes. Serve on lettuce leaves.

=Eggs, de Lesseps.= Butter shirred egg dishes, crack two eggs in each,
and lay one-quarter of a calf's brains that has been previously heated,
on each. Season with salt and pepper, and set in oven for a few minutes.
Put a small piece of butter in a frying pan and cook until smoking, and
nearly black; pour over the egg and brain. Put a spoonful of vinegar in
the frying pan and heat, and also pour over the egg. Sprinkle with a
little chopped parsley and a few capers.

=Rump steak, Dickinson.= Broil a rump steak, and place on a platter.
Parboil four slices of beef marrow and lay on top with some green and
red peppers cut in triangular shapes. Pour sauce Colbert around the
steak.

=Jerusalem artichokes in cream.= Peel a quart of Jerusalem artichokes,
and put in a casserole with water, salt and a piece of lemon. Boil until
done, drain off the water, and cut the artichokes in any shape desired,
or sliced. Make a pint of cream sauce, put the artichokes in it, and
boil for a few minutes. Season well.

=Puree of turnips, Caroline.= Peel six turnips, cut in four, put in a
casserole with two quarts of chicken or veal broth, half a pound of
rice, and a bouquet garni. Boil until done, remove the bouquet, and
strain through a fine sieve. Put back in the casserole, bring to a boil;
and add slowly, bit by bit, four ounces of sweet butter; season with
salt and pepper, and serve with small pieces of bread cut in dices and
fried in butter.

=Mortadella.= Imported Italian sausages, which comes in cans, sliced.
Very fine.


AUGUST 26

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Buckwheat cakes, maple syrup
       Crescents
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs, Don Juan
       Broiled veal kidneys, with bacon
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Celery Victor
       Napoleon cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Chatelaine
       Queen olives
       Fried soft clams, Tartar sauce
       Tenderloin of beef, Cardinalice
       Lima beans, au paprika
       St. Francis potatoes
       Endives salad
       Mirlitons
       Coffee

=Eggs, Don Juan.= Make four pieces of toast, lay six fillets of
anchovies on each, and cover with scrambled eggs.

=Consomme Chatelaine.= Equal parts of small chicken dumplings, boiled
rice and new peas, served in hot consomme.

=Fried soft clams, sauce Tartar.= Take the bellies of one dozen soft
clams and roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in fresh bread
crumbs. Fry in swimming hot lard or butter. Season with salt, place on a
platter, on a napkin; and garnish with fried parsley and quartered
lemons. Serve Tartar sauce separate.

=Tenderloin of beef, Cardinalice.= Roast a tenderloin of beef, and lay
sliced truffles heated in Madeira wine, on top. For each person, garnish
with one-half tomato seasoned with salt and pepper, a small bit of
butter placed on top and baked in the oven, and one pimento heated in
butter. Serve separate, sauce Bearnaise and tomato sauce mixed. This is
also a good way to serve tenderloin or sirloin steaks.

=Lima beans, au paprika.= Boil one quart of Lima beans in salted water.
When done drain off the water. Heat through in a casserole, two ounces
of butter and six chopped shallots. Then add one teaspoonful of flour
and one teaspoonful of paprika, and one-half cup of bouillon, stock, or
water; and boil for ten minutes. Then add the Lima beans, and simmer for
a few minutes. If necessary, add a little more salt.

=Mirlitons (cake).= Beat well together four eggs and three ounces of
sugar. Add one gill of orange flower water and one pint of cream.
Strain, and put into tartelette moulds lined with tartelette dough
rolled very thin. Dust some powdered sugar over them, and bake in a
moderate oven.


AUGUST 27

     BREAKFAST
       Cantaloupe
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cold celery broth
       Cold salmon, mayonnaise
       Sliced cucumbers
       Roquefort cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage bourgeoisie
       Pim olas
       Skate fish au beurre noir
       Potatoes, nature
       Boiled beef, horseradish sauce
       German cabbage
       Roast squab
       Chiffonnade salad
       Biscuit glace, vanilla
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Cold celery broth.= Wash two stalks of celery, and cut in small pieces.
Put in a vessel with three pounds of chopped raw shin of beef, the
whites of six eggs, one onion, and a spoonful of salt. Mix well, and add
slowly one gallon of stock or bouillon; or three quarts of water; and
boil for two hours. Strain through a fine cloth, put in ice box, and
serve when cold.

=Potage bourgeoisie.= In a kettle put a fresh brisket of beef, two
marrow bones, and a handful of salt; and cover with cold water. Bring to
a boil, skim well, add a small piece of Savoy cabbage, one carrot, one
onion, one piece of celery, a dozen stalks of leek tied in a bunch, a
bouquet garni, and a spoonful of whole black peppers. Boil slowly for
about three hours and a half; then remove the beef; and take out the
leeks and carrot and cut them in small round pieces. Take the fat off of
the broth, and strain the broth over the leeks and carrot. Boil for a
few minutes, and season with salt and pepper. Before serving add some
chopped chervil, and some bread crusts cut in half inch squares, and
fried in butter.

=German cabbage.= Heat three ounces of butter in a casserole, add three
chopped onions, and simmer until done. Then add one spoonful of flour
and one pint of bouillon from boiled beef, season with salt and pepper;
and then add two heads of sliced Savoy cabbage, and cover the pot. Cook
for one hour; then add one-half glass of white wine vinegar, and one
spoonful of chopped parsley, and boil for thirty minutes.


AUGUST 28

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced figs with cream
       Hominy
       Pulled bread
       Chocolate

     LUNCHEON
       Olive and anchovy salad
       Eggs, Canada
       Broiled pigs' feet      Chow chow
       Potatoes, surprise
       Corn starch blanc mange with stewed fruits
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage Colbert
       Salted hazelnuts
       Eels, mariniere
       Roast leg of mutton
       String beans with shallots
       Mashed potatoes
       Endives salad
       Dariolets, Duchesse
       Coffee

=Olive and anchovy salad.= Lay on a ravier, or flat celery dish, two
dozen fillets of anchovies, crosswise. Cut the stones out of one dozen
large queen olives, and slice the olives thin. Lay them over the
anchovies, sprinkle with a very little salt, some fresh-ground black
pepper, a spoonful of vinegar, and a spoonful of olive oil. Garnish with
hard-boiled eggs cut in four, and chopped parsley.

=Eggs, Canada.= Cut the tops from four solid even-sized tomatoes, scoop
out the insides, season with salt and pepper, break a raw egg in each,
put a small piece of butter on top, season with salt and pepper, place
on a buttered plate and bake in the oven for about eight or ten minutes.
Serve on a china platter with a little tomato sauce around the tomatoes.
Sprinkle with chopped parsley.

=Potatoes, surprise.= Bake four medium-sized potatoes, cut off the tops,
and scoop out the insides. Mix the insides with two ounces of sweet
butter, a little chopped chives, and salt and pepper. Mix lightly with a
spoon, and refill the potatoes. Replace the top, and bake in oven again
for three minutes. Serve on napkins.

=Potage Colbert.= Wash and dry two heads of chicory salad, slice fine,
and fry in a casserole in three ounces of butter. Then add one and
one-half ounces of flour, three pints of veal or beef broth, and one
bouquet garni; and boil for an hour. Remove the bouquet, and strain the
rest through a fine sieve. Put back in the vessel, season to taste with
salt and Cayenne pepper, and when nearly boiling add the yolks of two
eggs beaten with one cup of cream. Before serving add one
lightly-poached egg to each person.

=Eels, mariniere.= Remove the skin, and cut an eel in pieces three
inches long. Put in a buttered pan, add one dozen finely chopped
shallots, one glass of white wine, and one cup of fish broth. Cover, and
boil until the eels are done. Then place on a platter. Heat one ounce of
butter in a casserole, add a spoonful of flour and the broth in which
the eels were cooked, and boil for five minutes. Bind with the yolks of
two eggs and one-half cup of cream, add a little chopped parsley, and
pour over the fish. Do not strain the sauce.

=String beans with shallots.= Boil two pounds of string beans in salted
water. Simmer, without allowing to color, six chopped shallots in two
ounces of butter. Then add the string beans, one ounce of butter, and
some chopped parsley, season with salt and pepper, and simmer for a few
minutes.


AUGUST 29

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed dried fruit
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Eggs Benoit
       English mutton chops, Kentucky sauce
       Broiled sweet potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Brie cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme tapioca, ecrevisse butter
       California ripe olives
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Roast turkey, cranberry sauce
       Green corn
       Spinach with eggs
       Rissolee potatoes
       Cold artichoke, vinaigrette
       Roman punch
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs Benoit.= Spread some pate de foie gras on four pieces of toast,
lay a poached egg on top of each; and a head of fresh mushrooms saute in
butter on top of each egg. Cover with Madeira sauce.

=English mutton chop, Kentucky sauce.= Broil the chop. Serve Kentucky
sauce separate.

=Kentucky sauce.= Put in a casserole one pint of claret, half a pint of
whiskey or cognac, one pint of chicken broth, half a pint of tomato
ketchup, quarter of a pound of brown sugar, a little salt and one-half
teaspoonful of tabasco sauce. Bring to a boil, and thicken with one-half
cup of corn starch mixed with a little cold water. Boil for ten minutes,
and then strain. Serve with mutton or game.

=Stewed dried fruit (in general).= Take pears, apricots, peaches, figs,
or other fruit, and soak in cold water for about one hour. Then drain,
add a little sugar, to taste, and boil until soft. Allow to become cold
before serving.

=Consomme tapioca, au beurre d'ecrevisses (ecrevisse butter).= Make two
quarts of consomme tapioca, and while boiling add, little by little,
three ounces of ecrevisse butter. When the butter is melted, and while
the soup is boiling, add a little Cayenne pepper and a pony of cognac,
and serve.


AUGUST 30

     BREAKFAST
       Apple sauce
       Plain omelet
       Pulled bread
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of fresh caviar
       Eggs Chambord
       Breaded veal cutlets
       Macaroni Caruso
       Edam cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Plessy
       Celery
       Boiled turbot, Hollandaise
       Potatoes, nature
       Sirloin steak, Bordelaise
       Broiled fresh mushrooms
       Souffle potatoes
       French asparagus, melted butter
       Chicory salad
       Raspberry water ice
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs Chambord.= Poached eggs on toast, covered with sauce Chambord.

=Sauce Chambord.= Put in a casserole the head of a salmon cut in small
pieces. Add three ounces of butter, one sliced carrot, one onion, a
little parsley in branches, one bay leaf, four cloves, one spoonful of
whole black peppers, one clove of garlic, and a little salt. Simmer
until the head is cooked, then add one pint of claret and reduce until
nearly dry. Then add one quart of fish broth or stock and boil for ten
minutes. Thicken with two ounces of butter and one ounce of flour
kneaded together, mix well, add two tablespoonfuls of anchovy essence,
and boil for five minutes. Strain through a fine sieve, put back in
casserole, bring to a boil, add two ounces of fresh butter, whip well,
and season with salt and Cayenne pepper. Strain through fine cheese
cloth. Serve with fish or eggs.

=Macaroni Caruso.= Boil one pound of macaroni in salted water. When done
drain off the water, add one-half pound of sliced fresh mushrooms saute
in butter, a very little garlic fried in oil, a cup of tomato sauce, and
one-half cup of grated cheese. Also serve grated cheese separate.

=Potage Plessy.= Slice ten onions very fine, and put in a casserole with
a quart of water, bring to a boil, and then drain. Heat three ounces of
butter in a casserole, then add two ounces of flour and two quarts of
bouillon, and stir well. Then add the onions, season with salt and
pepper, boil for an hour, and strain through a fine sieve. Put back in
the casserole and add two ounces of sweet butter. When the butter is
melted add bread crumbs fried in butter.


AUGUST 31

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Baked beans, Boston style
       Boston brown bread
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Eggs Bernadotte
       Calf's head, vinaigrette
       Plain boiled potatoes
       German prune cake
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage Montglas
       Dill pickles
       Boiled striped bass, Indian soy sauce
       Chicken saute, Alsacienne
       Peas a la Francaise
       Chicory salad, Escoffier dressing
       Floating island
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Eggs Bernadotte.= Lay four poached eggs on four pieces of toast, put
two fillets of anchovies crosswise on each egg. Mix one pint of cream
sauce with one dozen sliced queen olives, and pour over the eggs.

=Potage Montglas.= Mix one pint of puree of tomatoes with one quart of
Consomme sago. Add the breast of a boiled fowl cut Julienne style, the
tip of a smoked beef tongue cut in small squares, and one-quarter of a
pound of macaroni cut in pieces one inch long. Serve grated cheese
separate.

=Boiled striped bass, Indian soy sauce.= Put a whole striped bass in a
fish kettle, cover with cold water, add a handful of salt, two sliced
lemons, one small piece of ginger root, one sliced onion, and a bouquet
garni. Bring to a boil, and set on side of stove at boiling point for
twenty minutes. When done place on a platter, on a napkin, and garnish
with small round boiled potatoes, parsley in branches, and two lemons
cut in half. Serve sauce separate.

=Indian soy sauce.= Put two ounces of butter in a casserole, add two
chopped shallots, and heat. Then add one spoonful of flour, one pint of
boiling milk, one-half pint of Indian soy sauce, and season with salt
and Cayenne pepper. Boil for a few minutes; then add a cup of thick
cream and the juice of a lemon. The Indian soy sauce may be obtained in
bottles.

=Chicken saute, Alsacienne.= Cut a chicken in four. Heat one ounce of
butter in a saute pan, add the chicken, season with salt and pepper and
a chopped shallot, and cook until golden yellow. Then add one-half
spoonful of flour, and toss. Then add one-half glass of white wine, one
cup of bouillon, and a spoonful of meat extract; and simmer for fifteen
minutes. Serve on a platter garnished on one side with noodles, and on
the other side with flour dumplings. Sprinkle with chopped parsley.

=Escoffier dressing.= Mix well together one-fourth cup of imported
Escoffier sauce, which may be obtained in bottles, three-fourths of a
cup of Chili sauce, a cup of mayonnaise to which has been added the
juice of half a lemon, a little chives cut fine, and salt, pepper and
paprika to taste. Pour over the salad.


SEPTEMBER 1

     BREAKFAST
       Orange marmalade
       Buckwheat cakes
       Breakfast sausages
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape de sardine
       Eggs Grazienna
       Pork tenderloin, sauce piquante
       Lorraine potatoes
       Dandelion salad
       Oregon cream cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Fish broth, with whipped cream
       Chow chow
       Broiled barracouda, sauce Rougemont
       Potato brioche
       Tournedos, Cafe Julien
       String beans with tomatoes
       Escarole salad
       Strawberries a la mode
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Eggs Grazienna.= Mix a cupful of boiled peas with a spoonful of cream
sauce and a little salt and sugar. Heat well, and place on a platter.
Put four fried eggs on top of the peas and pour a little tomato sauce
around the bottom of the platter.

=Fish broth with whipped cream.= Make a fish broth, serve whipped cream
and cheese straws on the side.

=Potato brioche.= Make a potato croquette preparation. Roll out, in
flour, into the shape of a ball, place on a buttered pan, brush the tops
with yolks of eggs, and bake in oven until nicely colored.

=Sauce Rougemont (cold).= Chop very fine some fresh mustard and
tarragon, and mix with well-seasoned mayonnaise. If fresh mustard is not
available use a little French mustard.

=Broiled barracouda, sauce Rougemont.= Split a barracouda, season well
with salt and pepper, roll in oil, and broil. Place on a platter and
garnish with parsley in branches and quartered lemons. Serve sauce
Rougemont separate.

=Tournedos, Cafe Julien.= Take tournedos, or filet mignons, or small
tenderloin steaks, or sirloin steaks; season well with salt and pepper,
roll in oil, and broil. When done place on a platter, and garnish, for
each person, with one fresh boiled artichoke bottom filled with French
peas. Pour sauce Madere over the meat.

=String beans with tomatoes.= Peel and cut four tomatoes in four. Put in
a casserole with one ounce of butter, season with salt and pepper, and
simmer for ten minutes. Add two pounds of fresh boiled string beans, and
two more ounces of fresh butter. Season with salt and pepper to taste,
and simmer for five minutes. Sprinkle with parsley chopped fine.


SEPTEMBER 2

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced pineapple
       Fried eggs with salt pork
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Little Neck clam cocktails
       Eggs a la tripe
       Cold roast beef
       String bean salad
       Duchesse darioles
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage Maintenon
       California ripe olives
       Pompano saute, meuniere
       Roast duckling, apple sauce
       Baked creamed squash
       Sweet potatoes saute
       Green peas
       Waldorf salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Fried eggs with salt pork.= Put four slices of salt pork in a frying
pan and fry until done. Then break four eggs on top of the pork, season
with a little pepper, and bake in oven for three minutes.

=Dariole Duchesse.= Mix one ounce of flour and three ounces of sugar
with two whole eggs and five yolks. Then add one pint of milk to which
has been added six crushed macaroons. Line about a dozen dariole moulds,
or small timbales, with tartelette dough, or puff paste parings. (Paste
left over when making vol au vent or puff paste cakes). The paste should
be rolled out very thin. Into the bottom of each lined mould place a
little chopped candied fruit, then fill with the above preparation. Dust
some powdered sugar on top, and bake in a rather hot oven. Unmould and
serve with fruit sauce.

=Potage Maintenon.= Put a soup hen and two pounds of veal bones in a pot
in one gallon of water, add a spoonful of salt, one onion, one carrot,
one stalk of celery, one-half stalk of leek, and a bouquet garni. Bring
to a boil, skim well, and then simmer until the fowl is done. Then take
out the fowl and cut the white meat in small squares. Strain the broth.
Heat in a casserole four ounces of butter, add one-half cup of rice and
two and one-half ounces of flour. When heated through add the broth,
stir well, and let it simmer slowly. When once boiling be careful that
the rice does not stick to the bottom and burn. Also be careful when
stirring that you do not break the rice. Taste, season with salt and a
little Cayenne pepper; and when the rice is soft thicken the soup with
the yolks of four eggs mixed with a cup of cream and a very little
grated nutmeg. Do not let the soup boil after adding the thickening.


SEPTEMBER 3

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries and strawberries with cream
       Calf's liver and bacon
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe and watermelon, surprise
       Shirred eggs, Caroli
       Veal kidneys saute, au Madere
       Mashed potatoes
       Salade Bresilienne
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme brunoise and vermicelli
       Pickles.      Radishes
       Planked black bass
       Cucumber salad
       Deviled chickens' legs with Virginia ham
       Spinach with cream
       Egg plant, Sicilienne
       French pastry
       Demi tasse

=Cantaloupe and watermelon, surprise.= Cut out with a round Parisian
spoon equal parts of cantaloupe and watermelon. Mix, and serve in
grapefruit supreme glasses. Serve salt, pepper and powdered sugar
separate.

=Eggs, Caroli.= Place in a buttered shirred egg dish one slice of smoked
beef tongue, break two eggs on top, season with salt and pepper,
sprinkle with grated cheese, put small bits of butter on top, and bake
in oven until brown.

=Consomme brunoise and vermicelli.= One quart of consomme brunoise mixed
with one pint of consomme vermicelli. Serve grated cheese separate.

=Planked black bass.= Season a whole black bass with salt and pepper,
and lay on a buttered plank. Put a little butter on top of the fish, and
set in oven to bake. When the fish is done make a border around the edge
of the plank with potato croquette preparation, using a pastry bag with
a star tube to squeeze the potato through. Then set back in oven and
cook until the border is brown. Pour two spoonfuls of maitre d'hotel
butter over the fish, and garnish with parsley in branches and quartered
lemons.

=Deviled chickens' legs and Virginia ham.= Use the legs from soup hens
or roasted chickens. Spread with a mixture of half English and half
French mustard, roll in bread crumbs, sprinkle with olive oil, broil,
and place on a platter. Broil one slice of Virginia ham for each person,
and lay on top of the chickens' legs. Pour tomato sauce around them.

=Egg plant, Sicilienne.= Peel an egg plant and cut in thin slices. Mix
in a bowl two cups of grated cheese, one egg, half a cup of very thick
cream, a little chopped chives, salt and a little Cayenne pepper. Spread
on a slice of egg plant, and lay another slice on top, in the form of a
sandwich. Roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in bread
crumbs. Fry in very hot swimming butter, and serve on folded napkin.


SEPTEMBER 4

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       German pancakes
       Corn muffins
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres assortis
       Cold consomme in cups
       Baked oysters, Gruyere
       Russian salad
       Mirlitons au rhum
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Ruffo
       Queen olives
       Bouillabaisse Marseillaise
       Roast leg of lamb
       Corn a la Marie
       Potato croquettes
       Lima beans in butter
       Chicory and romaine salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Lady cake
       Demi tasse

=Baked oysters, Gruyere.= Season one dozen oysters on the half shell
with salt and pepper, lay on each a very thin slice of Swiss cheese, put
a small bit of butter on top, and bake in a very hot oven for six
minutes. Serve in the shells, on a platter, garnished with quartered
lemons.

=Mirlitons au rhum.= Beat until very light, six eggs, six ounces of
powdered sugar, and six ounces of almonds chopped very fine. Then add
two tablespoonfuls of rum, one ounce of flour, and four ounces of melted
butter. Pour into tartalette moulds, that have been lined with very thin
dough. Dust the tops with powdered sugar, and bake in a rather hot oven.
Glace the tops with thin icing flavored with rhum.

=Potage Ruffo.= Mix one quart of puree of tomato soup with one pint of
consomme, add one-half pound of macaroni that has been boiled in salted
water, and cut in pieces one-half inch long. Serve grated cheese
separate.

=Corn a la Marie.= Put two ounces of butter and two peeled and quartered
tomatoes in a casserole, and simmer for five minutes. Then add the corn
cut from six boiled ears, season with salt, pepper, and a pinch of
sugar, and simmer for five minutes.

=Lady cake.= One pound of sugar, three-quarters of a pound of sweet
butter, one pound of flour, two ounces of corn starch, half a
teaspoonful of baking powder, the whites of sixteen eggs, and rose
flavoring. Mix the sugar with the butter and half of the whites of eggs.
Mix the flour, corn starch and baking powder together, and add it to the
first mixture. Beat the remainder of the whites of eggs until very hard,
and add them to the preceding. Add the rose flavoring, mix lightly, put
in mould and bake in the same manner as pound cake.


SEPTEMBER 5

     BREAKFAST
       Orange marmalade
       Poached eggs with bacon
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with chestnuts
       Eggs Mollet, Auben
       Lamb hash, Sam Ward
       Escaloped tomatoes
       Sierra cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Blue Point oysters on half shell
       Consomme federal
       Salted Brazil nuts
       Boiled Lake Tahoe trout, Hollandaise
       Potatoes, nature
       Sweetbreads braise, Georginette
       Roast chicken
       New beets, Californienne
       Baked kohl rabi
       Hearts of lettuce, egg dressing
       Lemon water ice
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

=Eggs Mollet, Auben.= Make four croustades, lay an egg Mollet in each,
and pour a little sauce Italienne over them.

=Lamb hash, Sam Ward.= Put two ounces of butter and one chopped onion in
a casserole and simmer until yellow. Then add one pound of raw potatoes
cut in small squares, and two pounds of left-over lamb cut in the same
manner; season with salt and pepper, add one cup of bouillon, cover, and
simmer for nearly an hour. Then dish up and sprinkle with chopped
parsley.

=Escaloped tomatoes.= Drain into a bowl the juice from canned tomatoes.
Butter a baking dish, cover the bottom with a layer of the tomatoes, add
bits of butter, season with salt and pepper, and sprinkle with fresh
bread crumbs. Then repeat with tomatoes, seasoning, and crumbs, in
order, until the dish is full. Then add the tomato juice, sprinkle some
crumbs on top, and bake in oven for twenty minutes. Serve in same dish.

=Consomme federal.= Make a consomme royal, season with a little Cayenne
pepper, and add six thin slices of truffle for each person.

=Sweetbreads braise, Georginette.= Make a puree of sorrel (see
vegetable). Add to the puree some sliced canned mushrooms; or fresh
mushrooms saute in butter. Put the sorrel on a platter, lay sweetbreads
braise on top, and pour the gravy around the bottom of the platter.

=New beets, Californienne.= Put in a saute pan two ounces of butter,
three cloves, one teaspoonful of tarragon vinegar, one-half teaspoonful
of sugar, and some fresh-cooked and peeled, small beets. Simmer for a
few minutes.

=Baked kohl rabi.= Peel some kohl rabi, slice thin, and boil in salted
water. Then arrange in a baking dish, cover with well-seasoned cream
sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese and bread crumbs in equal parts, put
small bits of butter on top, and bake in oven until brown.


SEPTEMBER 6

     BREAKFAST
       Baked pears with cream
       Broiled salmon bellies with melted butter
       Plain boiled potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Eggs, Jockey Club
       Cold chicken and tongue, meat jelly
       String bean and tomato salad
       American dairy cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Macaroni soup, with leeks
       California ripe olives
       Fillet of flounder, Chilienne
       Roast loin of veal, au jus
       Stuffed egg plant
       Asparagus tips in cream
       Cleo potatoes      Escarole salad
       Chocolate eclairs      Demi tasse

=Eggs, Jockey Club.= Shirred eggs garnished with veal kidneys saute au
Madere.

=String bean and tomato salad.= Equal parts of fresh-boiled cold string
beans and peeled and quartered tomatoes. Put the beans around the edge
of a salad bowl and the tomatoes in the center. Serve with French
dressing and fresh-chopped parsley.

=Macaroni soup with leeks.= Slice six stalks of leek very thin, and put
in casserole with three ounces of butter. Simmer until the leeks are
cooked; then add two quarts of bouillon, stock or chicken broth; and
bring to a boil. Then add six ounces of macaroni that has been boiled in
salted water for fifteen minutes and then cut in pieces one inch long.
Boil again for fifteen minutes, and season with salt and pepper. It is
ready to serve when the macaroni is soft. Serve grated cheese separate.

=Fillet of flounder, Chilienne.= Put four fillets of flounder in a flat
buttered baking dish, season with salt and pepper, lay four parboiled
oysters on top of each fillet, and cover all with sauce Creole. Sprinkle
with grated cheese and bread crumbs, put small bits of butter on top,
and bake in oven for thirty minutes. Serve in the same dish, sprinkled
with chopped parsley.

=Stuffed egg plant.= Three tablespoonfuls of sweet butter, one-half
cupful of fresh bread crumbs, one cup of bouillon, the breast or leg of
a cooked chicken chopped very fine, one egg, one-half glass of white
wine, one pony of sherry wine, one tablespoonful of flour; and for
seasoning use salt and pepper, and a little grated nutmeg, if desired.
Cut three egg plants in two lengthwise, and scoop out the centers,
leaving the shell a half inch thick. Soak half a cup of bread crumbs in
a little stock or bouillon for five minutes; then add the chicken, two
spoonfuls of butter, the egg, well beaten, and the chopped centers of
the egg plant. Season, fill the egg plant shells, sprinkle with fresh
bread crumbs, put small bits of butter on top, set in pan with a
spoonful of olive oil, pour in the rest of the bouillon and white wine,
and bake in a moderate oven. Serve on hot dishes, with the following
sauce. Heat one spoonful of flour with one spoonful of butter, add the
sherry wine and a cupful of the broth from the pan in which the egg
plant was baked, and cook for five minutes. Pour the sauce around the
egg plant.

=Asparagus tips in cream.= Make half a pint of cream sauce, and season
well. Heat a can of asparagus tips in its own water; drain, lay in a
deep vegetable dish, and pour the cream sauce over them.


SEPTEMBER 7

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh grapes and apricots
       Oatmeal with cream
       Crescents
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Herring salad, Moscovite
       Eggs, Germaine
       Lamb chops saute, aux fines herbes
       Peas and shallots in cream
       Mashed potatoes au gratin
       Lemon pie, special
       Coffee

     DINNER
       German carrot soup
       Salami.      Green olives.      Celery
       Sand dabs, Gaillard
       Braised beef, comfortable
       Green corn
       Potato croquettes
       Romaine salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Herring salad, Moscovite.= Soak half a dozen salted herrings in cold
water for two hours. Then skin them, remove the bones, slice very thin,
and place on a china platter. Chop two pickled beets, and place around
the herring. Chop separately the whites and yolks of two hard-boiled
eggs, and place on top of the herring. Pour the following dressing over
all: Put in a bowl two spoonfuls of fresh-grated horseradish, a little
salt and fresh-ground black pepper, one spoonful of tarragon vinegar,
two spoonfuls of olive oil, and a little chopped cloves and parsley. Mix
well.

=Eggs, Germaine.= Broil four large heads of fresh mushrooms and place
them on four small round pieces of toast. Put a poached egg on top of
each mushroom; and cover with sauce Colbert, to which has been added a
little chopped tarragon.

=Lamb chops saute, aux fines herbes.= Season eight lamb chops with salt
and pepper, and fry in melted butter. Then place the chops on a platter.
Put two ounces of butter in the frying pan, cook until the butter is
brown, and pour over the chops. Sprinkle with chopped parsley, chervil,
tarragon, and the juice of a lemon.

=Peas and shallots in cream.= Put in a saute pan one dozen peeled
shallots and simmer in two ounces of butter until golden yellow. Then
add one quart of shelled peas, one cup of water, a little salt and a
pinch of sugar. Then put on the cover and boil until soft. Drain off
half of the broth and add one pint of rich cream sauce. Boil again for a
few minutes.

=German carrot soup.= Grate the red parts of six carrots and put in a
casserole with two ounces of butter and one chopped onion. Simmer for
twenty minutes. Then add one pint of chicken broth, or veal broth, or
any kind of stock; and one bouquet garni. Boil for twenty minutes, then
remove the bouquet, and pass the rest through a fine sieve. Put back in
casserole, add one pint of cream sauce, bring to a boil, and bind with
the yolks of two eggs mixed with one cup of cream. Strain again; and
before serving add a quarter of a pound of boiled noodles. Season with
salt and a little Cayenne pepper.

=Sand dabs, Gaillard.= Season four sand dabs with salt and pepper, put
in a buttered pan, lay four raw oysters on top of each fish, add
one-half glass of white wine, cover with buttered paper, and cook in
oven for ten minutes. Then remove the paper and pour one pint of cream
sauce over the fish. Sprinkle with two chopped hard-boiled eggs, put a
few bits of butter on top, and bake in oven until brown.

=Braised beef, comfortable.= Braise the beef, as described elsewhere.
Add to the sauce one can of sliced mushrooms. Garnish the beef with a
timbale of spinach for each person.


SEPTEMBER 8

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Picked-up codfish in cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cold consomme, in cups
       Cold braised beef, meat jelly
       Cole slaw
       Omelette Celestine
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Mutton broth, Kitchener
       Radishes
       Oysters, Newburg
       Fried chicken, Savoy
       Canned corn fritters
       Egg plant in casserole
       Lettuce salad
       French pastry
       Coffee

=Omelette Celestine.= Prepare an omelet, and before turning on platter
fill with a little currant jelly. Sprinkle with powdered sugar, and burn
with a hot iron. Cut some lady fingers in two, mix with a little
sweetened whipped cream, and place at one end of the omelet. At the
other end place some macaroons mixed with sweetened whipped cream.

=Mutton soup, Kitchener.= Put in a casserole three pounds of shin of
beef, and a rack of lamb consisting of about six chops. Cover with about
a gallon of water, add a little salt, bring to a boil, and skim. Then
add two carrots, two turnips, one stalk of celery, two stalks of leeks,
a bouquet garni, a spoonful of whole black peppers tied in cheese cloth,
and one-half pound of large barley. Boil slowly. When the lamb is done
remove, cut the chops apart and lay in soup tureen. When the vegetables
are done remove the bouquet and the pepper bag; and cut the leeks,
celery, carrots and turnips in small squares. Continue boiling the beef
and barley until soft. Then remove the beef, which may be used the
following day for an entree dish if desired. Add to the soup two ounces
of sweet butter, a glass of dry sherry wine, and the cut vegetables.
Test for seasoning; and pour over the chops in the tureen. Sprinkle with
chopped parsley.

=Oysters, Newburg.= Put two dozen oysters, with their juice, in a pan.
Bring to a boil, drain off the broth, add one cup of cream sauce, boil
once, then bind with the yolks of four eggs mixed with one-half cup of
cream. Season with a little salt and Cayenne pepper, let come nearly to
a boil, and add one-half glass of sherry wine. Serve in a chafing dish.

=Fried chicken, Savoy.= Joint two small frying chickens, season with
salt and pepper, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in
bread crumbs. Fry in swimming hot melted butter. When done pour a cupful
of tomato sauce on a platter, lay the chicken on it, and garnish with
asparagus tips a la Hollandaise.

=Canned corn fritters.= One tablespoonful of melted butter, one can of
crushed corn, one cupful of flour, one teaspoonful of baking powder,
three tablespoonfuls of milk, and salt and white pepper to taste. Put
all in a bowl and mix well. Drop on a hot buttered griddle in spoonfuls,
and brown on both sides. Can be made with fresh corn if desired. Serve
with roast or fried chicken.

=Egg plant in casserole.= Slice very thin, one large, or two small, egg
plants, three small onions, one clove of garlic, three tomatoes, and one
green pepper. Arrange alternately in a buttered casserole, season with
salt and pepper, pour four tablespoonfuls of melted butter over all,
cover, and cook with a slow fire. Serve hot or cold.


SEPTEMBER 9

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Oolong tea

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, Florentine
       Tripe etuve, bonne femme
       Bischwiller potatoes
       Alligator pear salad
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Oysters on half shell
       Consomme Portugaise
       California ripe olives
       Salmon steak, Colbert
       Noisettes of lamb, Ducale
       Asparagus Hollandaise
       York potatoes
       Dandelion salad, egg dressing
       Wine jelly with apricots
       Silver cake
       Coffee

=Poached eggs, Florentine.= Cut a can of pimentos in strips their full
length and about one-quarter inch wide. Heat in a saute pan with a
little butter, and seasoned with salt and pepper. Lay them on a platter,
crosswise, and place six poached eggs on top. Pour Madeira sauce around
them.

=Tripe etuve, bonne femme.= Cut two pounds of cooked tripe in strips
about one-half inch wide and three inches long. Put two ounces of butter
and two chopped onions in a casserole, and simmer until done. Then add
spoonful of flour, and heat through. Then one glass of white wine, one
pint of stock, and the tripe. Season with salt and fresh-ground pepper,
add a bouquet garni, cover the casserole, and cook in oven for one
hour. When the tripe is done remove the bouquet, and add some
fresh-chopped parsley.

=Bischwiller potatoes.= Cut two pounds of peeled potatoes lengthwise, in
eight pieces each. Put in casserole and cover with cold water, add a
little salt, and boil. When done drain off the water and put the
potatoes on a long platter. Fry until crisp two sliced onions in two
ounces of butter. Pour the butter and onions over the potatoes. Sprinkle
with chopped parsley.

=Consomme Portugaise.= Peel four tomatoes, cut in two, squeeze out the
water, and cut in small dices. Bring three pints of consomme to a boil,
add the tomatoes and one cup of boiled rice. Canned tomatoes may be used
if desired.

=Salmon steak, Colbert.= Cut two slices of salmon about one inch thick.
Season with salt and pepper, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and
then in fresh bread crumbs. Fry in frying pan with hot melted butter.
When done place on a platter, on a napkin, and garnish with fried
parsley and quartered lemons. Serve sauce Colbert separate.

=Noisettes of lamb, Ducale.= Season four noisettes of lamb with salt and
pepper, and fry in saute pan with one spoonful of butter. When done
place on a platter and garnish with fresh-boiled artichoke bottoms
filled with French peas in butter. Pour sauce Madere over the noisettes.

=Silver cake.= Ten ounces of sugar, six ounces of butter, the whites of
six eggs, half a pint of milk, three-quarters of a pound of flour, and
one-half ounce of baking powder. Mix well the sugar and the butter, and
then stir in the whites of eggs and milk. Add the flour with the baking
powder mixed in, and the rind of one lemon. Mix the whole lightly, and
bake in the same manner as pound cake.


SEPTEMBER 10

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced nectarines with cream
       Broiled salt mackerel
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Casawba melon
       Eggs Chambery
       Ragout a la Deutsch
       German apple cake
       Iced tea

     DINNER
       Cream of farina, lie
       Sweet pickles.      Salted almonds
       Fillet of sole, Pondichery
       Veal chops, Montgolfier
       English spinach
       Duchesse potatoes
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Rice darioles
       Demi tasse

=Eggs Chambery.= Make a puree of chestnuts, spread on four pieces of
buttered toast, lay a poached egg on each, and cover with brown sauce
(sauce Madere).

=Cream of farina, lie.= Bring to a boil one pint of chicken broth, then
let one-half pound of farina run into it; and cook for about thirty
minutes. Then add one pint of boiling milk, season with salt and pepper;
and boil again. Then pass through a sieve, put back in the casserole,
and bind with the yolks of two eggs mixed with a large cup of cream.
Strain again.

=Fillet of sole, Pondichery.= Cut four fillets of sole, season with salt
and pepper, place in a buttered saute pan, add one-half glass of white
wine and one-half cup of fish broth. Cover with buttered paper, and cook
in oven for ten minutes. Then place the fish on a platter. Make a sauce
as follows: Heat two ounces of butter in a casserole, add one heaping
spoonful of flour and heat through. Then add the broth from the fillet
of sole, and an additional cup of broth; one spoonful of curry powder,
and a cup of tomato sauce. Season with salt and pepper, boil for a few
minutes, and strain over the fish.

=Veal chops, Montgolfier.= Season four veal chops with salt and pepper,
and place in a saute pan with two ounces of butter and an onion cut in
four. Saute until the onion and chops are golden yellow. Then place the
chops on a platter. In the saute pan put one-half spoonful of flour, and
simmer; then add one cup of broth or stock, and boil for a few minutes.
Cut a stalk of celery in small squares, and parboil in salted water for
ten minutes. Then drain off the water, and add the celery to the sauce
from the chops; and boil for ten minutes. Then add the chops, and simmer
for ten minutes. Remove the chops to the platter, and season the sauce
well with salt and pepper. Add one ounce of sweet butter and some
chopped parsley, and pour over the chops.

=Rice darioles.= Cook one-quarter pound of rice in one quart of milk;
with one-half split vanilla bean. When cooked add one-quarter pound of
sugar, one gill of cream, and the yolks of four eggs. Mix well. Line one
dozen dariole moulds with thin dough, cover the bottoms with a little
apricot marmalade, and fill with the rice. Put a small piece of butter
on top of each, and bake in oven. Serve with apricot sauce.


SEPTEMBER 11

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Scrambled eggs, with lobster
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Moliere
       Frogs' legs, Greenway
       Cold squab
       Sliced grapefruit and lettuce salad
       Stilton cheese with crackers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme with noodles
       California ripe olives
       Boiled salmon, sauce Maximilienne
       Potatoes, nature
       Filet mignon, Du Barry
       Chiffonnade salad
       Pancakes with raspberry syrup
       Coffee

=Eggs Moliere.= Cut off the tops from four medium tomatoes, scoop out
the insides, season with salt and pepper, lay an egg Mollet in each, and
fill to the top with cream sauce to which has been added a few slices of
mushrooms and truffles. Sprinkle with bread crumbs, and bake in hot oven
until brown on top.

=Frogs' legs, Greenway.= Heat two ounces of butter in a saute pan; then
add two dozen hind legs of frogs, cut in two and seasoned with salt and
pepper. Toss for two minutes in the pan over the fire; then sprinkle
with a spoonful of flour, and toss again; then add a half glass of white
wine and one large cup of chicken broth, and simmer for five minutes.
Then bind with the yolks of two eggs mixed with one-half cup of cream,
add a little chopped tarragon, chives and parsley. Serve in chafing
dish.

=Sauce Maximilienne.= Add some chopped truffles to lobster sauce.

=Filet mignon, Du Barry.= Broiled filet mignons garnished with fresh
bottoms of artichokes filled with cauliflower; and with a sauce Madere
to which has been added some sliced canned French mushrooms.

=Pancakes with raspberry syrup.= Make a French pancake dough or batter.
Cook small individual flat pancakes, place in a buttered chafing dish,
and pour a little raspberry syrup over each in turn. Serve in the
chafing dish.

=Scrambled eggs, with lobster.= Cut the tail of a boiled lobster in
small squares, put in a saute pan with two ounces of butter, season with
salt and pepper, and simmer for a few minutes. Then add twelve beaten
eggs, one-half cup of cream, and one ounce of sweet butter. Season with
salt and pepper, and scramble in the usual manner.


SEPTEMBER 12

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced oranges
       Broiled Alaska black cod
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Chocolate with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Egg salad
       Broiled sweetbreads on toast
       Puree of Lima beans
       Fried egg plant
       Royal cake
       Iced tea

     DINNER
       Blue Points, mignonette
       Puree of peas, with noodles
       Celery.      Pim olas
       Planked striped bass
       Roast chicken
       Young artichokes, en cocotte
       Baked sweet potatoes with sugar
       Cold asparagus, mayonnaise
       Fancy ice cream
       Alsatian wafers
       Demi tasse

=Egg salad.= Boil one dozen eggs eight minutes, remove the shells, and
cut the eggs in half. Place on a platter on lettuce leaves, season with
salt and fresh-ground blackpepper, sprinkle with two spoonfuls of
vinegar, three of olive oil, and some chopped chervil and parsley.

=Royal cake.= Bake a French sponge cake (which see), cut into four
layers, and fill between with royal butter. Glace the whole with orange
icing, and form on top a crown, using a pastry bag and some royal
butter. Decorate around the top of the cake with candied fruits.

=Royal butter.= The yolks of four hard-boiled eggs, six ounces of sweet
butter, one-quarter pound of powdered sugar, and one teaspoonful of
orange flower water. Crush and work the yolks smooth in a bowl, stir in
the butter, sugar and flavoring, and mix well. Allow it to become very
cold; pass it through a fine sieve and it will come out like vermicelli.
Use it for cake filling and cake decorations.

=Puree of peas with noodles.= Make a puree of pea soup, and to each
quart add three ounces of boiled noodles.

=Young artichokes, en cocotte.= Select very small California artichokes,
trim them, and put in an earthen cocotte dish with one spoonful of hot
olive oil, season with salt and pepper, cover, and cook slowly for about
twenty-five minutes. Then add to each dozen artichokes one small can of
American peas, and one head of lettuce salad sliced very thin. Cover
again, and cook in oven for about twenty minutes more.

=Baked sweet potatoes, with sugar.= Boil half a dozen sweet potatoes
until nearly done; cut in half, or in thick slices; lay in a buttered
baking dish, spread with butter, sprinkle with a spoonful of brown
sugar, season with salt and pepper, add one spoonful of hot water, set
in oven and finish cooking, basting often until brown.


SEPTEMBER 13

     BREAKFAST
       Baked bananas
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Scrambled eggs, Nantaise
       Deviled ham
       Puree of salad
       York potatoes
       Roquefort sandwiches
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Napier
       Radishes, Antipasto
       Oysters Mornay
       Roast leg of lamb
       Stewed onions
       Scalloped pumpkin and rice
       Sybil potatoes
       Endives salad
       Roman punch
       Macaroons
       Demi tasse

=Scrambled eggs, Nantaise.= Split some sardines and lay on four pieces
of buttered toast. Cook the scrambled eggs, and pour over the sardines.

=Deviled ham.= Slice some boiled or raw ham, spread with French and
English mustard mixed, roll in fresh bread crumbs, and broil. Then place
on platter, and serve with sauce diable, tomato sauce, or sauce Colbert.
Garnish the platter with watercress and quartered lemons.

=York potatoes.= Add some boiled ham cut in small squares to Duchesse
potatoes.

=Consomme Napier.= Add to boiling consomme a marrow bone cut as thin as
your butcher can cut it with a saw. Serve at once.

=Oysters Mornay.= Parboil two dozen oysters in their own juice, then
place them on a flat buttered baking dish, season with salt and pepper,
cover with cream sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese, put small bits of
butter on top, and bake in oven until brown.

=Stewed onions.= Peel some small white onions, and boil in salted water
until tender. Then drain, and turn into a hot vegetable dish. Melt two
tablespoonfuls of butter in a sauce pan, stir in one tablespoonful of
flour, mix well, add one-half pint of boiling milk, season with salt and
pepper, boil for five minutes, and pour over the onions.

=Scalloped pumpkin and rice.= Use a buttered fireproof dish. Put in a
layer of stewed pumpkin, cover with a layer of boiled rice, then a
spoonful of cream sauce, and continue in this order until the dish is
nearly full. Sprinkle with bread crumbs, put small bits of butter on
top, and bake in oven until brown.

=Stewed pumpkin.= Peel the pumpkin, cut in one-inch squares, place in a
well-buttered casserole, season with salt and pepper, put small pieces
of butter on top, add one spoonful of broth, cover, and bake in oven for
thirty minutes. Serve in a vegetable dish, sprinkled with chopped
parsley.


SEPTEMBER 14

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Boiled salt mackerel, with melted butter
       Boiled potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Stuffed eggs, Epicure
       Salisbury steak, Stanley
       Spanish beans
       Watercress salad
       Wine jelly with peaches
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Toke Point oysters, mignonette
       Cream of tomatoes
       Ripe California olives
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Roast duckling, apple sauce
       Corn oysters
       Green peas
       Baked sweet potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       French pastry
       Demi tasse

=Stuffed eggs, Epicure.= Boil six eggs until hard, remove the shells,
and cut in two lengthwise. Mix the yolks with one spoonful of puree de
foie gras, and the chopped breast of a boiled chicken. Season with salt
and pepper, pass through a fine sieve, put in bowl, add two ounces of
sweet butter, mix well, and fill the eggs. Serve on lettuce leaves.

=Salisbury steak, Stanley.= Pass two pounds of raw beef through a fine
meat grinder, season with salt and pepper and add a cup of thick cream.
Make four, or six, oval steaks, roll in fresh bread crumbs, then in oil,
and broil. Place on a platter. Split some bananas, roll in flour, fry in
butter, and lay two pieces on top of each steak. Pour horseradish sauce
around the steaks.

=Spanish beans.= One pint of red kidney beans, one pint of tomatoes, one
onion chopped fine, one clove of garlic, one tablespoonful of oil,
one-half pound of bacon or pork, one-half pound of beef cut in dices,
one tablespoonful of powdered Spanish pepper, and a little salt and
pepper. Soak the beans over night, parboil, and drain. Add the tomatoes,
onion, garlic, meat, etc., season with salt and pepper, and pour in
enough water to keep it from being too sticky, or thick. Cook slowly all
day, or until the meat is tender, and the beans thoroughly cooked. About
half an hour before serving add the Spanish pepper, and a tablespoonful
of corn meal. The cooking may be finished in a fireproof dish, in the
oven, if preferred.

=Wine jelly with apricots.= Fill some individual moulds, or glasses,
half full of liquid jelly, place in the center of each one-half of a
canned, or fully ripe, apricot; and place in ice box to set. When firm,
fill to the tops with more jelly, and again set in ice box until ready
to use.

=Wine jelly with peaches.= Prepare in the same manner as above.

=Wine jelly with any kind of berries.= Prepare in the same manner as
above, using selected ripe berries of any kind.

=Corn oysters.= Mix well together two cupfuls of grated green corn, one
beaten egg, one cup of flour, and a little salt and pepper. Drop from a
spoon into very hot fat, in a frying pan. Serve on a napkin.


SEPTEMBER 15

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Oatmeal
       Pulled bread
       Crescents
       Chocolate

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres, assorted
       Omelette Bayonnaise
       Paprika schnitzel with spaetzle
       Swiss cheese with crackers
       Pears
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme with stuffed cabbage
       Sardines
       Fillet of sole, Meissonier
       English mutton chops
       Broiled fresh mushrooms
       Colache (vegetable)
       Rissolee potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Omelette Bayonnaise.= For four persons, take the bottoms of two boiled
artichokes and cut in squares. Add one-half can of French mushrooms,
sliced. Mix with a very little tomato sauce. Make the omelet, and before
turning over on the platter fill with the above preparation. Make four
fillets of anchovies on top of the omelet, and pour Bearnaise sauce
around it.

=Pulled bread.= Take a large loaf of fresh bread and remove the inside,
pulling it into large flakes. Put the flakes on a baking pan and bake in
a moderate oven until crisp and brown.

=Consomme with stuffed cabbage.= Add to hot consomme one small stuffed
cabbage to each person.

=Stuffed cabbage.= May be made any size, using the whole cabbage; or as
small around as a silver half dollar, for garnishing. Parboil a whole
cabbage; or some leaves only. Make a stuffing as follows: Soak two rolls
in milk for ten minutes, then squeeze out, and chop fine. Add one onion,
chopped and fried in butter; one pound of sausage meat; a whole raw egg,
and some chopped parsley, chervil and chives. Season with salt and
pepper, and mix well. Fill the whole head of cabbage if desired. Or,
take two leaves and season with salt and pepper, put a spoonful of the
stuffing in the center, and fold the leaves in the form of a ball. Place
the stuffed cabbage in a buttered pan with a sliced carrot and onion, a
bay leaf and a clove. Cover with bouillon, put a buttered paper over the
top of the pan, and cook in the oven until the cabbage is soft. If
served as a vegetable serve a brown meat gravy, or sauce Madere, or
tomato sauce.

=Fillet of sole, Meissonier.= Trim four fillets of sole, fold them in
half, season with salt and pepper, lay in buttered saute pan, add
one-half glass of white wine and one-half cup of fish broth, cover with
buttered paper, and cook in oven for ten minutes. Put the fillets on a
platter and cover with the following sauce: Cut a carrot and a turnip in
very small dices, like brunoise, and put in a casserole with one ounce
of butter. Cover the casserole, and simmer for twenty minutes or over,
but be careful that it does not burn. Put two ounces of butter in
another casserole, add a spoonful of flour and the broth from the
cooked sole. If too thick add a little fish stock. Boil for five
minutes, bind with the yolks of two eggs mixed with half a cup of cream,
strain, and add the carrots and turnips, from which the butter has been
drained. Season well.

=Colache (vegetable).= Pare three good-sized summer squash, and cut in
small squares; three peeled and quartered tomatoes, and the corn cut
from four ears. Put two ounces of butter in a casserole with one chopped
onion, and simmer until the onion is yellow. Then add the squash, corn
and tomatoes, and steam slowly for about three-quarters of an hour.
Season with salt and pepper.


SEPTEMBER 16

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Broiled oysters with bacon
       Pig's knuckles and sauerkraut
       Boiled potatoes
       Assorted cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Ditalini soup, a la royal
       Pickles.      Ripe California olives
       Sand dabs, Carnot
       Larded tenderloin of beef, Sigurd
       Lettuce braise
       Cold asparagus, mayonnaise
       Black cake
       Compote of apricots.      Coffee

=Broiled oysters with bacon.= Drain the juice from two dozen large
oysters, season with salt and pepper, roll in melted butter, then in
fresh bread crumbs, place in a thin-wired special oyster broiler,
sprinkle with olive oil, and broil. When done, place on four pieces of
buttered toast, put a spoonful of maitre d'hotel butter on top, and two
strips of broiled bacon on top of all. Serve with lemons cut in half,
and parsley in branches.

=Pig's knuckles and sauerkraut.= If fresh pig's knuckles are used salt
must be added to the water; with salted knuckles it is unnecessary. Put
the knuckles in a kettle filled with cold water, and bring to a boil.
Skim, then add one onion, one carrot, one leek, one branch of celery,
and a bouquet garni. Boil slowly until soft. Place on a platter and
garnish with sauerkraut.

=Ditalini soup a la royal.= Ditalini is a species of macaroni, prepared
in small pieces. Bring two quarts of chicken broth to a boil, add
one-half pound of ditalini, and boil until the paste is soft. Then bind
the soup with the yolks of three eggs mixed with half a pint of cream.
Season well with salt and pepper, and serve at once. Serve grated cheese
separate.

=Sand dabs, Carnot.= Place four cleaned and well seasoned sand dabs in a
buttered pan, add one-half glass of white wine and one-half cup of fish
stock; cover, and cook. When done place on a platter and pour a white
wine sauce over the fish. Garnish with small patties filled with oyster
crabs.

=Oyster crab patties.= Wash one-half pint of oyster crabs, and drain
well. Put the crabs in a saute pan with one ounce of butter, season with
salt and pepper, and toss over the fire for five minutes. Then add a
pony of sherry wine, and simmer for two minutes. Then add one-half cup
of cream sauce, or white wine sauce, and fill the patties. Serve hot.
For garnishing fish, make very small patties. If served as a fish
course, serve on a platter garnished with parsley in branches.

=Larded tenderloin of beef, Sigurd.= Roast a larded tenderloin of beef,
place on a platter, and garnish one side with stuffed tomatoes Creole;
and the other side with potato croquettes. Serve sauce Perigueux
separate.

=Black cake (Christmas cake).= One pound of butter, one pound of sugar,
one pound of flour, ten eggs, one-half pint of brandy, three pounds of
currants, one pound of citron, two pounds of seeded raisins, one-half
pound of orange-peel, one-quarter pound of molasses, one-half ounce of
powdered cloves, one-half ounce of ginger, one ounce of allspice,
one-half ounce of cinnamon, and the rind and juice of two lemons. Mix
thoroughly and bake.


SEPTEMBER 17

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Cold consomme in cups
       Poached eggs, Dauphine
       Broiled squab on toast
       Saute potatoes
       Lorenzo salad
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Kalte Schahle

     DINNER
       California oysters on half shell
       Cream of corn and onions
       Queen olives.      Radishes
       Boiled salmon, Badu-Cah
       Parisian potatoes with parsley
       Roast turkey, cranberry sauce
       Corn fritters, Susan Jones
       Peas.      Endives salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Seed biscuits
       Demi tasse

=Poached eggs, Dauphine.= Lay some poached eggs on toast and garnish
with asparagus tips. Pour over the eggs some sauce Madere, to which has
been added some sliced French mushrooms.

=Lorenzo salad.= Cut some pears in squares, and add equal parts of
watercress and lettuce. Season with French dressing to which has been
added two spoonfuls of chutney sauce.

=Kalte Schahle.= This is a German summer drink, and is made as follows:
Put in a pitcher a large piece of ice, and then add three large glasses
of beer, two large glasses of lemonade made with very little sugar, two
spoonfuls of small raisins, and three spoonfuls of grated pumpernickel.

=Cream of corn and onions.= Heat two ounces of butter in a casserole;
then add two spoonfuls of flour, one quart of chicken broth, six sliced
onions, and six grated ears of corn. Season with salt and pepper, and
boil for one hour. Then add one pint of milk, and boil again. Strain
through a fine sieve, put back in casserole, add one-half pint of sweet
cream, bring nearly to a boil, and add two ounces of butter. When the
butter is melted, serve.

=Boiled salmon, Badu-Cah.= Cut two slices of salmon about one inch
thick, and put in pot in cold water; add half of a sliced onion, half of
a carrot, one bouquet garni, one-half spoonful of salt, and one
wineglassful of vinegar. Boil slowly for twenty minutes. Serve on a
platter, on a napkin, garnished with two lemons cut in half, and parsley
in branches. Serve separate, lobster sauce to which has been added two
spoonfuls of capers.

=Lobster sauce.= Make two pints of white wine sauce, and whip into it
two large spoonfuls of lobster butter. Season with salt and Cayenne
pepper. Strain, and add half a cupful of lobster cut in small dices. For
Badu-Cah, omit the lobster.

=Cranberry sauce.= Boil one-half gallon of ripe cranberries with
one-quart of water. Boil until soft, strain, add one and one-half pounds
of sugar, and boil for five minutes. Pour in moulds, and serve cold.

This sauce may be made without straining if desired.

=Corn fritters, Susan Jones.= One pint of grated corn, half a teacupful
of milk, half a teacupful of flour, a small teaspoonful of baking
powder, a tablespoonful of melted butter, two eggs, one teaspoonful of
salt, and a little pepper. Mix, and drop from a spoon into hot fat, and
fry.

=Seed biscuits.= Four ounces each of sugar and butter, one pound of
flour, three eggs, half ounce of caraway seeds, and lemon flavoring. Mix
to a dough, roll out about one-quarter inch thick, cut in round shapes,
wash the tops with beaten eggs, and bake in a medium oven.


SEPTEMBER 18

     BREAKFAST
       Baked bananas
       Codfish in cream
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Eggs, Isabella
       Mixed grill, special
       Escarole salad
       Petaluma cream cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme printanier royal
       California ripe olives
       Ecrevisses en buisson
       Boiled leg of mutton, caper sauce
       Mashed turnips
       Steamboat fried potatoes
       Lettuce and grapefruit salad
       Orange souffle glace, St. Francis
       Tango cake
       Demi tasse

=Baked bananas.= Peel six bananas and cut them in half, lengthwise. Lay
in a pan close together. Mix a little powdered cinnamon with some sugar,
and spread over the bananas. Put some small bits of butter on top, and
bake for twenty minutes. While baking, baste a couple of times with a
little syrup. Serve with its own juice.

=Orange souffle glace, St. Francis.= Take six nice oranges and cut off
the tops. Take out the insides. Put some sliced fruit, such as apples,
oranges, pineapple, grapefruit, etc., in the bottom of the orange shell,
and fill about one-third full. Add one-third of vanilla ice cream, and
finally finish with a meringue made of the whites of three eggs, six
ounces of sugar, and the grated rind of an orange. Dust some powdered
sugar on top, and bake in a very hot oven until brown.

=Eggs, Isabella.= Put some thick Creole sauce on a platter, lay four
poached eggs on top, and cover with a little cream sauce.

=Petaluma cream cheese.= This cheese is a specialty of Petaluma,
California. Serve plain; or mixed with salt, pepper, chopped chives, and
caraway seeds. Or serve with powdered sugar and cream, separate.

=Tango cake.= One-quarter pound of burnt almonds, powdered very fine,
one-quarter pound of melted butter, three-quarters of a pound of sugar,
two ounces of grated chocolate, one-quarter pound of biscuit crumbs, the
grated rind of one lemon, the yolks of seven eggs, three whole eggs, the
whites of seven eggs beaten very hard, and one pony of rum. Beat the
eggs and yolks with the sugar until light; then add the almonds,
chocolate, crumbs and lemon rind, and mix well. Add the rum and melted
butter; and finally the whites of eggs, mixing lightly. Line a ring
mould with very thin tartelette dough, cover the bottom with apricot
jam, and then fill with the above preparation. Bake in a warm (not hot),
oven. When done, glace with icing flavored with rum. While the icing is
still soft sprinkle with assorted colored nonpareil seeds. These seeds
may be obtained of grocers dealing in fancy groceries.

=Steamboat fried potatoes.= Peel three fresh-boiled potatoes, and cut
crosswise in pieces one and one-half inches thick. Fry in a pan with
half butter and half chicken fat. Season with salt and pepper, and cook
until golden yellow.


SEPTEMBER 19

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed pears with claret
       Oatmeal and cream
       Dry toast
       Oolong tea

     LUNCHEON
       Shrimp salad, Anastine
       Shirred eggs, Imperial
       Breast of squab, au jus
       Peas
       Chocolate cream pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Oysters on half shell
       Potage Carpure
       Dill pickles.      Lyon sausage
       Sand dabs, saute meuniere
       Roast chicken
       Cauliflower Hollandaise
       Potatoes au gratin
       Endives salad
       Coffee ice cream
       Anise toast
       Demi tasse

=Stewed pears with claret.= Peel a dozen nice pears, put them in an
earthen pot, add one pint of water, one-half pint of claret, one-half
pound of sugar, and a piece of cinnamon stick. Cover the pot, and cook
in oven for about two hours. Serve cold.

=Shrimp salad, Anastine.= Six shallots, one-half stalk of celery,
one-half can of pimentos, and some parsley. Chop all very fine, and put
in salad bowl with two pounds of picked shrimps. Mix, and add one-half
teaspoonful of salt, some fresh-ground black pepper, two spoonfuls of
tarragon vinegar, and four spoonfuls of olive oil. Serve in a salad
bowl, with leaves of lettuce around the sides; and with hard-boiled eggs
cut in four.

=Shirred eggs, Imperial.= Cut fresh goose liver in small pieces, and fry
in pan seasoned with salt and pepper. Then place the liver in a buttered
shirred egg dish, break eggs on top, season with salt and pepper, and
cook until the eggs are done.

=Breast of squab, au jus.= Cut the breasts from four large squabs,
season with salt and pepper, and roll in flour. Heat two ounces of
butter in a saute pan, add the breasts, and fry for ten minutes. Place
the breasts on a platter, and put in the pan one spoonful of meat
extract and one-half cup of stock. Season with salt and pepper, reduce
one-half by boiling, and pour over the squab. Sprinkle with chopped
parsley.

=Chocolate cream pie.= One quart of milk, the yolks of eight eggs,
one-half pound of sugar, two ounces of corn starch, two ounces of
powdered cocoa, and one ounce of butter. Dissolve the corn starch in a
little milk, and stir into the yolks of eggs. Put the milk on the fire,
add the sugar, cocoa, and butter, and bring to a boil. Then pour it into
the yolks and corn starch, and set back on the stove until it thickens.
Have a pie crust already baked, fill it with this cream, decorate the
top with meringue, and set it in the oven to brown the top. Serve cold.
The above will make about two pies.

=Potage Carpure.= Slice a head of lettuce very fine, wash, and drain
well. Then put in a casserole with two ounces of butter, cover, and
simmer for ten minutes. Then add chicken broth, or clear veal or beef
broth (three pints), season with salt and pepper, and boil slowly for
about fifteen minutes. Bind with the yolks of three eggs mixed with half
a pint of cream. Serve with bread sliced thin, and dried in the oven,
like toast.

=Anise toast.= One-half pound of sugar, four whole eggs, the yolks of
two eggs, one-half ounce of anise seed, one-half pound of flour, and
lemon flavoring. Beat the eggs, yolks and sugar over the fire until
light; then remove and continue beating until cold. Add the flour,
seeds, and flavor; dress on a buttered pan in long strips, and bake.
When cold cut in slices, and toast in the same manner as zwieback.


SEPTEMBER 20

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberries with cream
       Broiled salt mackerel
       Boiled potatoes
       Rolls      Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs, Derby
       Cold chicken, Isabella
       Compote of peaches
       Devil cake      Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Chartreuse.      Queen olives
       Terrapin saute au beurre
       Roast lamb, mint sauce
       Timbale of spinach
       Potatoes, Hollandaise
       Lettuce and grapefruit salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Baises (chocolate drops)      Coffee

=Eggs, Derby.= Cut a can of goose liver au natural in slices one-half
inch thick, season with salt and pepper, roll in flour, and fry in
butter. Place on a platter, put a poached egg on top of each slice, and
pour sauce Madere, to which has been added sliced mushrooms, over the
eggs.

=Cold chicken, Isabella.= Boil a fat chicken. When cold, slice the
breast very thin. Make a pint of mayonnaise, and add a spoonful of
paprika to it. Mix a cup of cold boiled rice with one spoonful of the
mayonnaise, season with salt, and place in the center of a china
platter. Lay the breast of chicken on top, and pour the rest of the
sauce over all. Lay a few leaves of tarragon crosswise on top. At each
end of the platter place two bouquets of asparagus tips. Sprinkle with
finely chopped chervil.

=Baises (chocolate drops).= One pound of sugar (half powdered and half
icing), the whites of three eggs, two ounces of chocolate, and vanilla
flavoring. Dissolve the chocolate, and stir into the sugar and whites of
eggs, over the fire, until all is melted and smooth; but do not let it
come to a boil. Dress on a buttered pan, like peppermint drops. Allow to
dry out for a few hours, and bake in a moderate oven.

=Devil cake.= One-half pound of almond paste, one-half pound of sugar,
one-half pound of butter, four ounces of grated chocolate, twelve yolks
and twelve whites of eggs, and four ounces of flour. Cream the sugar
with the butter, and work in the yolks. Rub the almond paste smooth with
four of the whites of eggs, and add, with the grated chocolate, to the
sugar, butter and yolks. Beat the rest of the whites of eggs very hard
and stiff, and add them to the mixture, with the flour. Fill a buttered
cake mould, and bake. Allow to become cool; then cut into three layers,
and fill between with chocolate filling. Glace the top with very dark
chocolate frosting.

=Consomme Chartreuse.= Boil one cup of chestnuts in salted water until
tender. Then drain off the water, and pass the chestnuts through a fine
sieve. When the chestnuts are cold put in a bowl, add four whole eggs,
and one pint of lukewarm consomme; season with salt and pepper; mix
well; put in buttered timbale moulds, set them in bain-marie, and boil
for twenty minutes, when they will set like custard when cold. Turn out
of moulds, and cut in slices one-eighth inch thick. Serve in hot
consomme.

=Terrapin au beurre.= Boil two terrapin (see index), cut up; season with
salt, pepper and a little paprika and celery salt. Heat three ounces of
butter in a pan, add the terrapin, and toss for about ten minutes. Put
the terrapin in a chafing dish, add to the pan two ounces of butter,
cook till brown, and pour over the terrapin. Sprinkle a pony of dry
sherry wine over all, cover the dish, and allow to stand for a few
minutes before serving.


SEPTEMBER 21

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced pineapple
       Hominy with cream
       Crescents
       Russian caravan tea

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Riga
       Consomme in cups
       Chicken hash, with poached eggs
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Oysters on half shell
       Bean and cabbage soup
       Celery
       Fillet of Tahoe trout, au vin blanc
       Roast loin of pork, apple sauce
       Sweet potatoes saute
       Artichokes, Hollandaise
       Green corn
       Waldorf salad
       Cold chocolate pudding
       Coffee

=Bean and cabbage soup.= Soak two pounds of white beans in water over
night. Put in a vessel two pounds of salt pork, three pounds of shin of
beef, two gallons of cold water, and a tablespoonful of salt. Bring
slowly to a boil, and skim well. Add the beans, and boil for an hour.
Then add a small head of cabbage that has been cut in one-inch squares,
one onion, one carrot, a bouquet garni, and one mashed clove of garlic.
Boil slowly for two hours, then remove the pork, beef, carrot, onion and
bouquet garni. Season to taste with salt and pepper, and add a little
chopped parsley.

=Cold chocolate pudding.= One pint of cream, one-half pint of milk, the
yolks of four eggs, six ounces of sugar, three ounces of chocolate,
one-half ounce of gelatine, and a little vanilla flavoring. Soak the
gelatine in a little cold water. Dissolve the chocolate and sugar on the
fire; then add the yolks and milk, and stir until it thickens, but do
not let it come to a boil. Remove from the fire, add the gelatine and
vanilla flavoring, and stir until the gelatine is melted. Then strain,
and cool. Whip the cream until stiff, mix with the foregoing, and
immediately pour into pudding moulds. Set in the ice box to harden.
Serve with cold chocolate sauce.

=Cold chocolate sauce.= Three-quarters of a pound of sugar, one-half
pound of water, and four ounces of powdered chocolate. Bring the water
to a boil, and dissolve the chocolate and sugar in it. Bring to a boil
again; take off the fire, and allow to become cool. Serve with bavarois,
puddings, blanc mange, ice creams, etc.

=Italian wine sauce, for puddings.= Two ounces of sago, one-half pint of
water, one-half pint of claret, one-quarter pound of sugar, the juice of
an orange, and a pony of rum. Soak the sago in the water for over an
hour; then boil until clear. Then add the claret, sugar, and orange
juice, and continue on fire until it thickens. Then add the rum. Serve
with corn meal, sago, tapioca, or rice pudding.


SEPTEMBER 22

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Plain scrambled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Pompano en papillote
       Broiled sweetbreads on toast
       Succotash
       Soufflee potatoes
       French pastry
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       California oyster cocktail
       Consomme Trianon
       Ripe olives
       Fried eels, sauce remoulade
       Breast of chicken with figs
       Artichokes, sauce Italienne
       Broiled fresh mushrooms
       Potatoes a la Reine
       Romaine salad, Roquefort dressing
       Biscuit glace, St. Francis
       Alsatian wafers
       Coffee

=Consomme Trianon.= Cut some green, red, and natural royal in triangle
shapes, and serve in hot consomme.

=Consomme with green royal.= Mix four eggs with one pint of warm
consomme, add green coloring, strain, put in buttered timbale moulds,
and cook in bain-marie. Cut in any shape, and serve in hot consomme.

=Consomme with red royal.= Obtain some red coloring from a fancy grocer.
Mix the yolks of four eggs with one pint of warm consomme, add some
coloring, strain, and cook in bain-marie. Cut in any shape desired, and
serve in hot consomme.

=Fried eels, sauce remoulade.= Cut the eels in pieces two inches long,
and boil in water with a little salt and vinegar, one sliced onion, one
carrot, and a bouquet garni. Allow to become cool in its own gravy. Then
take out of the gravy, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, then in bread
crumbs, and fry in very hot swimming fat until golden yellow. Season
with salt, and serve on a platter, on a napkin. Garnish with fried
parsley and quartered lemons. Serve sauce remoulade separate.

=Breast of chicken with figs.= Cut the breasts from two young raw
roasting chickens, remove the skin, season with salt and pepper, roll in
table cream, then in flour, and fry in very hot melted butter. When the
breasts are done, pour three spoonfuls of cream on a platter and lay the
breasts on top. Heat some preserved figs, and garnish with two for each
person. Or dry figs may be warmed in consomme, and used instead, if
desired.


SEPTEMBER 23

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Griddle cakes with maple syrup
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit en supreme
       Eggs Belley
       Roast loin of pork, apple sauce
       Fried sweet potatoes
       Cold artichokes, mayonnaise
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Chicken broth, San Remo
       Celery
       Oysters, Victor Hugo
       Small tenderloin steak, Cercle Militaire
       Peas in cream
       Pont Neuf potatoes
       Chiffonnade salad
       Philadelphia vanilla ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Eggs Belley.= Slice some smoked beef very fine, parboil, and add to
plain scrambled eggs, with a little chopped chives.

=Chicken broth, San Remo.= Make two quarts of plain chicken broth, add
to it one-half cup of sliced soft-boiled carrots, and one cup of boiled
rice. Serve grated cheese separate.

=Oysters, Victor Hugo.= Season two dozen oysters on the half shell with
salt and pepper. Put in a bowl one cupful of fresh-grated horse radish,
a little chopped parsley, one-half cup of fresh bread crumbs, one
spoonful of grated cheese, and one spoonful of butter. Mix well, and
spread over the oysters. Put in oven to bake, and when done serve in the
same shells. Serve one-half lemon to each person.

=Small tenderloin steak, Cercle Militaire.= Season four small tenderloin
steaks with salt and pepper, roll in oil, and broil. Broil in the same
manner, and at the same time, four whole lamb kidneys. When done place
the steaks on a platter with the kidneys on top. Boil four artichokes,
remove the leaves, and toss the bottoms in a saute pan with a little
butter. Season with salt and pepper, and use to garnish the steaks. Heat
two ounces of butter in a saute pan, add six chopped shallots, when hot
add a piece of lemon and a little chopped parsley, and pour over the
kidneys and steaks.


SEPTEMBER 24

     BREAKFAST
       Orange marmalade
       Boiled eggs
       Buttered toast
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Poached eggs, Mexicaine
       Broiled pig's feet
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       Meringue Chantilly
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Madrilene
       Ripe olives.      Celery
       Planked black bass
       Roast Muscovy duck, apple sauce
       Artichokes, Barigoule
       Laurette potatoes
       Fresh asparagus, Hollandaise
       Westphalian ham
       Frozen egg nogg
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Poached eggs, Mexicaine.= Slice one green pepper, and simmer in butter.
Slice one-half can of cepes, and toss in olive oil over fire. Slice two
pimentos; and mix all together with one cup of tomato sauce. Season
well, pour on a platter, and lay six poached eggs on top.

=Roast Muscovy duck.= Clean a Muscovy duck, season with salt and pepper,
and stuff with a piece of celery and two shallots chopped very fine. Put
the duck in a roasting pan with a sliced onion and carrot, add a little
water, and put in a hot oven. The water will evaporate quickly, and the
fat from the duck will be sufficient to roast it. Baste often. When done
place the duck on a platter, remove the fat from the pan, add one cup of
stock and a spoonful of meat extract, boil for five minutes, and pour
over the duck.

=Artichokes, Barigoule.= Parboil six artichokes in salted water for two
minutes. Then remove the hairy part, between the leaves and the bottoms;
and fill with a stuffing made as follows: Simmer twelve chopped shallots
in a casserole in two ounces of butter; then add one-half pound of
chopped fresh mushrooms, and simmer again for ten minutes. Then add
one-half glass of white wine, and boil until nearly dry, but be careful
that it does not burn. Then add one-half cup of brown gravy, season with
salt and pepper and a little chopped garlic and parsley, and boil for
five minutes. Then thicken with the yolks of three raw eggs, and if
necessary add a very little fresh bread crumbs. When the artichokes are
filled tie a thin slice of salt pork over the tops, lay in a saute pan,
with sliced onions, sliced carrots, a bouquet garni, and one-half pint
of bouillon. Cover, set in the oven and cook for about forty-five
minutes. If the leaves loosen easily they are done. Serve on a platter
with sauce Madere.

=Fresh asparagus and Westphalia ham.= Boil some fresh asparagus, and
serve with Hollandaise sauce. Serve at the same time raw sliced
Westphalian ham.


SEPTEMBER 25

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Breakfast sausages
       Flannel cakes, maple syrup
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Oysters, Louis
       Vogeleier omelet
       Spring lamb Irish stew with dumplings
       Camembert and Brie cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Homemade clam soup
       Dill pickles.      Salted pecans
       Fillet of sole, Paul Bert
       Leg of veal, au jus
       Spinach
       Mashed potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       German apple cake
       Demi tasse

=Oysters, Louis.= Season two dozen oysters on the half shell with salt
and pepper, sprinkle with one dozen shallots chopped fine. Put one-half
teaspoonful of bread crumbs, mixed with a little paprika, on each
oyster. Put a small bit of butter on top of each, and bake in oven for
about ten minutes. Serve in the shells, with one-half lemon to each
person.

=Spring lamb Irish stew with dumplings.= Make an Irish stew (see index),
and cook some dumplings in the broth, as given below.

=Dumplings, for stews, pot pie, etc.= One quart of flour, three heaping
teaspoonfuls of baking powder, one-half teaspoonful of salt, and some
sweet milk. Sift the baking powder, salt and flour, four times. Add
enough milk to make rather a stiff dough or batter. Drop by spoonfuls
into boiling broth. There should be broth enough to cook up around the
dumplings, but not enough to cover them. Boil for half an hour, and do
not lift the cover until done.

=Homemade clam soup.= Put three dozen Little Neck clams with their juice
in a sauce pan. Add one pint of cold water, bring to a boil, and skim
well. Then add one-half pint of boiling cream and two ounces of butter.
When the butter is melted add one cup of broken saltine crackers, and
season with salt, pepper, and a little chopped parsley.

=Fillet of sole, Paul Bert.= Put four fillets of sole in a buttered pan,
season with salt and pepper, add one-half cup of fish stock, and
one-half glass of white wine, cover with a buttered paper, and cook for
ten minutes. Place fillets on a platter, reduce the stock nearly dry,
add one cup of tomato sauce and one cup of Bearnaise sauce, mix well,
and strain over the fish.


SEPTEMBER 26

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Plain poached eggs on toast
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Pimentos Suedoise
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Fried loin of lamb chops, tomato sauce
       Lima beans with shallots
       Potato salad
       Chocolate eclairs
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Toke Point oysters
       Sorrel soup with rice
       Chow chow
       Baked lobster, cardinal
       Ham glace, champagne sauce
       Cooked lettuce salad
       Duchesse potatoes
       Fruit salad
       Philadelphia lemon water ice
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Pimentos Suedoise.= Spread the contents of a can of pimentos flat on
the table, lay a fillet of anchovies in oil on each pimento, and roll up
in the form of a sausage with the anchovy in the center. Lay them on a
ravier dish, season with salt and pepper, one-third of vinegar and
two-thirds olive oil, and sprinkle with chopped parsley.

=Fried loin of lamb chops.= Have your butcher cut six nice loin chops
about one and one-quarter inch thick, and well trimmed. Season with salt
and pepper, roll in flour, then in beaten egg, and finally in bread
crumbs. Put some lard or melted butter in a saute pan, and when hot add
the chops and fry until nice and brown. Place on a platter, garnish with
parsley in branches and lemons cut in half. Serve any sauce desired,
separate.

=Lima beans with shallots.= Put one dozen chopped shallots in a
casserole with two ounces of butter. When hot, add one teaspoonful of
flour, one-half cup of bouillon, one quart of boiled Lima beans, and
season with salt, pepper and a little chopped parsley. Boil for ten
minutes.

=Baked lobster, Cardinal.= Boil four small lobsters. When done, split in
two, remove the meat, and save the shells. Put two ounces of butter in a
saute pan, add the lobster meat cut in slices one-half inch thick,
season with salt and pepper, and toss over the fire for a few minutes.
Then add one-half glass of sherry wine, and reduce until nearly dry.
Then add one cup of cream sauce and boil for a few minutes. Then add one
spoonful of lobster butter, mix well; and then fill the shells. Sprinkle
with fresh bread crumbs, place small bits of butter on top, and bake in
oven until golden brown. Serve on a platter, on a folded napkin, and
garnish with parsley in branches and two lemons cut in half.


SEPTEMBER 27

     BREAKFAST
       Grapes
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Eggs Bennett
       Broiled quail on toast
       Soufflee potatoes
       Cold fresh asparagus, mustard sauce
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme national
       Plain celery.      Ripe olives
       Fillet of sand dabs, meuniere
       Sweetbreads, royal
       Roast leg of lamb, mint sauce
       String beans
       Stewed tomatoes
       St. Francis potatoes
       Sliced tomatoes
       French pastry
       Coffee

=Eggs Bennett.= Boil six eggs until hard, remove the shells, and cut in
two lengthwise. Remove the yolks, chop fine, and mix with one ounce of
butter, and twelve anchovies in oil cut in small squares. Fill the
whites of the eggs with this mixture, place on a buttered baking dish,
cover with a well-seasoned cream sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese, put
small bits of butter on top, and bake in the oven until brown.

=Broiled quail on toast.= Split the quail, season with salt and pepper,
roll in oil, and broil. When done place each quail on a piece of
buttered toast, put a spoonful of maitre d'hotel butter on top of each,
and garnish with watercress and lemons cut in half.

=Consomme national.= Cut some plain green, and red royal in small stars,
and serve in hot consomme.

=Sweetbreads, royal.= Parboil one pound of sweetbreads, pull off the
skins, and cut in slices one-quarter inch thick. Peel twenty small heads
of fresh mushrooms, wash well, and dry on a napkin. Put two ounces of
butter in a saute pan with the sweetbreads and mushrooms, season with
salt and pepper, and simmer slowly for ten minutes. Then add half a pint
of cleaned and well-washed oyster crabs, and simmer again for five
minutes. Then add one-half pint of cream, and boil. Thicken with the
yolks of three eggs well-mixed with a small cup of cream, but do not let
it come to a boil after the cream has been added. Taste to see if
seasoning is right, add half a glass of dry amontillado sherry wine, and
serve in chafing dish.


SEPTEMBER 28

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       German pancakes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit, cardinal
       Scrambled eggs, Norwegian
       Honeycomb tripe saute, aux fines herbes
       Alsatian potatoes
       Watercress salad
       Pear tartelette.      Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Navarraise
       Salted pecans
       Oysters en brochette, a la diable
       Roast chicken
       Stewed tomatoes, family style
       Mashed potatoes
       Peas a la Francaise
       Lettuce, mayonnaise dressing
       Crust with peaches (Croute aux peches)
       Demi tasse

=Scrambled eggs, Norwegian.= Make four pieces of anchovy toast, put some
plain scrambled eggs on top, and lay some fillets of anchovies crosswise
over the eggs.

=Honeycomb tripe saute, aux fines herbes.= Cut three pounds of boiled
tripe in strips, put in a saute pan with four ounces of butter, season
with salt and pepper, and cook over a quick fire. When nearly crisp add
parsley, chives and chervil, all chopped fine; and serve in a deep dish.
Serve quartered lemons on a platter, on a napkin, separate.

=Potage Navarraise.= Heat two ounces of butter in a casserole, add a
spoonful of flour, and cook until golden yellow. Then add one quart of
consomme and one pint of tomato sauce, or tomato puree; season with salt
and pepper, boil for ten minutes, and strain. Boil one-half pound of
vermicelli in salted water until soft, and add to the soup. Serve grated
cheese separate.

=Oysters en brochette.= Cut the beard, or gills, from two dozen large
oysters. Broil twelve slices of bacon, and cut them in three pieces
each. Take a silver or steel skewer and put a slice of bacon on it, then
an oyster, then bacon, then an oyster, and so continue until the skewer
is full. Season with salt and pepper, roll in melted butter, then in
fresh bread crumbs, and broil. When done, serve on a platter with maitre
d'hotel sauce, and garnish with lemons cut in four, and parsley in
branches.

=Oysters en brochette, a la diable.= The word, brochette, means skewer.
Make four skewers full of oysters and bacon as described above. Season
with salt and pepper. Mix a tablespoonful of French mustard and a
tablespoonful of English mustard together, and roll the skewered oysters
in it, then in fresh bread crumbs, and then broil. Serve with maitre
d'hotel sauce over the oysters, and devil sauce separate.

=Crusts with peaches (croute aux peches).= Stew a dozen nice peaches
(see index). Cut a dozen slices of bread about one-half inch thick, and
in round shape, about three inches in diameter. Butter them, put on a
pan, and roast in the oven; turning over so they will become brown on
both sides. Place on a platter, set a peach on top of each crust, and
pour its own syrup, to which has been added a little kirschwasser, over
all.

=Crusts with pears.= Prepare in the same manner as above.

=Crusts with apples.= Prepare in the same manner as above. Canned fruit
may be used if desired, for any of the above.


SEPTEMBER 29

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit juice
       Oatmeal with cream
       Rolls
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of fresh Beluga caviar
       Omelet with peas
       Sirloin steak, Saxonne
       Julienne potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       Meringue glacee a la vanille
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Toke Point oysters, mignonette
       Consomme Medina
       Ripe California olives
       Sand dabs, saute meuniere
       Roast young turkey, cranberry sauce
       Baked sweet potatoes
       Fresh asparagus, Hollandaise
       Fried egg plant
       Watercress salad
       Mince pie
       Coffee

=Omelet with peas.= Mix a cup of boiled peas with two spoonfuls of cream
sauce, and season with salt and a little sugar. Make an omelet with
twelve eggs, and before turning over on platter fill with the peas. Pour
a thin cream sauce around the omelet.

=Sirloin steak, Saxonne.= Season two sirloin steaks with salt and
pepper, roll in oil, and broil. When done place on a platter, and
garnish with four stuffed tomatoes with rice, and four stuffed cucumbers
(see index). Pour a little sauce Madere over the steaks.

=Consomme Medina.= Boil six chicken livers in bouillon. When done, cut
in Julienne style. Boil one-quarter pound of spaghetti until soft, cut
in pieces one inch long, and add with the chickens' livers, to one and
one-half quarts of very hot consomme. Serve grated cheese separate.

=Pickled nasturtion seeds.= Select the small and green seeds, and put
them in salted water; changing the water twice in the course of a week.
Then pour off the brine and cover with scalding vinegar with a little
alum in it. Use in salads.

=Pickled artichokes.= Select small and tender artichokes, trim the
bottoms, remove the hardest leaves, and allow to stand in alum water
until ready to cook. Then bring to the boiling point, and allow to
become cool slowly. Pack in glass jars, and cover with a liquor made as
follows: To one gallon of vinegar add a teacup of sugar, one cup of
salt, a teaspoonful of alum, and one-quarter ounce of cloves and black
pepper. Bring to the boiling point, pour over the artichokes, and seal
while hot.

=Pickled onions.= Select very small white onions, peel them, and boil in
equal parts of sweet milk and water for ten minutes. Drain well, place
in glass jars, and pour scalding spiced vinegar over them immediately.
Use no sugar, and no allspice in the vinegar as it would tend to darken
the onions.

=Pickles.= Take one hundred green cucumbers two inches long, or under;
and peel as many small white onions as desired. Wash well, and put into
a stone jar. Sprinkle plenty of table salt over them, and toss all about
with the hands. Allow to stand for twenty-four hours, then drain off the
liquor, place the cucumbers and onions in glass jars, and cover with
spiced vinegar without sugar. Add a small red pepper to each jar. Seal
hot.

=Sweet pickled peaches.= Select clingstone peaches, and peel; or rub the
down off with a coarse crash towel. For eight pounds of fruit use four
pounds of sugar, one quart of vinegar, one ounce of stick cinnamon, and
one ounce of whole cloves. Boil the sugar and vinegar with the cinnamon
for two minutes. Stick one or two cloves in each peach, and put in the
boiling syrup. When the peaches are done place in jars, and put others
in the syrup to cook until all are done. Then reduce the syrup to half
the original quantity, and pour over the fruit. Seal hot. Plums and
pears may be pickled in the same manner.

=Green tomato pickle.= Slice one peck of green tomatoes and one dozen
large onions very thin. Put the tomatoes in a jar with salt sprinkled
between layers, and allow to stand for a few hours. Put the onions in
another jar, pour boiling water over them, and allow them to stand for a
few hours also. Then squeeze the juice from both, and arrange them in a
stone jar in alternate layers, sprinkling through them celery and
mustard seed. Pour over all a quart of vinegar and a pint of sugar
brought to a boil. It will be ready to use when cold.

=Ripe cucumber sweet pickles.= Pare twelve large ripe cucumbers, cut out
the pulp, and cut them in strips. Boil together two pounds of sugar, one
pint of vinegar, and one-half ounce of cinnamon and cloves. Skim well.
Then put in the cucumbers, and cook until tender. Then remove the
cucumbers, reduce the liquor, pour over the cucumbers, and cover
tightly.


SEPTEMBER 30

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Shirred eggs, Brunswick
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Fried fillet of sole, Tartar sauce
       Cucumber salad
       Cold turkey and ham with chow chow
       Baked potatoes
       Brie cheese with crackers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage Schorestene
       Dill pickles.        Radishes
       Frogs' legs, saute a sec
       Small tenderloin steak, Nicholas II
       Brussels sprouts, au beurre
       Potatoes au gratin.        Escarole salad
       Baked brown bread pudding.        Coffee

=Shirred eggs, Brunswick.= Butter a shirred egg dish, lay a slice of raw
tomato about one-half inch thick in the bottom, heat through, turn it
over, and break two eggs on top. Season with salt and pepper, and finish
cooking.

=Potage Schorestene.= Chop fine, one pound of sirloin, or top sirloin,
of beef. Put in a casserole with three quarts of consomme and boil
slowly for one hour. Then strain through a coarse sieve. The meat must
be all forced through the sieve, and served in the soup.

=Small tenderloin steak, Nicholas II.= Cut four small steaks, and season
with salt and pepper. Put two ounces of butter in a frying pan and fry
the steaks, and when nearly done remove them to a casserole. Heat eight
whole truffles in sherry wine, and use them to garnish the steaks. Also
lay on each steak a slice of goose liver saute in butter. Pour a little
sauce Madere over all.

=Baked brown bread pudding.= One quart of graham bread crumbs, one quart
of milk, one gill of molasses, two ounces of butter, two ounces of
sugar, three eggs, and one-half teaspoonful of cinnamon. Make the crumbs
very fine. Then melt the butter in the milk, with the sugar, molasses,
cinnamon, and eggs. Then stir in the crumbs, and bake in buttered moulds
for about one-half hour. Serve hot, with cream sauce flavored with a
little cinnamon.

=Sweet grape juice.= Crush twenty pounds of Concord grapes in three
quarts of water, and put them in a porcelain kettle. Set the kettle on
the fire, and stir well until it reaches the boiling point; then allow
it to simmer for fifteen or twenty minutes. Strain through a cloth, and
add three pounds of white sugar. When the sugar is dissolved strain
again through a cloth, and heat to the boiling point. Pour into hot pint
or quart bottles, and seal instantly with new corks, only. After the
corks have been inserted dip the necks of the bottles into hot sealing
wax.

=Canned pumpkin or squash.= Peel the squash or pumpkin, and cut in small
squares. Boil, without seasoning, until soft. Mash through a fruit
press. Fill hot quart glass jars, and seal tight. Keep in a cool dark
place.

=Preserved violets.= Cut the stems from one pound of large full-blown
violets. Boil one and one-half pounds of granulated sugar, until a
little dropped in cold water makes a soft ball. Then throw the violets
into the sugar, remove the pan from the fire for a moment, and stir
gently. Then return the pan to the fire, boil up once, and then change
the violets immediately to another vessel. Let them stand over night,
and then drain off the syrup through a sieve. Put the syrup in a copper
pan, add a cupful of sugar, and cook until it hardens in water. Then put
in the violets, change to another vessel, and allow to stand again over
night. Again drain off the syrup, and boil it for a few minutes. Then
add the violets, and remove the pan at once from the fire, and stir
lightly until it begins to crystalize. Then pour the whole on sheets of
paper, shake, and separate the flowers carefully with the fingers. When
dry pick them from the sugar, arrange on a wire grating, and allow them
to become cool.

=Canned minced meat.= Three pounds of boiled beef, one pound of beef
suet, three pounds of brown sugar, one-half peck of apples, two pounds
of raisins, one pound of currants, one pound of citron, one grated
nutmeg, one tablespoonful of powdered mace, and allspice and cinnamon to
suit the taste. Chop the meat, suet and apples, slice the citron fine,
and mix all together with the seasoning. Pour on enough boiled cider to
make a thick batter. Heat it thoroughly and put into one quart glass
jars. Seal while hot, and set away in a cool dark place.


OCTOBER 1

     BREAKFAST
       Orange and grapefruit juice, mixed
       Broiled salt mackerel
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres assorted
       Eggs Castro
       Spring lamb steak, Bercy
       French fried potatoes
       Cold asparagus, mayonnaise
       Strawberry whipped cream
       Hazelnut macaroons.        Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Georgia
       Ripe California olives
       Pompano saute meuniere
       Virginia ham glace, champagne sauce
       Spinach in cream.        Laurette potatoes
       Hearts of lettuce salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes.        Coffee

=Eggs Castro.= Cook four artichokes, clean the bottoms, lay a poached
egg on each, and cover with the following sauce: Mix half a cup of cream
sauce with three-quarters of a cup of Hollandaise sauce, add a few
sliced canned mushrooms, and season with salt and a little Spanish or
Cayenne pepper.

=Strawberry whipped cream.= Crush one-half pint of strawberries with
one-quarter of a pound of sugar. Whip one pint of cream until stiff,
then add the crushed strawberries, mix well, and serve in saucers.

=Raspberry, peach or banana whipped cream.= Prepare in the same manner
as strawberry whipped cream.

=Hazelnut macaroons.= Roast some shelled hazelnuts in the oven, and as
soon as brown rub them well on a coarse sieve to remove the skins. Crush
three-quarters of a pound of the hazelnuts and one-quarter pound of
almonds with two pounds of sugar. Add eight or ten whites of eggs, and
stir to a paste. Dress on paper, and bake in the same manner as ordinary
macaroons.

=Consomme Georgia.= Peel two tomatoes, cut in two, squeeze out the
juice, and cut in small squares. Cut two pimentos in small squares. Boil
two peeled green peppers in bouillon, and cut in small squares. Slice
twelve heads of canned mushrooms very fine. Add all of the above,
together with a cup of plain boiled rice, to two quarts of very hot and
well-seasoned consomme.


OCTOBER 2

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches with cream
       Omelet with bacon
       Corn muffins
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Consomme in cups
       Lamb chops, Beau-sejour
       Chateau potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Compote of pears
       French sponge cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Shrimp soup, family style
       Salted Brazil nuts.        Radishes
       Fillet of turbot, Bagration
       Roast leg of lamb, puree of chestnuts
       Boiled Parisian potatoes
       Fresh asparagus, Hollandaise
       Fancy ice cream
       American gugelhoff
       Coffee

=Lamb chops, Beau-sejour.= Make a risotto, and put in small buttered
timbale moulds. Use one timbale to garnish each two broiled lamb chops.
Pour some tomato sauce over the chops.

=French sponge cake (Genoise legere).= Put six eggs and four yolks into
a basin with half a pound of sugar, and whip over a slow fire for about
fifteen minutes, but do not let it become too hot. Then take off the
fire, and continue beating until cold. Then mix in lightly half a pound
of sifted flour, a quarter of a pound of melted butter, and some vanilla
flavoring. Put in buttered moulds, and bake in a rather cool oven for
over half an hour. When cold glace with white frosting, and decorate the
top with candied fruit.

=Shrimp soup, family style.= Add to one quart of fish broth one pound of
picked shrimps, and bring to a boil. Then add one pint of boiling cream,
season with salt and pepper and chopped parsley, add one-half cup of
broken saltine crackers, and two ounces of sweet butter. It is ready to
serve when the butter is melted.

=Fillet of turbot, Bagration.= Put four fillets of turbot in a buttered
saute pan, season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of white wine
and one-half cup of fish broth, cover with buttered paper, and put in
oven. When done, remove the fish to a platter. With the trimmings of the
turbot make a fish forcemeat. Mash the trimmings well in a mortar, pass
through a sieve, add one egg, season with salt and pepper, make into
small round balls, and boil in fish broth for three minutes. Put these
fish balls into white wine sauce, pour over the fish, and serve hot.

=American gugelhoff.= One pound of flour, one-half pint of milk, one
ounce of yeast, four eggs, three ounces of sugar, six ounces of butter,
two ounces of Malaga raisins, and the rind of a lemon and a pinch of
mace for flavoring. Have the milk luke-warm, dissolve the yeast in it,
add all the other ingredients, and mix to a batter. Put into a basin,
cover with a cloth, and allow to raise for about two hours. Butter the
moulds well, sprinkle them with coarse-chopped almonds, fill the moulds
half full with the raised dough, allow to raise until the moulds are
about three-quarters full, and then bake in a medium oven.


OCTOBER 3

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Eldorado
       Poached eggs, Taft
       Beef steak, Jusienne
       Potatoes au gratin
       Chicory salad
       Banana pie
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Consomme Frascati
       Chow chow
       Boiled brook trout, sauce mousseline
       Potatoes, Nature
       Lamb chops, Beaugency
       Peas and carrots in cream
       Chiffonnade salad
       Pears a la Piedmont
       Alsatian wafers
       Coffee

=Canape Eldorado.= Spread a leaf of lettuce with some mayonnaise sauce,
lay a boiled artichoke bottom on top, and three small Mexican tomatoes
stuffed with anchovies on top of the artichoke. Decorate with anchovy
butter.

=Poached eggs, Taft.= Fry four slices of egg plant, lay a slice of
boiled Virginia ham on top of each, a poached egg on top of each slice
of ham, and cover with Hollandaise sauce. Cut a "T" out of a truffle and
lay on top of the sauce.

=Beef steak, Jusienne.= Season four small steaks with salt and pepper,
and fry in saute pan with melted butter. When done place on a platter
and garnish with lettuce braise, peas in butter, and onions glaces. Pour
sauce Madere over the steaks.

=Consomme Frascati.= Cut two potatoes in small dices, and parboil for
five minutes in salted water. Drain off the water, add six heads of
peeled fresh mushrooms sliced very thin, and two quarts of consomme.
Cook slowly until the potatoes are soft.

=Banana pie.= Mash enough bananas to make two cupfuls of pulp. Force
through a sieve with a potato masher, add one-half cup of sugar, two
crushed and sifted soda crackers, one-half cup of milk, the juice and
rind of a lemon, two spoonfuls of molasses, a pinch of powdered
cinnamon, and two eggs. Mix well together, and bake in an open pie, in
the same manner as a pumpkin pie.

=Lamb chops, Beaugency.= Broil the chops, place on a platter, and
garnish with fresh artichoke bottoms filled with parboiled beef marrow
cut in small dices. Serve sauce Choron separate.

=Pears, Piedmont.= Peel and remove the cores from a dozen nice pears,
and stew them in syrup. Fill the centers with pear marmalade and chopped
candied fruits. Cook some rice in the same manner as for rice
croquettes. Dress a layer of the rice on a platter, place the pears on
top, and serve with wine sauce. (See index for Italian wine sauce).


OCTOBER 4

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Griddle cakes, maple syrup
       Crescents
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Scrambled eggs, Bullit
       Broiled honeycomb tripe
       Saute potatoes
       Field salad
       Roquefort cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     WEDDING DINNER
       Fresh caviar with dry toast
       Toke Point oysters, mignonette
       Clear green turtle, amontillado
       Crisp celery.      Ripe olives
       Salted mixed nuts
       Frogs' legs, Jerusalem
       Sweetbreads braise, Liencourt
       Peas a la Francaise
       Saddle of lamb, au jus
       Jets de houblons
       Cardon a la moelle
       Potatoes a la Reine
       Sorbet au champagne
       Stuffed capon, St. Antoine
       Lettuce salad with Roquefort dressing
       Assorted fancy cakes
       Wedding cake
       Assorted cheese
       Fruit and bonbons
       Demi tasse

=Scrambled eggs, Bullit.= Peel six heads of fresh mushrooms, slice very
thin, and put in a sauce pan with one ounce of butter. Simmer until
done, then add twelve beaten eggs, one cup of cream, two ounces of sweet
butter, and a little salt and pepper. Scramble the eggs, and dish up on
a platter on top of four slices of fried egg plant.

=Sweetbreads, Liencourt.= Braise some sweetbreads (see index), place on
a platter with their own gravy, and garnish with fresh bottoms of
artichokes filled with puree of fresh mushrooms.

=Puree of fresh mushrooms.= Wash thoroughly two pounds of fresh
mushrooms, press in a cloth to extract the water, and chop very fine.
Put two ounces of butter in a casserole, add the mushrooms, season with
salt and pepper, cover and simmer for twenty minutes. Then add half a
cup of fresh bread crumbs and a little chopped parsley, and bind with
the yolks of two eggs.

=Wedding cake (home made).= One pound of sugar, one and one-half pounds
of butter, ten eggs, one and one-half pounds of flour. Mix in the same
manner as for pound cake, and then add one and one-half pounds of
seedless raisins, one pound of currants, one pound of chopped citron,
one-half pound of chopped orange peel, one tablespoonful of mixed spices
(cinnamon, cloves, mace, ginger, etc.), the juice and rind of a lemon,
and one-half pint of brandy. Put in a mould lined with buttered paper,
and bake in a slow oven for about two hours. The cake will improve if
allowed to set a few days after being baked.

=As a table decoration.=--Glace the wedding cake with very thick white
frosting, and then decorate it with royal icing (see glace royal), using
a fancy pastry tube.

=Wedding cake in boxes.=--When the cake has set for a few days after
baking, cut in size to fit your boxes, and wrap each piece in wax paper.
Tie the boxes with white ribbons.


OCTOBER 5

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries with cream
       Broiled kippered herrings
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of sardines
       Poached eggs, Velour
       Filet mignon, Monegasque
       Lettuce salad
       Camembert cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Hare soup, Uncle Sam
       Pim olas
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Roast leg of lamb, au jus
       Lima beans
       Mashed potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Crepes Suzette
       Demi tasse

=Poached eggs, Velour.= Split two English muffins, toast and butter
them, lay a slice of broiled ham on top of each, a poached egg on top of
the ham, and cover with Bearnaise sauce.

=Filet mignon, Monegasque.= Broil some small tenderloin steaks, place on
a platter, lay a slice of broiled tomato on top of each, and garnish
with the bottoms of fresh artichokes filled with Parisian potatoes. Pour
sauce Madere, to which has been added some sliced green olives, over the
steaks.

=Hare soup, Uncle Sam.= Cut the saddle and hind legs from a large
Belgian hare, and put the remainder in a roasting pan with two sliced
onions, one carrot, one stalk of leek, one-half stalk of celery, a few
pepper berries, two cloves, three bay leaves, two sprigs of thyme, and
three ounces of butter. Season with salt and pepper, and put in oven and
roast until done. Then sprinkle with three spoonfuls of flour, and roast
again until the flour is brown. Then put in a casserole with two gallons
of water and a little salt and one pound of lentils, and boil for four
hours. Then force all that is possible through a fine sieve. Roast the
legs and saddle of the hare, and cut the meat in half-inch squares. Put
the strained soup back in the casserole, bring to a boil, add the cut-up
hare meat and one glassful of sherry wine, and season if necessary with
salt and Cayenne pepper.

=Crepes Suzette.= Make some French pancakes, as thin as possible. Then
make a cream with one-half pound of sweet butter, one-half pound of
sugar, the grated peel of two oranges, and a dash of brandy or
kirschwasser. Mix the sugar and butter to a light cream, then add the
liquor and orange, and mix thoroughly. Spread some of the cream over
each pancake, and then fold in the form of an English pancake. Place
them in a chafing dish, pour two ponies of brandy or kirschwasser over
them, and light just before serving.


OCTOBER 6

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Shirred eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit en surprise
       Eggs, Sara Bernhardt
       Fried pig's feet, tomato sauce
       Chateau potatoes
       Apple pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Blue Point oysters
       Consomme with noodles
       Celery.      Radishes
       Fillet of halibut, Pondicherry
       Roast chicken
       Chestnuts Boulettes
       Artichokes, Hollandaise
       Potato croquettes
       Endive salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Alsatian wafers
       Demi tasse

=Eggs, Sarah Bernhardt.= Soak half a pound of salt codfish in water over
night, then boil for ten minutes, and shred it. Put twelve beaten eggs
in a casserole, season with a little salt and pepper, add two chopped
truffles, the shredded codfish, and half a cup of thick cream; and then
scramble. When done dish up in a deep china dish and lay sliced truffles
heated in butter, on top.

=Consomme with noodles.= Boil one-half pound of noodles in salted water.
When done add them to two quarts of hot consomme. Serve grated cheese
separate.

=Fillet of halibut, Pondicherry.= Place four fillets of halibut in a
saute pan, season with salt and pepper, add one-half cup of fish broth
and one-half glass of white wine, cover with buttered paper, and bake in
oven for ten minutes. Heat two ounces of butter in a casserole, add one
teaspoonful of flour and one of curry powder, heat through, then add the
broth from the fish and a cup and a half of fish broth additional, and
boil for ten minutes. Then bind the sauce with the yolks of two eggs
mixed with half a cup of cream, season with salt and pepper, and strain.
Then put the sauce back in the casserole, add two ounces of sweet
butter, and when the butter is melted pour the sauce over the fish.

=Chestnuts Boulettes.= One cup of boiled and mashed chestnuts, one
tablespoonful of whipped cream, one-half tablespoonful of butter, a
pinch of salt, the yolks of two eggs, a little sugar, the whites of two
eggs well beaten, and if desired, one teaspoonful of sherry wine. Mix
well together, form into small balls, dip in beaten eggs, roll in
crumbs, and fry in hot swimming fat.


OCTOBER 7

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced bananas with cream
       Sausage cakes
       Buckwheat cakes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Fresh artichokes a la Russe
       Eggs bonne femme
       Broiled Alaska black cod
       Paul Stock potatoes
       Cucumber salad
       Limberger cheese with crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clam cocktail
       Onion and tomato soup
       Ripe California olives
       Sand dabs, saute meuniere
       Sirloin steak, Braconiere
       New peas in cream
       Rissolee potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Roly-poly pudding
       Coffee

=Fresh artichokes a la Russe.= Boil the bottoms of four artichokes in
salted water, and allow them to become cold. Then fill them with fresh
caviar, place on a platter on a folded napkin, and garnish with two
lemons cut in half and parsley in branches.

=Eggs bonne femme.= Fry eight slices of bacon on both sides, in a frying
pan, then add eight eggs, season with a little pepper, and cook in oven
for three minutes. Serve on a platter, with mixed chopped parsley,
chervil and chives sprinkled over the eggs.

=Paul Stock potatoes.= Bake four potatoes, remove the peels, and put the
potatoes in a chafing dish. Add three ounces of sweet butter, season
with salt and paprika and a spoonful of chives cut fine, and mix with a
fork until the butter is melted. Serve in a chafing dish.

=Onion and tomato soup.= Slice four onions very fine, put in a casserole
with two ounces of butter, and simmer until done. Then add four peeled
and chopped tomatoes, and two quarts of bouillon, chicken broth, or
consomme. Season with salt and pepper, and boil for half an hour. Serve
grated cheese separate, and rolls cut in thin slices and toasted.

=Sirloin steak, Braconiere.= Broil a sirloin steak, place on a platter,
and garnish with onions glaces and broiled fresh mushrooms. Pour sauce
Madere over the steak.

=Roly-poly pudding.= One pound of suet, one pound of flour, one cup of
milk, and one pinch of salt. Chop the suet very fine, mix with the
flour, salt and milk, making a rather hard dough. Roll out about
one-quarter inch thick, and spread with a layer of any kind of jam. Roll
up in the form of a sausage, put a wet cloth around it, and tie with a
string at both ends. Steam or boil for an hour. Then unwrap, cut in
individual pieces, and serve hot, with hard and brandy sauces.


OCTOBER 8

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries with cream
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit a la rose
       Eggs, Boston style
       Lamb or mutton chops, Bignon
       String beans
       Mashed potatoes
       Tutti frutti pudding
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Seapuit oysters
       Consomme Pemartin
       Celery.       Salted almonds
       Brook trout, Cambaceres
       Cucumber salad
       Breast of squab, Eveline
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Coupe Victor
       Ginger bread
       Demi tasse

=Eggs, Boston style.= Make four codfish cakes, put a poached egg on top
of each, and cover with cream sauce.

=Lamb or mutton chops, Bignon.= Broil the chops, place on a platter, and
garnish with one tomato stuffed with rice Creole to each person, one
dozen green olives, and a small can of French mushrooms. Cut the
mushrooms in small squares, put them in a saute pan with one-half glass
of sherry wine and cook until nearly dry. Then add two cups of brown
sauce (sauce Madere), and pour over the chops.

=Tutti frutti pudding.= Sift one-quarter of a pound of flour into a
sauce pan, add one pint of boiling milk and two ounces of butter, and
stir over the fire with a wooden spoon, until it detaches from the pan.
Then remove from the fire and add two ounces of butter, four ounces of
sugar, the yolks of eight eggs, and four ounces of chopped candied
fruits. Mix well. Beat the whites of six eggs very stiff and add them to
the mixture, stirring them in lightly. Put in a buttered mould, and cook
in bain-marie in the oven for about thirty minutes. When done unmould,
and serve with apricot sauce flavored with a little kirschwasser.

=Consomme Pemartin.= Chop two truffles very fine, put in a casserole
with one large glassful of Pemartin sherry wine and boil for two
minutes. Then add two quarts of consomme, season well with salt and
Cayenne pepper, and serve very hot.

=Brook trout, Cambaceres.= Season six brook trout with salt and pepper
and place in a shallow buttered dish with one-half glass of white wine.
Sprinkle with chopped tarragon, pour two pints of tomato sauce over all,
lay a few bits of butter on top, and bake in the oven for twenty or
thirty minutes, according to the size of the fish. Serve in the dish in
which they were cooked.

=Breast of squab, Eveline.= Broil the breasts, and place on a platter
with maitre d'hotel sauce on top. Garnish one side with spaghetti in
cream and the other side with new peas in butter.

=Ginger bread.= One quart of flour, one ounce of butter, half a pint of
molasses, two teaspoonfuls of allspice, a teaspoonful of ginger, two
eggs, and a quarter of a teaspoonful of carbonate of soda. Sift the
flour, the allspice and the ginger together. Pour a spoonful of hot
water on the soda, and mix with the molasses, the eggs, and the melted
butter. Then stir all together, mixing well, and bake in a thin layer;
or divide into small rolls or cakes.

=Coupe Victor.= Take equal parts of raspberries and strawberries; and to
each basket allow four spoonfuls of sugar and four spoonfuls of
kirschwasser. Mix well, and set on ice to chill thoroughly. If there is
not time to chill in this manner cover with cracked ice for a few
minutes. Serve in punch glasses with a teaspoonful of lemon water ice on
top. The water ice may be omitted if desired, but be sure to have the
fruit well chilled.


OCTOBER 9

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh grapes
       Broiled smoked Alaska black cod
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Carciofini
       Eggs Argenteuil
       Chicken hash a l'Italienne
       Cranberry water ice
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Merry widow cocktail
       Chicken soup a la Francaise
       Celery
       Scallops a la poulette
       Roast leg of mutton
       Stewed tomatoes
       Peas in cream
       Duchesse potatoes
       Chicory salad
       French pastry
       Demi tasse

=Broiled smoked Alaska black cod.= Get a kippered Alaska black cod, roll
in oil and broil. Serve with maitre d'hotel butter, and garnish with
lemons cut in half, and parsley in branches. This fish is excellent
prepared in the same manner as finnan haddie or smoked salmon, or served
raw as a hors d'oeuvre.

=Eggs Argenteuil.= Scoop out the centers from four English muffins,
toast them, and place a poached egg in each, cover with sauce
Hollandaise, and lay two slices of truffle heated in butter on top of
each.

=Chicken hash, Italienne.= Put two ounces of butter in a saute pan with
one chopped onion, or six chopped shallots. Fry, and then add one-half
spoonful of flour and cook until brown. Then add one glass of sherry
wine, and one cup of broth or stock, one whole boiled fowl cut in small
dices, and one pound of dried mushrooms that have been previously soaked
in cold water for one hour. Season with salt and pepper, and boil all
together for thirty minutes. Serve toast Melba separate.

=Chicken soup a la Francaise.= Put a fat soup hen in a casserole with
three quarts of water, a little salt, one onion, one carrot, and a
bouquet garni. When coming to a boil skim well, cover, and simmer slowly
until the hen is cooked. Then remove the hen and cut the meat in half
inch squares. Strain the broth, bring to a boil, and add two cupfuls of
boiled rice and the chicken meat. Season well with salt and pepper, and
add some chopped chervil.

=Merry widow cocktail.= Use wide glasses. Put in the bottom the tails of
six ecrevisses, or crawfish. Lay six asparagus tips on top, season with
salt and pepper, and cover with plenty of mayonnaise. Set in the ice box
as near the ice as possible, to chill thoroughly.

=Scallops a la poulette.= Parboil the scallops from two to three minutes
in their own juice, but not longer, as they will become tough and
rubbery. Drain, and keep the juice. Heat two spoonfuls of flour and two
spoonfuls of butter, and add the juice and a little stock, making a thin
sauce. Season with salt and pepper, add the yolk of one egg and two
spoonfuls of cream, but do not boil. Mix in the scallops, and serve.
Oysters and clams may be prepared in the same manner.

=Cranberry water ice.= Cook the berries in a very small quantity of
water in a granite or porcelain lined kettle, as otherwise the berries
will become discolored. Then strain the cooked berries through a
hair-sieve, making a thin puree. To every quart of berries add the juice
of two lemons. For each quart of berries dissolve a pint of sugar in a
cup of water, and add to the puree. Taste to see if sweet enough. Freeze
in the same manner as other water ices. Serve as an ice, for dessert, or
between courses; although the latter manner of serving ices is going out
of vogue.


OCTOBER 10

     BREAKFAST
       Baked pears with cream
       Plain omelet
       Buttered toast
       Ceylon tea

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Eggs Andalouse
       Broiled Imperial squab on toast
       Saratoga chip potatoes
       Cold artichokes, mayonnaise
       Montmorency pudding
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Oysters on half shell
       Cream of summer squash
       Dill pickles.        Salted almonds
       Fillet of flounder, Norvegienne
       Roast tenderloin of beef, Boucicault
       Julienne potatoes
       Hearts of romaine salad
       Red currant water ice
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Eggs Andalouse.= Make a risotto, place it on a platter, lay a poached
egg on top, and cover with sauce Hollandaise. Pour tomato sauce around
the rice to cover the bottom of the platter.

=Cream of summer squash.= Put three ounces of butter in a casserole, add
two pounds of peeled summer squash cut in small pieces, and simmer for
fifteen minutes. Then sprinkle with two small spoonfuls of flour, heat
the flour through, and then add two quarts of chicken or other clear
white broth. Boil for ten minutes, season with salt and pepper to taste,
strain through a fine sieve, put back in the casserole, and before
serving add one pint of boiling thick cream.

=Fillet of flounder, Norvegienne.= Place four fillets of flounder in a
buttered pan, season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of white
wine and one-half cup of fish stock, cover, and cook for ten minutes.
Place on a platter, some spinach in cream, lay the fish on top, and
cover with sauce Hollandaise.

=Roast tenderloin of beef, Boucicault.= Put a roast tenderloin of beef
on a platter, and garnish with stuffed cabbage. Pour sauce Madere over
the meat.

=Montmorency pudding.= Butter a pudding mould very generously. Line it
with stale cake, putting quartered fresh or glace cherries on each
piece. Make a custard with four eggs, a quarter of a pound of sugar and
a pint of milk. Pour this over the cake, filling the mould. Bake for
thirty minutes. Then remove from mould and serve hot, with brandy sauce
to which has been added some fresh or glace cherries chopped fine.

=Red currant water ice.= Strain one quart of ripe red currants. Canned
ones may be used when the fresh are out of season. Add the juice of two
lemons, and additional sugar, if necessary. Dissolve the sugar in hot
water before adding. Freeze, using plenty of salt with the ice.


OCTOBER 11

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced peaches and cream
       Boiled eggs
       English breakfast tea
       Butter toast

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres assorted
       Eggs McKenzie
       Meat croquettes
       Cucumbers on toast
       Camembert cheese.      Crackers.      Coffee

     DINNER
       Oysters on half shell
       Hungarian soup      Ripe California olives
       Halibut Metternich
       Baked porterhouse steak
       Potatoes rissolees
       Plain spinach
       Lettuce salad
       Mince pie.      American cheese.      Coffee

=Hungarian soup.= Saute half a pound of lean beef that has been cut into
small cubes. Add six onions, thoroughly minced, and when slightly brown
add four tablespoonfuls of flour. Mix well. Add three quarts of stock
and a quart of tomatoes that have been strained through a sieve. Simmer
slowly for one hour. Then add a teaspoonful of caraway seeds, half as
much marjoram, and a large crushed garlic clove. Cook for another half
hour or longer, very slowly. The stock should be made with a knuckle of
veal and beef.

=Baked porterhouse.= Have a thick steak. Put into a Dutch oven, sprinkle
with salt and pepper, and two ounces of butter. On top place three whole
peeled tomatoes, one green pepper, two tablespoonfuls of Worcestershire
sauce, two of mushroom or tomato catsup and a little chopped parsley.
Baste frequently.

=Meat croquettes.= Chop a large onion and simmer in a pan with two
ounces of butter. Mince the meat, and add one raw egg and mix well.
Season with pepper, salt and some chopped parsley, and add a quarter cup
of brown gravy. Allow to cool, roll out and form into croquettes. Dip in
a mixture made of one egg and a spoonful of cream, and roll in sifted
crumbs. Fry in swimming fat. Serve with tomato or Madeira sauce.

=Eggs McKenzie.= Peel four tomatoes, cut off the tops and scoop out the
insides. Break an egg in each tomato, season with salt and pepper, cover
with a little Bordelaise sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese, put small
bits of butter on top, place on a buttered dish and bake in oven.

=Cucumbers on toast.= Peel and quarter two good sized cucumbers, and
soak in salted water for about thirty minutes. Then boil in slightly
salted water until tender, but not soft. Drain, and place each piece on
a round of buttered toast. Make a sauce by rubbing together a
tablespoonful of butter and a tablespoonful of flour, stir in a cup of
the water in which the cucumbers were boiled, add a teaspoonful of lemon
juice, salt and pepper to taste, and pour over the cucumbers and toast.
Garnish with strips of pimentos.

=Halibut Metternich.= Cut two slices of halibut, one and one-half inches
thick. Put in a vessel in cold water, season with salt, bring to a boil,
and skim. Add a glass of milk, boil for about twenty-five minutes, until
soft. Make a sauce in a casserole with two spoonfuls of butter, and two
spoonfuls of flour. When hot add two cups of the fish broth, boil for
ten minutes, and strain. Then add six chopped hard-boiled eggs and salt
and pepper to taste. Put the fish on a buttered baking dish, pour the
sauce over same, sprinkle with grated cheese, put small bits of butter
on top, and bake in the oven until brown.


OCTOBER 12

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries and cream
       Baked beans, Boston style
       Boston brown bread
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit cardinal
       Clam broth in cups
       Eggs Conte
       Veal saute, Catalane
       Romaine salad
       Assorted cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Nelson
       Radishes and celery
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Coquille of chicken, Mornay
       Roast leg of mutton, Kentucky sauce
       String beans in butter
       Potatoes Anna
       Field and beet salad
       Charlotte Russe
       Demi tasse

=Eggs Conte.= Butter a shirred egg dish. Place a spoonful of cooked
lentils in center of dish, cover with two strips of fried bacon, break
two eggs on top, season with salt and pepper, and bake in oven till eggs
are done.

=Veal Saute, Catalane.= Cut five pounds of breast and shoulder of veal
in pieces two inches square. Put three spoonfuls of olive oil in a saute
pan and set on the stove until hot, then add the veal, season with salt
and pepper, and toss over a quick fire until golden brown. Then sprinkle
one spoonful of flour and cook until golden yellow. Add one pint of hot
water or stock, six peeled and chopped tomatoes, one crushed garlic
clove, and a bouquet garni. Bring to a boil, skim well, and cover. Boil
until meat is soft. Before serving remove the bouquet garni, and add two
dozen small onions glaces, and two dozen stoned queen olives.

=Consomme Nelson.= Put three pounds of fish bones and three quarts of
water in a casserole, also one sliced onion, one carrot, one piece of
leek, one leaf of celery, a little parsley in branches, one bay leaf,
one clove, and season with salt and pepper. Boil for one-half hour, and
clarify as follows: In a casserole put one pound of raw chopped beef and
the whites of six eggs. Mix well. Add, little by little, the strained
fish broth, set on the stove and bring to a boil. Then put to one side
and allow to simmer for fifteen minutes. Strain through cheese cloth or
napkin, add two cups of boiled rice, season well, and serve.

=Coquille of chicken, Mornay.= Boil a soup hen. When done cut the meat
from the bones, and slice in thin pieces. Season with salt and pepper,
add a cup of cream sauce, and mix. Then place in four buttered coquilles
or shells, cover lightly with more cream sauce, sprinkle with grated
cheese, put small bits of butter on top, and bake in oven until brown.
Serve on platter with folded napkin, garnish with two lemons cut in two,
and parsley in branches.


OCTOBER 13

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal in cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cantaloupe
       Scrambled eggs, Magda
       Chicken saute, Josephine
       Asparagus tips, Hollandaise
       Escarole salad
       Danish apple cake.      Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Oysters on half shell
       Potage Villageois
       Lyon sausage.      Radishes.      Pickles
       Fillet of sole, Judic
       Tenderloin steak, Bernardi
       Potatoes Sybil
       Endive salad
       Fancy ice cream and cakes.      Coffee

=Scrambled eggs, Magda.= In a casserole put two ounces of butter, twelve
beaten eggs, one-half cup of cream, season with salt and pepper, and
then scramble. When nearly done add one tablespoonful of grated Swiss
cheese, one-half teaspoonful of mustard flour, and one tablespoonful of
mixed, chopped parsley, chervil and chives.

=Chicken saute, Josephine.= Cut two spring chickens in quarters, and
season with salt and pepper. In a saute pan put two ounces of butter and
a spoonful of olive oil. Set on the stove until hot, add the chicken,
and saute. When nearly done add six chopped shallots, one tablespoonful
of carrot cut in very small dices, one bay leaf cut very fine, one-half
of a clove, a little parsley, and two heads of mushrooms, all chopped
very fine. Also one spoonful of raw ham cut in very small squares. When
the chicken is cooked remove to a platter, and to the saute pan add one
pony of brandy and reduce one-half. Then add two more ounces of sweet
butter and the juice of a lemon, and pour over the chicken.

=Danish apple cake.= Pare and core six apples. Mix one and one-half cups
of fine bread crumbs, one-half cup of sugar and one-half teaspoonful of
cinnamon. Butter a deep cake mould and put a layer of the crumb mixture,
with a bit of butter, at the bottom. Then a layer of the sliced apples,
and continue alternately until the material is all used. Bake in a
moderate oven for about two hours, and serve cold with whipped cream.

=Potage Villageois.= In a casserole put three ounces of butter and three
stalks of leeks cut in Julienne shape. Simmer for fifteen minutes. Then
add six leaves of Savoy cabbage, cut Julienne, and simmer again for ten
minutes. Then add two quarts of stock, bouillon, chicken broth or
consomme, season well with salt and pepper, and boil for forty minutes.
Then add one-half pound of vermicelli and boil for fifteen minutes, or
until the vermicelli is done.

=Fillet of sole, Judic.= Put four fillets of sole in a buttered pan,
season with salt and pepper, put a little butter on top, squeeze the
juice of a lemon over all, and bake in the oven until done. Then place
four pieces of lettuce braise on a platter, lay the fillets on top,
cover with cream sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese, put small bits of
butter on top, and bake again in the oven until brown.

=Tenderloin steak, Bernardi.= Broil a tenderloin steak. Place on a
platter and garnish with croustades filled with spinach in cream, and
artichoke bottoms filled with macedoine of vegetables. Pour some sauce
Madere over the meat.


OCTOBER 14

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Bacon and eggs
       Coffee
       Rolls

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Nantaise
       Pompano saute, d'Orsay
       Broiled honeycomb tripe
       Maitre d'hotel potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       Apple snow and cakes
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Champenoise
       Ripe olives
       Boiled brook trout, Romanoff
       Hollandaise potatoes
       Shoulder of mutton, Budapest
       Peas a la Francaise
       Laurette potatoes
       Celery mayonnaise
       Biscuit glace, St. Francis
       Assorted fancy cakes
       Demi tasse

=Eggs Nantaise.= Split and toast two English muffins. Lay a few boiled
asparagus tips on each half. Put a poached egg on top and cover with
cream sauce.

=Pompano saute, d'Orsay.= Season the pompano with salt and pepper, roll
in flour and fry with melted butter. Then place the fried fish on a
platter, and sprinkle with plenty of chopped parsley and lemon juice. In
a hot pan put two ounces of butter, and when brown pour over the fish.

=Apple snow.= Peel, core and slice three large apples. Preferably sour
ones. Cook in a little water and vinegar until soft. Then drain, and rub
the apples through a sieve. When cold gradually add the whites of three
eggs whipped very stiff, and half a cup of powdered sugar. Dress in
dishes of fancy shape, and garnish with dots of currant jelly.

=Potage Champenoise.= Mix one quart of cream of potatoes with one quart
of cream of celery. Add as garniture one-half cup of carrots and celery
cut in very small dices, and boiled soft in consomme.

=Boiled brook trout, Romanoff.= Put six one-half pound trout in boiling
water, to which has been added one-half glass of vinegar, and cook for
about fifteen minutes. Serve on a platter on folded napkin. Garnish with
parsley in branches and two lemons cut in half. Serve separate, sauce
mousseline, to which has been added six chopped anchovies.

=Shoulder of mutton, Budapest.= Season the mutton well with salt and
pepper and place in a roasting pan with a sliced carrot, an onion, a few
branches of parsley, a leaf of celery and of leek, a few pepper berries,
half of a bay leaf and a clove. Put an ounce of butter on top, and
roast. Then remove the shoulder to a platter, drain off fat, and add to
the pan one cup of bouillon and a spoonful of meat extract. Boil for a
few minutes and strain over the meat. Garnish with risotto to which has
been added a few pimentos cut in small squares.


OCTOBER 15

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh raspberries and cream
       Waffles
       Honey in comb
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Herring Livonienne
       Eggs en cocotte, Ribeaucourt
       Beef tongue, Menschikoff
       Potato salad
       Roquefort cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of peas, Suzon
       Celery.        Radishes.        Pickles
       Fillet of pompano, Pocharde
       Roast tame duckling, apple sauce
       Fried sweet potatoes
       Succotash
       Stewed tomatoes
       Chocolate ice cream
       Macaroons
       Demi tasse

=Herring, Livonienne.= Soak two salted herrings in cold water for two
hours. Then skin and bone them, and cut in half inch squares. Add one
sliced boiled potato, and a peeled apple cut in small squares. Salt a
little if necessary, season with pepper, one spoonful of olive oil and
the juice of two lemons. Serve on a celery dish, sprinkled with chopped
tarragon and parsley.

=Eggs en cocotte, Ribeaucourt.= Butter four cocotte dishes and break an
egg in each. Cut in small squares, two slices of tongue, one slice of
boiled ham, and four heads of canned mushrooms. Mix with two spoonfuls
of brown gravy, season with salt and pepper, and put on top of the eggs.
Sprinkle with a little grated cheese, and bake in the oven for eight
minutes.

=Beef tongue, Menschikoff.= Place some sliced boiled beef tongue on a
platter and garnish with small onions glace, small vinegar pickles, and
Madeira sauce with a few raisins in it.

=Cream of peas, Suzon.= Make a cream of peas soup. Add one spoonful of
whipped cream for each person, and mix while hot. Put a poached egg on
each plate and serve the soup over the eggs.

=Cream of peas.= To one quart of shelled new peas add one pint of
chicken broth, and boil until the peas are soft. Strain and return to
casserole and add one pint of hot table cream, and, little by little,
one large spoonful of table butter. Season with salt and Cayenne pepper.

=Cream of peas, St. Germain.= Add a head of lettuce to the peas and
prepare as above. When strained for the second time add one cup of
fresh-boiled new peas to the soup.

=Fillet of pompano, Pocharde.= Cut four fillets of Florida pompano. Or
Pacific pompano may be used. The latter are much smaller. Put the fish
in a buttered pan, and season with salt and pepper. Add one-half glass
of claret, one-half glass of white wine, and one-half cup of fish broth.
Boil until done. In a sauce pan put one table spoonful of flour and
place on stove. When hot add the broth in which the fish were cooked,
and boil for five minutes. Then bind the sauce with the yolks of two
eggs mixed with one-half cup of cream and one ounce of butter. Whip well
and strain over the fish.


OCTOBER 16

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples in cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Casawba melon
       Eggs Mollet, a l'aurore
       Sweetbreads, Saint Monde
       Lettuce salad
       Mince pie
       American cheese
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage grenade
       Salted almonds
       Ecrevisses Georgette
       Roast leg of mutton, mint sauce
       String beans
       Mashed potatoes
       Tomato salad
       French pastry
       Coffee

=Eggs Mollet, a l'aurore.= Place four eggs Mollet on four pieces of
buttered toast. Cover with well seasoned tomato sauce.

=Sweetbreads, Saint Monde.= Prepare braised sweetbreads as described
elsewhere. Place on a platter and garnish with artichoke bottoms filled
with asparagus tips with a little Hollandaise sauce on top; and others
filled with French peas in butter with Madeira sauce.

=Potage grenade.= Cut in thin slices, the size of a silver quarter, two
turnips, one stalk of leeks, one-half stalk of celery and a small head
of Savoy cabbage. Put in a sauce pan with three ounces of butter, season
with salt and a teaspoonful of sugar, and place in the oven to smother.
Be careful that it does not burn. When soft add two quarts of consomme,
and boil for one-half hour. Then add two tomatoes peeled and cut in
small dices, boil for one minute, season with salt and pepper, and serve
with a little chopped chervil.

=Ecrevisses Georgette.= Bake four medium-sized potatoes. Then cut off
the tops, remove the insides, and refill with Ecrevisses Voltaire.

=Ecrevisses Voltaire.= Boil two dozen ecrevisses en buisson. Remove the
tails from the shells and place them in a sauce pan with two ounces of
butter and six sliced heads of fresh white mushrooms. Season with salt
and a little Cayenne pepper, and simmer for ten minutes. Then add a pony
of brandy, and simmer for a few minutes. Then add a large cup of cream,
and boil for five minutes. Then add two sliced truffles. Bind with the
yolks of two eggs mixed with one-half glass of dry sherry wine. Serve in
chafing dish.


OCTOBER 17

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal and cream
       Ham and eggs
       Coffee
       Rolls

     LUNCHEON
       Mortadella
       Poached eggs, Zurlo
       Broiled honeycomb tripe
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Field salad
       Port de Salut cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Leopold
       Chow chow
       Broiled smelts, a l'Americaine
       Chicken Leon X
       Peas a la Francaise
       Duchesse potatoes
       Lettuce and grapefruit salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse
       Mint wafers

=Mortadella.= This is an Italian sausage, very highly seasoned, and
comes in cans already sliced. Serve on a platter garnished with chopped
meat, jelly and parsley in branches.

=Poached eggs, Zurlo.= Form some flat potato croquettes, and fry. Place
a poached egg on top of each, and cover with cream sauce.

=Consomme Leopold.= Slice very fine one handful of sorrel and a head of
lettuce. Wash well, and boil in two quarts of chicken broth for about
thirty minutes. Serve with chervil.

=Broiled Smelts, a l'Americaine.= Split and remove the bones from twelve
large smelts. Season with salt and pepper, roll in oil, and broil. When
done place on a platter, garnish with six slices of broiled tomatoes,
two lemons cut in half, and parsley in branches. Pour a little maitre
d'hotel sauce over all.

=Chicken Leon X.= Put on fire, in cold water, one large fat roasting
chicken or capon. Add salt, one carrot, and a bouquet garni. Boil until
soft. Make a sauce with two ounces of butter mixed with two ounces of
flour. When hot add one pint of the chicken broth. If too thick add a
little more of the broth. Boil for half an hour. Then bind with the
yolks of three eggs mixed with a cup of cream. Strain, and add two
ounces of sweet butter. Stir the sauce well until the butter is melted.
Place the chicken on a platter and garnish with macaroni cooked in
cream. Pour a little of the sauce over the chicken. To the remainder of
the sauce add in equal parts some sliced truffle, sliced canned French
mushrooms and parboiled goose liver. Serve this sauce separate.

=Mint wafers (after dinner mints).= To half a gill of water add one
pound of powdered sugar, and mix over fire until dissolved and hot. Add
three or four drops of oil of peppermint. Then drop, about the size of a
half silver dollar, on waxed paper or a greased pan, using the tip of a
spoon or a paper bag. Allow to become cold and dry.


OCTOBER 18

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit juice
       Poached eggs on toast
       Uncolored Japan tea
       Crescents

     LUNCHEON
       Omelette Cherbourg
       Homemade beef stew
       Lorette salad
       Alhambra ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Cream of asparagus, Favori
       Salted mixed nuts.        Celery
       Sole Heloise
       Roast leg of veal, au jus
       Spinach in cream
       Potatoes au gratin
       Romaine salad
       Pancakes a la Lieb
       Demi tasse

=Omelette Cherbourg.= Mix a cup of picked shrimps with two spoonfuls of
cream sauce. Heat well, and season with salt and pepper. Make the
omelette in the usual manner, and before turning over on platter fill
with the prepared shrimps. Pour a thick cream sauce around the omelette.

=Lorette salad.= One-third field salad, one-third boiled celery root,
and one-third pickled beets. Season with French dressing.

=Alhambra ice cream.= Half vanilla and half strawberry ice cream served
in any fancy form.

=Cream of asparagus, Favori.= Make a cream of asparagus soup and serve
with plenty of boiled asparagus tips in it.

=Sole Heloise.= Remove the skin from both sides of a large sole. Place
on a buttered pan, season with salt and pepper, add one-half glass of
white wine, cover with a piece of buttered manila paper, and bake in the
oven for about twenty minutes. Remove the sole to a platter, and put in
the pan three ounces of butter, a little pepper, chopped parsley,
chervil, tarragon, and chives. When hot add the juice of two lemons,
season well, and pour over the sole.


OCTOBER 19

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh strawberries and cream
       Broiled fresh mackerel
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       California oyster cocktail
       Consomme in cups
       Shirred eggs, Metternich
       Pears, mayonnaise
       Cheese toast
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Ferneuse
       Ripe olives
       Sand dabs, saute meuniere
       Roast ribs of beef
       String beans in butter
       Stewed tomatoes
       St. Francis potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Romaine ice cream
       Alsatian wafers
       Demi tasse

=Shirred eggs, Metternich.= Place two eggs in a buttered shirred egg
dish with six canned mushrooms sliced very fine. Season with salt and
pepper, sprinkle with grated cheese, place a small piece of butter on
top, and bake.

=Pears, mayonnaise.= Use whole fresh pears cooked in syrup, or canned
ones. Place the pears on lettuce leaves and cover with thick mayonnaise.
On slices of toast place small pieces of American dairy cheese. Bake in
the oven, and serve separate.

=Cheese toast.= Spread any such cheese as Parmesan, American, Sierra or
Camembert, on slices of toast, and set in the oven until hot. Serve at
once.

=Potage Ferneuse.= Slice six white turnips very fine, put in a
casserole, with two ounces of butter. Cover, and simmer for fifteen
minutes. Then add one cup of rice and three pints of bouillon, consomme,
or chicken broth. Boil for one hour, strain through fine wire sieve, and
put back in vessel. When hot stir in well three ounces of sweet butter,
season with salt and a little Cayenne pepper.

=Romaine ice cream.= To coffee ice cream add a little rum before
serving.


OCTOBER 20

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples
       Oatmeal and cream
       English breakfast tea
       Crescents

     LUNCHEON
       Hard boiled eggs, vinaigrette
       Fried scallops, Tartar
       Broiled squab on toast
       Stewed corn
       Romaine salad
       Camembert cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Toke Point oysters
       Potage bouquetiere
       Celery
       Fresh herring, a l'Egyptienne
       Small boiled potatoes
       Cucumber salad
       Chicken en cocotte, Bazar
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       French pastry
       Assorted fruits
       Demi tasse

=Hard boiled eggs, vinaigrette.= Remove the shells from six hard boiled
eggs, and cut in two. Place them on a china platter, sprinkle with salt,
pepper, chopped parsley, a little chopped chervil, one spoonful of
vinegar and two of olive oil.

=Potage bouquetiere.= Consomme, tapioca and printanier mixed.

=Fresh herring, a l'Egyptienne.= Clean four fresh herring, season with
salt and pepper, and fry in hot olive oil. Remove the fish to a platter,
and add to the frying pan one sliced onion, and fry until done. Then add
two peeled and quartered tomatoes, one bay leaf, one clove, and a sprig
of thyme. Season with salt and pepper, and simmer for a few minutes.
Then put the fish back in the pan, add the juice of two lemons and a
little chopped parsley, and simmer together for five minutes. Serve both
fish and sauce on a platter.

=Chicken en cocotte, Bazar.= Season a spring chicken with salt and
pepper, and put in a cocotte (earthen casserole) with two ounces of
butter and six small onions. Set in the oven, and baste well until
golden yellow. Then add one spoonful of white wine and two peeled and
quartered tomatoes. Cover the casserole and simmer for ten minutes. Add
two dozen Parisienne potatoes and serve.


OCTOBER 21

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit a la rose
       Eggs, ministerielle
       Beef goulash, Hungarian style
       Mince pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Diane
       Chow chow.        Salted almonds
       Sole Dejazet
       Roast chicken
       Summer squash
       Chateau potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Consomme Diane.= Take any game bird, such as grouse, partridge, quail,
pheasant or guinea hen, and roast just enough to give a color. Then put
in soup stock and boil until soft. Clarify the broth with chopped beef,
and strain. Cut the breast out of the bird, cut in small squares, and
serve in the consomme. Add some dry sherry wine and a little Cayenne
pepper before serving.

=Sole Dejazet.= Remove the skin from a good sized sole, wash well, and
dry in a napkin. Season with salt and pepper, dip in milk, roll in
flour, then in beaten eggs, and finally in bread crumbs. Put in frying
pan with melted butter and fry until done. Place on a platter, and pour
some butter, which has been browned in a pan, over the fish. Lay a dozen
tarragon leaves on top of the fish, garnish with quartered lemons and
parsley in branches.


OCTOBER 22

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Omelette with chipped beef
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres assorted
       Smoked black Alaska cod in cream
       Lamb kidneys en pilaff
       Mashed potatoes
       Camembert cheese
       Almond biscuits
       Coffee

     DINNER
       California oysters on half shell
       Potage Livonien
       Olives.        Salted pecans
       Alsatian fish
       Roast ribs of beef
       Canned asparagus, Hollandaise
       Rissolees potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Lemon pie, special
       Coffee

=Potage Livonien.= In a casserole put one onion chopped fine, and three
ounces of butter. Simmer until yellow. Then add one-quarter of a pound
of sliced sorrel and one-half pound of sliced spinach. Simmer again for
ten minutes. Then add one quart of chicken broth and one large cup of
cream sauce. Boil one-half hour. Season well, and serve.

=Smoked Alaska black cod in cream.= Remove the skin from two pounds of
smoked Alaska black cod. Cut in pieces two inches square, lay in a saute
pan, add one pint of thick table cream and boil for five minutes. Then
thicken with the yolks of two eggs mixed with a little cream. Serve in a
chafing dish.

=Alsatian fish.= Heat two tablespoonfuls of oil and thicken with one
tablespoonful of flour. Remove from the fire and thin out with boiling
water. Chop fine some parsley, onions and two cloves of garlic, and add
to the pan. Season the fish with salt and pepper, place in the sauce,
and cook for about twenty minutes.

=Lamb kidneys en pilaff.= Slice fine a half dozen lamb kidneys, and
prepare in the same manner as chicken livers en pilaff. (See January
8th.)

=Almond biscuit.= To every ounce of almond flour add the whites of two
eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Salt to taste and beat well together. Put
in buttered patty tins and bake in a moderately quick oven from fifteen
to twenty minutes. The whole must be done quickly, and baked as soon as
the ingredients are mixed.

=Lemon pie, special.= Mix in saucepan the yolks of sixteen eggs,
three-quarters of a pound of sugar, and the juice and rinds of six
lemons, and cook over a slow fire until it thickens. Then remove from
the fire and stir in the whites of eight eggs beaten very hard. Pour the
mixture into two pie plates, lined with thin pie dough, and bake in a
medium hot oven for about twenty-five minutes.


OCTOBER 23

     BREAKFAST
       Prunes Victor
       Boiled eggs
       Coffee and rolls
       Snails (bread)

     LUNCHEON
       Avocado, French dressing
       War griddle cakes
       Tripe, Wm. H. Crane
       Mashed potatoes
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Orange and grapefruit, St. Francis
       Stuffed chicken with California raisins
       Rice Californienne
       Lettuce and tomato salad
       Olympic club cheese
       Coffee

=War griddle cakes.= Soak stale bread in sour milk. Add enough flour or
corn meal to make a batter. To a gallon add three eggs, baking powder,
and salt. Cook in the same manner as wheat cakes.

=Orange and grapefruit, St. Francis.= Sliced oranges and grapefruit, in
equal parts. Sprinkle with powdered sugar, and moisten with Dubonnet.
Serve in double supreme glasses with a few fresh strawberries on top.

=Prunes Victor.= Put two pounds of dry prunes in an earthen pot, add two
quarts of water, the rind of a lemon, one stick of cinnamon, one-half
cup of sugar, and a vanilla bean. Put on hot stove and bring to a boil.
Then move to one side of fire and simmer slowly for six hours. Or, set
in a moderate oven for six hours. Allow to become cool, and add a pony
of good cognac. Use the prune juice for a morning drink, and serve the
prunes with cream.

=Chicken stuffed with raisins.= Soak a small loaf of bread in warm milk,
squeeze out lightly, and add an equal volume of raisins. Season with
salt and pepper, fill the chicken, and roast in the usual manner.

=California raisins= may be used in many dishes, such as soup, fish,
entrees, roasts, bread, puddings, ice cream, etc.

=Rice Californienne.= Wash a pound of rice in cold water. Chop an onion,
smother in butter, add the rice, one quart of broth, and season with
salt and pepper. Bring to a boil, cover, and set in oven for thirty-five
minutes. Before serving add one-half cup of grated cheese.

=Tripe, Wm. H. Crane.= Wash the tripe well, and cut in round pieces
about five inches in diameter. Place them in a saucepan with a few
carrots, two or three onions, some whole peppers, salt, white wine, and
good white broth. Boil until thoroughly tender. Then place the tripe in
a stone jar and strain the liquid over it. Keep in a cool place. When
needed turn them in flour, and fry quickly in a frying pan in very hot
butter. Serve with some parsley butter.

=Avocado, French dressing.= Split the avocado, remove the pit, and fill
half full with a dressing made with salt, pepper, a little French
mustard, and one-third vinegar and two-thirds olive oil.

=French dressing.= Two teaspoonfuls of salt, one teaspoonful of mustard,
one-quarter teaspoonful of black pepper, one-half teaspoonful of
paprika, the juice of one lemon, and the same amount of vinegar. Put in
a quart bottle, fill with olive oil, and shake thoroughly.

=Salad dressing.= One-half cup of tomato catsup, one-half cup of cream,
two teaspoonfuls of lemon juice, and black and red pepper and salt to
taste.

=Snails.= Dissolve one ounce of yeast in warm water. Make a dough with
one pound of flour, four ounces of sugar, two eggs, two ounces of
butter, two ounces of lard, one ounce of salt, one cup of water, and the
dissolved yeast. Allow to raise for about an hour. Then roll the dough
into a square sheet about one-quarter inch thick. Brush over with butter
and bestrew with sugar, cinnamon, and currants. Roll the sheet into a
roll and cut in slices one-quarter inch thick. Lay the slices on a
greased pan and allow to raise until double the size. Bake in a moderate
oven.

=Olympic club cheese.= Scrape clean three best quality camembert
cheeses. Put in a copper casserole with one-quarter pound of good
Roquefort cheese, one-half pound of table butter, two tablespoonfuls of
sifted flour and one pint of cream. Boil until the whole is melted
together. Then strain through cheese cloth, put in an earthen pot, and
allow to become cool.


OCTOBER 24

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Omelette with parsley
       Spoon or mush bread
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Oysters Bellevue
       Cold Virginia ham
       Corn pudding
       Loganberry ice cream
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Canape P. P. I. E.
       Onion soup au gratin
       Ripe olives
       Roast turkey, cranberry sauce
       Sweet potato pudding
       Coffee

=Canape P. P. I. E.= (Panama-Pacific International Exposition). Make
some pieces of buttered toast. Put fresh caviar in the center and
anchovies around the edge. Serve on napkins with quartered lemons and
parsley in branches.

=Oysters Bellevue.= In a lighted chafing dish put four pats of table
butter, one-half teaspoonful of English mustard, a little salt, pepper
and celery salt. Stir until the butter melts. Then add a teacupful of
very finely chopped celery, and stir well until the celery is nearly
cooked. Then pour in slowly, while stirring, one pint of rich cream, and
allow to come to the boiling point. Then put in a dozen freshly opened
oysters and cook for four or five minutes. Add a tablespoonful of good
sherry or Madeira, and serve on very hot plates.

=Spoon or mush bread.= Scald two cups of corn meal in two cups of
boiling water, allow to cool slightly, then add one cup of buttermilk,
one teaspoonful of soda, two tablespoonfuls of lard or butter (butter
preferred), one egg, and salt to taste. If you have no buttermilk use
baking powder and sweet milk.

=Corn pudding.= One quart of corn cut from the ear and chopped fine, one
egg, a tablespoonful of butter, and salt and pepper to taste. Thin with
sweet milk, and bake in a hot oven.

=Sweet potato pudding.= Grate a large sweet potato and mix with one cup
of sugar, one-half cup of butter, and two or three eggs, according to
the size of the potato. Thin with sweet milk, flavor with ginger and
spices, or vanilla can be used. Beat the eggs well before adding to the
mixture. Bake in a moderate oven very slowly. The potatoes in the west
are not as sweet as the southern variety, therefore more sugar may be
required. A good rule is to bake a small portion first to see if the
flavor is right. It is considered a luxury in certain parts of the
South.

=Loganberry ice cream.= Put in a pan one quart of milk and one-half
pound of sugar, and place on the fire. Mix the yolks of sixteen eggs
with one-half pound of sugar. Stir the milk and sugar, after it has
reached the boiling point, into it. Replace on the fire and stir until
it becomes creamy, but do not let it boil. Then remove from the fire,
add one quart of cream, strain and freeze. When nearly frozen add one
quart of bottled loganberry juice, and finish freezing. A few drops of
red coloring can be added if a bright color is desired.


OCTOBER 25

     BREAKFAST
       Baked prunes
       Scrambled eggs
       Corn bread (2)
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Anchovy salad
       Lamb hash, J. A. Britton
       Cheese cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cold artichokes, St. Francis dressing
       Brook trout, Cafe de Paris
       Breast of chicken, James Woods
       Salad Algerienne
       Frozen loganberry juice
       Macaroons

     SUPPER
       Welsh rabbit, special
       Raisin bread
       Ale

=Baked prunes.= Select large prunes, place them in a baking pan side by
side so they hardly touch, cover with water and cook in a moderate oven
for an hour. Then pour off three-quarters of the juice, which may be
kept for a beverage, and to the prunes add a little sugar, a stick of
cinnamon, and the rind of a lemon. Cover the pan tightly, place back in
a moderate oven and bake for at least one hour.

=Corn bread (II).= Put in a pan one egg beaten light, one cup of milk,
one tablespoonful of sugar, one-half teaspoonful of salt, one cup of
yellow corn meal, one cup of flour, and two and one-half teaspoonfuls of
baking powder. If too thin add a little more white flour. Beat well
together, and add four tablespoonfuls of melted butter or bacon
drippings.

=Graham bread.= Same as for corn bread, but use no white flour.

=Raisin bread.= Warm one pint of milk and dissolve one-half ounce of
yeast in it. Then add two ounces of butter, two eggs, two ounces of
sugar, a pinch of salt and one-half pound of raisins. Mix well. Then
stir in two pounds of flour, and make a smooth dough. Allow to raise for
about three hours. Then fold the dough, put it in moulds, and let it
again raise for about one hour. Bake in a moderate oven for about
forty-five minutes.

=Lamb hash, J. A. Britton.= Take even quantities of left over roast lamb
and mashed potatoes and pass through a fine meat chopper. Season well,
add a piece of sweet butter, some chopped parsley and a little bouillon,
and cook together. Serve hot, with a fried egg on top.

=St. Francis dressing.= One green pepper, an equal amount of raw celery
and an equal amount of hard boiled eggs all chopped fine. Add one-half
cup of Chili sauce, one-half cup of mayonnaise, one tablespoonful of
white wine vinegar, two spoonfuls of olive oil, and salt, pepper and
Cayenne. Mix well. Can be served with almost any kind of salad.

=Brook trout, Cafe de Paris.= Butter well an earthern dish, sprinkle
with chopped shallots and parsley, lay the trout on top, season with
salt and pepper, add a little white wine and fish broth, lay a few
pieces of butter on top, and bake in oven until done. Serve in the dish
in which they were cooked.

=Breast of chicken, James Woods.= Remove the skin from a nice young
roasting chicken, lift off the breasts, season with salt and pepper,
roll in cream, then in flour, and fry in butter. Place on a buttered
shirred egg dish a piece of toast, then a thin slice of broiled Virginia
ham, then the breasts of chicken, then a few heads of fresh mushrooms
tossed in butter, then a little cream and a piece of butter, season all
well, cover with a glass mushroom cover, and bake in oven for ten
minutes.

=Salad Algerienne.= Sliced pineapple, oranges, grapefruit and bananas
in equal quantities. Serve in a bowl with lettuce leaves around the
sides, and mayonnaise dressing made with plenty of lemon juice.

=Frozen loganberry juice.= Mix one quart of loganberry juice, one quart
of water, one pound of sugar, and the juice of two lemons. Strain and
freeze.

=Welsh rabbit.= Break an egg in a deep plate, add a teaspoonful of
vinegar, and English mustard, paprika and salt to taste. Mix thoroughly.
Then grate or crumble four ounces of good American cheese, place in a
chafing dish, and add a small quantity of ale or beer. Just enough to
keep the cheese from frying. Use a hot flame, and with two forks in one
hand stir continually, in one direction. Do not permit the cheese to
boil. When the cheese is melted add the egg and seasoning, and stir
until blended. Then add a pinch of bicarbonate of soda, and serve on
buttered toast which has been previously prepared. The rabbit can be
prepared for any number of persons by allowing four ounces of cheese to
each person, and one egg for each pound, or less, of cheese.

=Cheese cake.= Work thoroughly together one and one-half cup of butter
and one and one-half cup of sugar until it is creamy. Then stir in eight
eggs, one by one, then the juice and rind of one lemon, then one and
one-half pound of cottage cheese, then one cup of cream and four
spoonfuls of flour. Bake in spring form pans lined with thin pie dough.


OCTOBER 26

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal with cream
       Bacon and eggs
       Mixed bran biscuits
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Little Neck clams, mignonette
       Consomme in cups
       Cold Virginia ham
       Lettuce salad
       Pink pudding, Victor
       Demi tasse

     AFTERNOON TEA
       Brioche
       Coffee cake
       Tea, chocolate or coffee

     DINNER
       Puree of pea soup
       Ripe olives
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Saddle of lamb, jardiniere
       Hearts of palm, Victor
       Figs Roma
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

=Brioche.= Dissolve one ounce of yeast in one gill of tepid water and
add about one-third of a pound of flour, to make a medium firm sponge.
Cover with a cloth and set in a warm place to raise. Then work into a
smooth paste two-thirds of a pound of flour, three-quarters of a pound
of butter, one ounce of sugar, a little salt, and six eggs. Beat the
eggs in gradually. Then spread the sponge over the top and mix into the
paste. Cover with a cloth and allow to raise until double in size. Then
work together again, and place in a box for several hours to harden
before using. Mould into small round balls, place in baking pans, and
allow to raise until about one-third above their original size. Brush
over with egg, make a cross-cut on top, and bake in a rather brisk oven.

=Coffee cake.= Put one pound of flour in a bowl. Dissolve an ounce of
yeast in a gill of lukewarm milk, add it to the flour with two eggs, and
work to a medium-stiff dough. Cover with a cloth and allow to raise till
double in size. Then work in thoroughly three ounces of butter, two
ounces of sugar, a pinch of salt, a pinch of nutmeg, and the juice and
rind of one lemon. Allow to raise again for about an hour, when the
dough will be ready to bake. This dough is the foundation for all kinds
of coffee cake.

=Pink pudding, Victor.= Cook one-quarter pound of rice in one quart of
milk with a vanilla bean and one-half pound of sugar. When done allow to
cool, and then add one quart of whipped cream, some chopped fruits, and
one drop of red coloring. Dissolve four sheets of gelatine in a little
warm milk, stir into the above, put into moulds, and set in ice box
until firm. Serve with fruit sauce.

=Figs Roma.= Line a bowl (timballe) with lady fingers. Put a layer of
vanilla ice cream in the bottom, then a layer of about a dozen peeled
and quartered figs, sprinkle this with good rum, cover thickly with
sauce au marasquin, and sprinkle some macaroon crumbs on top. Serve in
plates with ice around the bowl.

=Four o'clock tea bran bread.= Make a batter with two cups of bran, one
cup of Educator entire wheat flour, one cup of white flour, one-half
teaspoonful of salt, one teaspoonful of soda, one-half cup of molasses,
one-half cup of water and two cups of milk, or one cup of milk and
another one of water. Spread the batter about one inch thick in the pan,
and cook in a slow oven.

=Wheat bran gems.= Make a batter with two cups of wheat bran, one cup of
whole wheat flour, one teaspoonful of baking soda, one-half cup of
molasses, three tablespoonfuls of hot milk, and three tablespoonfuls of
boiling water. Put the dough in buttered gem pans, and cook for about
twenty-five minutes.

=Bran bread.= Mix together two cups of wheat bran, one and one-half cups
of flour, one-half teaspoonful of salt, one teaspoonful of soda,
one-half cup of molasses, one-half cup of water, and two cups of milk,
or one cup of milk and another cup of water. Put the dough in the pans
about one inch thick, and bake in a slow oven.

=Bran biscuits.= Mix two cups of wheat bran, one cup of white flour, two
teaspoonfuls of baking powder, one very small teaspoonful of salt, a
piece of lard the size of an egg, and enough milk to make a stiff dough.
Work well together, roll out about a half an inch thick, cut out with
forms, and bake in a slow oven.

=Hearts of palm, Victor.= Hearts of palm can be obtained in cans similar
to asparagus, and may be served in the same way, with Hollandaise,
Polonaise, vinaigrette, or other sauces. Hearts of palm, Victor, is
served cold, with Victor dressing (see April 21).


OCTOBER 27

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal
       Strawberries with cream
       Lamb chops with bacon
       Boiled eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with maraschino
       Consomme in cup
       Salted almonds
       Loin of pork, apple sauce
       Lettuce salad
       Meringue glacee a la vanille
       Black coffee

     DINNER
       Puree of peas, Varsovienne
       Olives
       Celery
       Sand dabs, saute meuniere
       Roast chicken
       Mashed potatoes
       Canned asparagus, sauce Hollandaise
       Escarole salad, French dressing
       Omelet with strawberries
       Coffee

=Oatmeal.= To one quart of water, boiling, add eight ounces of cracked
wheat. Boil for one-half hour. Salt.

=Consomme.= Mix one-half pound of beef, chopped fine, with one white of
an egg. Add slowly one quart of stock and let boil for half hour. Strain
through napkin or fine cheese cloth.

=Loin of pork.= Place pork in roasting pan and pepper and salt well. Add
one sliced onion, carrot, bay leaf, clove, a little celery and one
teaspoonful of whole black peppers. Put in moderate oven and roast for
about one and one-quarter hours. Baste often to keep juicy and of a fine
color. When done remove from pan, skim part of the fat from the gravy
and add one-half spoonful of flour, let simmer till brown, add one cup
of stock and boil for a few minutes.

=Puree of pea soup.= Soak three-quarters of a pound of green split peas
in cold water for three hours. Wash well and put on fire in cold water.
Put in saute pan one sliced onion, carrot, stalk of leek, a little
celery and parsley, a bay leaf and clove, and a ham bone or skin of
bacon or salt pork. Simmer in butter until soft. Add the peas and boil
together until soft. Salt and pepper to taste and strain through sieve.
If too thick add some stock or broth of any kind.

=Varsovienne.= Fried thin-sliced bacon.

=Aux croutons.= Bread cut in small dices and fried in butter.

=Sand dabs, meuniere.= Remove the skin from the sand dabs, salt, pepper
and roll in flour, and fry in fresh butter in shallow frying pan. When
brown remove fish to platter, place piece of butter in pan, cook till
brown, and pour over fish. Add the juice of one lemon and chopped
parsley. Garnish the platter with parsley and quartered lemons.

=Roast chicken, plain.= Prepare sauce as for loin of pork. Omit flour
for thickening. Serve with its own gravy.

=Hollandaise sauce.= Put the yolks of five eggs in saucepan. Place the
saucepan in pot containing very hot water, on range. Stir the yolks well
and add pieces of sweet butter the size of a hazelnut, until one pound
is used. As the butter melts in the eggs be careful that the sauce does
not get too hot. Add salt and Cayenne pepper to taste.

=Salted almonds.= Scald the almonds, allow to cool and remove the thin
paper-shells. Put the almonds on a pan and roast in hot oven until
brown. Wet with a solution of gum arabic and water, using about four
teaspoonfuls to the pound of nuts. Dust over with table salt and stir
until dry.

=Meringue shells.= To the whites of eight eggs use one pound of powdered
sugar. Beat the whites very firm and stiff. Add a handful of sugar and
beat thoroughly. Remove the whip and stir in the remainder of the sugar
with a large spoon. Form in the size of an egg and dress on a buttered
pan dusted with flour. Sprinkle with powdered sugar and bake in a
moderate oven.

=Vanilla ice cream.= One pint of cream, one quart of milk, eight yolks
of eggs, half pound of sugar and one vanilla bean. Place the milk, half
of the sugar and the split vanilla bean on the fire to boil. Mix the
remainder of sugar with the yolks of eggs, stir in the boiling milk and
cook until creamy. Allow to cool, strain and freeze.

=Plain omelet.= Beat six eggs. Put in hot frying pan a piece of butter,
add the eggs and roll quickly over hot fire to form. Salt. For a sweet
omelet sprinkle with sugar.

=Omelet with strawberries.= Dust a plain omelet with plenty of powdered
sugar. Burn bands across the top with a red-hot poker or special iron,
and garnish with stewed strawberries.

=Stewed strawberries.= Wash a basket of strawberries thoroughly. Dry in
napkin and roll in two ounces of granulated sugar. Put in saucepan and
place on fire. Allow to remain until sugar is melted and berries are
soft. Do not leave on fire too long.

=French dressing for salad.= To one-third of white wine vinegar use
two-thirds of olive oil. Mix with salt, pepper, a little powdered
mustard, dash of Worcestershire sauce and a little paprika.

=Coffee.= To seven ounces of ground coffee use two quarts of water. (Use
eight ounces for after dinner coffee.) If you do not use a special
coffee percolator pour the boiling water over the grounds, contained in
a bag. Draw off and repeat twice.

=Plain celery.= Stalks of celery well washed and split in four.

=Ripe olives.= California olives allowed to ripen on the trees, and
specially prepared in packing houses. Serve with cracked ice.

=Oysters on half shell.= Serve on cracked ice with half of lemon or
lime.


OCTOBER 28

     BREAKFAST
       Cantaloupe
       Hominy with cream
       Scrambled eggs with smoked beef
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of caviar
       Radishes
       Hungarian goulash
       Potato croquettes
       Assorted fruits

     DINNER
       Puree of tomato soup
       Celery
       Boiled codfish, egg sauce
       Roast leg of lamb
       String beans in butter
       Potatoes rissolees
       Chicory salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Hominy.= To one quart of boiling water add eight ounces of hominy. Cook
twenty minutes. Salt to taste. Serve cream separate.

=Scrambled eggs plain.= Beat six eggs, add two ounces of butter,
spoonful of cream and a little salt and pepper. Stir on fire with a
wooden spoon until cooked.

=Scrambled eggs with smoked beef.= Slice the beef very thin. Boil in
water for a few minutes, add the eggs and serve on toast.

=Canape of caviar.= Spread caviar, which has been kept on ice, on thin
toast. Sprinkle thick with chopped hard-boiled eggs all around. Garnish
with leaf of lettuce filled with chopped onion, parsley in branches, and
one-fourth of a lemon. Serve on napkin.

=Hungarian goulash.= One pound of shoulder of veal, one pound loin of
lean pork. Cut in pieces one inch square. Mix a little flour, salt,
pepper and plenty of paprika. Put in sauce pan a piece of butter, two
chopped onions and the fat from the loin of pork. Simmer till brown,
then add the meats and flour; a little bouillon, stock or water;
one-half cup of puree of tomatoes, a little thyme, one bay leaf, one
clove and a little chopped parsley and celery. Cover tight and cook for
three-quarters of an hour. Then add three potatoes cut the same as the
meat, and cook till done.

=Beef goulash.= Same as the above except use beef, and the fat of pork,
only.

=Potato croquettes.= Boil one pound of potatoes. Pour off water and let
evaporate well. When quite dry mash fine, mix with the yolks of two
eggs, salt and pepper. Roll on floured board into the form of a large
cork. Dip in flour, then in beaten raw eggs, then in bread crumbs, and
fry in swimming lard.

=Puree of tomatoes.= Put in sauce pan one sliced onion, a little celery
and leek, one bay leaf, one clove, a spoonful of whole peppers, piece of
butter, piece of hambone or pig skin, and allow to simmer. Then add one
gallon of fresh or canned tomatoes, salt, and a teaspoonful of sugar.
When cooked add a piece of butter. Strain well.

=Puree of tomato soup.= Add some chicken broth or bouillon to the puree
of tomatoes. Serve bread crumbs fried in butter.

=Boiled codfish, or any white fish.= Put fish in cold water. Add cup of
milk to keep it white. Salt and boil. When done let stand for ten
minutes. Serve on napkins with small boiled potatoes, parsley in
branches, and quartered lemons.

=Egg sauce.= Add some chopped boiled eggs to cream sauce. Sprinkle with
a little chopped parsley.

=Cream or Bechamel sauce.= Melt two ounces of butter in two ounces of
flour. When warm, but not brown, add one pint of boiling milk. Stir well
and cook for a few minutes. Strain.

=String beans.= Boil in salt water. Place in pan, add piece of butter
and salt and pepper.

=Escarole salad.= Serve with French dressing. This salad goes well with
piece of bread rubbed with garlic, and served in bowl.

=Chicory salad.= Serve with French dressing. Use crust of bread rubbed
with garlic if desired.


OCTOBER 29

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Pettijohns in cream
       Ham and eggs
       Rolls
       Tea

     LUNCHEON
       Chicken broth in cups
       Lamb hash
       Cheese balls
       Lettuce salad
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams on shell
       Giblet soup, English style
       Frog legs, saute a sec
       Roast teal duck
       Fried hominy and currant jelly
       Boiled artichokes, Hollandaise sauce
       Romaine salad
       Philadelphia ice cream
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Pettijohns.= To one quart of boiling water add eight ounces of
Pettijohns. Cook ten minutes. Salt. Serve cream separate.

=Fried ham.= Thin slices of raw ham fried in butter. If fried too much
ham will get hard.

=Fried eggs.= Use strictly fresh eggs and fry in hot butter. Salt and
pepper.

=Ham and eggs.= Put ham in frying pan and fry one side. Turn, and crack
eggs on top and fry.

=Chicken broth.= Put to boil in cold water two fat soup hens. Skim well,
add one-half onion, a little celery, salt to taste, and cook for three
hours, when fowls should be soft. Strain the bouillon and serve in cups.
The cooked fowls may be used for sandwiches, chicken salad, chicken a la
King, etc.

=Boiled fowl.= See chicken broth above.

=Lamb hash.= Cut cold boiled or roast lamb in small dices. Add one-half
as much cold boiled potatoes. Put piece of butter in saucepan with one
chopped onion and simmer until brown. Add lamb and potato, salt, pepper,
cup of stock or bouillon and cook for ten minutes. Serve on toast with
chopped parsley.

=Cheese balls.= Mix one and one-half cups of grated Parmesan or American
cheese, one tablespoonful of flour, one-quarter teaspoonful of salt, a
few grains of Cayenne pepper and the whites of three eggs beaten stiff.
Shape in small balls or croquettes, roll in cracker dust, fry in deep
fat and drain on brown paper. New lard is necessary for frying, and they
must not stand, but serve immediately.

=Lettuce salad.= Wash, dry in napkin, and serve with French dressing.

=Giblet soup a l'Anglaise.= (English style). Cut turkey or chicken
gizzards in small dices. Also a carrot, turnip, piece of celery and a
piece of leek. Add one-third pound of barley, large spoonful of flour
and four ounces of butter. Simmer all together, add two quarts of stock
or bouillon, season with salt, pepper and teaspoonful of Worcestershire
sauce and cook for one hour. Serve with a sprinkle of chopped parsley.

=Frogs' legs saute a sec.= Season the frogs' legs with salt and pepper
and dip in flour. Put a piece of butter in saute pan and place on stove
over a quick fire. When hot add the frogs' legs and fry for a few
minutes. Remove to a chafing dish and put a fresh piece of butter in the
saute pan, brown, and pour over the legs, with chopped parsley, and
garlic, if desired.

=Roast teal duck.= Season with pepper and salt and roast in very hot
oven for ten minutes. Rare, seven and one-half minutes.

=Fried hominy.= Boil ten ounces of hominy in one quart of water for
thirty minutes. Spread in pan to a depth of one inch or more, to cool.
Cut in diamond shape one-quarter inch thick, roll in flour, beaten eggs
and bread crumbs, and fry in swimming fat.

=Boiled artichokes.= Boil in salt water with a few slices of lemon. When
soft serve on napkins with parsley in branches. Sauce separate.

=Romaine salad.= Romaine should not be washed, or the leaves broken.
Wipe with a napkin if it is dusty and serve with French dressing.

=Philadelphia ice cream.= Dissolve one-half pound of sugar in one quart
of cream. Flavor to taste. Strain and freeze.

=Little Neck clams on shell.= Serve on cracked ice with half a lemon or
lime.


OCTOBER 30

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced oranges
       Force and cream
       Poached eggs on toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Hambourgeoise
       Broiled honeycomb tripe, maitre d'hotel
       Lyonnaise potatoes
       Field salad
       German apple cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree of lentils
       Ripe olives
       Fillet of sole, au vin blanc
       Lamb chops with bacon
       Asparagus tip salad
       Tartelette with pears
       Coffee

=Sliced oranges.= Peel and slice the oranges and put on compote dish.
Serve powdered sugar separate.

=Force and cream.= Serve raw with powdered sugar and cream separate.

=Poached eggs.= Break the eggs in boiling water, to which may be added a
soupspoonful of vinegar if desired. Add plenty of salt to the water to
take away the vinegar taste. Serve on toast and garnish with parsley in
branches.

=Canape Hambourgeoise.= Place on toast one sliced gherkin with a slice
of smoked salmon on top, and a little anchovy sauce in center. Garnish
around edge with chopped boiled egg, parsley and lemon.

=Boiled honeycomb tripe.= Cut honeycomb tripe in round pieces, five
inches in diameter. Put in vessel with one onion, carrot, bay leaf,
clove, a little celery and thyme and whole black peppers. Cover with
water, salt and boil until done.

=Broiled honeycomb tripe.= Take boiled tripe, roll in olive oil, then in
fresh bread crumbs, and broil. Serve with lemon and parsley garnishing,
and maitre d'hotel sauce on top.

=Maitre d'hotel sauce.= One-quarter pound of fresh butter, juice of one
lemon, and chopped parsley. Mix well. This sauce is not to be used hot.

=Lyonnaise potatoes.= Slice an onion, fry in butter, and mix with saute
potatoes.

=Field salad.= Wash and clean the salad well. Serve with French dressing
and chopped parsley.

=Puree of lentils (soup).= Put in pot one pound of well-washed lentils
and one quart of stock. Skim when it comes to a boil, and salt. Put in
saute pan an onion, carrot, bay leaf, clove, some parsley, celery, leek,
whole black pepper, a ham bone or small piece of pigskin, and a piece of
butter, and allow to simmer. Add to the lentils, and boil. When done
strain through sieve and serve with small dices of bread fried in
butter.

=Fillet of sole, au vin blanc.= Remove the skin from the fillets of
sole. Put in buttered pan, add salt and a little Cayenne pepper,
one-half glass of white wine, and one-half glass of stock. Cover with
buttered manilla paper and put in oven to boil. When done put on platter
and cover with sauce "au vin blanc." (See below.)

=Sauce au vin blanc (white wine sauce).= Cut up some large fish bones,
put in pot and cover with water. Add salt, an onion, carrot, bay leaf,
clove, a little thyme and whole black peppers. Boil for half an hour.
Put in another saucepan three ounces of butter. When warm add two
spoonfuls of flour, stir, add the strained fish stock; also add the
stock left from the fillets, and boil for ten minutes. Beat well the
yolks of two eggs and one-half cup of cream, and thicken the sauce with
same. Strain.

=Lamb chops with bacon.= With each broiled lamb chop serve two slices of
broiled bacon. Garnish with watercress.

=Asparagus tip salad.= Canned asparagus tips garnished with lettuce
leaves. Serve with French dressing.

=German apple cake.= Make a dough with one pound of flour, one pound of
butter, one cup of milk and a pinch of salt. Line a cake pan with the
dough rolled thin, and cover with sliced apples. Dust some powdered
sugar mixed with ground cinnamon over the apple, and bake. When nearly
done pour over it a custard made of one pint of milk, one-quarter pound
of sugar and three eggs, mixed well. Put again in the oven until the
custard is set.

=Tartelette of pears.= One pound of flour, one-half pound of butter, two
ounces of sugar, two eggs, one pinch of salt and one pony of water. Rub
the butter into the flour, then add the sugar, salt, eggs and water.
Work it lightly to a rather firm dough. Line some tartelette molds
thinly with the dough. Peel and slice the pears and arrange them in the
tartelette, put a pinch of sugar mixed with a very little cinnamon, on
top. Place in a pan and bake. While they are baking mix one pint of
apricot pulp with three-quarters of a pound of sugar, and boil for a few
minutes. When the tartelettes are done remove from the moulds, and use a
brush to coat the tops with the apricot marmalade. Allow to cool before
serving.


OCTOBER 31

     BREAKFAST
       Bananas in cream
       Buckwheat cakes
       Fried country sausages
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Cold poached egg with mayonnaise
       Broiled finnan haddie
       Rump steak, Bercy
       Chateau potatoes
       Pickled beets
       Assorted fruits

     DINNER
       Cream of cauliflower
       Butterfish, saute meuniere
       Shoulder of veal, au jus
       Carrots, Vichy
       Duchesse potatoes
       Watercress salad
       Roquefort cheese
       Toasted crackers
       Coffee

=Bananas and cream.= Peel and slice the bananas. Serve cream and
powdered sugar separate.

=Buckwheat cakes.= One-quarter pound of buckwheat flour, one-quarter
pound of white flour, one tablespoonful of baking powder, one ounce of
sugar, one ounce of molasses, one egg and just enough milk to make a
thin dough. Mix well and cook on hot iron plate rubbed with a piece of
raw lard. Serve with strained honey or syrup, separate.

=Mayonnaise sauce.= Put in bowl three yolks of eggs, a pinch of salt, a
little Cayenne pepper, a pinch of English mustard flour and a dash of
Worcestershire sauce. Stir well. Add, little by little, one pint of
olive oil and an occasional few drops of vinegar or lemon juice. When
finished, stir in one spoonful of boiling water, which will keep the
sauce from curdling.

=Cold poached eggs with mayonnaise.= Serve on the top of toast. Pour
mayonnaise over the egg, only. Garnish with lemon quarters and parsley.

=Finnan haddie in cream.= Remove the skin and bones and boil for one
minute in plain water. Then separate the fish in small pieces, add one
cup of cream and one-half cup of cream sauce, and boil for ten minutes.
Serve in chafing dish.

=Rump steak, Bercy.= Broil steak. Sauce Bercy as follows: Simmer
slightly in butter two chopped shallots. Add half cup of sauce maitre
d'hotel, and one parboiled marrow, cut in small pieces. Pour over steak
and put in oven for two minutes. Serve with chopped parsley.

=Chateau potatoes.= Cut raw potatoes in shape of a half-moon, and the
size of an egg. Put in cold water, salt, and boil for five minutes. Then
place in pan with butter and roast in oven for ten minutes. Salt again.

=Boiled beets.= Wash the beets well and boil with the skin on, in salt
water. When soft remove the skin with the fingers while still hot.

=Pickled beets.= Use fresh-boiled and very hot beets. Put in a piece of
cheese cloth, one onion, bay leaf, clove and one spoonful of whole black
peppers, and tie tightly together. Place this in center of earthern pot
with a layer of the hot sliced beets around the sides and over the top.
To each dozen beets put four pieces of lump sugar on top. Salt and cover
with white wine vinegar. Let stand, covered, at least two days before
serving. If not all used at once, a wooden spoon must be used to remove
the beets from the pot, otherwise they will spoil.

=Cream of cauliflower soup.= Put in saucepan one-half onion, a little
leek, a piece of butter the size of two eggs, and let simmer slowly. Add
one cup of flour, simmer a little more. Put in the stems of cauliflower
and one quart of milk, boil till done, and strain through sieve. Put in
pot, add one gill of cream and piece of sweet butter and stir well until
butter is melted. Add salt and a little Cayenne pepper. Cut the heart of
the cauliflower in small flowers, boil in salt water until soft, and add
before serving.

=Butter fish, meuniere.= See sand dabs, meuniere.

=Shoulder of veal, au jus.= Roast either with or without bones. If
boneless roll and tie firmly with a string. Season with salt and pepper
and put in pan with an onion, carrot, bay leaf, clove and piece of
butter. Put in oven and baste often. When done remove meat to platter,
put a little water in the pan and let simmer for a few minutes, and add
to the veal.


NOVEMBER 1

     BREAKFAST
       Fresh figs in cream
       Boiled eggs
       Milk toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Smoked salmon
       Broiled sweetbreads
       New peas
       Moka cake
       Tea

     DINNER
       Old fashioned pepper pot
       Celery
       Lake Tahoe trout, Sauce Genoise
       Hollandaise potatoes
       Roast mallard duck
       Fried hominy
       Currant jelly
       Summer squash in butter
       Vanilla ice cream
       Champagne wafers
       Coffee

=Fresh figs in cream.= Peel and slice the figs, and cool on ice before
serving. Powdered sugar and cream separate.

=Milk toast.= Put in soup tureen the toast, in small pieces, and cover
with boiling milk.

=Smoked salmon.= Slice the salmon very thin, serve on lettuce leaves,
with quartered lemon and parsley in branches on the side.

=Broiled veal sweetbreads.= Soak the sweetbreads in cold water for two
hours. Parboil and cool in cold water, and dry with a napkin. Split,
salt and pepper, dip in oil and broil. Serve with maitre d'hotel sauce.

=New peas, plain.= Boil peas in salt water. When done allow to cool.
Then put in saucepan with a piece of fresh butter, a little salt and a
pinch of sugar, and allow to simmer for a few seconds.

=Lake trout, boiled.= In three quarts of water boil an onion, carrot,
bay leaf, clove, some whole black pepper, salt, parsley and one glass of
vinegar. Pour over fish and boil slowly for fifteen minutes. Serve on
napkin garnished with lemon, parsley in branches and small round boiled
potatoes.

=Sauce Genoise.= Take a raw salmon head, (a trout head will do), and cut
in small pieces. Put in saute pan with a piece of butter, a sliced
onion, carrot, thyme, bay leaf, cloves, and some whole black pepper, and
simmer for fifteen minutes. Then add one glass of claret, reduce; add
one quart of brown gravy, cook for ten minutes and strain. Before
serving stir in well the juice of one lemon and a piece of fresh butter.
Sprinkle with chopped parsley.

=Hollandaise potatoes.= Shape potatoes in the form of a small egg. Boil
in salt water, drain off and evaporate well. Serve on napkin.

=Roast mallard duck.= Roast about sixteen or eighteen minutes. See teal
duck.

=Summer squash in butter.= Peel the squash and cut in quarters. Remove
the seeds, and boil in salt water for five minutes. Put in saute pan
with a piece of butter and simmer slowly till soft. Salt and pepper, and
sprinkle chopped parsley on top.


NOVEMBER 2

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Boiled salt mackerel
       Plain boiled potatoes
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of anchovies
       Omelette du Czar
       Spring lamb Irish stew
       Camembert cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of celery soup
       Barracouda saute, aux fines herbes
       Larded tenderloin of beef
       String beans
       Baked potatoes
       Sliced tomatoes, French dressing
       Vanilla custard pie
       Demi tasse

=Boiled salt mackerel.= Soak the mackerel in water over night. Boil in
plenty of water and serve on napkin with lemon and parsley.

=Canape of anchovies.= Lay split anchovies on thin buttered toast with
chopped eggs around the edges. Serve on napkin, with lemon and parsley
in branches.

=Omelette du Czar.= Pour horseradish sauce in cream, around the edge of
a plain omelet.

=Spring lamb Irish stew.= Take four pounds of neck, shoulder and breast
of lamb and cut in pieces two inches square. Put in vessel with cold
water and salt, and bring to a boil. Drain off and cool the meat, put
back in vessel in sufficient water to cover, with a bouquet garni, one
dozen small onions, one dozen small carrots, (large carrots may be cut
to size of onions), two dozen raw potatoes cut in small oval shapes, and
salt. Put on fire and cook till soft, remove bouquet garni, mix one cup
of flour with cold water and strain into the boiling stew, stirring at
the same time. Boil for five minutes. Before serving add chopped parsley
and a spoonful of Worcestershire sauce, if desired.

=Cream of Celery Soup.= Use celery instead of cauliflower, and prepare
the same as cream of cauliflower.

=Barracouda saute, aux fines herbes.= Put seasoned fish, well rolled in
flour, in pan in hot butter. When done lay fish on platter, and brown a
fresh piece of butter in pan. Add the juice of one lemon, and pour over
the fish. Serve with chopped parsley, chervil and chives.

=Larded Tenderloin of Beef.= Trim the tenderloin. Lard with fresh or
salt pork cut in two inch strips, one-quarter of an inch square. Lay on
in rows three-quarters of an inch apart, starting from the thick end of
the tenderloin and continuing its entire length. Put in pan with a
sliced onion, sliced carrot, bay leaf, clove, parsley in branches, and
some butter on top of the meat. Put in oven and baste continuously for
about thirty-five minutes. Remove the grease from the pan, add one cup
of stock or water, reduce, salt, pepper and strain. Madeira sauce may be
served with same if desired.

=Sliced tomatoes, French dressing.= Peeled tomatoes garnished with
leaves of lettuce, and French dressing over same.

=Vanilla custard pie.= Six eggs, one quart of milk, one-half pound of
sugar, and half of a vanilla bean. Mix the eggs with the sugar, add the
milk, and strain. Line a large pie dish with thin pie dough. Fill with
the custard and bake in moderate oven until set.


NOVEMBER 3

     BREAKFAST
       Orange marmalade
       English breakfast tea
       Tea biscuits
       Ham and eggs

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit
       Bouillon in cups
       Boiled beef, horseradish sauce
       Vegetable garnishing for beef
       Romaine salad
       Apple pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Petite marmite
       Broiled lobster
       Potted squab chicken, plain
       Waffle potatoes
       Peach compote
       Boiled artichokes, Hollandaise sauce
       Coffee ice cream
       Pound cake
       Demi tasse

=Tea biscuits.= Three pounds of flour, one-half pound of butter, one
quart of milk, three ounces of baking powder, three ounces of sugar, and
a little salt. Sift the sugar, salt and baking powder with the flour;
add the butter and milk, and make a dough on the table about one-half
inch thick. Cut with a round cutter about the size of a dollar, place in
a buttered pan, moisten the top with milk, and bake in a hot oven for
about fifteen minutes.

=Boiled beef with vegetables.= The meat should be juicy, well-flavored
and tender. The brisket, cross rib and rump are the best portions. The
wide ribs at the end of a rib roast are also very good. Tie the beef
with a string and put into boiling water; clear from scum, add salt, and
garnish with carrots, onions, turnips, celery, leeks and Savoy cabbage.
The cabbage may be tied with a string to prevent disintegration. A good
way is to put all the vegetables into a net as they can thus be
withdrawn at once. Allow the meat to simmer gently on the side of the
range, but do not let it come to a boil. When done cut in slices, not
too thin, and garnish with the vegetables neatly arranged around the
beef. Serve separately, either cream horseradish sauce, piquante,
tomato, or bouillon horseradish sauce. A little of its own broth should
be poured over the meat before serving.

=Horseradish sauce in cream.= Cream sauce with fresh-grated horseradish
and salt and pepper.

=Horseradish sauce with bouillon.= Put two fresh-grated horseradish
roots in saute pan with four ounces of butter. Cover and put in oven for
five minutes. Add two grated rolls and return to oven for two minutes
more. Then add bouillon enough to form the sauce. The bread will swell
and give the necessary body. Add a pinch of sugar, salt and pepper.

=Cold horseradish sauce, English style.= To two fresh-grated horseradish
roots add salt, a teaspoonful of English mustard, a teaspoonful of
Worcestershire sauce, and a spoonful of vinegar, mixed well. Then add
one pint of stiff-whipped cream.

=Bouillon.= Broth from boiled beef, strained.


NOVEMBER 4

     BREAKFAST
       Casaba melon
       Boiled eggs
       Cold Lyon sausage
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Consomme in cup
       Pompano saute, Tempis
       Broiled veal chops
       St. Francis potatoes
       Brazilian salad
       Brie cheese      Toasted crackers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Cherrystone oysters on half shell
       Cream of artichokes
       Boiled rock cod, sauce fleurette
       Sirloin steak, sauce Madere
       Broiled fresh mushrooms
       Delmonico potatoes
       Celery Victor
       Bavarois a la vanille
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Lyon sausage.= An imported sausage. Slice thin and garnish with chopped
meat jelly and parsley in branches.

=Pompano saute, meuniere.= Prepare the same as sand dabs, meuniere.
Sprinkle with chopped salted almonds over top.

=Broiled veal chops.= Salt and pepper the chops and dip in olive oil.
Broil over slow charcoal broiler. Serve with maitre d'hotel sauce and
watercress.

=St. Francis potatoes.= Peel three cold baked potatoes, chop very fine,
put in saute pan with one-half pint of cream, three ounces of butter,
salt and pepper. Simmer for five minutes.

=Brazilian salad.= Proportions should be one-half Lima beans,
one-quarter raw celery, and one-quarter raw green peppers, cut in the
form of matches. Pour French dressing over all and sprinkle with chopped
parsley.

=Oysters on half shell.= Serve on cracked ice with one-half lemon or
lime.

=Boiled rock cod.= See codfish.

=Sauce fleurette.= Cream sauce with chives, chervil and parsley, chopped
fine and well seasoned.

=Sirloin steak.= Salt and pepper the steak, dip in olive oil and broil.
Serve with maitre d'hotel sauce and chopped parsley.

=Sauce Madere.= Put in sauce pan one glass of sherry wine and reduce
over fire one-half. Add one and one-half cups of brown gravy, boil for a
few minutes, and add a little good Madeira before serving.

=Broiled fresh mushrooms.= Cut the stems from the mushrooms and wash the
heads in three waters, to free them from sand, dry on napkin. Season
with salt, pepper and a little olive oil, and broil over a slow fire for
about ten minutes, according to their size. Serve on dry toast with
maitre d'hotel sauce on top.

=Celery Victor. (Salad).= Wash six stalks of large celery. Make a stock
with one soup hen or chicken bones, and five pounds of veal bones, in
the usual manner, with carrots, onions, bay leaves, parsley, salt and
whole pepper. Place celery in vessel and strain broth over same, and
boil until soft. Allow to cool in the broth. When cold press the broth
out of the celery gently with the hands, and place on plate. Season with
salt, fresh-ground black pepper, chervil, and one-quarter white wine
tarragon vinegar to three-quarters of olive oil.

=Delmonico potatoes.= Put hashed in cream potatoes in a buttered shirred
egg dish, sprinkle with grated Parmesan cheese, and bake in oven until
brown.


NOVEMBER 5

     BREAKFAST
       Wine grapes
       Bacon and eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Buttermilk
       Waffles and honey
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little neck clams on shell
       Potage Lamballe
       Ripe California olives
       Boiled river salmon, sauce mousseline
       Potatoes nature
       Roast sirloin of beef, sauce Madere
       Cauliflower au gratin
       Potatoes Laurette
       Cole slaw
       Chocolate ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Bacon and eggs.= See ham and eggs.

=Fried bacon.= Thin slices of bacon fried slowly in pan in own fat.
Should be crisp.

=Waffles.= One-half pound of flour, one-half teaspoonful of baking
powder, two eggs, two ounces of sugar, two ounces of butter, a little
mace and a little milk. Make a batter a little stiffer than for
wheatcakes. Bake in waffle iron, but do not have the iron too hot.

=Potage Lamballe.= One-half puree of peas and one-half consomme with
tapioca, mixed.

=Boiled salmon, mousseline.= Boil salmon in the same manner as trout.

=Sauce mousseline.= To one pint of Hollandaise add one cup of whipped
cream and stir in gently.

=Little neck clams.= Same as oysters on shell.

=Potatoes nature.= Plain boiled potatoes cut in the shape of a small
egg.

=Roast sirloin of beef.= See tenderloin of beef.

=Cauliflower au gratin.= Put some dry, boiled cauliflower on a buttered
dish, cover with well-seasoned cream sauce, sprinkle with grated
Parmesan cheese, put a little butter on top and bake in oven until
brown.

=Potatoes Laurette.= To a cup of boiling water add one ounce of butter
and stir in one-half cup of sifted flour, mixing it well. Allow to cool
slightly and add the yolks of two eggs. Mix this dough with equal parts
of fresh-boiled potato that has been passed through a sieve. Roll in
flour in the form of a pencil and about two inches long, dip in egg and
bread crumbs, and fry in swimming fat or lard. Serve on a napkin.

=Cole slaw.= Slice the leaves of a white cabbage very fine. Put in salad
bowl and use dressing as desired. See salad dressings.

=Chocolate ice cream.= Prepare the same as vanilla ice cream, but in
place of the vanilla bean use two ounces of cocoa, or two ounces of
melted chocolate.


NOVEMBER 6

     BREAKFAST
       Scrambled eggs with ham
       Stewed fruits
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of sardines
       Fried smelts, Tartar sauce
       Broiled lamb chops
       Stewed celery in cream
       French fried potatoes
       Vanilla custard pie

     DINNER
       Tuna fish salad
       Chicken broth in cups
       Queen olives
       Roast capon, au cresson
       French peas
       Parisian potatoes
       Lettuce salad, egg dressing
       Fancy ice cream
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with ham.= Boiled ham cut in small dices and one small
piece of butter. Put in vessel and add scrambled eggs. See plain
scrambled eggs.

=Canape of sardines.= Skin and split the sardines. Place on buttered
toast, garnished with chopped eggs around the edges, and serve on napkin
with quartered lemon and parsley in branches.

=Fried smelts.= Season the smelts, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs,
and finally in bread crumbs. Fry in swimming fat and serve on napkin
with fried parsley and lemons quartered. Sauce separate.

=Fried parsley.= Parsley in branches, well-washed and dried in towel.
Fry in very hot swimming fat or lard for a second, as it fries very
quickly. Salt and pepper. Can be used for garnishing fried fish and
other dishes.

=Tartar sauce.= One chopped gherkin in vinegar, one tablespoonful of
capers, a little chervil, parsley, chives and a tablespoonful of French
mustard. Stir well into a cup of mayonnaise sauce.

=Stewed celery in cream.= Cut stalks or outside leaves of celery into
one inch lengths. Wash well, parboil in salt water and allow to cool.
Put back in salt water and boil until soft. Add one-half cup of cream
sauce, a small piece of butter, one-half cup of cream, and season with
salt and Cayenne pepper. Simmer for five minutes.

=French fried potatoes.= Cut raw potatoes in strips one-third inch thick
and two inches long. Fry in swimming lard, but do not have it too hot.
When potatoes are done remove from pan and let the fat become as hot as
possible. Fry the potatoes again until they are a golden yellow. Remove,
salt, and serve on a napkin. Do not cover, as this will cause them to
become soft and spongy.

=Tuna fish salad. (Thon marine).= This fish can be obtained in cans. Put
in salad bowl some sliced lettuce with the tuna on top. Garnish with
lettuce leaves and serve with French dressing. Do not mix until ready to
serve.

=Fancy ice cream.= Fill fancy lead moulds with any kind of ice cream,
using different colors in the same mould if desired. Cover with cracked
ice and rock salt for thirty minutes. Remove and serve on doilies.


NOVEMBER 7

     BREAKFAST
       Strawberries in cream
       Oatmeal
       Shirred eggs
       Rolls      Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Potato and leek soup
       Broiled halibut steak, maitre d'hotel
       Homemade beef stew
       Lemon water ice
       Fruit cake
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       California oysters on shell
       Consomme with sago
       Ecrevisses en buisson
       Leg of veal, au jus
       Browned mashed potatoes
       Peas and carrots in cream
       Hearts of lettuce, French dressing
       Omelet with jelly
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Welsh rabbit

=Shirred eggs, plain.= Put eggs on buttered shirred egg dish and cook
slowly. Salt and pepper.

=Potato and leek soup.= Simmer in butter one chopped onion and four
stalks of leeks cut in small dices. When golden yellow add one
tablespoonful of flour, mix, add one pound of potatoes cut in dices
one-quarter inch square, one quart of stock or bouillon, and a bouquet
garni. Boil until potatoes are done. Season with salt, pepper, a little
grated nutmeg and chopped parsley.

=Bouquet garni.= Tie in a bundle a small piece of celery, of leek, and
of parsley in branches, with a bay leaf, two cloves, a sprig of thyme,
and, if desired, a clove of garlic, in the center. This is used for
flavoring stews, soups, fish, etc.

=Broiled halibut, maitre d'hotel.= Cut halibut in slices one inch thick.
Salt and pepper, dip in olive oil and broil. Serve with maitre d'hotel
sauce, quartered lemon and parsley.

=Homemade beef stew.= Three pounds of rump, hip, or flank beef, cut into
squares two inches thick. Season the meat and simmer in sauce pot with
two chopped onions and three ounces of butter. When brown add two
tablespoonsful of flour and simmer again. Then add hot water enough to
cover the meat, and a bouquet garni. Cook for one hour and then add one
pound of potatoes cut in squares one inch thick, and leave on fire until
potatoes are soft. Take out the bouquet, add one cup of puree of
tomatoes and boil for five minutes. Serve with a sprinkle of chopped
parsley.

=Consomme with sago.= Bring one quart of consomme to a boil and then let
one-third of a pound of sago run slowly into it. Cook for ten minutes.

=Ecrevisses en buisson.= To three quarts of boiling water add one sliced
onion, one carrot, a bouquet garni, one glassful of vinegar, and salt.
Boil for five minutes. Then put in three dozen ecrevisses, or crayfish,
and boil for ten minutes. Serve on napkin with parsley and lemon, or
serve in its broth if desired. For most ecrevisses dishes the sauce is
made "en buisson" first and then prepared in fancy fashion following.

=Leg of veal, au jus.= Put leg of veal in pan and treat same as roast
veal. Baste often.

=Browned mashed potatoes.= Put in buttered egg dish some mashed
potatoes. Sprinkle with grated Parmesan cheese, place a little butter on
top, and bake in oven.

=Peas and carrots in cream.= Put in pot one pint of boiled peas, one
pint of boiled French carrots, one cup of thick cream, salt and a pinch
of sugar. Boil for a few minutes and thicken with a half cup of cream
sauce.

=Omelet with jelly.= See omelet with strawberries. Roll the omelet in
pan, put any kind of jelly in center, turn over on platter, and burn
with hot iron.


NOVEMBER 8

     BREAKFAST
       Bananas and cream
       Force and cream
       Crescent rolls      Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Cream of potato soup
       Radishes
       Broiled tenderloin steak, Bordelaise sauce
       Gendarme potatoes
       Asparagus tip salad
       Vanilla eclairs      Demi tasse

     AFTERNOON TEA
       Preserved strawberries      Dry toast
       Chicken sandwiches
       Assorted cakes      Oolong tea

     DINNER
       Puree of tomatoes, with rice
       Lobster Newburg
       Roast chicken
       Artichokes, Hollandaise
       Waffle potatoes
       Pistache ice cream
       Alsatian wafers      Coffee

=Force and cream.= Serve raw force on a compote dish, with cream and
powdered sugar separate.

=Cream of potato soup.= Simmer a little sliced onion, leeks, celery, one
bay leaf, a clove and a piece of pig skin, or a raw ham bone, in butter.
Then add one cup of flour and simmer again. Pour in two quarts of
boiling milk and two pounds of sliced raw potatoes and boil until the
potatoes are soft. Season with salt and a little Cayenne pepper, and
strain through a fine sieve. Before serving add the yolk of one egg
mixed with a cup of thick cream, and stir in gradually three ounces of
sweet butter.

=Radishes.= Wash well. The red skin of the turnip-shaped species may be
cut back, beginning at the bottom point and extending toward the top, in
the form of open leaves, to make them look like open roses, if desired.
Serve on cracked ice.

=Broiled tenderloin steak.= Salt and pepper the steak and dip in olive
oil before broiling. Garnish with watercress and serve with maitre
d'hotel sauce.

=Bordelaise sauce.= Simmer four shallots, chopped very fine, in two
ounces of butter. When thoroughly warmed through add one-half glass of
Bordeaux claret and reduce until nearly dry. Then add one pint of brown
gravy and boil for five minutes. Then add one-quarter of a pound of
sliced parboiled beef marrow, and a little chopped garlic, if that
flavor is desired. Sprinkle with chopped parsley, and before serving
stir in slowly two ounces of fresh butter. Serve poured over meats, or
separate.

=Gendarme potatoes.= Peel some small potatoes and cut lengthwise in
eight or more pieces. Put in roasting pan with salt, pepper and a piece
of butter, and roast in oven for seven minutes. Add a sliced onion, mix
well, and again roast, turning often.

=Chicken sandwich.= Slice boiled or left over roast chicken, very thin.
Cut the bread thin and spread with sweet butter. Place the chicken
between slices of the bread with a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Trim,
and cut in shape desired.

=Puree of tomato soup, with rice.= Add one-half cup of boiled rice to
each portion of puree of tomato soup.

=Artichoke, Hollandaise.= See boiled artichokes. Sauce Hollandaise
served separate.

=Lobster, Newburg.= Cut the meat from the tails of California lobsters,
in slices one-quarter inch thick. Put in saute pan with butter, salt and
pepper, and simmer for five minutes, or until the meat has a little
color, over a quick fire. Then add for each lobster tail one cup of
thick cream and one pony of brandy, and cook for two minutes. Thicken
with yolks of two eggs mixed with a little cream, some very dry sherry
wine, and a pinch of Cayenne pepper. Serve in chafing dish. Serve
Madeira or sherry wine separate.


NOVEMBER 9

     BREAKFAST
       Orange juice
       Cream toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs au beurre noir
       Hamburg steak
       Lorraine potatoes
       Cole slaw, Thousand Island dressing
       Limburger cheese
       Rye bread and pumpernickle
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of chicken
       Salted English walnuts
       Fillet of sole, Joinville
       Roast tame duckling, apple sauce
       Sweet potatoes, Southern style
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Strawberry ice cream
       Cakes
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Chicken salad

=Orange juice.= Strain the juice of peeled oranges through a napkin, and
serve in glass surrounded with fine ice.

=Eggs au beurre noir.= Use soft-fried or shirred eggs. Put a piece of
butter in hot frying pan and when nearly black and smoking add a dash of
vinegar, and pour over the eggs. Drop a few capers and chopped parsley
on top, and salt and pepper.

=Hamburg steak.= To one and one-half pounds of trimmed beef, add four
ounces of beef marrow, and pass through meat chopper, medium fine.
Simmer some chopped onions in butter until nice and brown. Mix the meat
and onions with salt, pepper, one raw egg, some chopped parsley, and a
dinner roll soaked in water and chopped fine. Form the meat in round
steaks one-half inch thick, roll in bread crumbs, and fry in pan in
butter for about ten minutes. Remove the steaks carefully. Add a
spoonful of flour to gravy in pan, simmer a little, and then add
one-half cup of stock or water, pepper and salt, and strain before
serving.

=Lorraine potatoes.= Simmer one chopped onion and one-quarter pound of
salt pork cut in small dices, in one ounce of butter, for five minutes.
Then add three pounds of potatoes cut in pieces one inch square, one
pint of stock or bouillon, salt and pepper, and a bouquet garni. Cook
until soft and sprinkle with chopped parsley before serving.

=Thousand Island dressing, for salads.= Two soupspoonfuls of mayonnaise,
one soupspoonful of Chili sauce, one soupspoonful of French dressing,
one teaspoonful of chopped pimentos, one-half teaspoonful of chopped
olives, salt and pepper, all well mixed. Use a very cold salad bowl.

=Cream of chicken.= Place a soup hen in a soup kettle with three quarts
of water, a leek, carrot, a little parsley and celery, six pepper
berries, and two cups of rice. Boil until fowl is soft. Remove and cut
away the white meat from the breast and set aside. Chop the remainder of
the meat very fine, return to the kettle, and then strain the entire
contents through a sieve. To the strained broth add one quart of milk,
and strain again. Then add one-half pint of cream and the yolk of one
egg, mixed; also a piece of sweet butter the size of an egg. Then add
the breast of the fowl cut in small squares.

=Roast tame duckling.= See roast chicken. Also see stuffings.


NOVEMBER 10

     BREAKFAST
       Shredded wheat biscuit
       Boiled eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Holland herring
       Boiled potatoes
       Waffles and honey
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Lynn Haven oysters on half shell
       Philadelphia pepper pot
       Roast canvas-back duck
       Hulled corn
       Currant jelly
       Cauliflower au gratin
       Celery mayonnaise
       Neapolitan ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Shredded wheat biscuits.= Put the biscuit in a deep dish. A little
boiling water poured over it will enable you to economize on cream.

=Philadelphia pepper pot.= Simmer in kettle four large onions chopped
fine, one piece of celery, two leeks, one green pepper cut in very small
squares, and one-quarter pound of butter. When done add two
soupspoonsful of flour, and simmer again; add two quarts of stock, two
pounds of tripe and one pound of potatoes cut in small squares, a
bouquet garni and salt. Cook for two hours. Before serving remove the
bouquet garni, add a tablespoonful of fresh-ground pepper, a little
chopped parsley and some flour dumplings. Let the flour dumpling dough
run through an ordinary sieve into boiling water and boil for just a
minute.

=Flour dumplings.= One cup of flour, two eggs, three-fourths of a cup of
milk, salt, and a little nutmeg. Mix well. Pass through colander with
holes of about one-third inch in diameter, into boiling salt water. Boil
for about three minutes, drain off water, put on platter and pour some
brown butter over them.

=Brown butter sauce.= Put good-sized piece of sweet butter into frying
pan and allow to brown. May be served poured over the dish, or in
separate sauce bowl.

=Hulled corn.= May be obtained in cans. Follow directions on same. To
hull corn is quite a complicated process, requiring the use of lye, etc.

=Canvas-back duck.= Same directions as for teal duck. Roast for about
eighteen minutes.

=Celery mayonnaise.= Cut raw celery in strips like matches and wash
well, then put in napkin on cracked ice, so it will become crisp. Serve
with well-seasoned mayonnaise sauce, either on top or separate, as
desired.

=Pound cake.= One-half pound of butter, one-half pound of sugar,
one-half pound of flour, five eggs, a little rum and a teaspoonful of
baking powder. Beat the butter with sugar until white, add the eggs one
by one, while beating briskly. Mix the flour and the baking powder in
together, and last of all add the rum. Put in mould and bake in oven for
one hour.

=Fruit cake.= To the pound cake batter add one-half pound of chopped
mixed glace fruits, and one-half pound of raisins.


NOVEMBER 11

     BREAKFAST
       Pearl grits and cream
       Fried eggs
       Rolls
       Chocolate

     LUNCHEON
       Cold assorted meats
       Potato salad
       Iced tea

     AFTERNOON TEA
       Chicken a la King
       Bread and butter sandwiches
       Raspberry water ice
       Champagne wafers
       Almond cake
       Tea
       Chocolate
       Whipped cream

     DINNER
       Consomme with tapioca
       Boiled salmon, mousseline sauce
       Potatoes Hollandaise
       Roast goose, apple sauce
       St. Francis potatoes
       Celery Victor
       Baked Alaska
       Coffee

=Pearl grits with cream.= See hominy in cream.

=Potato salad.= Slice three boiled potatoes while hot. Add one small
onion chopped fine, some chopped parsley, salt and pepper, two spoonsful
of olive oil, and one each of boiling bouillon, or boiling water, and
vinegar. Mix carefully so as not to break the potatoes, and serve in
salad bowl with lettuce garnishing.

=Chicken a la King.= Take the breast of a boiled chicken or hen (fowl),
and cut in very thin, diamond-shape pieces. Put in pan and add
three-quarters of a pint of cream, salt and Cayenne pepper. Boil from
three to five minutes. Add a glass of best sherry or Madeira wine. Boil
for a minute and thicken with the yolks of two eggs, mixed with
one-quarter pint of cream. Put some sliced truffles on top.

=Raspberry water ice.= One-half pound of sugar, one pint of water, and
one pint of fresh raspberry pulp strained through a fine sieve. Squeeze
in the juice of one lemon, add a little coloring if desired, strain and
freeze.

=Consomme with tapioca.= To one quart of boiling consomme add slowly one
cup of tapioca, and boil for eight minutes.

=Bread and butter sandwiches.= Spread sweet butter on thin slices of
bread, and place face to face in pairs. Cut in any fancy shape, or roll
and tie with soft baby ribbon.


NOVEMBER 12

     BREAKFAST
       Honey in comb
       Boiled eggs
       Postum cereal
       Dry toast

     LUNCHEON
       Cold goose and Virginia ham
       Port de Salut cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Oyster soup, family style
       Salted English walnuts
       Fried chicken, country style
       Au gratin potatoes
       Cauliflower, Polonaise
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Chocolate profiterole
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Canape regalia

=Postum cereal.= A prepared breakfast food obtainable from all grocers.
Follow directions on package.

=Oyster soup, family style.= Boil two dozen oysters with their juice. In
a separate vessel boil one quart of milk and one pint of cream. Put both
together and add two ounces of sweet butter, and salt and pepper. Before
serving stir in some fine cut chives and one-half cup of broken
crackers.

=Au gratin potatoes.= Fill a shallow buttered dish with hashed in cream
potatoes. Sprinkle with grated Parmesan cheese, put a little butter on
top, and bake in oven until brown.

=Cauliflower, Polonaise.= Put on a platter some fresh-boiled cauliflower
and sprinkle with two finely chopped boiled eggs, salt and pepper and
some chopped parsley. In a pan on range put three ounces of sweet
butter. When warm add two tablespoonsful of fresh bread crumbs and allow
to become well browned. Pour over cauliflower when very hot.

=Fried chicken, country style.= Put the dressed chicken in salt water
and leave for about one hour. Then wash and dry between towels, season
with pepper and a small amount of salt, and dredge well with flour.
Place in frying pan about three tablespoonsful of lard and two or three
slices of fat breakfast bacon. When bacon is brown remove, and strain
the lard, being careful that it is not burned. Have the lard very hot
and fry the chicken. When brown, and well done, remove the chicken and
strain the lard again through a hair sieve, then return lard to range,
and stir in thoroughly one tablespoonful of flour, being careful to have
no lumps. Immediately before serving stir into the sauce one pint of
cream, and let boil for one minute. Dress with the bacon and parsley in
branches.

=Canape Regalia.= Regalia is a special fish paste obtainable in cans. To
one small can add two ounces of butter, mix well, and spread on fresh
toast. Garnish with chopped eggs, serve on napkin with lemon in quarters
and parsley in branches.


NOVEMBER 13

     BREAKFAST
       Bananas and cream
       Scrambled eggs with chives
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Pickled oysters
       Consomme in cups
       Broiled bluefish, maitre d'hotel
       Tripe, Lyonnaise
       Mashed potatoes
       Hearts of lettuce, egg dressing
       Chocolate eclairs
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Potage Cambridge
       Boiled sheepshead, Hollandaise sauce
       Potatoes nature
       Chicken, Diva
       French peas
       Endive salad
       Strawberries with cream
       Assorted cakes
       Corn bread, Maryland
       Coffee

=Pickled oysters.= Parboil one carrot and one celery root cut in strips,
and one onion sliced fine. Pour off water and finish cooking in one
glassful each of white wine, and white wine vinegar, with a spoonful of
pepper berries tied in cheese cloth. When done remove the peppers, add
three dozen oysters and bring to a boil. Serve cold with parsley.

=Broiled bluefish.= Split the bluefish, remove the bones, season with
salt and pepper, dip in oil and broil. Serve maitre d'hotel sauce on
top, and quartered lemons and parsley.

=Boiled sheepshead, Hollandaise sauce.= Same as boiled salmon,
Hollandaise.

=Maryland corn bread.= Beat two eggs until very light, and stir in one
pint of sweet milk. Then sift one-half pint of coarse corn meal, add a
teaspoonful of yeast powder, half a teaspoonful of salt, and a
tablespoonful of melted lard or butter. Stir this into the milk and
eggs. Mixture must be a thin batter. Bake in small bread pan or muffin
rings.

=Chicken, Diva.= Prepare the chicken as for roast and stuff with rice
stuffing. Put chicken in kettle and cover with stock or water. When done
prepare a supreme sauce with the stock, pour over the chicken, and
sprinkle with chopped Virginia ham. Carve at table.

=Rice stuffing.= Simmer a small chopped onion in butter, add one cup of
washed rice, three cups of stock or bouillon, season, and cook in oven
for twenty minutes. Then add two truffles cut in small squares. This
stuffing is used for poultry, game, peppers, tomatoes, etc.

=Supreme sauce.= Melt three ounces of butter, add two ounces of flour,
and simmer, but do not allow to brown. Add one and one-half pint of
chicken stock, reduce for ten minutes, thicken with the yolk of one egg,
a cup of cream and a small piece of sweet butter. Season with salt and a
little Cayenne pepper. This sauce may be used with many entree dishes.

=Potage Cambridge (soup).= Melt three ounces of butter in vessel, add
two ounces of flour, and simmer for five minutes, or until golden
yellow. Add one pint of veal broth or stock, one-half pint of puree of
tomatoes and the trimmings of a few fresh mushrooms. Cook for twenty
minutes, strain through sieve and add fine-cut strips of fresh mushrooms
saute in butter. A pony of dry sherry wine may be added if desired.

=Strawberry ice cream.= One pint of cream, one quart of milk, the yolks
of eight eggs, one-half pound of sugar, one pint of strawberry pulp or
strained strawberries, the juice of one lemon and a little coloring. Put
the milk with half the sugar on the fire to boil. Mix the remainder of
the sugar with the eggs, stir the boiling milk into it, and cook until
it becomes creamy, but do not allow it to boil. Remove from the fire,
add the cream, strawberry pulp and lemon juice, cool and freeze.


NOVEMBER 14

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit with vanilla sugar
       Finnan haddie in cream
       Puff paste crescents
       Oolong tea

     LUNCHEON
       Green onions
       Radishes
       Eggs ministerielle
       Vermicelli aux croutons
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Cup custard
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Clam chowder, Manhattan style
       Queen olives
       Fillet of sole, Marguery
       Omelet with spinach
       Broiled fresh mushrooms
       Coffee ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Puff paste crescents.= Two pounds of flour, one pound of butter, one
pint of milk, one ounce of salt, one and one-half ounces of sugar and
two ounces of yeast dissolved in warm water. Mix one-half pound of the
flour with one-half pint of water and the dissolved yeast. Stand in warm
place for about twenty minutes. Put the remainder of flour on board and
mix in the yeast paste; when sufficiently risen, add salt, sugar and
milk, make a stiff dough and allow to stand for a few minutes. Roll out,
put the butter into the dough as for ordinary puff paste, and roll in
the same way, but giving it only half the number of turns.

=Stock for soup.= Two pounds of beef bones and a marrow bone, if you can
obtain one, two gallons of water, a carrot, onion, leek, piece of
parsley, a bouquet garni, salt and pepper. Boil for three hours. Strain.

=Puff paste (feuilletage).= Take one pound of flour and one cup of water
and make a smooth paste, but not too soft. Form into a square loaf and
let it set for about fifteen minutes. Roll out on floured board about
one-half inch thick, and place in the center one pound of butter,
well-worked and flexible. Fold the edges of the paste over the butter
and roll out about one-quarter inch thick, taking care that the butter
does not run out of the dough. Brush off the flour and fold in three.
Roll out again to the same thickness as before and repeat the folding.
Put in cool place or ice box for about one-half hour, then roll and fold
as before. Again rest for one-half hour, and then roll and fold again.
The paste will then have six turns in all, and after a little rest it
can be used.

=Brown gravy.= One pound of veal bones, cut in pieces and browned in
oven, with one carrot, one onion, a little thyme, one bay leaf, two
cloves and three ounces of butter. Baste well, then add three ounces of
flour, allow to brown a little, and then add two quarts of water and
boil for two full hours. Season with salt, and strain. This gravy is
used as a foundation for many fancy sauces, such as sauce Madere, etc.


NOVEMBER 15

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Grape-nuts with cream
       Yarmouth bloaters
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Shrimp salad
       Lamb chops
       Julienne potatoes
       French string beans
       Chocolate macaroons
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Seapuit oysters on half shell
       Onion soup au gratin
       Salted pistachio nuts
       Whitefish, maitre d'hotel
       Sweetbreads braise, au jus
       Puree St. Germain
       Olivette potatoes
       Roast leg of lamb, mint sauce
       Romaine salad
       Pineapple punch
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Stewed rhubarb.= Peel one pound of rhubarb, cut in two inch pieces, and
place in shallow pan. Put on top one-quarter pound of sugar, a small
piece of cinnamon, and one-half pint of water. Cover and put in oven for
about twenty minutes. Remove, take out the cinnamon, and serve cold in
its own juice. Cream and powdered sugar separate.

=Grape-nuts with cream.= Serve as prepared in package. Cream and
powdered sugar separate.

=Yarmouth bloater.= Imported in cans. Put on broiler and heat through.
Serve with maitre d'hotel sauce, quartered lemons and parsley.

=Shrimp salad.= Season fresh-boiled shrimps with salt, pepper and a
little vinegar. Put some sliced lettuce in the bottom of a salad bowl,
lay the shrimps on top, and cover with mayonnaise sauce. Garnish with
quartered hard boiled eggs, fancy-cut beets, capers and queen olives.
Serve very cold.

=Julienne potatoes.= Cut raw potatoes in thin strips like matches, and
full length of potatoes. Fry in swimming fat, lard preferred, until
crisp. Remove from fat, salt, and serve on napkin. Do not cover.

=Onion soup, au gratin.= Simmer three very finely sliced onions in
butter until brown. Add one cup of bouillon or consomme, and boil for a
few minutes. Put in earthern pot, or petite marmite, and place some
slices of toasted French bread, previously prepared, on top. Put
one-half cup of grated Parmesan cheese on the bread, set in very hot
oven, and bake until the cheese is browned. Season to taste.

=Whitefish, maitre d'hotel.= Split the fish and remove the bones. Salt,
pepper, dip in oil and broil. Serve with maitre d'hotel sauce, quartered
lemons and parsley.

=Puree St. Germain (vegetable).= Strain cooked peas through a fine
sieve. Put in pan with a piece of butter, salt and a pinch of sugar.
Stir well, and when hot, add a very little thick cream. The puree should
be firm, like mashed potatoes.


NOVEMBER 16

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Malta Vita with cream
       Poached eggs on toast
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Fried fillet of sole, remoulade sauce
       Broiled quail on toast
       Chiffonnade salad
       Soufflee potatoes
       Savarin au fine champagne
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Cotuit oysters on half shell
       Petite marmite      Salted almonds
       Terrapin, Maryland style
       Roast ribs of beef
       Stewed tomatoes      Mashed potatoes
       Cold artichokes, mustard sauce
       English breakfast tea ice cream
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Stewed prunes.= Wash well one pound of prunes, and soak in cold water
for two hours. Put on fire in same water, add a small piece of cinnamon
stick, the peel of a quarter of a lemon, and two ounces of sugar, and
cook on slow fire until soft. It will require about one hour. If an
earthern pot with cover is used, put in bake oven for about two hours.
The flavor will be better.

=Malta Vita.= Serve with powdered sugar, and cream, separate.

=Hors d'oeuvres varies.= (Appetisers assorted). Hors d'oeuvres are
different delicacies, and, except in rare instances, are served cold.
They consist of caviar, pickled oysters, Lyon sausages, any kind of fish
salad, pate de foie gras, smoked salmon, smoked goose breast, and many
others. From one dish to two dozen kinds may be served, allowing the
guests to make a selection. Each kind should be served on a separate
platter, or silver bowl.

=Caviar.= Leave the caviar three hours on ice. Serve in a glass dish.
For each person have a round platter with napkin, a lettuce leaf filled
with fine chopped onion and a quarter of a lemon. Thin dry toast and
sweet butter separate.

=Pate de foie gras.= (Goose liver patty.) Obtainable in cans or
terrines, of different sizes. Remove the fat, which is put on top as a
preservative, and with a soup spoon, which has been dipped in hot water,
cut the paste in thin slices, and serve on lettuce leaves on a napkin.
Garnish with meat jelly and parsley in branches. Let the pate de foie
gras stand in ice box a few hours before opening and serving.

=Lyon sausage.= A kind of imported beef sausage. Slice thin.

=Stuffed eggs.= Cut hard boiled eggs in two, either way. Mix the yolks
with equal parts of sweet butter and pass through a sieve. Add salt,
paprika, a little anchovy paste, and some chives. Mix well, and fill the
halved eggs. Or the yolks may be mixed with butter, and some poppy or
celery seeds, etc. Also with any kind of puree, such as puree of
tomatoes, regalia, chicken, etc. If the filling is put in a pastry bag
with a star mould in the bottom, to squeeze it through, the eggs can be
filled in an attractive and novel manner. Serve very cold.

=Sardines.= Serve cold with quartered lemons, on lettuce leaves.

=Sliced tomatoes.= Have the tomatoes very cold. Peel and slice, and
serve on lettuce leaves, with French dressing. To peel, put tomatoes in
hot water for ten seconds, and peel immediately.


NOVEMBER 17

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples
       Boiled eggs
       Toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
     Grapefruit with cherries
     Steak and kidney pie
     Cream cheese
     Maryland beaten biscuits

     DINNER
       Consomme Madrilene
       Ripe California olives
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Butterball duck with currant jelly
       Fried hominy
       French endive salad
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Grapefruit with cherries.= Cut the grapefruit in two pieces. Split some
maraschino cherries and decorate. Pour a little maraschino on top.

=Steak and kidney pie.= Use individual pie dishes. A slice of raw
sirloin steak one-half inch thick, cut in two. Two lamb kidneys cut in
two. Salt, pepper, and roll in flour, put in pie dish and cover with a
little cold water. Cover with piecrust dough and bake in oven for about
eighteen minutes. Serve in the dishes in which they were baked, on
napkins.

=Butterball duck.= Roast in hot oven for about twelve minutes.

=Assorted cakes.= Any kind of small cakes. Serve on a compotier, on
doily. The more varied the assortment the better.

=Maryland beaten biscuits.= To one pint of sifted flour add one heaping
teaspoonful of lard, or butter, and a little salt. Mix with one pint of
sweet milk to stiff dough. Beat with a mallet for one hour. The success
of same depends upon the beating. Shape as for tea biscuits and bake.

=Macaroons.= Mix one pound of almond paste with one pound of powdered
sugar. Add the whites of six eggs and a spoonful of flour and mix well.
Squeeze through a pastry bag onto paper, moisten the tops with water,
using a brush, and bake in a very slow oven for about twenty minutes.

=Lady fingers.= Eight eggs, with the yolks and whites separate, one-half
pound of sugar, one-half pound of flour, and some vanilla flavoring
extract. Beat the sugar with the yolks until light; then beat the whites
very stiff. Mix the flour with the yolks and sugar, then add the beaten
whites and mix lightly. Dress on paper with a plain pastry bag, in the
shape wanted. Dust powdered sugar on top and bake in a moderate oven.


NOVEMBER 18

     BREAKFAST
       Guava jelly
       Oatmeal with cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Mariniert herring
       Plain boiled potatoes
       Calf's liver, sauce piquante
       Fried egg plant
       Oregon cream cheese and crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree of game, hunter style
       Salted English walnuts
       Roast capon
       Compote of pears
       Stewed celery, au Madere
       Paille potatoes
       Bavarois a la vanille
       Fancy macaroons
       Coffee

=Mariniert herring.= Soak six salt herrings in water for twelve hours.
Then put in pot with one sliced onion, some whole parsley, a spoonful of
whole black pepper berries, three bay leaves and six cloves. Mix one
teaspoonful of English mustard with a cup of vinegar and pour over
herring. Cover all with thick cream, shake well to thoroughly mix, and
let stand for two days before serving. Serve with thin slices of one
lemon on top, or, if desired, the lemon may be put with the herring for
a day.

=Calf's liver, saute.= Slice the liver one-quarter inch thick, salt,
pepper, roll in flour and fry in butter. Do not fry too long as it will
make the liver tough. Serve on a platter with its own gravy, chopped
parsley, and quartered lemons.

=Sauce piquante.= Simmer one chopped onion with a piece of butter. Add
two spoonsful of crushed pepper berries and half a glass of vinegar.
Reduce almost dry. Then add one pint of brown gravy, boil for fifteen
minutes, and strain. Chop fine one-half cup of gherkins, put into the
sauce and boil for a few minutes. Add a sprinkle of chopped parsley.

=Fried egg plant.= Peel and cut the egg plant into slices one-quarter of
an inch thick. Salt, pepper, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and
finally in bread crumbs. Fry in swimming lard, fat, or butter. Place on
napkin, sprinkle with a little more salt, and garnish with parsley.

=Puree of game soup.= Simmer the carcasses or meat of almost any kind of
game, such as duck, rabbits, hares, venison, bear, etc. Cut in pieces
and add one carrot, an onion, two bay leaves, two cloves, a piece of
celery, a little thyme, some pepper berries and four ounces of butter.
Roast all together until nice and brown. Add a cup of flour and simmer
again until the flour is of a brownish color. Then add one and one-half
quarts of bouillon, or stock, and boil for an hour. Strain, pressing all
the soft parts of the game through the sieve, and season with salt and
Cayenne pepper. Before serving add one-half glass of dry sherry wine or
Madeira.

=Puree of game, St. Hubert.= Add to above soup some square cut pieces of
roasted game, before serving.

=Stewed celery, au Madere.= Wash well and cut the celery stalks in
pieces one inch long. Parboil in salt water, cool, and put back to boil
in enough stock to cover. When nearly done drain off most of the stock,
add a cup of brown gravy, and boil until soft. Salt and pepper, and add
a little dry sherry or Madeira before serving.

=Paille potatoes (straw).= Cut in thin strips like straws the full
length of the potato. Fry in very hot lard, serve in napkin, and salt
when first removed from fat.

=Fancy macaroons.= Mix one pound of almond paste, three-quarters of a
pound of powdered sugar, the whites of five eggs and one spoonful of
flour. Put in pastry bag with a fancy tube and squeeze the paste
through, about the size of a half dollar. Put half of a glace cherry on
top and let stand over night in a dry place. Bake in oven for ten
minutes.


NOVEMBER 19

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed apples
       Pettijohns with cream
       Ham and eggs
       Dry toast
       Oolong tea

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Riga
       Planked smelts, en bordure
       Sirloin steak, sauce Colbert
       Haricots panaches
       Lettuce and tomato salad
       Pistache eclairs
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage sante
       Salted pecans
       Crab meat, au beurre noisette
       Roast tame duckling, apple sauce
       Corn fritters and potato croquettes
       Waldorf salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Canape Riga.= One-half tuna fish (thon marine) and one-half caviar
mixed. Spread on thin toast, buttered. Decorate around the edges with
chopped eggs, quartered lemon and parsley in branches.

=Planked smelts, en bordure.= Split some large smelts down the back and
remove the bones. Place on a buttered plank with salt, pepper and a
little butter on top. Put some potato, prepared as for potato
croquettes, into a pastry bag with a star tube, and press out a border
around the fish about an inch high. Put in oven and bake for about
fifteen minutes. Serve with a little maitre d'hotel butter on top, and
garnish with quartered lemons and parsley.

=Sauce Colbert.= Chop three shallots very fine, and simmer in butter.
Add one-half glass of claret, and reduce almost dry. Then add one pint
of brown gravy and cook for ten minutes. Before serving add three ounces
of sweet butter, the juice of one lemon, and some chopped parsley.

=Potage sante (soup).= Wash a good handful of sorrel and slice very
thin. Put in pot with three ounces of butter and simmer slowly for ten
minutes. Then add one quart of bouillon, or consomme, and boil for a few
minutes. Thicken with the yolks of two eggs mixed with a cup of cream.
Before serving put in some French bread, or rolls, that have been dried
in the oven, and cut like chip potatoes.

=Boiled crabs.= Put two live crabs in a pot and cover with cold water.
Add one glass of white wine vinegar, an onion, carrot, a bouquet garni
and salt. Boil for thirty-five minutes and let become cool without
removing from the water. Serve cracked, cold, with mayonnaise or any
kind of cold sauce; or remove from shell and serve as a salad; or
prepare hot in many ways.

=Crab meat, au beurre noisette.= Put some fresh-boiled crab meat on a
platter and season with salt and pepper. In a frying pan put a quarter
pound of sweet butter. Simmer until of a hazel color, and pour over crab
meat. Sprinkle with chopped chervil, or parsley, on top, and garnish
with lemon.

=Waldorf salad.= Half white celery and half apple, cut in small squares.
Put both in salad bowl, but do not mix. Cover with mayonnaise and season
to taste.


NOVEMBER 20

     BREAKFAST
       Honey in comb
       Waffles
       Kippered herring
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls and coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs Marigny
       French pastry
       Iced tea

     DINNER
       Consomme Cialdini
       Radishes
       Fillet of bass, 1905
       Larded sirloin of beef, Richelieu
       Salade Doucette
       Meringue glacee, Chantilly
       Coffee

=Eggs Marigny.= Put in a buttered cocotte dish a very thin, small, slice
of ham, with two parboiled oysters on top. Break an egg over all, salt,
pepper, cover with cream sauce and a little grated cheese, and bake in
oven until done.

=Consomme Cialdini.= Cut some carrots, turnips and potatoes, with a
fancy cutting spoon, to the size of a large pea. Cook each separate in
salt water. When done put in consomme and add the boiled white meat of
chicken cut in small squares, a few boiled or canned peas, and some
chervil. Serve separate some very thin slices of French bread or rolls.

=Larded sirloin of beef.= Remove the skin and fat of the sirloin, half
way near the thick part. Lard same and roast in the usual manner.

=Richelieu.= A garnish for beef and other meats. Is prepared in various
styles. Here are four good ones.

Stuffed tomatoes with rice Creole, stuffed fresh mushrooms a la
D'Uxelles, braised lettuce and potatoes chateau.

Tomatoes, whole and baked, string beans, mushrooms and potatoes chateau.

Bouquet of all kinds of vegetables, fillets of anchovies, mushrooms and
green olives.

Buttons of artichokes stuffed, stuffed tomato, mushrooms, lettuce braise
and potatoes chateau.

=Fillet of bass, 1905.= I originated this style in 1905, hence the name.
Cut fillets of any kind of bass in pieces about three inches square, and
free from skin and bones. Place on a piece of toast in a buttered
shirred egg dish; salt, pepper, and place three nice heads of fresh
mushrooms saute in butter, on top of the fish. Put a soupspoonful of
maitre d'hotel butter on top of the mushrooms, cover with a glass globe
and bake in oven for twenty minutes. Just before serving uncover the
fish, pour a little white wine sauce on top, re-cover, and serve.

=Salade Doucette.= Field salad.

=Meringue glacee, Chantilly.= Same as meringue glacee a la vanille. But
decorate with whipped cream, passed through a pastry bag with a star
tube.


NOVEMBER 21

     BREAKFAST
       Bar le Duc jelly
       Horlick's malted milk
       Boiled eggs
       Maryland beaten biscuits

     LUNCHEON
       Stuffed eggs
       Broiled salmon steak, anchovy butter
       Olivette potatoes
       Breaded lamb chops, Milanaise
       Pickled beets
       German apple cake      Coffee

     DINNER
       Seapuit oysters on shell
       Consomme royal
       Skatefish au beurre noir      Potatoes nature
       Roast top sirloin of beef, forestiere      Yorkshire pudding
       Chiffonnade salad
       Fancy ice cream      Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Stuffed eggs with crab meat.= Cut in two some hard-boiled eggs and
remove the yolks. Fill the whites with fine-chopped crab meat mixed with
a very thick mayonnaise. Chop the yolks and mix with a little chopped
parsley, and sprinkle over the eggs. Serve very cold.

=Broiled salmon steak.= Cut a slice of salmon about one inch thick,
salt, pepper, dip in oil and broil. Serve on platter with maitre d'hotel
sauce, and garnish with quartered lemons and parsley in branches. Or
serve with anchovy butter or other sauce, either on top or separate.

=Anchovy butter.= Fresh butter mixed with anchovy paste and the juice of
a lemon.

=Breaded lamb chops.= Salt and pepper the chops, roll in flour, then in
beaten eggs, then in bread crumbs, and fry in butter.

=Spaghetti Milanaise.= Boiled spaghetti cut in two inch lengths, a slice
of boiled ham, a slice of tongue, six mushrooms and one truffle cut in
strips the same size as the spaghetti. Put all in one pot, add a little
tomato sauce, salt and pepper, and let simmer for a few minutes. Serve
grated Parmesan cheese separate. If served as a garnish with "lamb
chops, Milanaise," mix the cheese before serving.

=Consomme Royal.= Beat four eggs and season well. Add one pint of warm
(not hot), consomme, put in a buttered mould and set in a pan of hot
water. Cook slowly in a moderate oven. When the custard is done allow to
cool, and cut in any shape desired. Serve hot consomme, with royal
custard as a garnish.

=Skatefish au beurre noir.= Place the skate in boiling water for a few
minutes, when the skin may readily be scraped off. Put in cold water,
add a little milk to make the fish white, salt, and bring to a boil.
Take off the fire, but leave in the water for ten minutes. Then put fish
on platter, salt, pepper, sprinkle with a little vinegar, a few capers
and some chopped parsley. Put in frying pan a quarter pound of butter,
allow to become almost black, and pour over fish.

=Roast top sirloin of beef.= Same as roast sirloin of beef.

=Forestiere, for sauce.= Sliced fresh mushrooms, simmered in butter. Add
brown gravy and boil for ten minutes. Before serving stir in a little
sherry wine.

=Yorkshire pudding.= One cup of milk, one-half cup of flour, two eggs,
and one teaspoonful of baking powder. Mix well, add salt, pepper and
one-half cup of chopped beef suet. Bake in roasting pan with beef fat
from your roast. When done cut in squares.


NOVEMBER 22

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit
       Germea with cream
       Crescents
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Scrambled eggs, Morocquaine
       Lamb trotters, poulette
       Potatoes St. Francis
       Moka eclairs
       Tea

     DINNER
       Bisque of clams
       Frogs' legs, saute a sec
       Tournedos Massenet
       Jets de houblons
       Endives au cerfeuil
       Mince pie
       American cheese
       Coffee

=Germea and cream.= Powdered sugar and cream separate.

=Scrambled eggs, Morocquaine.= Cut cepes in small squares, fry in butter
and place in middle of scrambled eggs. Tomato sauce around the edge.

=Lamb trotters, poulette.= Cook lambs' feet in stock or water with salt,
and one carrot, an onion and a bouquet garni. When done pour poulette
sauce over all.

=Sauce poulette.= Simmer three shallots in butter, but do not brown. Add
one-half glass of white wine and reduce till almost dry. Then add chives
sliced fine, sliced French mushrooms, and one pint of sauce Allemande.
Boil for a few minutes, and bind with the yolk of an egg and a piece of
fresh butter.

=Bisque of clams.= Simmer one onion, a little celery and leeks, one bay
leaf and a few pepper berries in butter. Add the juice of one quart of
clams, one pint of fish broth or water, and one cup of rice, and boil
for an hour. Strain through a fine sieve, put back on fire and add one
pint of cream. When hot add three ounces of butter, salt and a little
Cayenne pepper. Parboil the clams, add the juice to the soup, cut the
clams in small pieces and serve in the soup terrine. If desired both
clams and broth can be used in making the bisque, and all strained
before serving.

=Tournedos Massenet.= Small tenderloin steaks saute in butter, and
seasoned with salt and pepper. Garnish in bouquets with hearts of
artichokes cut in four, sliced cepes, small squares of tomatoes saute in
butter, French fried onions, and Olivette potatoes. Serve with sauce
Madere.

=Jets de houblons.= (Hop sprouts). Can be obtained in cans. Warm in
their own juice, drain, serve in vegetable dish, and cover with
Hollandaise sauce.

=Mince meat.= One pound of beef suet chopped fine, one pound of boiled
beef cut in very small dices, one pound of seedless raisins, one pound
of cleaned currants, one-half pound of seeded Sultana raisins, one-half
pound of citron cut in very small dices, one-pound of orange and lemon
peel mixed and chopped fine, two pounds of chopped peeled apples, one
ounce of ground cinnamon, one ounce of cloves, allspice, ginger and mace
mixed, one pint of rum, and one pint of brandy. Mix well, put in jars
and keep in cool place. Use as needed.

=Mince pie.= Line pie plate with dough as for apple pie. Put in mince
meat, and finish as for apple pie. Serve warm with a piece of American
cheese on the side.


NOVEMBER 23

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples
       Baked beans, Boston style
       Boston brown bread
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Ecrevisse salad, gourmet
       Eggs, Henri IV
       Broiled squab chicken
       Souffle potatoes
       Apricot compote
       French pastry      Coffee

     DINNER
       Lynn Haven oysters on shell
       Chicken okra soup
       Salted Jordan almonds
       Fillet of halibut, Mornay
       Roast ribs of beef
       Stuffed tomatoes, Noyer
       Sweet potatoes, Southern style
       Wine jelly
       Caroline cakes
       Coffee

=Stuffed tomatoes, Noyer.= Cut the tops off two nice tomatoes, scoop
them out and season with salt and pepper. Mix fresh bread crumbs and
chopped English walnuts in equal parts and fill the tomatoes with same.
Put a piece of butter on top and bake in moderate oven for ten minutes.

=Baked apples.= Wash and core the apples. With a sharp knife cut a
circle through the skin, around the apple, above the center, to prevent
the apples from bursting. Place on a pan and fill the hole in each with
sugar mixed with a little ground cinnamon. Put a small piece of butter
on top of each, and a little water in the bottom of the pan. Bake in a
moderate oven. Serve with their own juice. Cream separate.

=Baked beans, Boston style.= Soak three pounds of white beans over night
in cold water. Then put same in a one and one-half gallon earthern pot
with one-half cup of molasses, one soupspoonful of English mustard mixed
with a cup of water, a little salt, and one whole piece of fat,
parboiled salt pork. Pour in just enough water to moisten, cover, and
put in bake oven for four hours. Or in a not too hot range oven for two
and one-half hours. If range is used, be careful that they do not burn.
Serve from pot, or in small individual pots, with Boston brown bread
separate.

=Ecrevisse salad, gourmet.= Cover the bottoms of four dinner plates with
chicory salad. In the center make a nest of celery cut in thin strips
like matches. On top of that one well-washed fresh mushroom head, cut
the same way, and to cap all, put the tails of six ecrevisses. Sprinkle
with salt and pepper, and a sauce of one-third tarragon vinegar and
two-thirds olive oil. Cut two truffles like matches, and with some fine
chervil, sprinkle all over the salad.

=Eggs Henri IV.= Breaded poached eggs fried in swimming lard. Place on a
piece of toast spread with puree de foie gras, and cover with sauce
Perigordine.

=Sauce Perigordine.= To one cup of brown gravy add one spoonful of
chopped truffles reduced in sherry wine. Season with salt and Cayenne
pepper.

=Broiled squab chicken.= Split a squab from the back, salt, pepper,
moisten with a little olive oil and broil. Serve on toast, with maitre
d'hotel sauce, quartered lemons and watercress.


NOVEMBER 24

     BREAKFAST
       Florida grapefruit
       Eggs Bercy
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Consomme in cups
       Fried smelts, Tartar sauce
       Broiled pig's feet, special
       Fried apples
       Romaine salad
       French pastry      Coffee

     DINNER
       Seapuit oysters
       Potage Lamballe
       Boiled beef garnished with vegetables
       Horseradish a l'Anglaise      Pickles
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Eggs Bercy.= Fry some small breakfast sausages and cut in pieces one
inch long. Make some shirred eggs. When half cooked add the sausages and
a very little tomato sauce. Season with salt and pepper and finish
cooking.

=Broiled pig's feet, special.= Take some boiled pig's feet, split, and
remove the upper bones. Season with salt, pepper and olive oil, roll in
fresh bread crumbs, and broil. See sauce below.

=Sauce special.= Two-thirds tomato ketchup, one-third tomato sauce, a
little paprika, a little Worcestershire sauce. Bring to a boil and
serve.

=Boiled pig's feet.= Roll two pig's feet very tightly together with
cheesecloth, so they will lay straight when cooked. Put in vessel, cover
with cold water, season with salt, whole black peppers, carrot, onion,
and a bouquet garni. Boil until well done. If necessary to keep them
after cooking, place in an earthern pot in their own broth.

=Fried apples.= Peel, core, and cut the apples in five or six pieces.
Roll in flour and fry in swimming fat or lard. Serve on a napkin.

=Icing or frosting=, for glace cakes, eclairs, etc. One and one-half
pounds of icing sugar, a pony of water or fruit juice, and the whites of
two eggs. Mix and heat over slow fire, stirring continually with a
wooden spoon. Do not let it boil. Flavor according to desire. For
chocolate frosting add a little melted cocoa.

=Cream puffs.= One-quarter pound of butter, one cup of water, one cup of
milk, four eggs and one-quarter pound of flour. Put the butter, water
and milk into a sauce pan and boil. Remove from the fire and add the
flour, mixing with a wooden spoon. Then add the eggs one by one, beating
well. Dress them on a buttered pan, and about two inches in diameter.
Moisten the tops with eggs, and sprinkle with chopped almonds. Bake in a
medium oven for about twenty minutes, then slit one edge and fill with
sweet whipped cream. Dust some powdered sugar on top and serve.

=Chocolate eclairs.= Same dough as for cream puffs. Dress them on a
buttered pan in the shape of lady fingers, and bake in hot oven. Split
at one side and fill with sweet whipped cream. Coat with chocolate
icing. Pastry cream may be used instead of whipped cream, if desired.

=Pastry cream.= Pint of milk, one-half of a vanilla bean, one-quarter
pound of sugar, three eggs and one ounce of corn starch. Mix the eggs,
sugar and corn starch. Boil the vanilla bean and add to the eggs. Mix
well with a whip, put on fire and keep stirring until thick. When cold
use it for filling small cakes, cream puffs, eclairs, etc.


NOVEMBER 25

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs
       Wheat cakes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Anchovy salad
       Poached eggs, sans gene
       Navarin of lamb, printanier
       Baba au rhum
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       California oysters on half shell
       Puree of lentils
       Stuffed roasted chicken
       String beans
       Duchesse potatoes
       Cold French asparagus, French dressing
       Almond cake
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Salade Olga

=Wheat cakes.= Sift together into a bowl one-half pound of flour and one
teaspoonful of baking powder. Add one ounce of sugar, one ounce of
melted butter, one egg and a little milk. Mix all into a medium thick
batter. Bake on a hot griddle iron. Serve honey or maple syrup, and
sweet butter separate.

=Breakfast rolls.= Three pounds of flour, one ounce of salt, one ounce
of sugar and two ounces of yeast. Scald the milk and pour it over the
sugar, salt and butter. Melt the yeast in luke-warm water, mix with the
milk, etc., and add half of the flour. Beat well, cover, and let raise.
Then add the remainder of the flour and let it raise again until it is
twice its original volume. Put on table, roll in shape desired, place on
pan, and let raise again. Brush the top with melted butter, and bake.

=Anchovy salad.= Put sliced lettuce on the bottom of a pickle dish.
Place fillets of anchovies crosswise over the lettuce. Garnish all
around with chopped eggs, beets and parsley. Season with French
dressing.

=Poached eggs, sans gene.= Place a hot poached egg on a heart of
artichoke, cover with a slice of parboiled beef marrow. Serve with sauce
Bordelaise.

=Navarin of lamb, printanier.= (Lamb stew). Take three pounds of
shoulder, or breast of lamb, and cut in pieces two inches square. Salt,
pepper, and put in saute pan with a little fat or butter, and allow to
roast until nice and brown. Then add a cup of flour and let same become
brown. Add a cup of puree of tomatoes and enough hot water to cover the
meat, and boil for ten minutes. Parboil three carrots and three turnips
and cut in small pieces, and add together with twelve whole small onions
fried brown in butter, twelve small round potatoes, and a bouquet garni.
Cook until soft, remove the bouquet garni, and serve with chopped
parsley and fresh cooked peas on top.

=Duchesse potatoes.= Make dough as for potato croquettes. Roll on table
with a little flour, and cut in the shape of a cork. Flatten and cut a
cross on the top with a small knife, brush with yolks of eggs, put on
buttered pan and bake in oven. By using a pastry bag with a star mould
the tops can be decorated with the dough, in the form of a rose, in
place of the cross.

=Salade Olga.= Cut into small dices two apples, one stalk of celery, two
buttons of cooked artichokes, a few asparagus tips, and one truffle.
Season with salt, pepper, and a very little vinegar and oil. Place in
salad bowl with leaves of lettuce around the sides, and cover with
mayonnaise. Garnish with fancy-cut pickled beets and artichokes.
Sprinkle with hard-boiled yolks of eggs chopped fine, and parsley.


NOVEMBER 26

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal with cream
       Boiled salt mackerel, melted butter
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Stuffed eggs, Nantua
       Mutton chop, grilled
       Saratoga chip potatoes
       Chiffonnade salad
       Camembert cheese
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of asparagus
       Whitebait on Graham bread
       Rheinbraten
       Romaine salad
       Cup custard
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Stuffed eggs, Nantua.= Cut four hard-boiled eggs in two, lengthwise,
and remove the yolks. Mix a piece of butter, the size of an egg, with a
little anchovy paste, a very little salt, pepper, paprika, chopped
parsley, and the yolks strained through a coarse sieve. Dress or fill
the eggs through a pastry bag, put a slice of pimento on top of each,
and serve very cold.

=Mutton chops, grilled.= Salt and pepper the chops, roll in oil and
broil. Garnish with watercress.

=Saratoga chip potatoes.= Round the potatoes off lengthwise to about the
size of a silver dollar. Slice very thin, fry in swimming fat until
crisp, remove and salt. Serve on napkin. Do not cover or they will
become soft.

=Chiffonnade salad.= Equal parts of romaine, lettuce, chicory, escarole,
sliced cucumbers and quartered tomatoes. Put in salad bowl, pour French
dressing over all, and garnish with chopped beets, eggs and parsley.

=Cream of asparagus.= Prepare same as cream of cauliflower. Use either
canned or fresh asparagus.

=Whitebait on Graham bread.= Wash the whitebait and dry, then put in
bowl, season with salt and pepper, and cover with milk. Remove and roll
in flour, using a colander to allow the flour to sift through. Fry in
swimming lard, which is ready in advance, and very hot. Serve on napkin,
and garnish with Graham bread and butter sandwiches, fried parsley,
quartered lemon, and sauce Tartar separate, or any kind of cold sauce.

=Rheinbraten.= Cut sirloin steaks one-half inch thick. Season with salt
and paprika on both sides, and fry in hot butter. Dish up on platter
with paprika sauce, and garnish with paprika potatoes.

=Paprika sauce.= Simmer one chopped onion and a chopped slice of raw
ham, in a little butter. Add one cup of cream, two cups of cream sauce,
a soupspoonful of paprika, and a little salt. Boil for ten minutes and
strain.

=Paprika potatoes.= Slice fresh-boiled potatoes and put in sauce pan.
Cover with paprika sauce, salt, and boil for a few minutes.


NOVEMBER 27

     BREAKFAST
       Assorted fruits
       Boiled eggs
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cold assorted meats
       Potato salad
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Clear green turtle, au Xeres
       Toke Point oysters, mignonette
       Salted almonds.      Celery
       Radishes.      Ripe olives
       Planked striped bass
       Sweetbread patties, cream sauce
       Roast stuffed turkey, with chestnuts
       Cranberry sauce
       Sweet potatoes, Southern style
       Succotash
       Hearts of lettuce, egg dressing
       Plum pudding, hard and brandy sauces
       Mince pie
       Fancy ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Roquefort cheese and crackers
       Assorted fruits
       Coffee

=Mignonnette sauce.= Take one-half cup of whole white peppers and crush
with a bottle on a hard table or marble slab, but not too fine. Mix with
four finely chopped shallots, a little chives, one spoonful of salt and
one-half pint of white wine or tarragon vinegar. Serve in a green
pepper, or a small glass, in center of plate surrounded with oysters or
clams.

=Planked striped bass.= Split the bass, remove the bones, place on
buttered plank, season with salt, pepper and a little melted butter over
all. Bake in oven until nearly done. Take out and decorate with a pastry
bag and a star mould, with some potato prepared as for potato
croquettes, forming a border around the fish. Put back in oven and bake
until nice and brown. Pour maitre d'hotel sauce on top, garnish with
quartered lemons and parsley in branches.

=Turkey stuffed with chestnuts.= Stuff the turkey with chestnut
dressing. Put some thin-sliced pork fat over the breast and tie
together. Place in pan with an onion, carrot, a little thyme, bay leaf
and fresh piece of butter. Salt, put in oven and baste all the time.
When turkey is done remove from pan, and let gravy set for a few
minutes. Take off the fat, add a little stock or water, reduce one-half,
add a little meat extract and strain.

=Dressing for chicken, turkey, suckling pig, etc.= Bake six onions, with
the skins on, in oven for ten minutes. Remove the skins and chop very
fine. Add turkey, chicken or suckling pig livers cut in very small
squares. Then add fresh bread crumbs, a piece of fresh butter, salt and
pepper. Mix well, add a little powdered thyme, chopped parsley, add
garlic if desired. If for suckling pig add some sage.

=Chestnut dressing.= Split the shells of two pounds of chestnuts with a
sharp pointed knife. Put in oven and when they burst open remove and
peel. Put in pot with a small piece of celery, salt, cover with water,
boil till done, allow to cool, and mix with dressing described above.

=Apple dressing.= Peel half a dozen apples, remove the cores, cut in six
pieces, put in pan with three ounces of butter and simmer slowly for ten
minutes. Mix with above dressing, omitting chestnuts.


NOVEMBER 28

     BREAKFAST
       Hothouse raspberries with cream
       Oatmeal and cream
       Stewed lamb kidneys
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with cherries
       Turkey hash on toast
       Coffee eclairs
       Oolong tea

     DINNER
       Consomme aux quenelles
       Ripe California olives
       Cultivated brook trout, Hollandaise
       Potatoes nature
       Roast ribs of prime beef
       Stewed tomatoes
       Mashed potatoes
       Lettuce salad
       English breakfast tea ice cream
       Assorted fancy cakes
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Welsh rabbit

=Stewed lamb kidneys.= Split six kidneys, remove the skin, and cut in
thin slices. Have a pan ready with hot butter and fry on a quick fire
for a few seconds. Take kidneys from pan, and add one soupspoonful of
flour to the sauce and let simmer until brown. Add one cup of stock or
hot water, salt and pepper, and reduce one-half. Return the kidneys to
the sauce, but do not let them boil or they will become hard. Before
serving add a little sherry wine or chopped parsley.

=Turkey hash on toast.= Cut turkey in small dices, put in sauce pan,
cover with two-thirds boiling cream and one-third cream sauce, season,
boil for a few minutes, and serve on hot dry toast.

=Welsh rabbit.= Cut one pound of American cheese in very small dices.
Put in pan with a small pinch of Cayenne pepper, one spoonful of ale or
beer, one teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, and put on fire to melt.
Do not stir until cheese is quite soft; then stir well with whip till it
is melted and boiling. Pour over toast on a very hot china platter or
shirred egg dish.

=French bread.= One gallon of warm water, two ounces of yeast, three
ounces of salt, three ounces of sugar and three ounces of lard. Dissolve
the yeast, salt, sugar and lard in the water, and mix in flour enough to
form a medium-stiff dough. Work it until smooth, cover with a cloth and
let it raise for one-half hour. Then form the dough into long loaves and
about two inches thick. Lay them on a cloth dusted with flour and let
them raise to nearly double in size. Moisten the tops with milk, make
several diagonal cuts on each loaf half way through, and bake in a
rather hot oven.

=Homemade bread.= One quart of warm water, one quart of warm milk, two
ounces of yeast, one ounce of salt and one-quarter of a pound of melted
lard or butter. Dissolve the yeast in the milk and butter, and add the
salt and butter, or lard. Add enough flour to make a medium dough, mix,
beat well and cover. Allow to raise for about four hours. Divide the
dough in four parts, roll and place in moulds or pans and let raise
another hour before baking.


NOVEMBER 29

     BREAKFAST
       Orange juice
       Scrambled eggs with anchovies
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Ecrevisses with mayonnaise
       Lamb chops saute, aux cepes
       Sybil potatoes
       Cup custard
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Toke Point oysters on half shell
       Cream of summer squash
       Filet mignon, Cheron
       Georgette potatoes
       Ravachol salad
       Pistache ice cream
       Baked Alaska
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with anchovies.= Put some fillets of salted anchovies in
oil and leave for a few days; or use anchovies in oil. Salt the
scrambled eggs lightly and lay the anchovies crosswise over the top.

=Ecrevisses with mayonnaise.= Prepare the ecrevisses en buisson. When
cold remove the tails from the shells and serve on platter with lemons
and parsley. Mayonnaise separate.

=Lamb chops saute, aux cepes.= Fry the chops in saute pan, in oil. When
done put on platter. Slice some cepes, (a specie of mushroom) season
with salt and pepper and fry for a few seconds. Just before removing
from the fire add a little garlic, and pour all over the chops. Sprinkle
with chopped parsley.

=Georgette potatoes.= Use potato croquette dough. Roll on table to the
thickness of a cork and about ten inches long. Make a hollow the entire
length and fill with puree of spinach. Bring the edges of the hollow
together and roll again so the spinach will be in the middle of the
potato dough and not visible. Cut in pieces two inches long, roll in
bread crumbs, and fry in the same manner as croquettes.

=Ravachol salad.= Use whole leaves of romaine. Place alternate slices of
grape fruit and orange on top until the leaves are covered. Put some
narrow strips of red pepper across the top, pour French dressing over
all, and decorate with unsweetened whipped cream.

=Filet mignon, Cheron.= Small fillets of beef saute in butter. Cover
with Bearnaise sauce, and garnish with artichoke buttons, macedoine,
(mixed vegetables) and fleurons.

=Fleurons.= Used for garnishing entrees, Newburg or chafing dish
preparations, fish, etc. Take some puff paste, with six turns, roll it
to about one-eighth inch in thickness, cut with a half moon cutter about
two inches in diameter, and place on a pan moistened with water. Wash
the tops with eggs and bake in a hot oven.


NOVEMBER 30

     BREAKFAST
       Hominy and cream
       Calf's liver and bacon
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Stuffed tomatoes, Nana
       Poached eggs, Persanne
       Broiled squab on toast
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Saratoga chip potatoes
       German apple cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Onion soup, au gratin
       Celery
       Planked striped bass
       Roast leg of veal, au jus
       Cardon a la moelle
       Potatoes a la Reine
       Escarole and chicory salad
       Neapolitan ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Stuffed tomatoes, Nana.= Put four nice medium sized tomatoes in boiling
water for fifteen seconds. Then dip in cold water and peel. Cut off the
tops, scoop out and fill with the following: One-half of the breast of a
boiled chicken, chopped very fine, some chopped walnuts, a little
mayonnaise sauce, a little whipped cream, and salt and pepper. Mix well.
After filling place the tomatoes on lettuce leaves and cover with thin
mayonnaise. Serve very cold.

=Calf's liver and bacon.= Slice the liver about two-thirds of an inch
thick. Salt, pepper, pass through olive oil and broil, but not too well
done or the liver will be hard. Serve broiled bacon on top, maitre
d'hotel sauce, and garnish with lemon and parsley.

=Mustard sauce, cold.= For asparagus, artichokes, etc. To one cup of
mayonnaise sauce add one soupspoonful of French mustard. Mix well.

=Lunch rolls.= Two pounds of flour, one ounce of yeast, one ounce of
salt, one pint of water. Dissolve the yeast and salt in the water, add
the flour and mix, making a rather hard dough. Put into a basin, cover
with a cloth, and allow to stand for four hours. Then divide the dough
in four parts, roll each one separately into the form of a stick about
fourteen inches long and one inch thick. Put on a cloth on a special
roll plank made for the purpose. Take care that the rolls are
sufficiently far apart so they will not touch when they raise. Let them
set for about one-half hour. Then cut each roll of dough in three parts
with a sharp knife, make two incisions in the top of each, put into a
pan and bake for about twenty minutes.

=Cardons a la moelle.= Cardon is a vegetable, a thistle-like plant
related to the artichoke. It can be obtained in cans. Empty into a
vessel and warm in its own juice. Parboil some sliced beef marrow, put
into a brown gravy with the juice of one lemon and some chopped parsley.
Remove cardon from its broth, put on a platter and pour the brown sauce
and marrow over all.


DECEMBER 1

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs with cream
       Force with cream
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cold fillet of sole, Raven
       Spring lamb Irish stew
       Cream puffs
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Sevigne
       Salted Brazil nuts
       Sweetbreads braise, Pompadour
       Chateau potatoes
       Terrine de foie gras a la gelee
       Hearts of romaine, Roquefort dressing
       Meringue a la creme, Chantilly
       Coffee

=Cold fillet of sole, Raven.= Cook four fillets of sole in white wine
and place on a platter. Simmer two spoonsful of finely chopped shallots
in butter, add a few chopped fresh mushrooms, one chopped tomato and the
wine used for cooking the fish. Reduce until it becomes thick, cool off,
add some chives and chervil chopped fine, and a little mayonnaise.
Spread over the fillets, and cover with a mayonnaise rose. Decorate to
taste with fancy-cut truffles, pickles, etc. Serve very cold.

=Consomme Sevigne.= White meat of chicken and smoked beef tongue cut
Julienne, (in the shape of matches). Serve in consomme with a sprinkle
of chopped chervil.

=Sweetbreads braise, Pompadour.= Braise the sweetbreads until about
two-thirds done. Cool a little and cover with a thin layer of chicken
force meat. Decorate all around with chopped tongue, with chopped
truffles in the center. Replace in pan, using the same stock used
before, but strained. Cover with buttered manilla paper and return to
oven to finish cooking. Serve with own gravy and a little Madeira sauce.

=Terrine de foie gras a la gelee.= Put the foie gras on ice for a few
hours. Carve from the terrine with a table spoon and place on a platter
covered with a napkin. Decorate with meat jelly cut in triangles and
chopped, and parsley in branches.

=Gelee. (Meat jelly).= Take any kind of good stock. Put in the whites of
six eggs to each gallon to clarify it. Add one pound of chopped raw beef
to the gallon. Also one sliced onion, one carrot, one leek, a little
celery and parsley, a few pepper berries, one bay leaf and a clove. Stir
well and add slowly the hot stock. Soak twelve leaves of gelatine in
cold water for ten minutes and add. Bring to a boil slowly, stirring
from time to time. When it comes to a boil it must be clear. Strain
through very fine cheese cloth, being careful not to stir up the meat so
that it will cloud the broth. Season with salt and a very little
Cayenne, add a glass of good sherry, and allow to cool.

=Meringue a la creme, Chantilly.= Whip some cream until stiff, add some
powdered sugar, flavor with vanilla. Put one spoonful between each two
meringue shells, dress on a plate, and decorate with some of the same
cream passed through a pastry bag with a star mould.


DECEMBER 2

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples
       Oatmeal with cream
       Butter toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs, Tivoli
       Miroton of beef, en bordure
       Cabinet pudding
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Blue Point oysters
       Consomme Doria
       Fillet of sole, St. Malo
       Tournedos, Boulanger
       Souffle potatoes
       Roquefort cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

=Eggs, Tivoli.= Cut a piece of homemade bread into a cube and fry in
butter. Open one side with a sharp knife and scoop out the center. Place
in the cavity a poached egg, cover with cream sauce, sprinkle a little
grated cheese on top, and bake until brown.

=Miroton of beef, en bordure.= Use left over boiled or braised beef, and
cut in thin slices. Put into sauce pan one sliced onion with a piece of
butter, and simmer until nice and brown. Then add one gill of vinegar,
and a spoonful of French mustard and reduce until almost dry. Now add
the sliced beef, cover with brown gravy, season with salt, pepper and a
little chopped parsley, and boil for a few minutes. Dish into a deep
platter, or individual shirred egg dishes, make a border of potato
croquet dough, sprinkle grated cheese on top and bake till brown.

=Consomme Doria.= Consomme tapioca, with chopped truffles and sherry
wine.

=Fillet of sole, St. Malo.= Fillet of sole au vin blanc with the
addition of lobster sauce with scallops, and lobster and oysters cut in
small squares.

=Tournedos, Boulanger.= Small fillets of beef saute, with sauce Madere.
Garnished with fried calf's brains and artichoke bottoms stuffed with
spinach.

=Souffle potatoes.= Peel the potatoes to oval shape. Do not wash but
wipe with a napkin. Cut lengthwise in strips about an eighth of an inch
in thickness. Place in swimming fat or lard that is merely warm and put
on fire to get hot. When the potatoes are nearly done they will swim on
top of the fat and swell up like little cushions. When all are on top
take out and throw into very hot fat to color them. Remove, salt, and
serve on napkin.


DECEMBER 3

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs
       Boiled eggs
       Corn muffins
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit
       Eggs en cocotte, Italienne
       Chicken hash, Victor
       Endive salad
       Cup custard
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Hors d'oeuvre varies
       Cream of squash
       Aiguillettes of bass, a la Russe
       Squab saute, Tyrolienne
       Anna potatoes
       Strawberry ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Corn Muffins.= One-half pound of corn meal, one-half pound of flour,
two ounces of melted butter, four eggs, one pint of sour milk, one-half
cup of molasses, one teaspoonful of soda and one teaspoonful of salt.
Sift together the corn meal, flour and salt. Dissolve the soda in the
sour milk, add the eggs, well beaten, the molasses, the butter and the
sifted ingredients. Beat well and bake in a well-greased muffin pan.

=Eggs en Cocotte, Italienne.= Put in buttered cocotte dish one raw egg,
cover with sauce Italienne, put a little grated cheese and a small piece
of butter on top and bake in oven.

=Italienne sauce.= Chop six shallots very fine and simmer in sauce pan
with two ounces of butter. Do not let the shallots become brown or they
will lose their flavor. Add some chopped fresh or canned mushrooms
(about a can full), and one glass of white wine, and boil until reduced
almost dry. Then add one and one-half pints of brown gravy, and boil
again for a few minutes. Season with salt and pepper to taste, and
sprinkle with chopped parsley. This sauce is used for many entree
dishes.

=Endive salad.= Endive is a species of chicory salad, originally
imported from France. Cut in two lengthwise and lay on platter or
individual plates. Serve with a sauce of salt, pepper, and one-fourth
tarragon vinegar to three-fourths olive oil. Sprinkle with chopped
chervil.

=Chicken hash, Victor.= Take the white meat of a boiled chicken or soup
hen and cut in half inch squares, and half as much fresh-boiled potatoes
cut the same way. Chop six shallots very fine and simmer in four ounces
of sweet butter, but do not let them become colored. Add the chicken and
potatoes, and cover with clear chicken broth. Season with salt, pepper
and a little chives, and let simmer for five minutes. Serve in a chafing
dish with a sprinkle of chopped chervil on top. Melba toast separate.


DECEMBER 4

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit juice
       Shredded wheat biscuit with cream
       English muffins
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Casaba melon
       Eggs aromatic
       English lamb chops, XX Century Club
       Lettuce salad
       Pistache eclairs
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Blue Point oysters
       Fillet of bass, shrimp sauce
       Braised beef, Cumberland style
       Baked Hubbard squash
       Mashed potatoes
       Endive salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Eggs aromatic.= Fry the eggs in oil or poach. Place on toast, cover
with tomato sauce, and put a few leaves of fresh mint on top before
serving.

=English lamb chops, XX Century Club.= Broil the chops, garnish with
pimentos stuffed with puree of sweet potatoes. Serve with sauce Madere.

=Pistache Eclairs.= Same as chocolate eclairs. Cover with pistache
icing.

=Pistache icing.= To white icing add some pistache essence, or orange
flower extract, and a little green coloring.

=Fillet of bass, shrimp sauce.= Place the fillets in a buttered pan,
season with salt, add one-half glass of white wine, and a little stock
or water. When cooked dish up on platter and cover with shrimp sauce.

=Shrimp sauce.= To some white wine sauce (sauce vin blanc) add some
shrimps.

=Braised beef with calf's feet.= Take a piece of round or rump of beef,
season with salt and pepper, put in pot with two onions cut in four, two
carrots and a piece of butter. Roast until nice and brown. Then add one
spoonful of flour and brown again. Add one glass of claret, one quart of
stock, three tomatoes cut in four, or canned tomatoes, and a bouquet
garni. Bring to a boil, cover tight and put in oven till very well done.
This is braised beef, plain. When served Cumberland style (with calf's
feet) add the feet at the same time as the claret and stock, and strain
the sauce when done. If the feet are not served with the beef they may
be used as an entree.

=Baked Hubbard squash.= Cut the squash in four, remove the seeds, salt
and pepper, put a piece of butter on top of each piece of squash and
bake in oven.


DECEMBER 5

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced oranges
       Boiled salt mackerel
       Baked potatoes
       Corn bread
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Clam broth in cups
       Ripe olives
       Fillet of turbot, Pelissier
       Potatoes Parisienne
       Spinach aux croutons
       Omelette au rhum
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Lobster chowder
       Celery.      Salted English walnuts
       Aiguillettes of sole, Venitienne
       Planked striped bass
       Cucumber salad
       Brussels sprouts and chestnuts
       Apple Charlotte
       Coffee

=Clam broth.= Take hard or soft clams and wash well. Put in vessel with
just water enough to cover, a little salt and a small piece of raw
celery. Boil for fifteen minutes, and strain through cheese cloth.

=Clam broth, Chantilly.= Serve whipped cream separate, or on top of each
cup.

=Consomme en Bellevue.= Half chicken broth and half clam broth mixed.
Serve in cups with whipped cream on top.

=Clam chowder.= Chop two onions, one leek, a piece of celery and one
green onion in small pieces, also cut one-half pound of salt pork in
small squares. Put all together in a vessel with two ounces of butter
and simmer till well done. Then add one gallon of stock or fish broth,
four potatoes cut in half inch squares, salt, pepper, a little paprika,
one teaspoonful of sugar, one teaspoonful of chopped thyme, a little
chopped parsley, and four peeled tomatoes cut in small dices; or chopped
canned tomatoes. Bring to a boil and let cook for about one hour. Put
one hundred well-washed Little Neck clams in a separate vessel and put
on fire with one-half glass of water and boil for ten minutes. Strain
the broth and add to the chowder. Remove the clams from the shells, cut
in four pieces and add to the chowder with one cup of cracker meal, and
boil for four minutes. Serve with broken crackers.

=Lobster chowder.= Same as clam chowder with the exception of lobster
cut in small dices instead of the clams.


DECEMBER 6

     BREAKFAST
       Bananas with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Chocolate
       Whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Fish salad, ravigote
       Broiled lamb chops
       French fried potatoes
       Cauliflower Polonaise
       German coffee cake
       Lunch rolls
       Tea

     DINNER
       Cream of endives
       Fillet of flounder, Chevreuse
       Chicken saute, Ambassadrice
       Carrots, Vichy
       Fondante potatoes
       Escarole salad
       Peach ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Oysters poulette
       St. Francis rolls
       Nesselrode pudding
       Lady fingers
       Demi tasse

=Oysters poulette.= Open three dozen oysters, put in vessel with their
own juice and bring to a boil. Drain off the broth, cover oysters with a
pint of poulette sauce, and serve in chafing dish.

=Carrots, Vichy.= Slice some tender carrots very fine, place in buttered
sauce pan, season with salt and a little pepper, and simmer over a slow
fire. Then add a little chicken broth or soup stock and cook until soft.
Mix one teaspoonful of flour with three ounces of butter, add to the
carrots and simmer for five minutes. Serve with chopped parsley.

=Chocolate.= For each person take one rib or bar of chocolate. Cut in
very small pieces, put in pot and add one spoonful of water and let
chocolate melt. Add one large cup of very hot milk for each person, and
bring nearly to the boiling point.

=Fish salad, ravigote.= Any kind of boiled fish that may be left over.
Remove the bones and skin, break the fish in small pieces and lay on
lettuce leaves. Cover with Tartar sauce, garnish with sliced pickles,
pickled beets and hard-boiled eggs.

=Cream of endives.= Prepare the same as cream of cauliflower, using
endives instead.

=Fillet of flounder, Chevreuse.= Stuff the fillets with halibut force
meat, put in buttered pan and cook in white wine. Cover with Bearnaise
sauce mixed with a little puree of tomatoes.

=Chicken saute, Ambassadrice.= Jointed chicken saute in butter, sauce
supreme, garnished with truffles, mushrooms and goose liver saute.

=Goose liver saute.= Salt and pepper some fresh goose livers, roll in
flour, put in pan with fresh butter and simmer until done. For
garnishing entree dishes the imported goose liver au natural can be
obtained in cans. Remove the fat from the top of the can, cut the liver
out in slices, season with salt and pepper, put in flour, and fry very
quickly in sweet butter. Serve as a garnish or as an entree.

=Goose liver saute aux truffes.= Put goose liver saute in chafing dish
and cover with sauce Perigord.

=Sauce Perigord.= Slice six truffles very thin, put in vessel with a
glass of dry sherry wine and reduce until it is nearly dry. Then add
one-half pint of brown gravy, seasoned with salt and Cayenne pepper, and
cook for ten minutes.


DECEMBER 7

     BREAKFAST
       Oatmeal with cream
       Baked beans, Boston style
       Boston brown bread
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Mariniert herring
       Boiled potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Chicken okra soup
       Salted pecans
       Fillet of sole, Normande
       Roast ribs of beef
       Asparagus, Hollandaise
       Brabant potatoes
       Bijou salad
       Hazelnut ice cream
       Alsatian wafers
       Coffee

=Corn bread.= One-half pound of yellow corn meal, one-half pound of
flour, one teaspoonful of baking powder, three eggs, one ounce of melted
butter, one teaspoonful of salt, one pint of milk and one-half cup of
boiling water. Pour the boiling water over the corn meal and allow it to
become cold. Beat the yolks of the eggs and add to the corn meal, then
add the milk, flour and the baking powder, salt and melted butter. Mix
and then add the whites of the eggs beaten very stiff. Pour into a
shallow well-greased pan and bake in a hot oven for about twenty-five
minutes.

=Boston brown bread.= One pound of rye flour, one pound of Graham flour,
two pounds of corn meal, one pound of wheat flour, one quart of
molasses, one and one-half quarts of milk, two ounces of salt and three
ounces of baking powder. Put all the flour and the baking powder in one
vessel, then add the molasses, milk and salt and make a soft dough. Fill
brown bread moulds about three-fourths full, put in steam cooker for
three and one-half hours, then remove from steam and bake in oven for
twenty minutes.

=Chicken okra soup.= Remove the breast from a raw fowl, and with the
remainder make a chicken broth. Cut the breast in small dices, put in
vessel with a chopped onion and a chopped green pepper and a small piece
of butter, simmer till onion is soft, then add the chicken broth, two
peeled tomatoes cut in small dices, or some canned tomatoes, salt and
pepper. Let boil slowly for one-half hour, then add one pound of okra
cut in pieces three-quarters of an inch in length, and cook until okra
is soft. Add one teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce and a cup of boiled
rice and serve with chopped parsley. If desired a slice of ham may be
cut in small squares and added at the same time as the chicken breast.


DECEMBER 8

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Scrambled eggs with asparagus tips
       Buttered toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Hors d'oeuvres varies
       Eggs Boremis
       Hungarian beef goulash
       Apple pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Cream of spinach
       Fillet of bass, Dieppoise
       Chicken saute, Marengo
       Potatoes a la Reine
       Dandelion salad
       Apricot ice cream
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with asparagus tips.= Put some asparagus tips in butter,
season with salt and pepper, simmer till hot, and add to the eggs.

=Eggs Boremis.= Put an egg in a well-buttered cocotte dish, season with
salt and pepper, put plenty of grated cheese and a piece of butter on
top of all, and bake in oven.

=Cocoa.= Put two tablespoonsful of cocoa in a pot with one-half cup of
water and boil for a minute. Add two cups of milk, bring to a boil, and
strain. Serve powdered sugar separate. May also be made with water only,
omitting the milk.

=Fillet of bass, Dieppoise.= Cook the fillets "au vin blanc." Dish up on
platter with lobster sauce and oysters, mushrooms, truffles, shrimps and
mussels cut in small squares.

=Chicken saute, Marengo.= Joint of chicken, season with salt and pepper
and put in pan in very hot olive oil. When nice and brown on both sides
add four chopped shallots and a little garlic and allow them to get hot,
but not brown. Then add one-half glass of white wine and reduce. Add one
cup of brown gravy, one cup of chopped tomatoes and one can of French
mushrooms. Cook for fifteen minutes. Dish up and garnish with eggs and
croutons fried in oil, chopped parsley, and a few slices of truffle on
top.

=Pie paste.= One and one-half pounds of flour, one-half pound of lard,
one-half pound of butter and a pinch of salt. Mix all together and add
enough water, (about one cup), to make a rather stiff dough. Keep in
cool place or ice box.

=Apple pie.= For two pies line the plates with pie paste rolled very
thin. Slice six good sized apples, add one-quarter of a pound of sugar
and a teaspoonful of powdered cinnamon, mix and fill the plates. Wet the
edges of the dough and cover with paste also rolled thin. Wash over with
egg, make a few cuts in the center so the steam may escape while baking,
and put in a moderate oven. When done dust with powdered sugar, and
serve hot or cold as desired. If the apples are coarse it will be well
to boil them a little in water with a piece of cinnamon and a very
little sugar.


DECEMBER 9

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Hominy with cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit en supreme
       Eggs Benedict
       Lamb hash
       Chocolate layer cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Coulis
       Salted pecans
       Fillet of turbot, Royaldi
       Chicken, Edward VII
       Potato croquettes
       Chiffonnade salad
       Parfait au chocolate
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Grapefruit en supreme.= Serve in a long-stemmed double grapefruit
glass, put shaved ice in large glass around the smaller one. In small
glass put sliced grapefruit mixed with powdered sugar. Tie a ribbon,
with neat bow, around the glass.

=Eggs Benedict.= Split an English muffin, toast on the inside, place on
each half a small slice of broiled ham, on the ham a poached egg, cover
with Hollandaise sauce, and place a piece of truffle on top.

=Layer cake.= Eight eggs, one-half pound of sugar, one-half pound of
flour, one-quarter pound of melted butter, and some flavoring extract.
Beat the eggs with the sugar, on slow fire until warm, remove and
continue beating until cold. Mix the flour in lightly and then add the
melted butter, little by little, and the flavoring. Do not mix too much.
Pour into a well-buttered mould and bake in a moderate oven for about
three-quarters of an hour. Allow to cool, cut in three or four slices,
and fill with cream, or jelly, or marmalade, as desired. Glace the top
with icing and decorate. The American style layer cake is mixed in the
same manner, but baked in shallow moulds, requiring only about ten
minutes in the oven. The filling is then placed between the cakes,
instead of slicing.

=Chocolate layer cake.= Bake some layers as for moka cake, and put three
or four, one on top of another, with chocolate butter cream filling
between. The filling is made in the same manner as moka filling, but use
one ounce of melted chocolate or cocoa instead of the coffee flavor.
Glace the top of the cake with chocolate frosting and decorate with some
of the chocolate cream filling, using pastry bag with fancy tube.

=Chicken, Edward VII.= Boil the chicken in stock and stuff with rice as
for Chicken Diva. Add small squares of truffles and goose liver natural.
Serve with curry sauce.


DECEMBER 10

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Riga
       Eggs Coquelicot
       Tripe and oysters in cream
       Camembert cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Hollandaise
       Stuffed fillet of sole, Diplomate
       Tournedos de Goncourt
       String beans, aux fines herbes
       Julienne potatoes
       Salade Bresilienne
       Floating island
       Pound cake
       Coffee

=Eggs Coquelicot.= Line a timbale mould with a whole red pepper, (canned
pimento) and break an egg into it, season with salt and pepper, and put
timbale in a pan in boiling water, and place in oven until egg is
cooked. Put some chicken hash in cream on a platter and turn egg and
pepper on top to look like a little red cap. Serve with cream sauce
around the hash.

=Tripe and oysters in cream.= Simmer six chopped shallots in butter, but
do not allow them to color. Add two pounds of tripe cut in strips, one
cup of stock, one bouquet garni, and boil for one hour. Remove the
bouquet garni, drain off the broth. Add two cups of cream sauce and
three dozen parboiled oysters. Simmer for a minute, and season with salt
and a little Cayenne pepper.

=Potage Hollandaise. (Soup).= Bind a veloute of chicken with cream and
yolks of eggs. Serve with brunoise garnishing.

=Veloute.= Used for the foundation of many soups. Put in vessel five
ounces of butter and four ounces of flour and simmer for a few minutes.
Add two quarts of chicken broth, stock or bouillon, cook for half an
hour and bind with one cup of cream and the yolks of two eggs.

=Consomme brunoise.= Cut in very small dice, (nearly fine chopped), one
carrot, one turnip, one leek, a stalk of celery and a little white
cabbage, and parboil in salt water. Then drain off the water, put in
well-buttered casserole, add a pinch of sugar, cover with buttered
manilla paper and with the casserole cover on top of that, and put in
the oven to braise. If too dry a half cup of stock may be added. Cook
until vegetables are soft. Use for potage garnishing, Consomme brunoise,
and other dishes. For soups use one heaping spoonful of brunoise to each
plate.

=Fillet of sole, Diplomate.= Slice fine six fresh mushrooms, season with
salt and pepper, and simmer in butter. When done add one spoonful of
meat extract. Split four fillets of sole and fill with the above
dressing and cook "au vin blanc." Then place on a platter, cover with
cream sauce well seasoned, put grated cheese on top and bake in oven.

=Tournedos de Goncourt.= Broiled fillet of beef served with Bearnaise
sauce mixed with a little puree of tomatoes, and garnished with tomatoes
glacees.

=Tomatoes glacees.= Put six whole peeled tomatoes on a buttered pan,
season with salt and pepper, put a small piece of butter on top of each,
and bake in moderate oven for ten minutes.


DECEMBER 11

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit juice
       Omelet with ham
       Puff paste crescents
       Oolong tea

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Martha
       Cold assorted meats
       Potato salad
       Cherry tartelettes
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Blue Points
       Consomme brunoise
       Braised salmon, Parisienne
       Boiled leg of mutton, caper sauce
       Mashed turnips
       Roast chicken
       Hearts of lettuce salad
       Biscuit glace
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Omelet with ham.= Cut a slice of cooked ham in small squares, put in
omelet pan with a small piece of butter. When hot add three beaten eggs
and follow directions for plain omelet, but use a little less salt.

=Canape Martha.= Cut a round piece of toast and put some lobster
croquette farce on top in the shape of a pyramid. Put a thin slice of
Swiss cheese on top and bake in oven. Garnish with lemon and parsley.

=Cherry tartelette.= Line tartelette moulds and follow directions as for
pear tartelettes, but fill with canned cherries.

=Braised salmon, Parisienne.= Put a slice of salmon in buttered pan,
season with salt and pepper, sprinkle with chopped shallots and parsley,
add one one-half glass of white wine, cover and simmer until cooked.
Remove fish to platter, and in the pan pour some white wine sauce,
(sauce au vin blanc). Let boil for five minutes and pour over fish.
Don't strain.

=Boiled leg of mutton, caper sauce.= Put the leg of mutton in pot and
cover with boiling water. Add one carrot, a leek, onion, a little celery
and a bouquet garni. Season with salt, and boil for about forty-five
minutes.

=Caper sauce.= Melt three ounces of butter in sauce pan, add three
ounces of flour and allow to become hot. Add three pints of stock,
bouillon, or the stock from the leg of mutton. Boil for ten minutes,
season to taste, bind with the yolk of one egg and a piece of butter,
strain, and add one-half cup of capers.

=Mashed turnips.= Boil or steam a half dozen white or Russian (yellow)
turnips. Strain through a fine sieve or colander, add salt and pepper
and three ounces of butter. A potato boiled with the turnips will reduce
the strong turnip odor.


DECEMBER 12

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Codfish balls
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Oyster broth
       Chow chow
       Bouillabaisse Marseillaise
       Asparagus Hollandaise
       Omelette au confiture
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Clam chowder
       Celery
       Oysters a la Hyde
       Striped bass, meuniere
       Potatoes nature
       Combination salad
       Fancy ice cream
       Alsatian wafers
       Coffee

=Codfish balls.= Soak one pound of salt codfish in cold water over
night. Then boil in fresh water for ten minutes. Boil two potatoes in
salt water and strain through colander or sieve. Shred the codfish very
fine and mix with the potato and the yolks of three eggs working well
together. Allow to become cool, form into balls, roll in flour and fry
in melted butter until nice and golden yellow. Serve on napkins with
quartered lemons and parsley in branches.

=Bouillabaisse Marseillaise.= (Fish stew). Simmer in shallow saute pan
six chopped shallots, one-half onion sliced very fine and one stalk of
white leek also finely sliced, in two spoonsful of olive oil, for about
one minute. Then add a clove of chopped garlic, one glass of white wine,
one pint of fish stock or hot water, salt, pepper, a little Cayenne, a
bouquet garni and the tail of a live lobster cut in six slices, and one
dozen of well washed Little Neck clams shell and all, boil for ten
minutes. Add some solid meat of white fish such as rock cod, bass,
tomcods, etc., and a pinch of whole saffron tied in a cloth. Boil again
for twenty-five minutes. Do not skim. Remove the saffron and serve in
deep dish with the broth. Sprinkle some chopped parsley over the top.
Serve separate, slices of bread fried in oil and then rubbed with
garlic.

=Omelette au confiture.= (Jelly omelet). Same as strawberry omelet. Put
currant jelly or any kind of marmalade in center of omelet before
turning over on platter.

=Oysters a la Hyde.= Parboil one-half cup of white celery chopped fine,
for ten minutes, and allow to cool. Put in sauce pan two dozen large raw
oysters with their own juice, add two tablespoonsful of cracker meal,
two ounces of butter, one cup of cream and the parboiled celery. Season
with salt, pepper, a little Cayenne, and boil for two minutes. If the
sauce is not sufficiently thick add a little more cracker meal. Serve in
chafing dish.


DECEMBER 13

     BREAKFAST
       Griddle cakes
       Honey
       Breakfast sausage
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Casaba melon
       Consomme Ditalini
       Eggs Creole
       Stuffed lamb chops, Soubise
       Champs Elysees potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Napoleon cake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Little Neck clams
       Potage Mongol
       Fillet of sole, Joinville
       Chicken saute, Bordelaise
       Artichokes Hollandaise
       Potatoes Laurette
       Biscuit Tortoni
       Macaroons
       Coffee

     SUPPER
       Oysters mignonette
       Salted almonds
       Sweetbreads a la King
       Parfait Napolitain
       Cakes
       Demi tasse

=Breakfast sausages.= Small pork sausages fried in pan with a small
piece of butter. Serve on platter with their own fat.

=Consomme Ditalini.= Boil some Ditalini (a species of Italian paste), in
salt water, drain off and serve in consomme. Grated cheese separate.

=Eggs Creole.= Put in buttered shirred egg dish one spoonful of Creole
sauce, break two eggs in center, and bake in oven.

=Creole sauce.= Put in sauce pan three ounces of butter, one sliced
onion, and three sliced green peppers. Simmer for ten minutes, or until
soft, then add one quart of canned tomatoes with their juice, one can of
sliced French mushrooms, one-half can of sliced pimentos, a very little
finely chopped garlic, and salt and pepper. Cook slowly for one hour.
Fresh tomatoes may be substituted for canned, if desired; and if the
sauce is too thick some brown gravy or bouillon may be added.

=Fillet of sole, Joinville.= Cook the fillets "au vin blanc." Serve
crayfish sauce or ecrevisse, or shrimp sauce with sliced French
mushrooms, truffles and lobster.

=Potage Mongol.= One-third puree of peas, one-third consomme Julienne,
one-third puree of tomatoes. Well mixed.

=Chicken saute, Bordelaise.= Jointed chicken saute in butter with a
shallot. Serve brown gravy with mushrooms and cepes saute, and garnish
with fried onions.

=Cepes saute.= Cepes are a species of mushrooms and may be obtained in
cans. Slice and fry in butter and olive oil in equal parts, season with
salt and pepper, and when nearly golden yellow add a very finely chopped
shallot and some chopped parsley, and simmer for a minute longer. Often
used for garnishing entrees, etc.

=Fried onions.= Cut large onions in thin slices and separate into rings.
Put in milk, then in flour, and fry in hot swimming lard. When brown
remove, salt, and serve on napkin, or use for garnishing.


DECEMBER 14

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs
       Oatmeal with cream
       Chickens' livers saute, au Madere
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Cold assorted meats
       Alligator pear, French dressing
       Roquefort cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Lynnhaven oysters
       Puree of Lima beans, aux croutons
       Ripe olives
       Sand dabs, meuniere
       Louisiana gumbo file
       Boiled rice
       Russian salad
       Peach Melba
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Chickens' livers saute, au Madere.= Cut the livers in three, salt and
pepper and fry in saute pan in butter. Drain off and add a cup of sauce
Madere. Do not let them boil in the sauce.

=Puree of Lima beans.= Take a can of Lima beans, or a quart of fresh
beans, put in vessel, cover with chicken broth or bouillon and boil till
done. Then strain through fine sieve, put back in vessel, add two ounces
of sweet butter, and season to taste. Serve with small squares of bread
fried in butter.

=Louisiana gumbo file.= Two chickens, one quart of large oysters, one
quart of cooked shrimps, six bell peppers, four large onions, one quart
of tomatoes, one-half pound of butter, two bunches of celery, one small
bunch of parsley, one-quarter teaspoonful of tobasco sauce, and black
pepper and salt to suit.

=First.=--Cut the chicken the same way as for fricassee, and wipe dry.

=Second.=--Cut onions and brown in butter, and strain.

=Third.=--Fry chicken brown in strained butter, then set to one side.

=Fourth.=--Add two tablespoonsful of flour to strained butter and brown
gradually. When a rich brown add two quarts of boiling water, then add
the tomatoes. Now bring to boiling point and strain through a fine
strainer.

=Fifth.=--Place strained liquor in a large stew pan and add one
teaspoonful of salt and a half teaspoonful of black pepper, then add the
chicken. Should the liquor not sufficiently cover the chicken add more
hot water to about two inches above. Then add the bell peppers and
celery without cutting up. Boil over slow fire until chicken can be
picked off the bones with fork. Then remove chicken and strip meat from
bones and cut in small pieces, remove the celery and bell peppers, and
replace chicken. Add the shrimps, oysters and tobasco sauce. Boil for
ten minutes. Then gradually add sufficient "file powder" to bring to a
rich creamy consistency. Add to each plate two large tablespoonsful of
boiled rice. Serve immediately.

=Boiled rice.= Wash one-half pound of rice and soak in cold water for an
hour. Cook over hot fire in four quarts of boiling water for fifteen
minutes, or until the grains can be mashed between the fingers. Strain
through a colander.


DECEMBER 15

     BREAKFAST
       Hothouse raspberries with cream
       Boiled eggs
       Dry toast
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Livermore salad
       Fillet of halibut, Mornay
       French pastry
       Rolls
       Tea

     DINNER
       Potato and leek soup
       Queen olives
       Black bass, Cambaceres
       Vol au vent Toulouse
       Roast lamb, mint sauce
       Rissolees potatoes
       Field salad
       Vanilla ice cream
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Livermore salad.= Broil three country sausages, allow to cool and slice
thin. Mix with one peeled tomato cut in small squares, one-half cup of
string beans, chives, chervil, salt and pepper, and one-third of white
wine vinegar to two-thirds of olive oil.

=Fillet of halibut, Mornay.= Place the halibut fillets in buttered pan,
season with salt and pepper, cover with fish stock or water, and boil.
When nearly done remove from pan and put on buttered platter, cover with
Mornay sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese and place small pieces of
butter on top. Bake in oven till nice and brown. See sauce below.

=Sauce Mornay.= For four persons use one pint of thick cream, season
with salt and Cayenne pepper, bind with the yolks of two eggs and one
tablespoonful of grated cheese.

=Mint sauce.= Use one-quarter pound of brown sugar to one quart of
vinegar. Bring to the boiling point, cool off and add some fresh mint
leaves chopped fine.

=Rissolees potatoes.= Cut potatoes in the form of a small egg or a ball.
Boil for seven minutes, then put in pan with butter and brown. Sprinkle
with salt.

=Vol au vent, Toulouse.= Boiled breast of chicken cut in small squares;
chicken dumplings, dessertspoon size; one can of French mushrooms,
whole; one sliced truffle, and two sweetbreads sliced and boiled in
chicken broth. Put all in casserole, add one-half wine glass of dry
sherry wine, allow to become hot, and add sauce Allemande to cover. It
will now be like a stew. Season to taste and fill the heated "vol au
vents," or patties.

=Black bass, Cambaceres.= Simmer six finely chopped shallots in butter.
While hot add three sliced fresh mushrooms, one peeled tomato cut in
squares, and one-half glass of white wine. Reduce almost dry. Then add
one pint of white wine sauce. Cook the fish "au vin blanc" style and
pour the sauce over same.


DECEMBER 16

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced pineapple
       Rolled oats with cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Omelette Lorraine
       Cold lamb with jelly
       Salade Americaine
       French pancake
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Flamande
       Boiled codfish, sauce Horose
       Potatoes nature
       Tenderloin of beef, Bristol
       Lettuce salad
       Ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Demi tasse

=Omelette Lorraine.= Serve the omelette with small sausages, broiled
bacon and Madeira sauce.

=Salade Americaine.= Parboil one-half cup of okra cut in pieces one inch
long. Peel a tomato and a boiled potato and cut in strips. Put in bowl
with the okra, which has been allowed to cool, and garnish the top with
very finely chopped Virginia ham over one half, and with chopped green
peppers over the other half. Serve with French dressing.

=Pancakes.= For two persons take three-fourths of a cup of flour, the
same of milk, one egg and a pinch of salt. Mix together into a thin
batter. Bake on a pancake pan, well buttered.

=English pancakes.= Mix and cook the cakes as above. Stack one on
another in a chafing dish, sprinkling each with a little lime juice and
powdered sugar.

=Pancakes Lieb.= Same as above, but instead of the lime juice, spread
each cake with sweet butter and powdered sugar. Keep hot with chafing
dish.

=French pancakes.= Same ingredients as above, but cover each cake with
currant jelly and roll into a roll. Sprinkle with powdered sugar and
burn with a redhot iron in stripes.

=Potage Flamande.= Potato soup garnished with brunoise.

=Boiled codfish, sauce Horose.= Boil the codfish, place on napkin,
garnish with small boiled potatoes, quartered lemons and parsley. See
sauce below.

=Sauce Horose.= Two-thirds Hollandaise sauce and one-third tomato sauce
mixed.

=Tenderloin of beef, Bristol.= Roast tenderloin of beef, sauce Madere,
garnished with rice croquettes in pear form, puree of green peas and
Laurette potatoes.

=Rice croquettes.= Put two ounces of butter and a finely chopped onion
in vessel and simmer until yellow. Then add one cup of washed rice,
one-half cup of bouillon and a pinch of salt, and cook in oven for ten
minutes. Then add one cup of sauce Allemande and again put in oven for
twenty minutes. When rice is well done bind with the yolks of two eggs
and one spoonful of grated Parmesan cheese. Allow to cool and roll in
the shape of a pear or ball or other desired shape. Bread and fry in
swimming lard.


DECEMBER 17

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced oranges
       Boiled eggs
       Corn muffins
       English breakfast tea

     LUNCHEON
       Consomme Rivoli
       Olives
       Kingfish, meuniere
       Loin of mutton, charcutiere
       Corn fritters
       Mashed potatoes
       Coffee eclairs
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Cream of chicken, a la Reine
       Celery.      Salted pecans
       Fillet of sole, Maximilian
       Roast chicken, Rosabelle
       Escarole salad
       Frozen raisin punch
       Lady fingers
       Coffee

=Consomme Rivoli.= Consomme garnished with carrots cut in half moon
shape and boiled in consomme, small chicken dumplings and royal custard
also cut in half moon shape.

=Kingfish, meuniere.= Wash and dry the fish and season with salt and
pepper. Roll in flour and saute in pan with butter. When done put on
platter and cover with sauce meuniere. Garnish with quartered lemons and
parsley. See sauce below.

=Sauce meuniere.= This is a butter sauce and is principally used for
fish. Place the fish or meat on a platter and sprinkle with a little
salt and pepper, chopped parsley and the juice of a lemon. Heat in
frying pan four ounces of butter to a hazelnut color and pour over the
dish.

=Loin of mutton, charcutiere.= Salt and pepper the loin well on the
inside, and roll up. Put in roasting pan and roast in the usual manner.
To make charcutiere use the mutton pan gravy, or take Madeira sauce, and
add two sliced pickles and one dozen sliced green olives.

=Corn fritters.= One-half cup of flour, one egg, one-half cup of milk,
one teaspoonful of baking powder and salt and pepper. Mix well and then
add one and one-half cups of grated fresh corn, or a can of drained
corn. Fry in pan with hot butter. Serve on napkin.

=Cream of chicken, a la Reine.= Cream of chicken served with small
chicken dumplings.

=Fillet of sole, Maximilian.= Cook fish as for "au vin blanc." Cover
with Hollandaise sauce mixed with one tablespoonful of hot meat extract.

=Roast chicken, Rosabelle.= Garnish the chicken with hearts of
artichokes and whole tomatoes, Macedoine. Sauce Madere. This garnish is
fine with most any kind of meat.

=Frozen raisin punch.= Strain the juice of three lemons, add one pint of
water, one-half pound of granulated sugar and freeze in the usual
manner. Have ready one-half pound of boiled in sugar, and chopped,
seeded or seedless raisins. Let the raisins cool, and add with the
whites of two eggs, well beaten, to the contents of the freezer, and
finish. Serve in glasses with kirschwasser or maraschino poured over the
top.


DECEMBER 18

     BREAKFAST
       Wheat cakes
       Honey
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Omelette du Czar
       Pickled ham with red cabbage
       Rolled oats pudding
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Puree of white beans
       Pickles
       Striped bass, Portugaise
       Braised beef
       Macaroni in cream
       Chiffonnade salad
       Oriental cup
       Cakes
       Coffee

=Omelette du Czar.= Grate a horseradish root and place in pan with piece
of butter. When hot add one-half cup of cream sauce and mix well. Make
the omelet, and before turning on the platter put the horseradish in the
center. Serve with cream sauce around the edge.

=Pickled ham.= Take a fresh leg of pork, rub with salt and pepper and
put in earthern jar. Cover with red or white wine, or water mixed with
wine, as you prefer; one onion, one carrot, a piece of celery, parsley
in branches, a few pepper berries and a bouquet garni. After two or
three days take out the leg of pork and roast in the ordinary manner.
Half of the pork pickle may be used to make a flour gravy if desired.

=Red cabbage.= Slice a head of red cabbage very fine. Put in vessel with
salt, pepper, one glassful of red wine and two cups of fat bouillon.
Cover and cook in oven for two hours.

=Red cabbage, German style.= One sliced red cabbage, one-half glass of
vinegar, three sliced apples, two cups of bouillon, and a small piece of
salt pork or bacon. Put in oven and cook as above.

=Puree of white beans.= Soak two pounds of white beans over night. Put
in pot and cover with stock or bouillon. Cook until soft, strain through
fine sieve, put back in pot and add enough bouillon to make a soup.
Season to taste, add two ounces of sweet butter, and serve with small
squares of bread fried in butter, separate.

=Striped bass, Portugaise.= Take a whole bass and cut in slices two
inches thick. Put in a buttered pan one-half of an onion chopped, three
chopped shallots, a little chopped garlic and parsley, two tomatoes cut
in small squares and a bouquet garni. Place the fish on top, season with
salt and pepper, add one glass of white wine, one cup of stock or fish
broth, cover and cook slowly. When done remove the bouquet, place the
fish on platter and reduce the broth one-half. Add four ounces of
butter, mix well and pour over the fish. Sprinkle with a little
fresh-chopped parsley mixed with a little finely chopped garlic.

=Macaroni in cream.= Boil the macaroni in salt water. When done drain,
add cream sauce, a little sweet butter, salt and Cayenne pepper. Serve
grated cheese separate.


DECEMBER 19

     BREAKFAST
       Picked-up codfish in cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit with maraschino
       Poached eggs, a l'Indienne
       Nivernaise salad
       German huckleberry pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Oysters on half shell
       Clam broth in cups
       Salted almonds
       Boiled whitefish, Golfin
       Hollandaise potatoes
       Salade Rejane
       Pistache ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Picked-up codfish in cream.= Soak one pound of codfish in cold water
over night. Cut two fresh-boiled potatoes in small squares. Put the
codfish in cold water and boil for ten minutes, drain, and shred the
fish in small pieces. Put in pot with the potatoes, add two cups of
cream sauce, salt and a little Cayenne pepper, and simmer for ten
minutes.

=Poached eggs, a l'Indienne.= Lay hot poached eggs on plain boiled rice
and cover with curry sauce.

=Curry sauce.= Simmer one onion, one leek, a small piece of celery, one
bay leaf, a branch of thyme and a little garlic in three ounces of
butter. Then add two spoonsful of curry powder and two of flour. When
hot add one quart of stock, one sliced apple, one sliced banana saute in
butter, and one-half cup of Indian chutney. Boil for twenty minutes,
strain through a fine sieve and salt to taste. This sauce is used for
chicken, fish, oysters, lamb, veal, etc., and should be made
respectively with chicken broth, fish broth, juice of oysters, and so
forth.

=Salade Nivernaise.= Cut in dices cooked carrots, beets and turnips.
Place in salad bowl in separate piles with a bouquet of watercress in
center. Season with French dressing.

=Boiled whitefish, Golfin.= Boil in the same manner as codfish. Serve on
napkin, garnished with parsley, lemon and small boiled potatoes. Serve
sauce separate. See below.

=Sauce Golfin.= White wine sauce mixed with small strips of boiled
smoked tongue and gherkins.

=Salade Rejane.= Boiled celery root and artichoke buttons, and two
tomatoes cut in squares. Place in salad bowl in separate piles. Slice
two pimentos and place in center. Season with French dressing.

=Pistache ice cream.= Prepare a vanilla ice cream mixture. Crush
one-quarter pound of pistachio nuts to a very fine paste, mix with a
little orange flower water and two ounces of sugar. Infuse in the
vanilla ice cream mixture, and strain when hot. Allow to become cold,
color a very light green, and freeze.


DECEMBER 20

     BREAKFAST
       Sliced bananas
       Shredded wheat biscuit with cream
       Dry toast
       Tea

     LUNCHEON
       Consomme Orleans
       Poached eggs, Diane
       Tripe a la Creole
       Boiled rice
       Demi tasse
       Coffee eclairs

     DINNER
       Potage Alexandra
       Fish patties, Bagration
       Veal kidney roast
       Turnips glaces
       Gendarmes potatoes
       Celery root, field and beet salad
       Bavarois au chocolat
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Consomme Orleans.= Boiled barley well-washed so it will not discolor
the soup, small chicken dumplings, peas, one peeled tomato cut in very
small squares, and some chopped chervil. Put in consomme just before
dishing up.

=Poached eggs, Diane.= Line a tartelette mould with paste and fill with
raw white beans to support the walls, and bake in oven. Then throw out
the beans and fill with tomatoes saute in butter, place a poached egg on
top, cover with Hollandaise sauce, and put in hot oven for a second.

=Tripe a la Creole.= Cut two pounds of boiled tripe in strips, put in
casserole one pint of Creole sauce and boil for thirty minutes. Serve
with boiled rice.

=Potage Alexandra.= Half veloute of chicken and half cream of potatoes.

=Veal kidney roast.= Secure a loin of veal with the kidneys left in,
roll, season well and roast in the same manner as shoulder of veal.

=Fish patties, Bagration.= Small pieces of sole, twelve oysters, and
twelve Little Neck clams boiled in white wine. Drain and add six heads
of French mushrooms sliced, one sliced truffle, and enough white wine
sauce to make the consistency of a stew. Have the patty shells very hot,
and fill.

=Turnips glaces.= Cut the turnips in pieces four times the size of an
almond, and put to boil in salt water. When nearly done drain, add a
small piece of butter and put in oven until yellow. Then add one
spoonful of meat extract and glace them.

=Gendarme potatoes.= Cut the potatoes in the same shape as for French
fried. Put in pan with piece of butter and roast in oven. When half done
add one sliced onion and finish roasting. Sprinkle with salt and chopped
parsley before serving.

=Celery root, field and beet salad.= Boil two peeled celery roots. When
cold slice and put in salad bowl with field salad on top, and decorate
with sliced boiled beets. Season with French dressing.


DECEMBER 21

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed rhubarb
       Boiled eggs
       Dipped toast
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Sweet-and-sour bananas
       Consomme Massenet
       Blood pudding
       Mashed turnips
       Camembert cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Reine Margot
       Celery
       Boiled salmon, sauce Riche
       Olivette potatoes
       Breast of chicken, Alexandra
       Hearts of lettuce
       Philadelphia ice cream
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Sweet-and-sour bananas.= Put six ounces of brown sugar and some pepper
berries tied in cheese cloth, in one quart of vinegar and bring to the
boiling point. Then add three sliced green peppers and boil for two
minutes, add six sliced pimentos and remove the pepper berries. Peel one
dozen bananas and put them in an earthern jar and pour the boiling
vinegar and peppers over them. Let stand for twelve hours and serve
cold.

=Consomme Massenet.= Garnish the consomme with boiled carrots cut in
half-moon shape, and boiled macaroni cut in pieces one-half inch long.
Sprinkle with chopped chervil.

=Blood pudding.= Made of pork blood, etc., and may be obtained from your
butcher. Broil or fry in butter.

=Potage Reine Margot.= To cream of chicken add some almonds mashed fine,
mixed with a little cream, and strained. This is called almond milk.

=Sauce Riche.= Mix a tablespoonful of anchovy paste with a pint of
Hollandaise sauce, add one truffle, three heads of French mushrooms, and
one dozen shrimps cut in small squares.

=Breast of chicken, Alexandra.= Take the breasts of a raw roasting
chicken, season with salt and pepper, put in saute pan with butter. Cook
until nice and yellow, add one-half cup of cream and finish cooking.
Place the breasts on two oval croustades filled with string beans saute.
Add the cream gravy to a cup of Mornay sauce, with a little paprika,
cover the breasts with this sauce and bake in oven till golden yellow.
Serve on napkin with parsley in branches.

=Vanilla Bavarois.= Boil one quart of milk with one-half of a split
vanilla bean. Stir in gradually, until it gets creamy, six ounces of
sugar mixed with the yolks of four eggs. Add five leaves of gelatine
that have been washed in cold water, stirring until melted. Strain, when
cold add one pint of rich, very stiff, whipped cream. Pour into moulds
of fancy shape and place in ice box for about two hours. Serve with
vanilla sauce or sweetened whipped cream flavored with vanilla.


DECEMBER 22

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples with cream
       Scrambled eggs with fine herbes
       Crescents
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Croustade Cancalaise
       Consomme Fleury
       Ragout a la Deutsch
       Roquefort cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Faubonne
       Medaillon of sole, St. Victor
       Roast squab
       Asparagus Hollandaise
       Duchesse potatoes
       Romaine salad
       Pineapple water ice
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Scrambled eggs with fine herbs.= Add to the eggs some fine cut chives,
parsley and chervil.

=Croustade Cancalaise.= Drain off the juice from pickled oysters and
fill the croustades with them. Cover with sauce Tyrolienne and garnish
with chopped hard-boiled eggs.

=Consomme Fleury.= Sliced sorrel boiled in water for a second, boiled
rice, small asparagus tips and peas, in equal parts. Serve in consomme.

=Ragout a la Deutsch.= One-half pound of sliced raw tenderloin of beef,
and three lamb kidneys, season with salt and pepper and fry in frying
pan with very hot butter. When done remove the meat and place in a deep
dish. Put three chopped shallots and a green pepper cut in small dices,
in the butter in frying pan and simmer for a minute. Drain, add two cups
of brown gravy and one cup of saute potatoes. Mix with the meat, but do
not allow to boil. Serve from the deep dish or casserole.

=Potage Faubonne.= Make a puree of white beans and bind with the yolk of
one egg mixed with a little cream. Serve small squares of bread fried in
butter, separate.

=Medaillon of sole, St. Victor.= Cook the fish in white wine and allow
to become cold. Mix the stock with white wine sauce, bring to a boil and
reduce until it becomes very thick. Strain and mix with equal parts of
mayonnaise, whipping well so it will not turn. Let the sauce become cold
and pour over the fish, and place in the ice box. Boil three eggs for
seven minutes, cool, split in two crosswise, remove the yolk and fill
with fresh caviar. Turn the eggs upside down and cover with some of the
fish sauce, colored a delicate rose. Cut some peeled tomatoes in the
form of strawberries, and make a vegetable salad mixed with a little
thick mayonnaise. Make a pyramid of the salad in the middle of the dish,
place the fillet of sole around it, and garnish with the eggs and
tomatoes. Sprinkle with chopped parsley.


DECEMBER 23

     BREAKFAST
       Honey in comb
       Waffles
       Yarmouth bloater
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       German pancakes
       Chocolate
       Whipped cream

     DINNER
       Potage Mathilda
       Lobster croquettes, cream sauce
       Plain potted squab chicken
       Stewed tomatoes
       Lettuce braise
       Chateau potatoes
       Cold artichokes, mustard sauce
       Charlotte aux pommes
       Coffee

=German pancakes.= Two eggs, one-half cup of milk, one-half cup of
flour, a pinch of salt, a little nutmeg and one teaspoonful of sugar.
Mix well. Have a large frying pan ready with hot butter. Be sure and
have the butter run all over the inside of the pan so the pancake will
not stick to the sides when it rises. Pour in the batter and place in
oven. When nearly done, powder with sugar and put back in oven to brown.
Serve with lemon and powdered sugar.

=Potage Mathilda.= Cream of cucumbers with small squares of bread fried
in butter.

=Rice Creole.= Put in sauce pan three ounces of butter, one chopped
onion, a slice of raw ham cut in small squares, and one green pepper cut
in small dices. Simmer until the onions are soft, then add one cup of
washed rice, one peeled and chopped tomato, two red peppers (pimentos),
cut in small dices, two cups of stock or bouillon, and a little salt.
Cover and put in oven until the rice is soft. Before serving add two
spoonsful of grated Parmesan or Swiss cheese. This rice may be used for
stuffing green peppers, tomatoes, onions, etc.

=Chicken croquettes.= Three cups of chicken hash made from white and
dark meat, one cup of chopped fresh or canned mushrooms, and one-half
onion chopped very fine. Simmer in butter. Then add two cups of
Allemande or cream sauce, season with salt and Cayenne pepper. Put on
fire and reduce until thick. Bind with the yolks of two eggs. Allow to
become cold, and form in pyramid shape or in the shape of a large cork,
bread, and fry in swimming fat until well colored. Serve on napkin with
sauce separate, or around the croquettes. A chopped truffle may be added
before simmering, if desired.

=Sweetbread croquettes.= Three cups of sweetbreads parboiled and cut in
small dices, and if desired, one chopped truffle. Simmer with chopped
onions, and then follow recipe for chicken croquettes.

=Lobster croquettes.= Three cups of lobster cut in small dices, one cup
of canned or fresh mushrooms, and one truffle chopped fine. Simmer all
in butter, then add one-half glass of sherry wine and cook for two
minutes, then add two cups of cream sauce and reduce. Bind with the
yolks of three eggs. Follow directions for chicken croquettes for
cooking and serving.


DECEMBER 24

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs with cream
       Shirred eggs
       Dry toast
       Cocoa

     LUNCHEON
       Petite marmite
       Broiled lobster
       Roast beef
       Cleo potatoes
       String bean salad
       Lemon pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Duchesse
       Fillet of sole, Marguery
       Roast lamb, mint sauce
       Succotash
       Broiled fresh mushrooms on toast
       Alligator pear salad
       Peach Tetrazzini
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Petite marmite.= Put in a vessel with cold water to cover, five pounds
of short ribs of beef and a soup hen. Season with a spoonful of salt,
and bring to a boil, and skim carefully so the broth will be clear. Then
add two large carrots, three turnips, a piece of cabbage, one stalk of
celery and four leeks, all tied in a cheese cloth; one bouquet garni,
and a large marrow bone. When beef and fowl are well done remove, take
off the skin and fat and cut the meat in pieces one inch square. Remove
the bouquet garni, and cut the cabbage, carrots, turnips, celery and
leeks in round pieces one-half inch in diameter. Put the beef, chicken
and vegetables in another pot and strain the broth over them. Boil
slowly for five minutes. Have your butcher saw some raw marrow bones in
wafers as thin as paper, and add them to the soup at the last moment.
Serve very hot in soup tureen, with a sprinkle of chopped chervil. Cut
some crust of bread or rolls in diamond shape, bake in oven till brown,
and serve separate. Special earthern petite marmite pots are carried at
the large stores, and are preferable to tureens for serving.

=Broiled lobster.= Cut a live lobster in two lengthwise, season with
salt and pepper, sprinkle with olive oil, and broil on hot iron. Serve
with maitre d'hotel sauce, garnished with lemons and parsley.

=Cleo potatoes.= Cut raw potatoes in pear shapes the size of an egg,
parboil in salt water, then put in a well-buttered pan pointed end up,
sprinkle with melted butter and roast in oven, basting all the time till
brown. When done, salt and serve on napkin, garnished with parsley.

=String bean salad.= Put in salad bowl some cold boiled string beans,
sprinkle with very finely-sliced chives, chopped parsley, salt and
fresh-ground black pepper, and one-third vinegar and two-thirds olive
oil.

=Potage Duchesse.= Cream of rice with royal in strips.

=Fillet of sole, Marguery.= Prepare the sole as for "au vin blanc."
Place on top of each fillet two parboiled mussels, and two heads of
French mushrooms, cover with sauce "au vin blanc," sprinkle with bread
crumbs made from stale rolls, and a little butter, and bake in hot oven
until a light yellow color.


DECEMBER 25

     BREAKFAST
       Hothouse raspberries with cream
       Oatmeal
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Eggs ministerielle
       Cold assorted meats
       Chiffonnade salad
       Pont Neuf cake
       Demi tasse

     DINNER
       Blue Points, mignonette
       Bisque d'ecrevisses
       Salted almonds.      Celery
       Ripe California olives
       Fillet of trout, Cafe de Paris
       Sweetbreads braise, au jus
       Puree de marrons
       Roast goose, apple sauce
       Sweet potatoes, Southern style
       Pate de foie gras de Strasbourg
       Lettuce salad, aux fines herbes
       Frozen diplomate pudding
       Assorted cakes
       Pont l'eveque cheese      Crackers
       Nuts and raisins      Coffee

=Eggs ministerielle.= Cut sandwich bread in slices about two inches
thick. With a round cutter about three inches in diameter cut out the
white of the bread. With another cutter about an inch and a half in
diameter cut out the center of the round slices, leaving a ring of
bread. Soak these rings in thick cream for a second, put on buttered
dish, break an egg in the center of each, salt and pepper, cover with a
light cream sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese, and bake in oven for
about eight minutes.

=Pont Neuf potatoes.= Three times the size of regular "French" fried
potatoes.

=Sweetbreads braise au jus. (Glace).= Place in buttered saute pan one
sliced onion, one carrot, a little parsley, a bay leaf and a clove, and
a few pepper berries. Put three parboiled sweetbreads, which may be
larded with fresh or salted pork if desired, on top, add one-half cup of
bouillon, salt, and put over fire to boil. When reduced place in oven,
add a small quantity of meat extract, and glace by basting continually
with its own broth, until well browned. When done lay on platter and
strain the broth over them.

=Bisque d'ecrevisses.= Remove the tails of three dozen ecrevisses. Use
two-thirds of the shells, broken up, to make the soup, and one-third for
ecrevisse butter. Simmer in butter one onion, one carrot, a leek and a
little celery, all cut up; with one bay leaf, some thyme and one
spoonful of black pepper berries. Then add the broken shells, two
spoonsful of flour, one glass of white wine, one-half glass of brandy,
one gallon of bouillon and one cup of raw rice. Season with salt and
Cayenne pepper, cook till rice is very soft, and strain through fine
sieve. Bisque should be a little thicker than other cream soups. Before
serving add two spoonsful of ecrevisse butter and stir well, then add
the ecrevisse tails and one-half glass of Cognac.

=Ecrevisse= butter. Break fine in mortar some ecrevisse (crayfish)
shells. Put in sauce pan with one-half pound of butter, one-half onion,
one-half carrot, a small piece of celery, one-half of a leek stalk, a
little thyme, one bay leaf and a few pepper berries, and simmer in oven
till butter is clarified, or clear, and all the other liquids
evaporated. Squeeze through cheese cloth into a bowl standing in ice.
The butter will rise to the top, and may be easily removed when cold.
This butter is used with many sauces, soups, etc.

=Lobster butter.= Use lobster shells and prepare in the same manner as
ecrevisse butter. This butter is used for lobster sauce, Newburg dishes,
soups, etc.


DECEMBER 26

     BREAKFAST
       Stewed prunes
       Boiled eggs
       Toast
       Tea

     LUNCHEON
       Grapefruit en supreme
       Cold goose and ham, apple sauce
       Romaine salad
       Brie cheese
       Crackers
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage bonne femme
       Roast ruddy duck
       Fried hominy and currant jelly
       Cold asparagus, mustard sauce
       Baba au rhum
       Coffee

=Potage bonne femme.= Puree of white beans with Julienne of vegetables.

=Fillet of sole, Florentine.= Put the fillet of one sole in a buttered
pan, salt, add one-half glass of water mixed with white wine, and boil
until done. In the center of a buttered platter put a cup of puree of
spinach and place the boiled fillet on top, cover with Mornay sauce,
with grated cheese and small bits of butter on top of the sauce. Bake in
oven until brown.

=Roast ruddy duck.= Roast for twelve minutes, in the same manner as teal
duck.

=Baba au rhum.= One-half pound of flour, one ounce of yeast, three
ounces of butter, two ounces of sugar, two ounces of currants and the
rind and juice of one lemon. Dissolve the yeast in one cup of warm milk
and make a soft sponge with half of the flour, cover and let rise in a
warm place. Work the sugar and the butter together until creamy, add the
eggs and lemon and the rest of the flour. When the sponge has risen to
twice its original size mix with the batter; at the same time adding the
currants. Fill baba moulds half full and let raise until nearly to the
edge of the moulds. Bake in a rather hot oven. When done soak well in a
syrup made with one pint of water, one pound of sugar, one gill of rum
and the juice of a lemon. Pour some of the sauce over the babas when
serving.

=Savarin au kirsch.= Make a dough the same as for baba au rhum, but omit
the currants. Fill a round crown-shaped savarin mould half full, allow
to raise, and bake. Soak in a syrup made of one pint of water, one pound
of sugar, and one gill of kirschwasser. Serve warm.

=Savarin Chantilly.= Same as savarin au kirsch, but decorated with
whipped cream, and served cold.

=Savarin Montmorency.= Like savarin au kirsch, but serve hot with stewed
stoned cherries as sauce.

=Savarin mirabelle.= Same as savarin au kirsch, but serve hot with
stewed stoned mirabelles.


DECEMBER 27

     BREAKFAST
       Preserved figs
       Ham and eggs
       Toasted corn muffins
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Consomme in cups
       Ripe olives
       Panfish saute, meuniere
       Stewed tripe, Blanchard
       Savarin au kirsch      Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Flamande
       Frogs' legs, saute a sec
       Roast sirloin of beef, Porte Maillot
       Lettuce braise
       Chateau potatoes
       Endive salad
       Biscuit glace
       Assorted cakes
       Coffee

=Stewed tripe, Blanchard.= Simmer a chopped onion in three ounces of
butter, add one pint of bouillon, or stock, or chicken broth, one
spoonful of flour, one pound of tripe cut in strips, one cupful of raw
round potatoes cut out with a small-size "Parisian" spoon, one bouquet
garni and one gill of white wine. Cover and cook for one hour, or until
potatoes are very soft. Before serving remove bouquet garni and sprinkle
with fresh-chopped parsley.

=Potage Flamande.= Potato soup mixed with brunoise.

=Frogs' legs, saute a sec.= To have the best flavor frogs should be
killed just before cooking. Remove the skins and cut off the hind legs,
salt and pepper them and roll in flour. Saute one dozen frogs' legs in
three ounces of hot butter in a frying pan, for a few minutes over a
good fire. Then add a chopped shallot and let simmer for a few minutes.
The legs should then be crisp. Serve on a platter with chopped parsley
and lemon.

=Roast sirloin of beef, Porte Maillot.= Roast the sirloin, serve with
sauce Madere, garnish with small French carrots, celery braise, lettuce
braise and chateau potatoes.

=Lettuce braise.= Wash four heads of large romaine lettuce in cold
water, parboil in salt water, cool, and squeeze dry with the hands. Cut
each head in four lengthwise, remove the stem, season with salt and
pepper, and fold so both ends come together. Place a piece of pigskin in
the bottom of a buttered pan, put the lettuce on top, and add a sliced
onion, one carrot and a bay leaf. Cover with buttered manilla paper and
allow to simmer for a while. Then add one cup of stock, put in oven and
cook until soft. Used for garnishing entrees, etc.

=Biscuit glace.= Put in double boiler eight yolks of eggs, one-half
pound of sugar, and one-half of a split vanilla bean. Cook until it
thickens, stirring continually. Then remove from the fire and beat with
an egg whip until cold and very light. Remove the vanilla bean, add one
quart of whipped cream and mix lightly. Put in fancy paper cases or
fancy moulds, and freeze. Before serving decorate the tops with whipped
cream, or any kind of ice cream or water ice.

=Biscuit glace, St. Francis.= Fill some oblong paper cases with biscuit
glace foundation, put in ice box to freeze, decorate the tops with
pistachio and strawberry ice cream before serving.

=Biscuit glace= of strawberry, raspberry, coffee, pistachio, chocolate,
apple, mapleine, pineapple, kirsch, peppermint, etc. Same as Biscuit
Glace, but decorate with the desired ice cream or water ice before
serving.


DECEMBER 28

     BREAKFAST
       Broiled Finnan haddie
       Baked potatoes
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape of sardines
       Boston baked beans
       Brown bread
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Seapuit oysters
       Cream of rice
       Salted pecans
       Fillet of flounder, Cafe Riche
       Spring lamb tenderloin, Thomas
       Roast chicken, au jus
       Hearts of romaine, egg dressing
       Strawberry parfait
       Macaroons
       Coffee

=Broiled Finnan haddie.= (Smoked haddock). Remove the bones, roll in oil
and put on iron to broil. When done on both sides place on platter,
cover with maitre d'hotel sauce or plain melted butter, garnish with
parsley in branches and quartered lemons.

=Cream of rice.= Melt in sauce pan two ounces of butter, add one-quarter
pound of rice flour, and when hot, one and one-half pints of chicken
broth. Boil for ten minutes and strain. Season with salt and Cayenne
pepper, and add one-half pint of hot cream and a small piece of butter
before serving.

=Salted Pecans.= Roast one-half pound of shelled pecans to a light brown
color, wet with a solution of water and a little gum Arabic, or the
white of an egg, while they are still hot, and then dust over with one
spoonful of fine table salt and stir until dry.

=Salted English walnuts.= Follow directions for pecans.

=Fillet of flounder, Cafe Riche.= Put the fillets in a buttered pan,
cover with white wine, and boil. When done place on platter, pour
Genoise sauce with the addition of a spoonful of beef extract, over the
fish.

=Spring lamb tenderloin, Thomas.= Broil the tenderloin and dish up on
buttered toast, and cover with sauce Colbert. Garnish on one side with
small boiled potatoes covered with cream sauce, and flageolet beans on
the other.

=Flageolet beans.= These are French beans and can be obtained in cans.
Put on the fire in salt water, bring to the boiling point, and drain.
Add sweet butter, salt and pepper, mix well and serve immediately.

=Egg dressing, for salads.= Chop two hard-boiled eggs, and put in salad
bowl with one-half teaspoonful of French mustard, one pinch of salt,
some fresh-ground pepper, a little chopped parsley, a little chervil,
two spoonsful of vinegar and four of olive oil. Mix well.

=Strawberry parfait.= With one quart of strawberry ice cream mix one
pint of sweet whipped cream. Put in moulds or glasses and serve with
whipped cream on top.

=Parfaits.= Pistachio, vanilla, chocolate, peach and cafe, all prepared
the same as strawberry.

=Neapolitan parfait.= Put in mould or glass, three kinds of parfaits, as
strawberry, vanilla and pistachio. Allow to become very hard in ice box,
and serve whipped cream on top.

=Wilson parfait.= Peach parfait with the addition of some chopped peeled
peaches. Serve with whipped cream and a crystallized violet on top.


DECEMBER 29

     BREAKFAST
       Baked apples
       Oatmeal with cream
       Rolls
       Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Canape Monte Carlo
       Poached eggs, Persanne
       Tosca salad
       French pastry
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Consomme Madrilene
       Ripe California olives
       Boiled salmon, sauce Anglaise
       Ragout fin
       Stanislaus salad
       Cream cheese with Bar le Duc
       Crackers
       Coffee

=Canape Monte Carlo.= Puree of foie gras lightly mixed with a little
stiff mayonnaise and spread on thin toast. Garnish around the edge with
chopped yolks of hard-boiled eggs, and serve on napkins with parsley in
branches.

=Eggs Persanne.= Place hot poached eggs on a round toast, cover with
tomato sauce and sprinkle with fine chopped ham and parsley.

=Tosca salad.= Cut in fine strips about one inch long some boiled ham,
tongue, cooked potatoes and buttons of artichokes. Arrange in salad bowl
with some asparagus tips in the center, garnish with the chopped yolks
and whites of hard-boiled eggs, separate; and serve with French
dressing.

=Consomme Madrilene.= Slice a handful of sorrel and cook for five
minutes in consomme. Add vermicelli and one tomato cut in small dices.
Serve grated cheese separate.

=Boiled salmon, sauce Anglaise.= Cook the salmon in the same manner as
for Hollandaise. For sauce Anglaise use one pint of Hollandaise sauce,
mixed with two chopped hard-boiled eggs, sliced chives, chopped parsley
and chervil. Serve separate.

=Stanislaus salad.= Remove the inside leaves of a whole head of lettuce,
leaving a green bowl. Put in bottom, celery cut in long strips, with
slices of grapefruit and seedless grapes cut in half, on top. Sprinkle
with chopped walnuts. Serve with French dressing.

=Ragout fin.= Slice some parboiled tender sweetbreads, chickens' livers,
chickens' combs, chickens' kidneys and truffles, and saute in butter,
cooking each separately. Then put all in one pan, add a half glass of
good sherry, boil for one minute, add a half pint of brown gravy, simmer
for a few minutes, and serve with chopped chervil on top. Chickens'
combs and kidneys come in bottles from France. If you wish you may cut
the tips from raw rooster combs, put in boiling water for a minute, when
they can be rubbed with salt to remove the skin. Then soak in cold water
to cause the blood to run out, and boil in salt water till soft.

=Cream cheese with Bar le Duc.= Mix some cream cheese with a little
whipped cream and spread on plate in the shape of a ring. Put some red
Bar le Duc jelly in center. Serve toasted crackers separate.


DECEMBER 30

     BREAKFAST
       Grapefruit
       Pork sausages      Apple sauce
       Wheat cakes      Coffee

     LUNCHEON
       Plain consomme in cups
       Fried fillet of sole, remoulade
       Brie cheese and crackers      Coffee

     DINNER
       Potage Jackson      Crab meat Monza
       Chicken dumplings, sauce Allemande
       Braised beef a la mode      Peas a la Francais
       Duchesse potatoes
       Pineapple biscuit glace
       Assorted cakes      Coffee

=Fried fillet of sole.= Clean and trim the fillets, season with salt and
pepper, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, then in bread crumbs, and
fry in swimming hot lard for five minutes. Remove and serve on napkin
with quartered lemons and fried parsley. Sauce separate.

=Remoulade sauce.= Take a handful of spinach, one of watercress and one
of parsley and mash fine in a mortar. Put in a cloth and press out the
juice. Mix the juice with a pint and a half of mayonnaise, add four
chopped gherkins and some sliced chives.

=Crab meat, Monza.= Wash carefully one pound of fresh mushrooms, and cut
each one in four. Put in saute pan with two ounces of butter and simmer
for thirty minutes. When the mushrooms are soft add the meat of one crab
cooked in cream. Before serving add one gill of dry sherry wine.

=Crab meat in cream.= Remove the meat from the shell of a boiled crab.
In a sauce pan put a piece of butter the size of an egg, and place on
stove. When warm add two spoonsful of flour and allow to become hot,
then add one pint of boiling milk and one-fourth of a pint of hot cream.
Stir well and boil for ten minutes. Season with salt and Cayenne pepper,
then add the crab meat and serve in deep dish. Serve dry toast separate.

=Chicken dumplings.= (Quenelles de volaille). Take the breast of a raw
fowl and trim carefully away the fat, using the white meat only. Chop
very fine and pass through a fine sieve, place in a bowl on ice, season
with salt and Cayenne pepper, and with a wooden spoon stir in little by
little some very thick cream (not whipped), which has been kept on ice.
Add the cream until you have nearly double the amount of force meat.
Have two teaspoons in cold water. Take one and fill with the force meat,
make a little hole in the middle and fill with goose liver puree and
close up. Remove the dumpling from the first spoon with the other one
and place on a buttered pan, and continue. When enough are formed cover
with stock and bring to the boiling point, then set off the fire and let
stand for ten minutes on the back of the range. The force meat may be
used for small dumplings without the puree of goose liver; or some other
filling may be used. Make them small for garnishing consomme, vol au
vent, patties, financiere, tortue, etc. The force meat is also used to
make timbales of chicken.

=Sauce Allemande.= Cut up three pounds of veal bones, put in vessel with
two gallons of water, bring to a boil and skim. Add one onion, a carrot,
a little celery and leek, some pepper berries, two cloves, a sprig of
thyme and some salt. Boil for two hours and strain. Put in sauce pan
three ounces of butter, when hot add two ounces of flour and heat again.
Then add a pint and a half of the broth, boil for ten minutes, season
and strain. This is the foundation of many fancy sauces.

=Potage Jackson.= Potato soup with small pieces of macaroni added.


DECEMBER 31

     BREAKFAST
       Raw apples
       Rolled oats with cream
       Buttered toast
       Cocoa with whipped cream

     LUNCHEON
       Poached eggs, Zingara
       Calf's head, vinaigrette
       Boiled potatoes
       Lemon pie
       Coffee

     DINNER
       Toke Point oysters
       Potage Americaine
       Fillet of sole, Valeska
       Saddle of lamb, international
       Chiffonnade salad
       Coffee ice cream
       Alsatian wafers
       Demi tasse

=Poached eggs, Zingara.= Poached eggs on toast. Cover with tomato sauce
and small strips of tongue.

=Potage Americaine.= Put in a pot one onion, one leek, and a little
celery, and simmer in three ounces of butter until soft. Then add two
spoonsful of flour and simmer again. Now add one peeled and cut up
squash, a bouquet garni and two quarts of stock, and boil till well
done. Remove the bouquet garni and strain the remainder through a fine
sieve. Season with salt and pepper. Before serving add one cup of cream
and two cups of plain boiled rice.

=Fillet of sole, Valeska.= This is stuffed fillet of sole with a slice
of lobster and a slice of truffle on top, and cooked in white wine.
Reduce broth and add Hollandaise sauce, and stir in a spoonful of
ecrevisse butter to give a pink color.

=Saddle of lamb, international.= Put saddle of lamb in a roasting pan
with one carrot, an onion, a piece of celery, a few pepper berries and
some parsley in branches. Season the saddle with salt and pepper,
rubbing in well. Spread some butter over the top and roast in oven,
basting continually so it will not become dry. Cook for forty minutes,
then take saddle from the pan, remove the fat and add to the gravy a
spoonful of flour and a cup of stock or hot water, salt, cook for five
minutes and strain. Before serving add one-half gill of sherry wine. For
international garnishing use a bouquet each of puree of peas, mashed
potatoes and puree of chestnuts.

=Coffee ice cream.= Add to vanilla ice cream before freezing one pint of
strong coffee and one-quarter pound of sugar.

=Calf's head, plain.= Cut the flesh, tongue and brains from the skull
and put in cold water for six hours. Put the brains aside. (See index
for calf's brains.) Put the rest of the meat on the fire in water with a
handful of salt, bring to a boil and allow to cool. Then cut in square
pieces, leaving the tongue whole. Put the cut-up pieces in a pot, cover
with water, add one handful of salt, a carrot, an onion, a spoonful of
black pepper berries, one bouquet garni and a lemon cut in two. Boil
till well done. If not to be used right away put in earthen jar and
strain the broth over it.

=Vinaigrette sauce.= Chop fine one small sour pickle and add salt, some
fresh-ground black pepper, one spoonful of vinegar, two spoonsful of
olive oil, some sliced chives, chopped parsley and chervil. If desired,
add one chopped shallot and a spoonful of chopped capers.




Selections from The Hotel St. Francis Menu Files


_Hotel St. Francis, Oriental Dinner_, May 15 1917:

     Fruit Salad, Oriental
     Cream of Chicken, Sam Yong
     Mixed Chinese Nuts
     Halibut, Veronica
     Chop Suey
     Roast Duckling, Apple Sauce
     Noodles
     Cold Artichoke
     Mikados Glacee
     Mignardises
     Demi Tasse


_Hotel St. Francis, Californian Dinner_, March 31, 1917:

     California Oysters
     Clear Green Turtle, Sherry
     Salted Almonds
     Sand Dabs, Meuniere
     Sweetbreads braise, with Peas
     Broiled San Francisco Jumbo Squab
     Chateau Potatoes
     Cold Fresh Asparagus, Mustard Sauce
     Cafe Parfait
     Assorted Cakes
     Demi Tasse


_French Dinner_, March 15, 1917:

     Coeur de Palmier, Victor
     Creme de Volaille, a la Reine
     Amandes Salees
     Truite de Riviere, Meuniere
     Pommes Parisienne
     Pigeonneau au Cresson
     Petits Pois Etuves
     Salade de Saison
     Pudding Diplomate Glace
     Petits Fours
     Demi Tasse


_To meet Mr. Masaya Suzuki, director of The Sumitomo Bank, Limited, and
director-in-chief of The Sumitomo General Head Office. Mr. Seiichi Koh,
host_, April 10, 1919:

     Canape Favorite
     Toke Point Oysters
     Green Turtle Soup
     Almonds      Celery      Olives
     Seafood, Mariniere
     Noisette of Spring Lamb, Colbert
     Sherbet Fleur de Palma
     Sweetbreads Conte de Nassau
     Breast of Chicken, St. Francis
     Potatoes Clarence
     Heart of Lettuce, Fines Herbes
     Biscuit Emaline
     Friandises
     Coffee

     _Amontillado Sherry_
     _Pommery Greno_
     _Liqueurs_


_Hotel St. Francis, Mexican Dinner_, May 23, 1917:

     Ecrevisses, Gourmet (Cold)
     Abalone Chowder
     Salted Jordan Almonds
     Boiled Striped Bass, Hollandaise
     Potatoes Nature
     Pilaff Mexicaine
     Roast Imperial Squab
     Asparagus Tips
     Salade de Saison
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Wafers
     Demi Tasse


_Hotel St. Francis, Italian Dinner_, April 27, 1917:

     Hors d'Oeuvres, Italienne
     Bisque d'Ecrevisses
     Salted Almonds
     Shad au Gratin, Piedmontaise
     Macaroni, Caruso
     Stuffed Imperial Squab
     Potatoes, Tetrazzini
     Cold Artichoke
     Tutti Frutti
     Friandises
     Bonbon Italien
     Demi Tasse


_Hotel St. Francis, Southern Dinner_, May 28, 1917:

     Pickled Oysters, New Orleans
     Giblet Soup, with Barley
     Salted Nuts
     Boiled Salmon, Genoise
     Vol au Vent, Toulouse
     Roast Squab
     Potatoes Sybil
     Cold Asparagus
     Coupe Carolina
     Assorted Cakes
     Demi Tasse


_Patek-Newman wedding_, August 24, 1915:

     Fresh caviar
     Toke Points
     Essence of Chicken
     Celery      Olives      Salted Nuts
     Frogs' Legs, Newman
     Noisettes of Lamb, Colbert
     Peas Etuve
     Champagne Punch
     Breast of Duckling
     Pommes a la Reine
     Salad Veronica
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Cakes
     Coffee


_Mr. Raphael Weill_, May 23, 1915:

     California Oysters on Half Shell
     Salmon Belly, Bechamel
     White Corn Bread, sliced
     Saddle of Lamb
     Chicory Salad
     Asparagus, Sauce Mousseline
     Hot Waffles
     Cafe au Lait


_Chi Psi Fraternity_, August 28, 1915:

     Toke Points
     Clear Bortsch
     Salted Almonds      Celery      Olives
     Lobster Newburgh
     Vol au Vent, Financiere
     Chateaubriand, Colbert
     Peas a la Francaise
     Pommes Chateau
     Champagne Punch
     Breast of Squab
     Salad de Saison
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Cakes


_Hayashi Banquet_, March 24, 1916:

     California Oysters on Half Shell
     Potage Lemardelais
     Salted Walnuts      Olives      Celery
     Mountain Trout, Meuniere
     Pommes Maitre d'Hotel
     Noisette of Baby Lamb, Perigord
     Croustade St. Germain
     Sorbet Doi
     Roast Guinea Hen
     Lettuce and Tomato Salad
     Glace Madeleine
     Mignardises
     Coffee


_Mr. A. Johnston, dinner to Charles Schwab_, May 9, 1915:

     Crab Cocktail, Moscovite
     Chicken Gumbo, Princess
     Almonds      Olives
     Sweetbreads, Eugenie
     Roast Guinea Hen
     Grilled Sweet Potato
     Artichokes, French Dressing
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Mr. James Woods, dinner to Mr. Boomer of New York_, May 13, 1915:

     Hors d'Oeuvres
     Beef Tea en Tasse Diable
     Olives      Almonds
     Huitres
     Vol au Vent of Chicken
     Saddle of Lamb
     Potatoes Reine
     Chicory
     Asparagus, Hollandaise Sauce
     Bavarois
     Cakes
     Coffee


_Knights of the Royal Arch_, May 20, 1915:

     Toke Points
     Cream of Celery
     Olives      Almonds
     Striped Bass, Joinville
     Tournedos Forestiere
     Pommes Rissole
     Peas Etuve
     Champagne Punch
     Roast Squab Chicken
     Salad de Saison
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Cakes
     Coffee


_Mrs. Neustadter_, February 14, 1916:

     California and Toke Points
     Consomme de Volaille, Royal
     Almonds      Olives
     Frogs a la Michels
     Asparagus, Hollandaise
     Chicken Poele
     Brandied Peaches
     Pommes Fondantes
     Goose Liver Saute
     Lettuce, French Dressing
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Real Estate Banquet_, February 5, 1916:

     Toke Points
     Mongol
     English Walnuts      Olives      Celery
     Fillet of Bass, Joinville
     Sweetbread Cutlets, Virginia
     Peas
     Roast Squab
     Potatoes Chateau
     Salad de Saison
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Mr. L. J. Scroffy_, February 4, 1916:

     Fresh Caviar
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Terrapin Maryland
     Wild Rice
     Virginia Ham Glace, Ferrari
     Faison Truffles
     Salad de Saison
     Pudding Glace, Diplomate
     Mignardises
     Coffee


_Mrs. J. C. Cowdin_, January 27, 1916:

     Canape de Caviar Frais
     Huitres de Californie
     Bortsch Clair en Tasse
     Celeri      Olives Mures      Amandes Salees
     Poitrine de Faisan aux Figues
     Pommes a la Reine
     Petits Pois a la Francaise
     Foie d'Oie a la Gelee
     Salad de Laitue
     Coupe St. Jacques
     Mignardises
     Demi Tasse


_Mrs. Samuel Rissinger_, January 5, 1916:

     Hors d'Oeuvres Russe
     Potage Lord Mayor
     Almonds      Olives      Celery
     Frogs, Michels
     Breast of Pheasant, Rossini
     Figs au Madere
     Fresh Asparagus, Hollandaise
     Salad Veronica
     Apple Charlotte
     Ice Cream Pralinee
     Cakes
     Coffee


_Bagmen of Bagdad_, December 30, 1915:

     Toke Points
     Green Turtle Soup
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Terrapin Maryland
     Noisette of Lamb, Colbert
     Haricot Panachee
     Potatoes Rissolee
     Champagne Punch
     Breast of Duck, Currant Jelly
     Fried Hominy
     Cold Asparagus, Mustard Sauce
     Pudding Glace
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Mr. Horace Hill_, December 22, 1915:

     California Oysters on Half Shell, Mignonnette
     Chicken Gumbo, Princess
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Vol au Vent of Crab Meat, Monza
     Saddle of Spring Lamb
     Puree of Chestnut
     Peas a la Francaise
     Aspic de Foie Gras, Romaine
     Orange Souffle Glace
     Assorted Cakes
     Demi Tasse


_Mrs. Jules Levy_, January 10, 1917:

     Toke Points
     Petite Marmite with Marrow Dumplings
     Cheese Straws
     Frogs, Neptune
     Breast of Duckling a l'Orange
     Potatoes Fondantes
     Sweet and Sour String Beans
     Fresh Asparagus, Hollandaise
     Foie d'Oie aux Truffes
     Lettuce Salad
     Omelette Souffle aux fraises
     Demi Tasse


_Mr. Otto Irving Wise_, December 27, 1916:

     Queux d'Ecrevisse, Moscovite
     Broth in Cups
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Frogs Mariniere
     Boneless Squab Guinea Hen
     Pommes a la Reine
     Artichoke Bottom, Hollandaise
     Mousse de Foie Gras, Virginie
     Lettuce Salad, French Dressing
     Pudding Diplomate
     Fancy Cakes
     Coffee


_Mr. L. A. Schwabacher_, December 2, 1916:

     Canape de Caviar
     Queux d'Ecrevisse, Moscovite
     Broth in Cups au Cerfeuil
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Frogs' Legs a la Schwabacher
     Ris de Veau Braise
     Truffes de Perigord en Serviette
     Boneless Squab Guinea Hen, Farcis
     Pommes a la Reine
     Asperges Nouvelles, Hollandaise
     Mousse de Foie Gras, Virginie
     Salad de Laitue
     Pudding Diplomate
     Mignardises
     Demi Tasse


_Mr. Colum_, June 28, 1919:

     Canape Caviar with Cocktail
     Toke Points
     Green Turtle Soup
     Almonds      Olives
     Lobster Newburg
     Ham Glace, Champagne Sauce
     Timbale of Spinach
     Iowa Corn Bread
     Vol au Vent Toulouse
     Kirsch Punch
     Guinea Hen
     Potatoes Chateau
     Salad
     Ice Cream      Cakes
     Coffee


_Mrs. J. Ehrman, Supper_, October 27, 1915:

     Oysters on Half Shell
     Frogs in Rings
     Broiled Squab on Toast
     Shoestring Potatoes
     Lettuce Salad
     Chocolate Parfait
     Strawberry Water Ice
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Mr. Charles Schwab_, May 15, 1915:

     Supreme Frascate
     Potage Lemardelais, Passe
     Almonds      Olives
     Fillet of Trout, Cafe de Paris
     Breast of Chicken, Colbert
     Peas a la Francaise
     Artichokes, Hollandaise Sauce
     Terrine de Foie Gras
     Lettuce aux Cerfeuil
     Bavarois aux Fraise and Framboise
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Pacific Musical Club, Supper_, February 23, 1916:

     Toke Points
     Salted Almonds
     Broiled Squab
     Sybil Potatoes
     Salad de Saison
     Ice Cream, Mozart
     Fancy Cakes
     Coffee


_St. Ignatius University_, November 9, 1916:

     Blue Points
     Clear Turtle
     Almonds      Celery      Olives
     Sole Normande
     Filet Mignon, Sauce Madere
     Haricots Panaches
     Potatoes Noisette
     Champagne Punch
     Roast Squab Chicken
     Salad de Saison
     Glace Madeleine
     Fancy Cakes
     Coffee


_Mr. T. F. Baxter, Supper_, November 20, 1916:

     California Oysters on Half Shell, Mignonnette
     Crab Meat, Monza
     Breast of Squab, Colbert
     Lettuce Salad
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_First Subscription Ball, Mrs. S. S. Martin, Supper_, December 22, 1915:

     Scrambled Eggs
     Bacon
     Sausages
     Toast Melba
     Coffee


_Mr. Ercole Canessa, Luncheon_, May 29, 1915:

     Hors d'Oeuvres
     Salted Almonds
     Fillet of Sand Dabs, Victor, Tartar Sauce
     Breast of Chicken, Colbert
     Peas      Souffle Potato
     Souffle Chocolat
     Sauce Vanilla
     Demi Tasse


_Prudential Insurance Company of America, Luncheon_, February 15, 1916:

     Canape of Anchovies
     Potage Lambale
     Olives
     Lobster Newburgh
     Loin of Lamb, Zahler
     Salad de Saison
     Hot Mince Pie
     Black Coffee


_Mrs. A. Welch, Luncheon_, February 16, 1916:

     Fruit Cocktail in Coupe
     Chicken Broth in Cups
     Almonds
     Fillet of Sole, Tartare
     Broiled Squab
     Pommes Chateau
     Cold Asparagus, Mustard Sauce
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Cakes Caroline
     Coffee


_Dr. Hugo Lieber_, May 18, 1915:

     California Oysters
     Strained Gumbo
     Olives      Almonds
     Fillet of Sole, Florentine
     Breast of Chicken, Colbert
     Pomme Foudaietes
     Lettuce
     Asparagus, Hollandaise Sauce
     Ice Cream      Cakes
     Coffee


_Mrs. Hiram Johnson_, July 22, 1915:

     Cantaloupe Moscovite
     Beef Tea in Cups
     Salted Almonds
     Fillet of Trout, Cafe de Paris
     Breast of Chicken with Truffles
     Potatoes Noisettes
     Hearts of Lettuce
     Biscuit Glace, St. Francis
     Friandises
     Demi Tasse


_National Association of Professional Baseball_, November 10, 1915:

     Toke Points
     Cream a la Reine
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Fillet of Sole, Joinville
     Chicken Croquettes with Peas
     Roman Punch
     Imperial Squab
     Salad de Saison
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Fancy Cakes
     Coffee


_Inland Iron Company_, May 27, 1915:

     Crab Cocktail, Moscovite
     Clear Bortsch in Cups
     Salted Almonds      Ripe Olives
     Sand Dabs, Meuniere
     Sweetbread Cutlets, St. Germain
     Chateaubriand, Sauce Madere
     Artichokes
     Pommes Fondantes
     Sorbet au Champagne
     Roast Imperial Squab
     Salad de Saison
     Ice Cream
     Mignardises
     Coffee


_Prudential Insurance Company_, May 24, 1919:

     Cherry Stone
     Clear Green Turtle
     Salted Almonds      Ripe Olives
     Aiguillette of Sole, Marjory
     Filet Mignon with Fresh Mushrooms
     Flageolet aux Fines Herbes
     Potato Chateau
     Orange Sherbet
     Roast Imperial Squab
     Chiffonade Salad
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Mr. Henry T. Scott_, May 19, 1915:

     Bouchees Fui with Cocktail
     Fresh Caviar
     California Oyster Soup
     Almonds      Olives
     Sand Dabs, Saute, Meuniere
     Pommes Parisienne, Persillade
     Breast of Duck
     New String Beans
     Chicory and Escarole Salad
     Mousse of Fresh Strawberries
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Dinner in honor of Baron S. Goto, given by Consul General T. Ohta_:

     Grapefruit and Orange au Marasquin
     Potage Lemardelais
     Salted Pecans      Ripe Olives
     Bass Under Glass with Fresh Mushrooms
     Noisette of Baby Lamb, Colbert
     String Beans
     Sorbet Mikado
     Breast of Chicken, Lucullus
     Potatoes Julienne
     Cold Fresh Asparagus, Mustard Sauce
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Friandises
     Demi Tasse
     _White Wine_      _Red Wine_
     _Champagne_
     _White Creme de Menthe_
     _Cognac_
     _Cigarettes_
     _Cigars_


_Mr. Raphael Weill_, May 13, 1915:

     California Oysters on Half Shell
     Brandade
     Saddle of Lamb
     Petits Pois a la Francaise
     Chicory
     Blanc Mange
     Petits Fours
     Coffee


_Mrs. George Marye_, July 20, 1915:

     Grapefruit Supreme
     Salted Almonds and Pecans
     Fillet of Sand Dabs, Mornay
     Noisettes of Lamb, Sauce Diable
     Corn
     Boneless Squab, Stuffed
     Hearts of Lettuce, Russian Dressing
     Fresh Peach Ice Cream
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Mrs. H. Sinsheimer_, October 27, 1915:

     Toke and California Oysters
     Einlauf Suppe
     Almonds
     Frogs Raphael, Weill
     Eingedampfte Chicken
     French Fried Potatoes
     String Beans au Beurre
     Bottoms of Artichokes, Lettuce Victor
     Orange Souffle Glace St. Francis
     Fancy Cakes
     Coffee


_Retail Dry Goods Association_, October 10, 1916:

     Blue Points
     Potage Lord Mayor
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Fillet of Sole, Bagration
     Tournedos Forestiere
     Potatoes Noisette
     Peas Etuve
     Champagne Punch
     Roast Squab Chicken
     Salade de Saison
     Frozen Diplomate Pudding
     Fancy Cakes
     Coffee


_Golden Gate Thoroughbred Breeders' Association_, September 19, 1915:

     Toke Points
     Clear Turtle
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Aiguillette of Sole, Marguery
     Vol au Vent Vaupaliere
     Filet Mignon Madere
     Peas a la Francaise
     Champagne Punch
     Breast of Squab
     Potatoes Noisettes
     Salade de Saison
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Fire Chief's Banquet of San Francisco_, September 30, 1915:

     Toke Points
     Potage Lord Mayor
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Fillet of Bass, Mariniere
     Tournedos with Fresh Mushrooms
     Peas a la Francaise
     Potato Risolee
     Roman Punch
     Roast Squab
     Salade de Saison
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Telephone Pioneers of America_, September 21, 1915:

     Caviar d'Astrakan
     Toke Points
     Potage Windsor
     Celery      Almonds      Olives
     Ecrevisses Voltaire
     Mousse de Ris de Veau Royal
     Chateaubriand Bayard
     Petits Pois a la Francaise
     Sorbet Ambassadrice
     Poitrine de Guinea aux Fines Herbes
     Pommes Noisettes
     Salade Veronica
     Glaces Fantaisies
     Mignardises
     Cafe Noir


_West Virginia Banquet_ (_West Virginia Building, Exposition Grounds_),
November 5, 1915:

     Toke Points
     Strained Gumbo, Princesse
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Fillet of Bass, Joinville
     Sweetbread Braise with Peas
     Champagne Punch
     Roast Imperial Squab
     Pommes Chateau
     Salad de Saison
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Mrs. Henry T. Scott_, August 30, 1915:

     Canape Caviar with Cocktail
     Clear Bortsch in Cups
     Cheese Straws
     Salted Pecans
     Sand Dabs, Meuniere
     Mousse of Virginia Ham
     Timbale of Spinach
     Breast of Pheasant, Lucullus
     Salad Veronica
     Coupes Curasco
     Fancy Cakes
     Coffee


_Carlos Sanjinis_ (_Bolivian Consul_), August 23, 1915:

     Toke Points
     Green Turtle Soup, Xerxes
     Almonds      Olives      Celery
     Lobster Newburgh
     Noisette of Lamb, Perigordine
     Peas a la Francaise
     Pommes a la Reine
     Champagne Punch
     Breast of Chicken, Virginia Ham
     Celery Victor
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Papyrus Club_, May 15, 1918.

     Coupe Printaniere au Kirsch
     Consomme Tomato Chantilly
     Olives
     Sand Dabs, Meuniere
     Pommes Hollandaise
     Chateau Briand Forestiere
     Cold Asparagus, Mustard Sauce
     Meringue Glacee
     Demi Tasse


_Dinner to Mr. Thomas Coleman, Manager Hotel St. Francis_, September
26, 1918.

     Toke Points
     Clear Turtle
     Olives      Almonds
     Ecrevisses Voltaire
     Breast of Chicken, Colbert
     Peas Etuve      Potatoes Fondante
     Hearts of Lettuce St. Francis
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Cakes Caroline
     Coffee


_Mrs. Anita Baldwin_, August 14, 1915:

     Fruit Salad Supreme
     Consomme
     Almonds      Olives
     Frogs, Neptune
     Mousse of Virginia Ham
     Puree of Fresh Artichokes
     Breast of Chicken
     Pommes Soufflee
     Alligator Pears
     Pudding Nesselrode
     Fancy Cakes
     Coffee


_Mrs. E. H. Stotesbury_, July 25, 1915:

     Astrakan Caviar
     Chicken Broth
     Cheese Straws
     Salted Pecans and Almonds
     Sand Dabs, Tempis
     Pommes Parisienne
     Virginia Ham
     English Spinach
     Corn Lieb
     Breast of Squab Chicken
     Salad Ravajole
     Coupes Fraise
     Fancy Cakes
     Coffee
     Candy

_Monsieur Gregoire, French Building, P. P. I. E._, November 15, 1919:

     Bouchees Fines
     Huitres Mignonnettes
     Bisque d'Ecrevisses
     Almonds      Celery      Olives
     Truite de Riviere
     Tournedos Cheron
     Pommes Soufflee
     Poitrine de Volaille, Virginie
     Coeur de Laitue
     Glace Madeleine
     Friandises
     Coffee


_Students Army Training Corps_, December 7, 1918.

     Oyster Cocktail
     Potage Mongol
     Olives      Celery      Almonds
     Filet of Sole, Joinville
     Roast Imperial Squab
     Peas Etuve      Potatoes Parisienne
     Salad de Saison
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Assorted Cakes
     Coffee


_Mr. Jesse Lillienthal (Luncheon)_, November 7, 1918.

     California Oyster Cocktail
     Olives      Celery
     Filet Mignon Grilled
     Pommes Chateau
     New String Beans
     Individual Alaska
     Demi Tasse


_Mr. Mulcahy_, February 26, 1918:

     Toke Points Mignonnette
     Clear Bortsch in Cups
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Ecrevisses Voltaire
     Noisette of Lamb with Fresh Mushrooms
     Peas Etuve--Pommes Lorette
     Breast of Duck
     Fried Hominy
     Endive, Victor Dressing
     Asparagus Glacee
     Assorted Cakes
     Cafe Marcel


_Colonel Tessier_, November 4, 1918:

     Potage St. Germain
     Almonds
     Fillet Sand Dabs, Sauce Ecrevisses
     Poulet Poele
     Pommes Champs Elysees
     Petits Pois Parisienne
     Lettuce Salad, Fines Herbes
     Soufflee, Vanilla Sauce
     Fruit
     Coffee


_Mr. T. Ohta_:

     Blue Points Mignonnette
     Clear Green Turtle Soup
     Salted Nuts      Celery      Olives
     Ecrevisses Voltaire
     Mackerel Mikado
     Jumbo Squab, Parisienne
     Asparagus, Hollandaise
     Salad Fruitiere
     Fresh Figs, Sake
     Friandises
     Demi Tasse


_Luncheon to Major Harley, Mr. French and Friends_, November 5, 1918:

     Ecrevisses Gourmets Cold
     Broiled Chicken
     Peas Etuve--Potatoes Champs Elysees
     Cream Cheese and Bar le Duc
     Demi Tasse


_Mr. M. J. Cohen_, April 16, 1917:

     Toke Points
     Potage Lord Mayor
     Celery      Olives      Almonds
     Terrapin Maryland
     Whole Squab Chicken
     Potatoes Chateau
     Cold Asparagus, Figaro
     Fancy Ice Cream
     Cakes
     Demi Tasse


_Mr. Mogi_, January 16, 1918:

     Fresh Caviar on Ice Socle
     Clear Green Turtle, Amontillado
     Almonds      Celery      Olives
     Frogs Legs, Michels
     Sweetbread aux Truffes
     Petits Pois
     Goose Liver with Apples
     Punch Mikado
     Pheasant, Bread Sauce
     Potatoes Champs Elysees
     Melon Richelieu
     Cakes
     Coffee




INDEX


The Classified Index follows on pages 398 to 412, inclusive. The general
Alphabetical Index is on pages 413 to 430 inclusive.


CEREALS

     Boiled farina in milk, July 6
     Fried hominy, Oct. 29
     Force and cream, Oct. 30; Nov. 8
     Germea, Nov. 22
     Grape-nuts, Nov. 15
     Hominy, Oct. 28
     Malta vita, Nov. 16
     Pearl grits, March 5
     Pearl grits with cream, Nov. 11
     Pettijohns, Oct. 29
     Shredded wheat biscuits, Nov. 10


CHEESE

     Cheese balls, Oct. 29
     Cottage cheese, May 24
     Cream cheese with Bar-le-Duc, Dec. 29
     Olympic Club cheese, Oct. 23
     Petaluma cream cheese, Sept. 18
     Souffle au fromage (cheese souffle), April 4
     St. Francis cheese, July 1


CHICKEN

     A la King, Nov. 11
     Austrian fritters, April 22
     A l'Estragon, March 8
     Boiled fowl, Oct. 29
     Breast of chicken, Alexandra, Dec. 21
     Breast of chicken with Virginia ham, Feb. 22
     Breast of chicken with figs, Sept. 22
     Breast of chicken, James Woods, Oct. 25
     Baked chicken with rice, March 19
     Broiled chicken, Tyrolienne, May 28
     Breast of chicken en aspic, July 26
     Boiled fowl, celery sauce, Aug. 21
     Chicken croquettes, Dec. 23
     Cold chicken, Isabella, Sept. 20
     Coquille of chicken, Mornay, Oct. 12
     Diva, Nov. 13
     Deviled chicken's legs, April 30
     Deviled chicken's legs with Virginia ham, Sept. 3
     Edward VII, Dec. 9
     Essence of chicken in cup, Feb. 6
     En cocotte, Bazar, Oct. 20
     Fried, Maryland, Jan. 20
     Fried, Villeroi, June 26
     Fried, Savoy, Sept. 8
     Fried, country style, Nov. 12
     Fricassee, a l'ancienne, June 27
     Hash, Victor, Dec. 3
     Hash, on toast, Feb. 15
     Hash, a l'Italienne, Oct. 9
     Leon X, Oct. 17
     Livers, saute, forestiere, Feb. 8
     Livers saute, au Madere, Dec. 14
     Plain, roasted, Oct. 27
     Patties, Toulouse, May 12
     Potpie, home style, Feb. 18
     Saute, Ambassadrice, Dec. 6
     Saute, Marengo, Dec. 8
     Saute, Parisienne, Feb. 12
     Saute, Montmorency, Feb. 23
     Saute, Salonika, March 3
     Saute, Hongroise, March 17
     Saute, Portugaise, March 18
     Saute, Chasseur, April 3
     Saute, D'Austin, April 16
     Saute, Madeleine, April 29
     Saute, Demidoff, May 3
     Saute, au Madere, May 13
     Saute, Amphitian, May 16
     Saute, demi-deuil, May 31
     Saute, Archiduc, June 14
     Saute, Viennoise, July 3
     Saute, Lafitte, July 7
     Saute, Alsacienne, Aug. 31
     Saute, Josephine, Oct. 13
     Stuffed chicken with California raisins, Oct. 23
     Tyrolienne, March 26
     Valencienne, Jan. 7


SQUAB CHICKEN

     Broiled, Nov. 23
     Michels, July 22
     Plain potted, Jan. 10
     Saute, Sutro, Feb. 26


CAPON

     Galantine, July 19
     Stuffed, Bruxelloise, Feb. 27
     Stuffed, St. Antoine, Jan. 4


BEEF

     Braised beef, with calf's feet, Dec. 4
     Beefsteak, Provencale, Jan. 13
     Beefsteak, Bismarck, Jan. 18
     Beef tongue, boiled, Jan. 29
     Beef a la mode, May 21
     Braised beef, June 12
     Beef marrow, Princess, July 8
     Braised beef, comfortable, Sept. 7
     Beefsteak, Jussien, Oct. 3
     Baked porterhouse, Oct. 11
     Beef tongue, Menschikoff, Oct. 15
     Beef tongue, Parisienne, March 11
     Broiled tenderloin steak, Nov. 8
     Broiled sirloin steak, Cliff House, June 9
     Corned beef and cabbage, Jan. 27
     Corned beef hash, March 31
     Corned beef hash, browned, March 31
     Corned beef hash, au gratin, March 31
     Chipped beef on toast, June 8
     Filet mignon, April 14
     Filet mignon, Athenienne, June 16
     Filet mignon, Bayard, March 4
     Filet mignon, Cheron, May 25; Nov. 29
     Filet mignon, Du Barry, Sept. 11
     Filet mignon, Marechale, May 20
     Filet mignon, Trianon, April 14
     Fillet of beef, Charcutiere, April 15
     Fillet of beef, Cendrillon, May 5
     Fillet of beef, Lombarde, May 12
     Fillet of beef, Balzag, June 26
     Fillet of beef, Dumas, Aug. 14
     Hamburg steak, Nov. 9
     Hashed fillet of beef, Sam Ward, April 29
     Larded sirloin of beef, Nov. 20
     Larded tenderloin of beef, April 28
     Larded tenderloin of beef, Montbasson, April 28
     Larded tenderloin of beef, St. Martin, June 1
     Larded tenderloin of beef, Vigo, June 22
     Larded tenderloin of beef, Lili, July 2
     Larded tenderloin of beef, Sigurd, Sept. 16
     Larded rump of beef, June 12
     Miroton of beef, en bordure, Dec. 2
     Minced tenderloin, a l'estragon, Feb. 21
     Meat croquettes, Oct. 11
     Ox tail braise, May 4
     Planked sirloin steak, Jan. 22
     Porterhouse steak, Bercy, May 20
     Porterhouse steak, Jolly, June 20
     Planked sirloin steak, St. Francis, July 17
     Rump steak, Bercy, Oct. 31
     Roast top sirloin of beef, Nov. 21
     Rheinbraten, Nov. 26
     Rump steak, Dickinson, Aug. 25
     Roast beef, Jules Albert, Aug. 18
     Roast sirloin, fermiere, June 14
     Roast sirloin, Mounet-Sully, Aug. 7
     Roast tenderloin, Berthieu, July 13
     Roast tenderloin, Boucicault, Oct. 10
     Roast tenderloin, vert pre, July 24
     Sirloin steak, sauce Madere, Nov. 4
     Sirloin of beef, roasted, Nov. 5
     Sirloin steak, marchand de vin, Feb. 11
     Sweet-sour beef tongue, March 1
     Sirloin steak, Dickinson, April 7
     Small tenderloin steak, Demidoff, April 17
     Sour schmorrbraten, May 16
     Smoked beef tongue, with spinach, May 22
     Small tenderloin steak, Fedora, May 27
     Steak, Tartare, July 21
     Small sirloin steak a la Russe, July 29
     Salisbury steak, Stanley, Sept. 14
     Small tenderloin steak, Cercle Militaire, Sept. 23
     Sirloin steak, Saxonne, Sept. 29
     Small tenderloin steak, Nicholas II, Sept. 30
     Sirloin steak, Braconiere, Oct. 7
     Steak and kidney pie, Nov. 17
     Tenderloin of beef, larded, Nov. 2
     Tenderloin of beef, Cubaine, April 19
     Tenderloin of beef, Cumberland, April 22
     Tenderloin of beef, Brillat Savarin, May 15
     Tenderloin of beef, Voisin, June 4
     Tenderloin of beef, Moderne, Aug. 3
     Tenderloin of beef, Gambetta, Aug. 9
     Tenderloin steak, Marseillaise, June 25
     Tenderloin steak, Polonaise, April 25
     Tournedos Massenet, Nov. 22
     Tournedos Bordelaise, May 8
     Tournedos Nicoise, May 17
     Tournedos Bayard, May 30
     Tournedos, Vaudeville, June 29
     Tournedos, Porte Maillot, July 10
     Tournedos, Cafe Julien, Sept. 1
     Tenderloin steak, Bernardi, Oct. 13


BREAD, ETC.

     Almond biscuits, Oct. 22
     Anchovy toast, May 17
     Bran bread, Oct. 26
     Bran biscuits, Oct. 26
     Breakfast rolls, Nov. 25
     Cheese toast, Oct. 19
     Corn bread, I, Dec. 7
     Corn bread, II, Oct. 25
     Four o'clock tea bran bread, Oct. 26
     French bread, Nov. 28
     Graham bread, Oct. 25
     Homemade bread, Nov. 28
     Lunch rolls, Nov. 30
     Maryland beaten biscuits, Nov. 17
     Maryland corn bread, Nov. 13
     Milk toast, Nov. 1
     Popover muffins, July 20
     Puff paste crescents, Nov. 14
     Pulled bread, Sept. 15
     Raisin bread, Oct. 25
     Snails, Oct. 23
     Spoon or mush bread, Oct. 24
     Tea biscuits, Nov. 3
     Toast Melba, March 5
     Wheat bran gems, Oct. 26


DUCKS, TAME

     Breast of duck, Virginia style, April 26
     Breast of duck, April 26
     Roast Muscovy duck, Sept. 24
     Roast tame duckling, Nov. 9


EGGS

     FRIED
     Fried, Oct. 29
     Infante, Aug. 19
     In oil, Jan. 29
     With chives, May 30
     With salt pork, Sept. 2
     A la Russe, Jan. 29
     A la tripe, Feb. 12
     Bacon and eggs, Nov. 5
     Bagration, Feb. 15
     Basque, June 23
     Belmont, June 6
     Biarritz, May 31
     Bennett, Sept. 27
     Bonne femme, Oct. 7
     Bordelaise, March 2
     Buckingham, Aug. 16
     Canada, Aug. 28
     Castro, Oct. 1
     Coquelin, April 13
     Don Juan, Aug. 26
     Fedora, June 2
     Gastronome, March 13
     Grazienna, Sept. 1
     Ham and eggs, Oct. 29
     Lenox, Aug. 22
     McKenzie, Oct. 11
     Meyerbeer, Aug. 20
     Mery, Jan. 21
     Mirabeau, Jan. 12
     Montebello, Aug. 6
     Moscow, July 12
     Oudinot, June 19; Jan. 20
     Sarah Bernhardt, March 7
     St. Catherine, July 17
     St. George, April 9
     Suzette, July 29
     Virginia ham and eggs, April 12
     Venetian, in chafing dish, April 1

     COLD EGGS
     Danoise, June 4
     Poached, a l'Estragon, June 24
     Poached, mayonnaise, Oct. 31
     Riche, Aug. 21
     Stuffed, with anchovies, July 5
     Stuffed, epicure, Sept. 14
     With celery, Aug. 5

     SCRAMBLED
     Scrambled, Oct. 28
     Belley, Sept. 23
     Bullit, Oct. 4
     Caroline, July 6
     Havemeyer, July 9
     Lucullus, July 19
     Magda, Oct. 13
     Marseillaise, May 25
     Mauresque, Aug. 13
     Mayence, July 21
     Nantaise, Sept. 13
     Norwegian, Sept. 28
     Pluche, July 31
     Pocahontas, March 23
     Raspail, April 14
     Sarah Bernhardt, Oct. 6
     Texas Clover, April 2
     With anchovies, Nov. 29
     With asparagus tips, Dec. 8
     With bacon, Feb. 6
     With cheese, June 14
     With cheese, Swiss, July 5
     With chives, March 30
     With fine herbs, Dec. 22
     With ham, Nov. 6
     With lobster, Sept. 11
     With morocquaine, Nov. 22
     With morrilles, Jan. 22
     With smoked beef, Oct. 28
     With smoked salmon, July 24
     With tomatoes, Aug. 25
     With truffles, March 11

     SHIRRED EGGS
     Shirred, Nov. 7
     Amiral, June 21
     Antoine, June 16
     Au beurre noir, Nov. 9
     Argenteuil, June 8
     Bercy, Nov. 24
     Bienvenue, July 14
     Brunswick, Sept. 30
     Careme, March 21
     Caroli, Sept. 3
     Chipolata, Jan. 24
     Conte, Oct. 12
     Creole, Dec. 13
     De Lesseps, Aug. 25
     Epicurienne, April 18
     Imperial, Sept. 19
     Jockey Club, Sept. 6
     Lorraine, April 15
     Meyerbeer, March 5
     Metternich, Oct. 19
     Ministerielle, Dec. 25
     Monaco, June 5
     Mornay, Jan. 5
     Nicoise, July 24
     Opera, Aug. 24
     Turque, April 30
     With bananas, May 27
     With parsley, Feb. 7
     With peppers, July 8

     POACHED
     Poached, Oct. 30
     Agostini, June 10
     A la Reine, Feb. 28
     Andalouse, Oct. 10
     Argenteuil, Oct. 9
     Aromatic, Dec. 4
     Au fondu, June 11
     Balti, Aug. 17
     Bar le Duc, July 20
     Benedict, Dec. 9; Feb. 3
     Beaujolais, Jan. 6
     Benoit, Aug. 29
     Bernadotte, Aug. 31
     Blanchard, June 17
     Bombay, June 20
     Boston Style, Oct. 8
     Bresilienne, Feb. 11
     Celestine, June 26
     Chambord, Aug. 30
     Chateaubriand, May 6
     Chambery, Sept. 10
     With clams, Creole, Feb. 1
     Colbert, June 13
     Colonel, Feb. 26
     Columbus, May 28
     Creole, July 4
     Crossy, April 4
     d'Artois, April 27
     Dauphine, Sept. 17
     Derby, Sept. 20
     Diane, Dec. 20
     d'Orleans, Aug. 9
     Florentine, Sept. 9
     Gambetta, Jan. 13
     Germaine, Sept. 7
     Gourmet, April 26; July 11
     Henri IV., Nov. 23
     Hongroise, May 23
     Indienne, Dec. 19
     Isabella, Sept. 18
     Lackmee, Feb. 7
     Malakoff, May 3
     Maltaise, March 9
     Marlborough, July 16
     Martha, Feb. 25
     Mexicaine, Sept. 24
     Mirabel, May 16
     Mounet-Sully, March 3
     Nantaise, Oct. 14
     Oriental, Jan. 1
     Patti, Aug. 1
     Paulus, April 16
     Perigordine, July 28
     Persanne, Dec. 29
     Piedmontase, July 30
     Presidential, May 27
     Princesse, March 17
     Rothschild, Feb. 20
     Sans Gene, Nov. 25
     St. Laurent, April 3
     St. Pierre, May 17
     Taft, Oct. 3
     Talleyrand, Feb. 24; April 7
     Tivoli, Dec. 2
     Troubadour, Feb. 13
     Vanderbilt, May 26
     Velour, Oct. 5
     Vilna, Aug. 4
     Virginia, April 12
     Waterloo, May 19
     Zingara, Dec. 31
     Zurlo, Oct. 17

     EGGS MOLLET
     Auben, Sept. 5
     A l'aurore, Oct. 16
     Bordelaise, Aug. 12
     Cream sauce, Aug. 3
     Florentine, Aug. 18
     Moliere, Sept. 11

     EGGS EN COCOTTE
     Boremis, Dec. 8
     Commodore, April 29
     Coquelicot, Dec. 10
     Du Barry, March 19
     d'Uxelles, June 3
     Italienne, Dec. 3
     Marigny, Nov. 20
     Plain, April 24
     Porto Rico, May 20
     Renaissance, March 10
     Ribeaucourt, Oct. 15
     Valentine, April 20
     Voltaire, April 1


FISH

     Admiral, Jan. 31
     Alaska black cod, broiled, Feb. 4
     Alaska black cod, kippered in cream, Aug. 8
     Alaska black cod, smoked, broiled, Oct. 9
     Alaska black cod, smoked in cream, Oct. 22
     Alaska candlefish, broiled, Feb. 25
     Alsatian fish, Oct. 22
     Barracouda, aux fines herbes, Nov. 2
     Barracouda, broiled, sauce Rougemont, Sept. 1
     Bass, aiguillettes of, Massena, March 14
     Bass, dijonnaise, March 12
     Bass, fillet of, Argentina, June 17
     Bass, fillet of, Brighton, July 5
     Bass, fillet of, Dieppoise, Dec. 8
     Bass, fillet of, Duglere, May 9
     Bass, fillet of, Menton, March 17
     Bass, fillet of, 1905, Nov. 20
     Bass, fillet of, shrimp sauce, Dec. 4
     Bass, Nicoise, May 31
     Bass, paupiettes of, March 20
     Bass, Provencale, Jan. 6
     Bass, timbale of, Feb. 11
     Bignon, Jan. 11
     Black bass, Cambaceres, Dec. 15
     Black bass, Heydenreich, July 16
     Black bass, planked, Sept. 3
     Black bass, Tournon, July 11
     Bluefish, broiled, maitre d'hotel, Nov. 13
     Bouillabaisse, Marseillaise, Dec. 12
     Brook trout, boiled, Romanoff, Oct. 14
     Brook trout, broiled, with bacon, April 8
     Brook trout, Cafe de Paris, Oct. 25
     Brook trout, Cambaceres, Oct. 8
     Brook trout, Meuniere, April 4
     Brook trout, Miller style, April 13
     Brook trout, Volper, Aug. 18
     Butterfish, saute Meuniere, Oct. 31
     Catfish, saute Meuniere, April 6
     Codfish balls, Dec. 12
     Codfish, boiled, Flamande, Aug. 20
     Codfish, boiled, Horose, Dec. 16
     Codfish, cakes, April 16
     Codfish or other white fish, boiled, Oct. 28
     Codfish, picked, in cream, Dec. 19
     Codfish, salt, Biscayenne, June 24
     Codfish, salt, Nova Scotia, March 23
     Codfish steak, a l'Anglaise, Aug. 14
     Chambord, Feb. 20
     Court bouillon, Feb. 26
     Ecrevisses, Voltaire, Oct. 16
     Eels, Mariniere, Aug. 28
     Finnan haddie, broiled, Dec. 28
     Finnan haddie, in cream, Oct. 31
     Fish, cold, Michels, June 29
     Fish dumplings, Feb. 11
     Flounder, fillet of, Cafe Riche, Dec. 28
     Flounder, fillet of, Cansale, Feb. 7
     Flounder, fillet of, Chevreuse, Dec. 6
     Flounder, fillet of, Chilienne, Sept. 6
     Flounder, fillet of, Circassienne, May 17
     Flounder, fillet of, Meissonier, Jan. 7
     Flounder, fillet of, Norvegienne, Oct. 10
     Flounder, fillet of, Piombino, June 11
     Flounder, fillet of, Pompadour, May 2
     Flounder, fillet of, St. Avertin, July 13
     Frogs' legs, Dilloise, June 20
     Frogs' legs, fried, Espagnole, July 22
     Frogs' legs, Greenway, May 27; Sept. 11
     Frogs' legs, Jerusalem, Feb. 19
     Frogs' legs, Mariniere, Jan. 23
     Frogs' legs, saute a sec, Oct. 29
     Frogs' legs, saute a sec, Dec. 27
     Halibut, Boitel, July 2
     Halibut, broiled, Alcide, May 22
     Halibut, broiled, maitre d'hotel, Nov. 7
     Halibut, fillet of, Bristol, May 4
     Halibut, fillet of, Cubaine, Aug. 10
     Halibut, fillet of, Lilloise, May 30
     Halibut, fillet of, Mornay, Dec. 15
     Halibut, fillet of, Venitienne, May 26
     Halibut, Metternich, Oct. 11
     Halibut, Richmond, April 30
     Halibut, scalloped, with cheese, April 15
     Herring, fresh, a l'Egyptienne, Oct. 20
     Kingfish, Argentine, July 29
     Kingfish, Meuniere, Dec. 17
     Kingfish, Ubsala, June 25
     Kippered herring, broiled, March 21
     Mackerel, broiled, anchovy, butter, Aug. 15
     Mackerel, salted, boiled, Nov. 2
     Matelote, of fish, March 9
     Montebello, Jan. 17
     Papillote, Feb. 8
     Papillote, Club style, Feb. 8
     Patties, Bagration, Dec. 20
     Perch, au Bleu, June 22
     Perch, fillet of, St. Charles, May 24
     Perch, Meuniere, Jan. 2
     Pompano, Bateliere, June 19
     Pompano, broiled, Havanaise, March 23
     Pompano, Cafe Anglaise, March 18
     Pompano, fillet of, Pocharde, Oct. 15
     Pompano, saute, d'Orsay, Oct. 14
     Pompano, meuniere, Nov. 4
     Pompano, Vatel, June 13
     Rock cod, boiled, Fleurette, Nov. 4
     Rock cod, fillet of, Nantaise, March 27
     Royal, Jan. 10
     Russe, Jan. 13
     Salmon belly, salted, melted butter, June 5
     Salmon, boiled, Badu-Cah, Sept. 17
     Salmon, boiled, Diplomate, June 1
     Salmon, boiled, Fidgi, May 14
     Salmon, boiled, Princesse, Jan. 4
     Salmon, boiled, sauce mousseline, Nov. 5
     Salmon, boiled, Villers, April 21
     Salmon, Mirabeau, April 15
     Salmon, braised, Parisienne, Dec. 11
     Salmon, broiled, a la Russe, July 8
     Salmon, broiled, St. Germaine, July 21
     Salmon, cold, smoked, Nov. 1
     Salmon, concourt, June 26
     Salmon, smoked, broiled, March 5
     Salmon steak, broiled, Nov. 21
     Salmon steak, Calcutta, Aug. 6
     Salmon steak, Colbert, Sept. 9
     Salmon steak, Hongroise, June 15
     Sand dabs, Carnot, Sept. 16
     Sand dabs, David, May 13
     Sand dabs, fried fillet of, sauce verte, April 25
     Sand dabs, Gaillard, Sept. 7
     Sand dabs, Grenobloise, May 28
     Sand dabs, Meuniere, Oct. 27
     Sardines on toast, Jan. 29
     Scallops, Poulette, Oct. 9
     Sea bass, boiled, Hollandaise, March 3
     Sea bass, Montebello, July 24
     Shad, baked, with raisins, April 16
     Shad, broiled, Albert, March 8
     Shad, broiled, maitre d'hotel, Feb. 19
     Shad and roe, baked, a l'Americaine, April 24
     Shad and roe, planked, April 3
     Shad roe, Bordelaise, May 12
     Shad roe, Bordelaise, May 29
     Shad roe, broiled, maitre d'hotel, Jan. 7
     Shad roe, broiled, Ravigote, March 24
     Shad roe, broiled, with bacon, March 20
     Shad roe, en bordure, June 4
     Sheepshead, boiled, cream sauce, Feb. 17
     Sheepshead, boiled, sauce Hollandaise, Nov. 13
     Skate, au beurre noire, Nov. 21
     Smelts, broiled, Americaine, Oct. 17
     Smelts, fillet of, Stanley, May 3
     Smelts, fried, Nov. 6
     Smelts, planked, en bordure, Nov. 19
     Sole, aiguillettes of, Hoteliere, Feb. 15
     Sole, aiguillettes of, Mariniere, Feb. 23
     Sole, Colbert, May 25
     Sole, cold fillet of, Raven, Dec. 1
     Sole, Dejazet, Oct. 21
     Sole, fillet of, au vin blanc, Oct. 30
     Sole, fillet of, Bercy, Feb. 21
     Sole, fillet of, Bretonne, April 10
     Sole, fillet of, Castelanne, Jan. 15
     Sole, fillet of, Cardinal, April 24
     Sole, fillet of, Choisy, Feb. 13
     Sole, fillet of, Diplomate, Dec. 10
     Sole, fillet of, Doria, May 15
     Sole, fillet of, Florentine, Dec. 26
     Sole, fillet of, Francaise, July 10
     Sole, fillet of, Gasser, Jan. 4
     Sole, fillet of, Joinville, Dec. 13
     Sole, fillet of, Judic, Oct. 13
     Sole, fillet of, Lord Curzon, May 18; Jan. 18
     Sole, fillet of, Mantane, June 6
     Sole, fillet of, Marechale, Feb. 9
     Sole, fillet of, Marguery, May 1; Dec. 24
     Sole, fillet of, Maximilian, Dec. 17
     Sole, fillet of, Meissonier, Sept. 15
     Sole, fillet of, Montmorency, July 1; July 23
     Sole, fillet of, Normande, Jan. 8
     Sole, fillet of, Orly, March 18
     Sole, fillet of, Paul Bert, Sept. 25
     Sole, fillet of, Paylord, Aug. 5
     Sole, fillet of, Pondichery, Sept. 10
     Sole, fillet of, Rose Caron, Jan. 25
     Sole, fillet of, St. Cloud, April 18
     Sole, fillet of, St. Malo, Dec. 2
     Sole, fillet of, St. Nizaire, June 12
     Sole, fillet of, Suchet, May 7
     Sole, fillet of, Talleyrand, June 18
     Sole, fillet of, Turbigo, March 11
     Sole, fillet of, under glass, March 24
     Sole, fillet of, Valeska, Dec. 31
     Sole, fillet of, Villeroi, March 13
     Sole, fillet of, Voisin, April 14
     Sole, fried fillet of, Remoulade, Dec. 30
     Sole, Heloise, Oct. 18
     Sole, small fried fillet of, March 18
     Spanish mackerel, broiled, aux fines herbes, Jan. 9
     Striped bass, boiled, Indian soy sauce, Aug. 31
     Striped bass, Buena Vista, June 27
     Striped bass, planked, Nov. 27
     Striped bass, Portugaise, Dec. 18
     Striped bass, stewed, Americaine, Aug. 24
     Tahoe trout, boiled pepper sauce, May 29
     Tahoe trout, boiled, sauce mousseline, June 7
     Tahoe trout, boiled, Vatchette, May 20
     Tomcods, fried, March 6
     Tomcods, Meuniere, Feb. 2
     Tomcods, Montmorency, April 29
     Trout, boiled, plain, Nov. 1
     Trout, fillet of, Rachel, June 2
     Turbot, aiguillettes of, Bayard, June 14
     Turbot, boiled, nonpareil, Aug. 16
     Turbot, fillet of, Bagration, Oct. 2
     Turbot, fillet of, Bateliere, July 27
     Turbot, fillet of, Bonnefoy, March 7
     Turbot, fillet of, Daumont, Jan. 3
     Turbot, fillet of, Jean Bart, June 8
     Turbot, fillet of, Nesles, April 3
     Turbot, fillet of, Sarcey, April 12
     Turbot, fillet of, Tempis, July 31
     Turbot, fillet of, Windsor, April 27
     Victoria, Feb. 28
     Vol au vent of salmon, Genoise, May 1
     Whitefish, baked, St. Menehould, Aug. 2
     Whitefish, boiled, Netherland style, Jan. 1
     Whitefish, broiled, maitre d'hotel, Nov. 15
     Whitebait, fried, March 15
     Whitebait on graham bread, Nov. 26
     Yarmouth bloater, Nov. 15


FRUIT

     Bananas sliced, with whipped cream, June 3
     Berries with whipped cream, June 3
     Cactus fruit with lemon, Feb. 7
     California raisins, Oct. 23
     Cantaloupe and watermelon, surprise, Sept. 3
     Fruit salad, au kirsch, Feb. 3
     Fruit salad, au marasquin, Feb. 3
     Fruit salad, Chantilly, Feb. 3
     Fruit salad glace, April 18
     Figs sliced, with cream, June 4
     Fruits sliced, with whipped cream, June 3
     Grapefruit a l'anisette, April 8
     Grapefruit a la Rose, April 25
     Grapefruit and orange en supreme, Feb. 18
     Grapefruit, Cardinal, July 10
     Grapefruit cocktail, April 18
     Grapefruit en supreme, Dec. 9
     Grapefruit en supreme with kirsch, April 15
     Grapefruit with cherries, Nov. 17
     Grapefruit with chestnuts, Jan. 30
     Orange and Grapefruit, St. Francis, Oct. 23
     Orange en supreme, March 18
     Orange en supreme au curacao, May 5
     Peaches, sliced, with whipped cream, June 3
     Peach, Norelli, April 27
     Pears, mayonnaise, Oct. 19
     Strawberries, Parisienne, May 22
     Strawberries Romanoff, April 18


FRUIT, COOKED

     Apple, baked, Nov. 23
     Apple compote, June 23
     Apricot compote, June 23
     Apples fried, Nov. 24
     Apple sauce, April 12
     Bananas, baked, Sept. 18
     Compote of pineapple, June 13
     Gooseberry compote, June 29
     Grapefruit marmalade, April 10
     Nectarine compote, June 23
     Orange compote, July 4
     Peaches, baked, June 22
     Peach compote, June 23
     Peaches with brandy sauce, May 19
     Pears, baked, June 22
     Pears in syrup, April 1
     Pears, stewed, with claret, Sept. 19
     Plum compote, June 23
     Prunes, Nov. 16
     Prunes, baked, Oct. 25
     Prune compote, June 23
     Prunes, Victor, Oct. 23
     Rhubarb, Nov. 15
     Strawberries, Oct. 27


GAME

     Butterball duck, roasted, Nov. 17
     Canvas-back duck, roasted, Nov. 10
     Hare, saddle of, sour cream sauce, March 30
     Mallard duck, roasted, Nov. 1
     Partridge, roasted, Feb. 15
     Pheasant pie, cold, July 10
     Pheasant, roasted, Jan. 9
     Puree of game, for garnishing, Feb. 20
     Quail, broiled, on toast, Sept. 27
     Reindeer, chops, March 4
     Reindeer, roast leg of, April 17
     Ruddy duck, roasted, Dec. 26
     Teal duck, roasted, Oct. 29
     Venison, roast saddle of, July 9
     Venison chop (steak), port wine sauce, Aug. 11


GOOSE

     Goose liver saute, Dec. 6
     Goose liver saute, aux truffes, Dec. 6
     Goose, stuffed, with chestnuts, Jan. 18


GARNITURES FOR ENTREES, ETC.

     Bercy, Feb. 7
     Boulanger, Dec. 2
     Bristol, Dec. 16
     Cheron, Nov. 29
     Clermont, Jan. 3
     De Goncourt, Dec. 10
     Ducale, Feb. 22
     Financiere, March 2
     International, Dec. 31
     Malvina, Feb. 7
     Porte Maillot, Dec. 27
     Richelieu, Nov. 20
     Rosabelle, Dec. 17
     Rossini, Feb. 5
     Toulouse, Jan. 25


HORS D'OEUVRES

     Antipasto, Feb. 6
     Artichokes, fresh, a la Russe, Oct. 7
     Barquette a l'Aurore, Jan. 14
     Canape Eldorado, Oct. 3
     Canape Hambourgeoise, Oct. 30
     Canape Julia, Feb. 22
     Canape Martha, Dec. 11
     Canape Monte Carlo, Dec. 29
     Canape Norway, May 31
     Canape, P. P. I. E., Oct. 24
     Canape Riga, Nov. 19
     Canape Romanoff, April 1
     Canape St. Francis, July 11
     Canape Regalia, Nov. 12
     Canape Thon Marine, Aug. 21
     Canape of anchovies, Nov. 2
     Canape of caviar, Oct. 28
     Canape of chicken, March 3
     Canape of lobster, Aug. 13
     Canape of raw meat, Feb. 19
     Canape of raw beef, May 22
     Canape of sardines, Nov. 6
     Caviar, Nov. 16
     Cold fonds d'artichauts, Du Barry, Aug. 10
     Crab legs, Stock, June 3
     Croquettes Livannienne, Jan. 6
     Croustades Cancalaise, Dec. 22
     Egg salad, Sept. 12
     Fillet of herring, marine, Feb. 21
     Fish salad, ravigote, Dec. 6
     Hard boiled eggs, vinaigrette, Oct. 20
     Herring Livonienne, Oct. 15
     Herring salad, July 29
     Herring salad, Moscovite, Sept. 7
     Hors d'oeuvres varies, Nov. 16
     Indian canape, March 28
     Kieler sprotten, April 10
     Lyon sausage, Nov. 4
     Lyon sausage, Nov. 16
     Marinite herring, Nov. 18
     Matjes herring, March 28
     Matjes herring, Krasnapolsky, July 25
     Merry Widow cocktail, Oct. 9
     Mortadella, Aug. 25; Oct. 17
     Olive and anchovy salad, Aug. 28
     Oysters marine, April 23
     Pain mane, Jan. 17
     Pancake Molosol, Jan. 11
     Pate de foie gras, Nov. 16
     Pickled oysters, Nov. 13
     Pickled salmon, St. Francis, April 29
     Pimentos, a l'huile, Jan. 24
     Pimentos Suedoise, Sept. 26
     Pimentos, vinaigrette, Aug. 3
     Pim olas, June 6
     Plain celery, Oct. 27
     Radishes, Nov. 8
     Ripe olives, Oct. 27
     Ripe olives with garlic and oil, April 22
     Salted almonds, Oct. 27
     Salted Brazil nuts, May 13
     Salted English walnuts, Dec. 28
     Salted pecans, Dec. 28
     Sardines, Nov. 16
     Sardines vinaigrette, March 16
     Shrimp salad, Anastine, Sept. 19
     Sliced tomatoes, Nov. 16
     Smoked goosebreast, Feb. 13
     Smoked salmon, Nov. 1
     Steak Tartare, July 21
     Stuffed eggs, Nov. 16
     Stuffed eggs, Epicure, Sept. 14
     Stuffed eggs, Nantua, Nov. 26
     Stuffed eggs with crab meat, Nov. 21
     Stuffed tomatoes, Nana, Nov. 30
     Sweet-sour bananas, Dec. 21
     Tartine Russe, April 6
     Terrine de foie gras, a la gelee, April 2
     Terrine de foie gras en aspic, July 24
     Thon Marine salad, Jan. 27
     Tomato en surprise, July 22
     Tomato en surprise, Aug. 25
     Tomatoes Parisienne, Jan. 28
     Yarmouth bloater in oil, April 7


ICES, SHERBETS, FANCY ICES

     Alhambra ice cream, Oct. 18
     Apple water ice, March 31
     Baked Alaska, March 24
     Banana coupe, May 8
     Banana ice cream, Jan. 8
     Biscuit glace (foundation), Dec. 27
     Biscuit glace, apple, Dec. 27
     Biscuit glace, chocolate, Dec. 27
     Biscuit glace, coffee, Dec. 27
     Biscuit glace, kirsch, Dec. 27
     Biscuit glace, mapleine, Dec. 27
     Biscuit glace, peppermint, Dec. 27
     Biscuit glace, pineapple, Dec. 27
     Biscuit glace, pistache, Dec. 27
     Biscuit glace, raspberries, Dec. 27
     Biscuit glace, St. Francis, Dec. 27
     Biscuit glace, strawberry, Dec. 27
     Biscuit Tortoni, March 30
     California sherbet, April 22
     Cantaloupe baskets, July 21
     Cantaloupe water ice, Jan. 1
     Caramel ice cream, May 23
     Chocolate ice cream, Nov. 5
     Champagne punch, June 8; July 31
     Coffee ice cream, Dec. 31
     Coupe Oriental, Jan. 16
     Coupe Victor, Oct. 8
     Cranberry water ice, Oct. 9
     Diplomate pudding, glace, March 25
     Eau de vie de Dantzig, May 22
     English breakfast tea, Jan. 19
     Fancy ice cream, Nov. 6
     Figs, Roma, Oct. 26
     Fresh Raspberry coupe, May 8
     Fresh strawberry coupe, May 8
     Frozen egg nogg, April 19
     Frozen loganberry juice, Oct. 25
     Grapefruit coupe, May 8
     Lallah Rookh, April 12
     Lemon water ice, Jan. 1
     Lillian Russell, May 18
     Loganberry ice cream, Oct. 24
     Macedoine water ice, Jan. 6
     Maraschino sauce for iced pudding, March 20
     Meringue glacee a la Chantilly, Nov. 20
     Meringue glacee au Chocolate, Jan. 18
     Millionaire punch, May 19
     Mousse au cafe, May 30
     Mousse au chocolate, May 30
     Neapolitan ice cream, April 4
     Neapolitan sandwich, May 17
     Normandie water ice, Jan. 6
     Orange baskets, July 21
     Orange coupe, May 8
     Orange souffle glace, St. Francis, Sept. 18
     Orange souffle, St. Francis, Feb. 26
     Orange water ice, Jan. 1
     Peach, ice cream, Jan. 8
     Peach Melba, March 25
     Peach, Mona Lisa, Feb. 16
     Philadelphia ice cream, Oct. 29
     Pineapple ice cream, Jan. 8
     Pistache ice cream, Dec. 19
     Plombiere aux fruits, June 10
     Plombiere a la vanille, June 10
     Plombiere aux marrons, June 10
     Punch Palermitaine, April 15
     Raisin punch, Dec. 17
     Raspberries a la mode, May 27
     Raspberry ice cream, Jan. 8
     Raspberry Melba sauce, March 25
     Raspberry meringue Glacee, Jan. 11
     Raspberry water ice, Jan. 1; Nov. 11
     Romaine ice cream, Oct. 19
     Roman punch, April 17
     Souffle glace, plain, May 26
     Souffle glace, Pavlowa, June 6
     Souffle glace, St. Francis, June 6
     Strawberries a la mode, May 27
     Strawberry ice cream, Nov. 13
     Strawberry water ice, Jan. 1
     Tutti frutti, Feb. 10
     Vanilla charlotte Glacee, April 23
     Vanilla ice cream, Oct. 27


LAMB

     Baby lamb steak, Horticulture, March 28
     Chops, Beaugeney, Oct. 3
     Chops, Beau Sejour, Oct. 2
     Chops, Bignon, Oct. 8
     Chops, Bradford, June 2
     Chops, breaded, Nov. 21
     Chops, breaded, Reforme, May 6
     Chops, Charcutiere, March 7
     Chops, Maison d'Or, July 15
     Chops, Marechal, Jan. 6
     Chops, Robinson, July 4
     Chops, sauce Soubise, April 11
     Chops, saute aux cepes, Nov. 29
     Chops, saute, aux fines herbes, Sept. 7
     Chops, Victor Hugo, March 2
     Chops with bacon, Oct. 30
     Curried, with rice, Jan. 15
     Cutlets in papers, March 31
     Easter kid, roasted, Feb. 24
     English chop, Tavern, Feb. 26
     English chops, XX Century Club, Dec. 4
     English chuck steak, maitre d'hotel, April 23
     Hash, Oct. 29
     Hash, J. A. Britton, Oct. 25
     Hash, Sam Ward, Sept. 5
     Hash, with peppers, May 17
     Kidneys en brochette with bacon, Aug. 7
     Kidneys en Pilaff, Oct. 22
     Kidney stew, Nov. 28
     Leg, Boulangere, Jan. 24
     Leg, Renaissance, May 19
     Loin chops, jardiniere, May 10
     Loin chops, fried, Sept. 26
     Noisettes, Feb. 22
     Noisettes, Ducale, Sept. 9
     Noisettes, Montpensier, July 8
     Rack of lamb, March 27
     Rack of lamb, jardiniere, March 27
     Rack of lamb, Montjo, May 9
     Roasted (See chicken), Oct. 27
     Saddle, Carnot, May 14
     Saddle, International, Dec. 31
     Saddle, jardiniere, July 25
     Saddle, Souvaroff, June 18
     Shoulder of lamb in bakers' oven, May 24
     Steak, Feb. 7
     Steak, Bercy, Feb. 7
     Tenderloin, Thomas, Dec. 28
     Trotters, Poulette, Nov. 22


MISCELLANEOUS

     Alligator pear cocktail, May 14
     Anchovy butter, July 8
     Apple dressing, Nov. 27
     Bain marie, Jan. 26
     Boneless squab, en aspic, July 17
     Bouquet garni, Nov. 7
     Breast of chicken en aspic, July 26
     Brown Betty, April 9
     Calf's foot jelly, July 12
     Champagne punch, July 31
     Cheese straws, March 1
     Chestnut dressing, Nov. 27
     Chicken jelly, July 15
     Claret punch, July 26
     Cocktail sauce, for oysters, Jan. 23
     Cold beef a la mode, July 15
     Cold celery broth, Aug. 27
     Cold pheasant pie, July 10
     Croustades, Feb. 23
     Croustades Financiere, March 2
     Croustades Laguipierre, March 10
     Croutons Diable (for soup), May 7
     Croutons Parmesanne, May 13
     Dressing for chicken, turkey, pig, etc., Nov. 27
     Dumplings for stews, pot pies, etc., Sept. 25
     D'Uxelles, Jan. 10
     Ecrevisse butter (crayfish), Dec. 25
     Fish broth, July 20
     Fleurons, Nov. 29
     Flour dumplings, Nov. 10
     Forcemeat--tongue and truffles, March 19
     Fricadellen (balls of cooked meat), May 14
     Gelee (meat jelly), Dec. 1
     Gnocchis a la Romaine, June 25
     Gnocchis au gratin, June 25
     Golden buck, March 3
     Green coloring (vert d'epinards), Feb. 13
     Hangtown fry, March 4
     Icings or frosting, Nov. 24
     Julienne, Jan. 19
     Kalter aufschnitt, July 14
     Kalte schahle, Sept. 17
     Koenigsberger klobs, May 15
     Lemonade, July 30
     Lobster butter, Dec. 25
     Lobster corals, March 20
     Macaroni Caruso, Aug. 30
     Macaroni in cream, Dec. 18
     Meat croquettes, Oct. 11
     Mince meat, Nov. 22
     Mixed grill, Jan. 26
     New England boiled dinner, Jan. 12
     Noodles, Jan. 20
     Noodles, Polonaise, Feb. 25
     Ombrelle d'Ostende, June 13
     Orangeade, July 30
     Oyster crab patties, Sept. 16
     Pastry cream, Nov. 24
     Pate dough, July 10
     Pistache icing, Dec. 4
     Pumpkin pulp, Aug. 2
     Puree of game, Feb. 20
     Raisin cocktail, March 20
     Rice stuffing, Nov. 13
     Royal butter (pastry), Sept. 12
     Schlemmorbroedchen, July 31
     Shrimp patties, Aug. 11
     Soubise, for stuffing chops, etc., Jan. 14
     Spaghetti, Caruso, April 7
     Spaghetti in cream, May 26
     Spaghetti Milanaise, Nov. 21
     Spaetzel, March 5
     Steak Tartare, July 21
     Stock for soup, Nov. 14
     Stuffed olives, May 17
     Terrine de foie gras a la gelee, Dec. 1
     Terrine de foie gras en aspic, July 12
     Terrine de foie gras en aspic, July 24
     Tournedos, Feb. 5
     Vol au vent patty shells, Jan. 25
     Vol au vent, Toulouse, Dec. 15
     Welch Rabbit, Nov. 28
     Welch rabbit, Special, Oct. 25
     Whipped cream, June 3
     Yorkshire buck, May 1
     Yorkshire pudding, Nov. 21


MUTTON

     Chops, Argenteuil, Aug. 9
     Chops, Bignon, Oct. 8
     Chops, braised, May 7
     Chops, Daumont, Feb. 23
     Chops, grilled, Nov. 26
     Chops, Maison d'Or, July 15
     Chops, Robinson, Feb. 16
     Chops, Signora, March 10
     English chop, Kentucky sauce, Aug. 29
     English chop, Tavern, Feb. 26
     English chops, XX Century Club, May 24
     Leg, a la Busse, Feb. 20
     Leg, boiled, caper sauce, Dec. 11
     Leg, Bretonne, March 9
     Leg, Choiseul, April 27
     Leg, Clamart, March 23
     Leg, Mexicaine, Aug. 17
     Leg, Reforme, Feb. 28
     Leg, roasted, Jan. 26
     Loin, Charcutiere, Dec. 17
     Rack, roasted, April 14
     Saddle, roasted, April 3
     Shoulder, Budapest, Oct. 14


OMELETS

     Argentine, June 28
     Au cognac, April 29
     Au confiture, Dec. 12
     Bayonnaise, Sept. 15
     Celestine, Sept. 8
     Cherbourg, Oct. 18
     du Czar, Nov. 2; Dec. 18
     En surprise, March 8
     Fines herbes, April 11
     Imperatrice, Aug. 23
     Levy, Aug. 7
     Lorraine, Dec. 16
     Louis XIV, Feb. 8
     Meissonier, July 23
     Plain, and for sweet dessert, Oct. 27
     Potato, March 11
     Robespierre, April 2
     Schofield, April 10
     Soufflee, March 8
     Spanish, March 6
     Suzanne, March 1
     Vogeleier, Jan. 16
     With cepes, May 9
     With chives, Aug. 19
     With egg plant, June 9
     With ham, Dec. 11
     With jelly, Nov. 7
     With kidneys, March 27
     With onions, May 17
     With oysters, Jan. 2
     With parsley, June 3
     With peas, Sept. 29
     With potatoes, June 23
     With soft clams, Jan. 9
     With soft clams, Newburg, Feb. 5
     With strawberries, Oct. 27
     With Virginia ham and peppers, Feb. 27


OYSTERS

     A la Hyde, Dec. 12
     A l'Ancienne, Feb. 18
     A la Poulette, Dec. 6
     Angels on horseback, April 26
     Baked, au Gruyere, Sept. 4
     Bellevue, Oct. 24
     Broiled, Sept. 16
     Broth, April 8
     Cocktail, Jan. 23
     Curried, April 8
     En brochette, Sept. 28
     En brochette, a la Diable, Sept. 28
     Kirkpatrick, Jan. 31
     Louis, Sept. 25
     Mignonnette, April 17
     Mornay, Sept. 13
     Newburg, Sept. 8
     On half shell, Oct. 27; Nov. 4
     Oysters or crab, Poulette, March 22
     Pickled, cold, Nov. 13
     Stewed, Jan. 13
     Supreme, St. Francis, May 3
     Victor, March 10
     Victor Hugo, Sept. 23
     Yaquino, Jan. 10


PASTRY

     Alexandria pudding, July 25
     Almond cake, April 5
     Almond cream cake, April 5
     Almond rocks, July 21
     Allumettes, June 7
     American gugelhoff, Oct. 2
     Angel cake, or Angel food, June 18
     Anise seed cake, Feb. 20
     Anise toast, Sept. 19
     Anisette cake, July 29
     Apple cobbler, July 16
     Apple cottage pudding, July 11
     Apple Moscovite, Feb. 22
     Apple snow, Oct. 14
     Apple strudel, April 13
     Apple turnover, May 30
     Apricot cobbler, July 16
     Apricot layer cake, Feb. 27
     Apricot meringue, July 18
     Baba au rhum, Dec. 26
     Baises (chocolate drops), Sept. 20
     Baked apple roll, June 15
     Baked apricot roll, June 15
     Baked blackberry roll, June 15
     Baked huckleberry roll, June 15
     Baked loganberry roll, June 15
     Banana whipped cream, Oct. 1
     Bavarois a la vanille, Dec. 21
     Bavarois a la vanille with Bar le Duc, Feb. 2
     Bavarois Noisette, March 28
     Bavarois, raspberry, Jan. 29
     Beignets souffles, June 14
     Berliner pfannenkuchen, June 30
     Bird's nests, July 30
     Blackberry meringue, July 18
     Black cake, Sept. 16
     Blanc mange aux fruits, June 16
     Blanc mange aux liqueurs, June 16
     Blanc mange, chocolate, June 16
     Blanc mange, coffee, June 16
     Blanc mange, vanilla, June 16
     Boiled custard, July 15
     Boston brown pudding, July 11
     Bouchettes, June 15
     Bouchettes Palmyra, July 15
     Brandy sauce, Feb. 17
     Bread custard pudding, July 8
     Brioche, Oct. 26
     Brown Betty, April 9
     Cabinet pudding, Jan. 31
     Cakes, assorted, Nov. 17
     Cannelons a la creme, May 28
     Caramel custard, Jan. 28
     Caroline cake, March 16
     Charlotte Russe, April 16
     Cheese cake, Oct. 25; Jan. 14
     Cherry tartelette, Dec. 11
     Chocolate bouchettes, June 15
     Chocolate eclairs, Nov. 24
     Chocolate layer cake, Feb. 27; Dec. 9
     Chocolate macaroons, April 6
     Chocolate profiterole, Jan. 20
     Chocolate pudding, cold, Sept. 21
     Cinnamon cake, July 3
     Cocoa cake, April 9
     Cocoanut pudding, July 8
     Coffee bouchettes, June 15
     Coffee cake, Oct. 26
     Coffee cake dough, June 30
     Coffee cream cake, July 3
     Coffee custard, April 10
     Coffee fruit cake, July 3
     Cold chocolate sauce, Sept. 21
     Compote with rice, July 31
     Cornet a la creme, May 28
     Corn starch blanc mange, Aug. 24
     Corn starch blanc mange with berries, Aug. 24
     Corn starch blanc mange with Sabayon, Aug. 24
     Corn starch blanc mange, stewed fruits, Aug. 24
     Corn starch food (for invalids), Aug. 24
     Corn starch pudding, July 1
     Cottage pudding, July 11
     Cream fritters, June 5
     Cream puffs, Nov. 24
     Cream sauce, Jan. 24
     Crepes suzette, Oct. 5
     Croute a l'Ananas (pineapple crust), July 23
     Croute aux fruits (fruit crust), July 23
     Crullers, June 30
     Crusts with apples, Sept. 28
     Crusts with peaches, Sept. 28
     Crusts with pears, Sept. 28
     Cup custard, Jan. 26
     Danish apple cake, Oct. 13
     Dariole Duchesse, Sept. 2
     Dartois Chantilly, April 23
     Devil cake, Sept. 20
     Diplomate pudding, March 18
     Doughnuts, June 30
     English rice pudding, April 24
     Frankfort pudding, April 21
     French layer cake, Feb. 27
     French pastry, Feb. 13
     French sponge cake (Genoise legere), Oct. 2
     Fried cream, March 11
     Fritters, surprise, July 20
     Fruit cake, Nov. 10
     Fruit cake (white), Feb. 25
     German almond strips, June 23
     German apple cake, Oct. 30
     German coffee cake, July 3
     German huckleberry cake, June 24
     Gingerbread, Oct. 8
     Ginger snaps, May 15
     Hard sauce, Feb. 17
     Hazelnut macaroons, Oct. 1
     Homemade apple pudding, March 20
     Homemade cookies, Feb. 2
     Honey cake, June 23
     How to cook sugar to a blow, June 21
     Icing or frosting, Nov. 24
     Imperial pancake, April 26
     Italian meringue, June 21
     Italian wine sauce, Sept. 21
     Jam roll pudding, April 27
     Jelly roll, May 29
     Kisses, June 7
     Lady cake, Sept. 4
     Lady fingers, Nov. 17
     Langues de chat, June 23
     Layer cake, Feb. 27; Dec. 9
     Lemon butter filling, Aug. 10
     Lemon cake, Aug. 10
     Lemon darioles, Aug. 16
     Lemon sauce, March 27
     Macaronade Celestine, July 15
     Macaroons, Nov. 17
     Macaroons, fancy, Nov. 18
     Meringue a la creme, Chantilly, Dec. 1
     Meringue peaches, March 10
     Meringue shells, Oct. 27
     Mint wafers, Oct. 17
     Mirlitons, Aug. 26
     Mirlitons au rhum, Sept. 4
     Moka cake (Mocha cake), Feb. 18
     Napoleon cake, Feb. 16
     Orange cake, Aug. 10
     Orange butter filling, Aug. 10
     Orange darioles, Aug. 16
     Orange sauce, March 27
     Pastry cream, Nov. 24
     Patience cake, July 18
     Peaches, Bourdaloue, May 13
     Peach cobbler, July 16
     Peach meringue, July 18
     Peach whipped cream, Oct. 1
     Pears Bourdaloue, April 28
     Pear cobbler, July 16
     Pears Piedmont, Oct. 3
     Pie paste, Dec. 8
     Pineapple Creole, April 14
     Pink pudding, Victor, Oct. 26
     Pistache eclairs, Dec. 4
     Plum pudding, Feb. 17
     Pommes d'arbre 1915 (apple), March 28
     Pound cake, Nov. 10
     Prune souffle, March 23
     Pudding Gastaner, April 8
     Pudding Rossini, March 27
     Pudding souffle, Dame Blanche, May 12
     Puff paste, Nov. 14
     Puff paste baskets, Aug. 7
     Puff paste roses, Aug. 1
     Puff paste sandwich, Aug. 9
     Raspberry meringue, July 18
     Raspberry shortcake, April 11
     Raspberry whipped cream, Oct. 1
     Rice croquettes, July 31
     Rice darioles, Sept. 10
     Rolled oats pudding, Jan. 24
     Roly poly pudding, Oct. 7
     Royal butter, Sept. 12
     Royal cake, Sept. 12
     Royal icing, June 7
     Sabayon sauce, April 21
     Sand tart (sable), March 9
     Savarin au kirsch, Dec. 26
     Savarin Chantilly, Dec. 26
     Savarin Mirabelle, Dec. 26
     Savarin, Montmorency, Dec. 26
     Snails, July 4
     Sponge cake, March 16
     Strawberry meringue, July 18
     Strawberry shortcake, April 11
     Strawberry shortcake, old fashioned, April 11
     Strawberry whipped cream, Oct. 1
     Streusel cake, July 3
     Tango cake, Sept. 18
     Tartelette au Bar le Duc, Jan. 16
     Tartelette of pears, Oct. 30
     Tipsy parson, July 15
     Tutti frutti pudding, Oct. 8
     Vanilla cream sauce, Jan. 24
     Vanilla custard with meringue, July 15
     Vanilla darioles, Aug. 16
     Wedding cake, Oct. 4
     Whipped cream in cup, Aug. 22
     Wine sauce, July 16


PIE

     Apple, Dec. 8
     Apricot, March 26
     Banana, Oct. 3
     Banana cream, May 23
     Blackberry, March 26
     Chocolate cream, Sept. 19
     Cherry, March 26
     Cocoanut custard, April 20
     Cocoanut meringue, April 20
     Currant, March 26
     English currant, March 26
     English gooseberry, March 26
     English grape, March 26
     English huckleberry, March 26
     English rhubarb, March 26
     Gooseberry, March 26
     Lemon custard, April 20
     Lemon meringue, April 20
     Lemon pie, special, April 20
     Lemon pie, special, Oct. 22
     Meringue paste for pie, April 20
     Mince, Nov. 22
     Orange custard, April 20
     Orange meringue, April 20
     Peach, March 26
     Pear, March 26
     Pineapple, March 26
     Pumpkin pie, Aug. 2
     Pumpkin pie pulp, Aug. 2
     Raspberry, March 26
     Raspberry cream, May 23
     Strawberry, March 26
     Strawberry cream, May 23
     Vanilla custard, April 20; Nov. 2
     Vanilla meringue, April 20


PORK

     Bacon and cabbage, Feb. 10
     Bacon, fried, Nov. 5
     Blood pudding, Dec. 21
     Blood pudding, sauce Robert, May 30
     Buckwurst, hot, March 21
     Breakfast sausages, Dec. 13
     Chops, Badoise, July 23
     Deviled ham, Sept. 13
     Ham and spinach, boiled, April 12
     Ham, boiled, Leonard, March 19
     Ham croquettes, Aug. 17
     Ham, fried, Oct. 29
     Ham, pickled, Dec. 18
     Imported Frankfurter sausages, Aug. 19
     Loin, baker's oven style, March 15
     Loin, roasted, Oct. 27
     Pig's feet, boiled, Nov. 24
     Pig's feet, broiled, chili sauce, Feb. 7
     Pig's feet, broiled, special, Nov. 24
     Pig's feet, St. Menehould, July 2
     Pig's knuckles and sauerkraut, Sept. 16
     Spareribs, broiled, with lentils, Feb. 2
     Sugar-cured ham glace, Aug. 23
     Virginia ham, broiled, May 12
     Virginia ham croquettes, Aug. 17
     Virginia ham glace, Aug. 8


POTATOES

     A la Reine, Jan. 10
     Allumette, June 4
     Alsatian, March 30
     Anna, Jan. 11
     Au gratin, Nov. 12
     Baked, sweet, with sugar, Sept. 12
     Bischwiller, Sept. 9
     Brioche, Sept. 1
     Broiled, sweet, Feb. 1
     Browned hashed, Jan. 2
     Candied, sweet, April 19
     Chateau, Oct. 31
     Cleo, Dec. 24
     Cottage fried, July 2
     Croquettes, Oct. 28
     Delmonico, Nov. 4
     Duchesse, Nov. 25
     En surprise, Aug. 28
     Flambe, sweet, with rum, April 23
     Fondante, April 3
     French fried, Nov. 6
     Gauffrette, Feb. 21
     Gendarme, Nov. 8; Dec. 20
     Georgette, Nov. 29
     Hollandaise, Nov. 1
     Jeanette, April 16
     Julienne, Nov. 15
     Laurette, Nov. 5
     Lorraine, Nov. 9
     Louis, Aug. 18
     Lyonnaise, Oct. 30
     Maitre d'hotel, Jan. 5
     Marquise, June 1
     Mashed, au gratin, Jan. 19
     Mashed browned, Nov. 7
     Nature, Nov. 5
     O'Brien, Feb. 6
     Olivette, Jan. 17
     Paille (straw), Nov. 18
     Pancakes, July 2
     Paprika, Nov. 26
     Parisian, Feb. 11
     Parisienne, Hollandaise, Aug. 6
     Paul Stock, Oct. 7
     Palestine, March 30
     Persillade, March 13
     Pont neuf, Dec. 25
     Potato cakes, March 1
     Rissolees, Dec. 15; Jan. 17
     Ritz, March 12
     Saratoga chips, Nov. 26
     Saute, sweet, Feb. 24
     Southern style, sweet, Jan. 25
     Southern, No. 2, sweet, April 22
     Soufflee, Dec. 2
     St. Francis, Nov. 4
     Steamboat fried, Sept. 18
     Sweet potatoes (see Southern)
     Sweet potato pudding, Oct. 24
     Sweet potato croquettes, March 30
     Sybil, Feb. 21
     Waffle, Feb. 21
     York, Sept. 13


PRESERVES, JELLIES, PICKLES

     Apples and quinces, canned, July 6
     Apple butter, July 6
     Apple jelly, May 11
     Apples spiced sweet, Aug. 12
     Apricot marmalade, June 17
     Artichokes pickled, Sept. 29
     Blackberry cordial, for medicinal purposes, July 14
     Blackberry jam, May 11
     Blackberry jelly, May 11
     Cherry preserves, June 17
     Cherries brandied, June 17
     Cherries jellied, July 14
     Cherries spiced, Aug. 12
     Cider, boiled, May 19
     Citron preserves, March 29
     Crab apple marmalade and jelly, June 17
     Cranberry jelly, June 17
     Cucumber sweet pickles, ripe, Sept. 29
     Currant jelly, June 12
     Fig jam, July 14
     Fruits, dried, stewed, Aug. 29
     Glace fruits, Aug. 1
     Gooseberry jam, Aug. 12
     Grape jelly, Aug. 12
     Grape juice, sweet, Sept. 30
     Green gage plums preserved, June 17
     Lemon or orange peel, candied, July 14
     Limes, to preserve, July 14
     Mince meat, canned, Sept. 30
     Nasturtion seeds pickled, Sept. 29
     Onions, pickled, Sept. 29
     Orange or lemon brandy for flavoring, Aug. 1
     Peaches, brandied, June 17
     Peaches, sweet pickled, Sept. 29
     Peach marmalade, June 17
     Pears, baked, for canning, Aug. 1
     Pears, peaches or plums, canned, July 6
     Pears, preserved, March 29
     Pickles, Sept. 29; May 10
     Pineapple preserves, March 29
     Preserves--amount of fruit required, May 11
     Pumpkin or squash, to can, Sept. 30
     Quince jelly, March 29
     Raspberry juice, May 19
     Raspberry or loganberry jam, May 11
     Spiced vinegar, for pickles, Aug. 12
     Strawberries, canned, May 11
     Strawberry preserves, May 11
     Tomatoes, pickled, green, Sept. 29
     Tomatoes, spiced, Aug. 12
     Tomato preserves, July 6
     Vanilla brandy, July 14
     Violets preserved, Sept. 30
     Watermelon preserves, July 6


SALADS

     Algerienne, Oct. 25
     Alligator pear, Feb. 22
     Anchovy, Nov. 25
     Americaine, Dec. 16
     Asparagus tips, Oct. 30
     Avocado, French dressing, Oct. 23
     Beets, pickled, Oct. 31
     Brazilian, Nov. 4
     Bresilienne, July 13
     Bretonne, June 27
     Cauliflower, July 7
     Celery mayonnaise, Nov. 10
     Celery root, field and beet, Dec. 20
     Celery Victor, Nov. 4
     Cendrillon, June 25
     Chateau de Madrid, Aug. 15
     Chicken, Victor, Jan. 3
     Chicory, Oct. 28
     Chiffonade, Nov. 26
     Chilian, Aug. 10
     Cole slaw, Nov. 5
     Cole slaw, ravigote, April 19
     Cosmopolitan, Aug. 6
     Crab, Feb. 16
     Crab, Louis, May 7
     Cucumber salad, Jan. 9
     Culemo, sliced, Aug. 4
     Cupid d'azure, July 19
     Dandelion, April 12
     Dandelion, German style, April 12
     Doucette, Nov. 20
     Ecrevisse, Gourmet, Nov. 23
     Egg, Sept. 12
     Endive, Dec. 3
     Endive, with beets, Aug. 15
     Escarole, Oct. 28
     Field, Oct. 30
     Fresh vegetable, Jan. 17
     Herring, July 29
     Herring, Moscovite, Sept. 7
     Imperial, July 1
     Italian, Jan. 14
     Knickerbocker, May 9
     Lentil, Feb. 2
     Lettuce, Oct. 29
     Lettuce and tomato, March 23
     Livermore, Dec. 15
     Lobster, Jan. 2
     Lobster with anchovies, Jan. 2
     Lorenzo, Sept. 17
     Lorette, Oct. 18
     Louis, July 26
     Louise, July 20
     Majestic, July 17
     Mirabeau, Jan. 7
     Nivernaise, Dec. 19
     Olga, Nov. 25
     Orloff, June 18
     Panache, May 12
     Pear, mayonnaise, Oct. 19
     Potato, Nov. 11
     Puree of potato, June 8
     Rachel, June 15
     Ravachol, Nov. 29
     Red cabbage, July 31
     Rejane, Dec. 19
     Romaine, Oct. 29
     Russe, Jan. 28
     Salad dressing, Oct. 23
     Shrimp, Nov. 15
     Shrimp, Anastine, Sept. 19
     Stanislaus, Dec. 29
     String bean, May 23; Dec. 24
     String bean and tomato, Sept. 6
     Tomatoes, sliced, Nov. 2; Nov. 16
     Tosca, Dec. 29
     Tuna, Nov. 6
     Waldorf, Nov. 19
     Watercress, Feb. 16
     White bean, Aug. 2


SALAD DRESSING

     Egg, Dec. 28
     Escoffier, Aug. 31
     French, Oct. 27
     Roquefort, Jan. 19
     Russian, June 23
     Salad, Oct. 23
     St. Francis, Oct. 25
     Thousand Island, Nov. 9
     Victor, April 21
     With chapon, June 2


SANDWICHES

     Bread and butter, Nov. 11
     Careme, April 5
     Chicken, Nov. 8
     Cream of almond, April 9
     Creole, April 9
     Dubney, April 9
     Olive, April 9
     Schlemmerbroedchen, July 31
     Windsor, April 9


SAUCES

     Allemande, March 4
     Anchovy, Jan. 29
     Anchovy butter, Nov. 21
     Anglaise, Dec. 29
     Au vin blanc, Oct. 30
     Bearnaise, Jan. 13
     Bearnaise tomatee, Jan. 13
     Bechamel, Oct. 28
     Bercy, Feb. 7; Oct. 31
     Bordelaise, Nov. 8
     Bread, Jan. 9; Feb. 15
     Bread crumbs, Jan. 9; Feb. 15
     Brown butter, Nov. 10
     Brown gravy, Nov. 14
     Cardinal, May 3
     Caper, Dec. 11
     Celery, Aug. 21
     Chambord, Aug. 30
     Champagne, Aug. 8
     Choron, Jan. 13
     Colbert, Nov. 19
     Cranberry, Sept. 17
     Cream, Oct. 28
     Creole, Dec. 13
     Curry, Dec. 19
     Devil, April 30
     Diplomate, June 1
     Ecrevisse, July 28
     Egg, Oct. 28
     Estragon (tarragon), April 15
     Fidgi, May 14
     Figaro, cold, Aug. 7
     Flamande, Aug. 20
     Fleurette, Nov. 4
     Forestiere, Nov. 21
     Genoise, Nov. 1
     Giblet, March 14
     Golfin, Dec. 19
     Green Hollandaise, Feb. 13
     Hollandaise, Oct. 27
     Horose, Dec. 16
     Horseradish, cold, English style, Nov. 3
     Horseradish en bouillon, Nov. 3
     Horseradish in cream, Nov. 3
     Hussarde, June 16
     Indian soy, Aug. 31
     Italienne, Dec. 3
     Kentucky, Aug. 29
     Lobster, Sept. 17
     Madere, Nov. 4
     Maitre d'hotel, Oct. 30
     Mariniere, March 4
     Maximilienne, Sept. 11
     Mayonnaise, Oct. 31
     Meuniere, Dec. 17
     Mignonnette, Nov. 27
     Mint, Dec. 15
     Montebello, Aug. 6
     Mornay, Dec. 15
     Mousseline, Nov. 5
     Mustard, July 19; Nov. 30
     Newburg, Feb. 5
     Nonpareil, Aug. 16
     Olive, April 30
     Oyster, Jan. 16
     Paprika, Nov. 26
     Pepper, May 29
     Perigord, March 7; Dec. 6
     Perigordine, Nov. 23
     Perigueux, March 7
     Pink mayonnaise, Jan. 14
     Piquante, Nov. 18
     Poivrade, Feb. 28
     Port wine, March 4; Aug. 11
     Poulette, Nov. 22
     Remoulade, Dec. 30
     Riche, Dec. 21
     Robert, May 23
     Rougemont, Sept. 1
     Shrimp, Dec. 4
     Soubise, Jan. 14
     Special, Nov. 24
     Supreme, Nov. 13
     Sweet-sour, March 1
     Tarragon (estragon), April 15
     Tartar, Nov. 6
     Venitienne, May 26
     Verte, April 25
     Vinaigrette, Dec. 31
     White wine, Oct. 30


SHELL FISH

     Crab a la Louise, March 22
     Crab, boiled, Nov. 19
     Crab cocktail, Cremiere, July 2
     Crab cocktail, Victor, March 24
     Crab, curried, April 7
     Crab, deviled, Jan. 30
     Crab, deviled, in shell, April 17
     Crab en brochette, April 6
     Crab meat au gratin, March 22
     Crab meat, au beurre noisette, Nov. 19
     Crab meat, Belle Helene, March 23
     Crab meat, Gourmet, March 22
     Crab meat in chafing dish, March 22
     Crab meat in cream, Dec. 30
     Crab meat, Monza, Dec. 30
     Crab meat, Suzette, March 22
     Crab or oysters, Poulette, March 22
     Crab, Portola, April 13
     Crab, ravigote, cold, May 9
     Ecrevisses en buisson, Nov. 7
     Ecrevisses, Georgette, Oct. 16
     Ecrevisses, Lafayette, June 3
     Ecrevisses, mayonnaise, Nov. 29
     Mousse d'ecrevisses, July 28
     Lobster, baked, Cardinal, Sept. 26
     Lobster, baked, Lincoln, June 28
     Lobster, Becker, July 9
     Lobster, broiled, Dec. 24
     Lobster croquettes, Dec. 23
     Lobster en court bouillon, Aug. 22
     Lobster, stuffed, Jan. 5
     Lobster, Newburg, Nov. 8
     Lobster, Thermidor, Jan. 22
     Mussels, Mariniere, March 4
     Scallops a la Mornay, March 2
     Scallops, Newburg, Feb. 24
     Shrimps with mushrooms, March 25
     Terrapin, how to boil, March 21
     Terrapin au beurre, Sept. 20
     Terrapin, Baltimore, March 21
     Terrapin, Jockey Club, March 21
     Terrapin, Maryland, March 21


SHELL FISH--CLAMS

     Bateliere, March 6
     Creole, Feb. 1
     En cocotte, Californienne, July 3
     Fried soft clams, Tartare, Aug. 26
     Little necks on half shell, Nov. 5
     Scalloped, Aug. 3
     Soft clams, Newburg, Feb. 5
     Stuffed, July 7
     With wine sauce, April 5


SOUPS

Consomme

     Ab-del-Cader, June 14
     Allemande, June 22
     Alexandria, Aug. 1
     Andalouse, June 16
     Aux eclairs, May 18
     Aux pluches, May 26
     Aux quenelles, April 14
     Aux quenelles, Doria, May 22
     Bellevue, Dec. 5
     Bohemienne, June 28
     Bouillon, Nov. 3
     Bretonne, Jan. 22
     Brunoise, Dec. 10
     Brunoise and vermicelli, Sept. 3
     Cameroni, July 11
     Camino, March 17
     Caroline, June 2
     Celery and rice, Aug. 19
     Celestine, April 28
     Charles Quint, July 8
     Chartreuse, Sept. 20
     Chatelaine, Aug. 26
     Chevalier, July 23
     Chicken broth, Oct. 29
     Chiffonnade, May 3
     Cialdini, Nov. 20
     Clam broth, Dec. 5
     Clam broth, Chantilly, Dec. 5
     Colbert, Feb. 25; Aug. 22
     Creme de volaille, Jan. 14
     Creole, June 24
     Croute au pot, May 5
     D'Artagnan, Jan. 12
     Daumont, April 16
     De la mariee, Jan. 16
     Diable, May 14
     Diane, Oct. 21
     Ditalini, Dec. 13
     Doria, Dec. 2
     Du Barry, March 11
     Favorite, Jan. 7
     Federal, Sept. 5
     Fermiere, Aug. 12
     Fleury, Dec. 22
     Florentine, Feb. 21; July 4
     Frascati, Oct. 3
     Garibaldi, July 15
     Georgia, Oct. 1
     Gumbo, strained, in cups, Feb. 27
     Imperatrice, Jan. 18
     Inauguration, July 28
     Irma, June 18
     Italian paste, Aug. 24
     Japonnaise, June 4
     Julienne, Jan. 4
     Leopold, Oct. 17
     Madrilene, Dec. 29
     Magadore, June 26
     Marchand, June 6
     Marie Louise, July 2
     Massenet, Dec. 21
     Medina, Sept. 29
     Monaco, Aug. 8
     Monte Cristo, July 26
     Montesquieu, Aug. 17
     Napier, Sept. 13
     National, Sept. 27
     Nelson, Oct. 12
     Nicoise, July 6
     Noodles, Oct. 6
     Oriental, Aug. 10
     Orleans, Dec. 20
     Oyster broth, April 8
     Palestine, July 13
     Parfait, April 6; Jan. 24
     Paysanne, Aug. 6
     Pemartin, Oct. 8
     Perles de Nizam, May 24
     Plain, Oct. 27
     Portugaise, Sept. 9
     Printanier, April 30
     Profiteroles, May 28
     Rachel, Feb. 17
     Rivoli, Dec. 17
     Ravioli, May 12
     Rothschild, Aug. 4
     Royal, Nov. 21
     Royal, with carrots, May 8
     Royal, green, Sept. 22
     Royal, red, Sept. 22
     Russe, April 26
     Sago, Nov. 7
     Sarah Bernhardt, May 20
     Scotch, Jan. 11
     Sevigne, I, Dec. 1
     Sevigne, II, April 18
     Sicilienne, July 21
     Soubise, April 22
     Stuffed cabbage, Sept. 15
     Tapioca with ecrevisse butter, Aug. 29
     Talleyrand, July 17
     Tapioca, Nov. 11
     Theodora, April 20
     Tosca, May 16
     Turbigo, June 10
     Trianon, July 19; Sept. 22
     Vanderbilt, July 30
     Vivieurs, May 7
     Valentienne, May 10; June 20
     Venitienne, May 30
     Vermicelli, Feb. 10
     Xavier, June 22


CREAM SOUPS

     Algerienne, May 25
     Artichokes, June 11
     Asparagus, Nov. 26
     Asparagus, Favori, Oct. 18
     Creme Bagration, May 17
     Bananas, March 5
     Bisque d'ecrevisses, Dec. 25
     Bisque of California oysters, Jan. 9
     Bisque of clams, Nov. 22
     Bisque of crabs, Jan. 23
     Cardinal, May 27
     Cauliflower, Oct. 31
     Celery, Nov. 2
     Celery, Kalamazoo, Feb. 8
     Chicken, Nov. 9
     Chicken a la Reine, Dec. 17
     Chicken, Hortense, April 1
     Congolaise, May 31
     Corn and onions, Sept. 17
     Countess, June 25
     Endives, Dec. 6
     Farina, March 7
     Farina lie, Sept. 10
     Flageolets, July 24
     Frogs' legs, Feb. 24
     Green corn, I, March 9
     Green corn, II, June 3
     Lettuce, March 2
     Lima beans, Feb. 19
     Maintenon, Jan. 18
     Parisienne, April 13
     Parsnips, April 29
     Parsnips, II, June 17
     Pea, Oct. 15
     Pea, Suzon, Oct. 15
     Pea, St. Germain, Oct. 15
     Potatoes, Nov. 8
     Reine Mogador, April 6
     Rice, Dec. 28
     Summer squash, cream of, Oct. 10
     Watercress, July 22


THICK SOUPS

(Potage)

     Bean and cabbage soup, Sept. 21
     Burned farina soup, April 24
     Cabbage soup, Normande, June 15
     Chicken okra, Dec. 7
     Chicken, Bresilienne, June 27
     Chicken, Florentine, Aug. 18
     Chicken, Francaise, Oct. 9
     Chicken, Mulligatawney, July 14
     Chicken, Piedmontaise, July 16
     Chicken, Portugaise, July 5
     Chicken, San Remo, Sept. 23
     Clam chowder, Dec. 5
     Clam chowder, Boston style, March 24
     Clear green turtle, April 2
     Cold celery broth, Aug. 27
     Cooper soup, May 23
     Crab gumbo, July 20
     Croute Bretonne, July 3
     Ditalini, a la Royal, Sept. 16
     Farina, Francis Joseph, May 2
     Fish broth, July 20
     Fish broth with whipped cream, Sept. 1
     Fish chowder, April 10
     German carrot soup, Sept. 7
     German lentil, March 29
     Giblet, a l'Anglaise, Oct. 29
     Hare soup, Uncle Sam, Oct. 5
     Homemade clam soup, Sept. 25
     Hungarian, Oct. 11
     Lamb broth a la Grecque, May 6
     Lamb broth, a la Reine, Aug. 2
     Lamb broth, Olympic Club, June 9
     Lobster chowder, Dec. 5
     Macaroni soup with leeks, Sept. 6
     Mock turtle, Feb. 15
     Mutton, Kitchener, Sept. 8
     Onion and tomato, Oct. 7
     Onion, au gratin, March 1; Nov. 15
     Oyster, family style, Nov. 12
     Oxtail, English style, Feb. 1
     Pannade, March 3
     Pea, with vermicelli, Aug. 14
     Petite marmite, Dec. 24
     Potage a l'Anglaise, Jan. 7
     Potage Albert, May 29
     Potage Alexandra, Dec. 20
     Potage Americaine, Dec. 31
     Potage Andalouse, Jan. 17
     Potage Arlequin, June 13
     Potage Bagration, Jan. 11
     Potage Bonne Femme, Dec. 26
     Potage Bouquetiere, Oct. 20
     Potage Bourgeoise, Aug. 27
     Potage Brunoise with rice, Aug. 20
     Potage Cambridge, Nov. 13
     Potage Cameroni, Aug. 7
     Potage Champenoise, Oct. 14
     Potage Chatelaine, April 11
     Potage Coburg, July 9
     Potage Colbert, Aug. 28
     Potage Coquelin, March 23
     Potage Dagobert, July 10
     Potage Dieppoise, Aug. 15
     Potage Duchesse, Dec. 24
     Potage Esau, March 25
     Potage Faubonne, Dec. 22
     Potage Ferneuse, Oct. 19
     Potage Flamande, Dec. 27; Dec. 16
     Potage Fontange, May 15
     Potage Carpure, Sept. 19
     Potage Gentilhomme, Jan. 19
     Potage Grande Mere, Jan. 10
     Potage Grenade, Oct. 16
     Potage Hollandaise, Dec. 10
     Potage Honolulu, July 7
     Potage Italienne, Aug. 16
     Potage Jackson, Dec. 30
     Potage Kroumir, Feb. 23
     Potage Lamballe, Nov. 5
     Potage Livonien, Oct. 22
     Potage Lord Mayor, July 13
     Potage maintenon, Sept. 2
     Potage Marie Louise, Jan. 15
     Potage Marquis, Jan. 5
     Potage Mathilda, Dec. 23
     Potage McDonald, Jan. 20; July 29
     Potage Mexicaine, July 31
     Potage Mongol, Dec. 13
     Potage Montglas, Aug. 31
     Potage Nassau, Aug. 13
     Potage Navarraise, Sept. 28
     Potage Parmentier, Aug. 11
     Potage Paysanne, June 19
     Potage Plessy, Aug. 30
     Potage Portugaise, April 12
     Potage Quirinal, Jan. 8
     Potage Reine Margot, Dec. 21
     Potage Ruffo, Sept. 4
     Potage Sante, Nov. 19
     Potage Saxe, April 7
     Potage Schorestene, Sept. 30
     Potage Solferino, April 4
     Potage St. Marceau, July 1
     Potage Talleyrand, Feb. 5
     Potage tapioca, Crecy, Jan. 30
     Potage Turinoise, May 13
     Potage Velour, July 27
     Potage Venitienne, Jan. 13; April 8
     Potage vert pre, July 18
     Potage Viennoise, April 8
     Potage Villageois, Oct. 13
     Potage Voisin, Feb. 13
     Potage Waldaise, Feb. 11
     Potage Westmoreland, Feb. 18
     Potato and leek soup, Nov. 7
     Potato soup, Faubonne, April 5
     Potato, Dieppoise, April 23
     Pot au feu, March 15
     Puree Camelia, May 21
     Puree Celestine, March 20
     Puree Crecy, Jan. 26
     Puree d'Artois, March 8
     Puree of cucumbers, June 21
     Puree of game, Nov. 18
     Puree of game, St. Hubert, Nov. 18
     Puree of green asparagus, April 27
     Puree of lentils, Oct. 30
     Puree of lentils with tapioca, Aug. 21
     Puree of lima beans, Dec. 14
     Puree of peas, plain, Oct. 27
     Puree of peas, aux croutons, Oct. 27
     Puree of peas, Varsovienne, Oct. 27
     Puree of peas with noodles, Sept. 12
     Puree of pheasant, St. Hubert, Feb. 10
     Puree of potatoes, March 20
     Puree of red kidney beans, May 4
     Puree of spinach, April 19
     Puree of tomatoes, Oct. 28
     Puree of tomatoes with rice, Nov. 8
     Puree of turnips, Caroline, Aug. 25
     Puree of white beans, Dec. 18
     Puree of white beans, Allemande, Aug. 23
     Puree of white beans, Soubise, May 9
     Puree paysanne, March 16
     Puree St. Germain, April 15
     Rice soup, a l'Allemande, July 25
     Rice, Palmero, Aug. 9
     Rocol, a la Russe, June 1
     Shrimp, family style, Oct. 2
     Soft clam soup, Salem, June 7
     Sorrel, a l'eau, June 5
     Sorrel, with rice, June 29
     Terrapin, Southern style, Aug. 3
     Tomato broth (hot or cold), July 29
     Veloutine Aurore, May 19
     Veloute, Dec. 10
     Velvet soup, March 19
     Viennese bean, March 26
     White bean soup, March 14


SQUAB

     Boneless, en aspic, July 17
     Breast of, au jus, Sept. 19
     Breast of, Eveline, Oct. 8
     Breast of, Perigord, May 2
     Breast of, saute in butter, June 4
     Breast of, under glass, St. Francis, Feb. 4
     Broiled squab, April 2
     Broiled squab, with fresh mushrooms, April 2
     En compote, Jan. 15
     Potpie, English style, Jan. 1
     Roast, au jus, Feb. 21


STEWS

     Beef goulash, Oct. 28
     Beef stew, homemade, Nov. 7
     Haricot of mutton, Feb. 13
     Hasenpfeffer (hare stew), Jan. 12
     Hungarian goulash, Oct. 28
     Lamb Irish stew, Nov. 2
     Navarin of lamb, printanier, Nov. 25
     Paprika veal, July 20
     Pickelsteiner stew, May 13
     Pilaff a la Turc, Jan. 8
     Ragout a la Deutsch, Dec. 22
     Ragout Fin, Dec. 29
     Reindeer stew, March 7
     Spring lamb Irish stew with dumplings, Sept. 25


TRIPE

     A la mode de Caen, Feb. 28
     Broiled honeycomb, chili sauce, May 11
     Broiled honeycomb, maitre d'hotel sauce, Oct. 30
     Blanchard, Dec. 27
     Creole, Dec. 20
     Etuve, Bonne Femme, Sept. 9
     Honeycomb, saute, aux fines herbes, Sept. 28
     In cream with peppers, April 26
     Saute, Lyonnaise, Feb. 17
     Tripe and oysters in cream, Dec. 10
     Tripe and potatoes, family style, Jan. 1
     Tripe, Wm. H. Crane, Oct. 23


TURKEY

     Broiled baby turkey, July 4
     Deviled legs, with chow chow, Jan. 19
     Hash, Chateau de Madrid, June 28
     Hash on toast, Nov. 28
     Livers en brochette, March 6
     Roast, March 6
     Stuffed with chestnuts, Nov. 27


VEAL

     Breast, stuffed, au jus, Jan. 27
     Calf's brains au beurre noir, March 13
     Calf's brains, fried, tomato sauce, June 1
     Calf's head plain, boiled, Dec. 31
     Calf's head a la Francaise, March 9
     Calf's head, Providence, May 6
     Calf's head, sauce piquante, April 13
     Calf's head, poulette, Feb. 10
     Calf's head, vinaigrette, Feb. 27
     Calf's liver and bacon, Nov. 30
     Calf's liver, Lyonnaise, Aug. 11
     Calf's liver saute, Nov. 18
     Calf's liver saute, Robert, May 23
     Calf's liver saute, Spanish style, Aug. 4
     Chops, broiled, Nov. 4
     Chops en papillote, Feb. 8
     Chops, Montgolfier, Sept. 10
     Cutlets, breaded, tomato sauce, May 26
     Fricandeau, au jus, April 7
     Fricassee, Jan. 20
     Kidneys, broiled, English style, June 13
     Kidney roast, Dec. 20
     Kidneys saute au Madere, June 29
     Leberkloese (calf's liver dumplings), April 25
     Leg, au jus, Nov. 7
     Loin, roasted, June 23
     Loin roasted, Nivernaise, July 11
     Paprika schnitzel, March 5
     Paprika veal, July 20
     Rolled veal, Huguenin, March 25
     Saute, Catalane, Oct. 12
     Shoulder, au jus, Oct. 31
     Sweetbreads braise (glace), Dec. 25
     Sweetbreads braise, Ancienne, April 14
     Sweetbreads braise, Clamart, April 5
     Sweetbreads braise, Georginette, Sept. 5
     Sweetbreads braise, Godard, May 7
     Sweetbreads braise, Henri IV, March 27
     Sweetbreads, Lavaliere, June 22
     Sweetbreads braise, Marie Louise, April 1
     Sweetbreads Marigny, July 24
     Sweetbreads braise, Montebello, June 11
     Sweetbreads braise, Pompadour, Dec. 1
     Sweetbreads Poulette, July 16
     Sweetbreads braise, Princess, July 1
     Sweetbreads braised, Soubise, June 24
     Sweetbreads braise, Elizabeth, July 21
     Sweetbreads braise, St. George, June 8
     Sweetbreads braise, Zurich, May 4
     Sweetbreads, broiled, Nov. 1
     Sweetbread croquettes, Dec. 23
     Sweetbreads Egyptienne, Aug. 5
     Sweetbreads Figaro, Aug. 7
     Sweetbreads Lieb, Aug. 15
     Sweetbreads Liencourt, Oct. 4
     Sweetbreads Metropolitan Club, July 27
     Sweetbread patties in cream, April 19
     Sweetbreads Royal, Sept. 27
     Sweetbreads, St. Alban, Aug. 12
     Sweetbreads, Saint Monde, Oct. 16
     Sweetbreads Sans Gene, Aug. 20
     Sweetbreads, Theodora, Feb. 25
     Wiener schnitzel, Feb. 3


VEGETABLES

     Artichoke au gratin (individual), Feb. 19
     Artichokes, Barigoule, Sept. 24
     Artichokes, boiled, Oct. 29
     Artichokes en cocotte, Sept. 12
     Artichokes filled with cauliflower, Feb. 23
     d'Artichokes, fonds, Feypell, March 12
     Artichokes, fried, March 3
     Artichokes, jardiniere, May 2
     Artichokes, quartered, April 28
     Asparagus, boiled, March 13
     Asparagus, polonaise, March 12; Feb. 4
     Asparagus, stewed, April 4; March 14
     Asparagus tips au gratin, Jan. 27; April 17
     Asparagus tips in cream, Sept. 6
     Beans, baked, Boston style, Nov. 23
     Beans Bretonne, March 9
     Beans, Normandie, March 17
     Beans, white, with tomatoes, April 23
     Beets a la Russe, July 7
     Beets, boiled, Oct. 31
     Beets, Californienne, Sept. 5
     Beets, Frouard, April 17
     Beans, Spanish, Sept. 14
     Beets, young, in butter, March 16
     Brussels sprouts and chestnuts, Jan. 5
     Brussels sprouts, boiled, Jan. 5
     Brussels sprouts in bouillon, Feb. 1
     Cabbage, boiled, Jan. 3
     Cabbage, German style, Aug. 27
     Cabbage, red, Dec. 18
     Cabbage, stuffed, Sept. 15; Dec. 18
     Cardon a la Moelle, Nov. 30
     Carrots in butter, March 11
     Carrots, Vichy, Dec. 6
     Cauliflower au gratin, Nov. 5
     Cauliflower polonaise, Nov. 12
     Cauliflower, puree of, March 19
     Celery stewed, au Madere, Nov. 18
     Celery stewed in cream, Nov. 6
     Cepes saute, Dec. 13
     Cepes, Tyrolienne (cold), Jan. 30
     Chestnuts, boiled, Jan. 3
     Chestnuts, boulettes, Oct. 6
     Chestnuts glace, Feb. 7
     Chestnuts glace au Madere, Feb. 7
     Colache, Sept. 15
     Corn a la Marie, Sept. 4
     Corn (canned) fritters, Sept. 8
     Corn fritters, Dec. 17
     Corn fritters, Susan Jones, Sept. 17
     Corn, green, June 8
     Corn, hulled, Nov. 10
     Corn oysters, Sept. 14
     Corn pudding, Oct. 24
     Corn saute in butter, July 4
     Corn, stewed (canned), April 15
     Cucumbers on toast, Oct. 11
     Cucumbers stuffed, April 22
     Egg plant, broiled, June 8
     Egg plant, fried, Nov. 18
     Egg plant in casserole, Sept. 8
     Egg plant, Sicilienne, Sept. 3
     Egg plant, stuffed, Sept. 6
     Flageolets au cerfeuil, June 8
     Flageolet beans, Dec. 28
     Hubbard squash, baked, Dec. 4
     Jerusalem artichokes in cream, Aug. 25
     Jets de houblons, Nov. 22
     Kohl rabi, baked, Sept. 5
     Lentils, Feb. 2
     Lettuce boiled, Feb. 4
     Lettuce braise, Dec. 27
     Lima beans, Jan. 16
     Lima beans au paprika, Aug. 26
     Lima beans, curried, Jan. 6
     Lima beans, puree of, Feb. 8
     Lima beans with shallots, Sept. 26
     Macedoine, March 17
     Mushrooms, fresh, broiled, Nov. 4
     Mushrooms, fresh, puree of, Oct. 4
     Mushrooms, fresh, saute in butter, Feb. 20
     Mushrooms, fresh, stuffed, Jan. 10
     Okra and tomatoes, saute, June 8
     Onions fried, Dec. 13
     Onions glaces, Feb. 20
     Onions Hongroise, March 25
     Onions, puree of, Soubise, March 31
     Onions, stewed, Sept. 13
     Onions stuffed, with cabbage, Jan. 3
     Parsley, fried, Nov. 6
     Parsnips, boiled, April 21
     Parsnips in cream, April 21
     Peas a la Francaise, June 21
     Peas and carrots in cream, Nov. 7
     Peas and shallots in cream, Sept. 7
     Peas au cerfeuil, March 3
     Peas, farmer style, March 15
     Peas in cream, Jan. 16
     Peas, new, plain, Nov. 1
     Peppers, stuffed green, Aug. 5
     Pimentos, stuffed, Creole, Aug. 17
     Pumpkin and rice, scalloped, Sept. 13
     Pumpkin, stewed, Sept. 13
     Puree St. Germain, Nov. 15
     Rice, Californienne, Oct. 23
     Rice, Creole, Dec. 23
     Rice croquettes, Dec. 16
     Rice, timbale of, May 31
     Rice, timbale of, Creole, May 16
     Risotto, Jan. 8
     Salad, puree of, March 14
     Sauerkraut, Feb. 14
     Sorrel, Jan. 28
     Spinach, boiled, Jan. 5
     Spinach, English style, Jan. 5
     Spinach in cream, Feb. 20
     Spinach, timbale of, Aug. 8
     String beans, Oct. 28
     String beans, Alsacienne, April 8
     String beans, sweet-sour, July 22
     String beans with tomatoes, Sept. 1
     Succotash, July 2
     Summer squash au beurre, Nov. 1
     Summer squash, Native Son, June 4
     Summer squash, mashed, June 3
     Tomatoes baked, June 9
     Tomatoes glacees, Dec. 10
     Tomatoes, scalloped, Sept. 5
     Tomatoes, stewed, Jan. 30
     Tomatoes, stewed, Brazilian, March 19
     Tomatoes, stewed, family style, April 30
     Tomatoes, stuffed, Creole, June 22
     Tomatoes, stuffed, Noyer, Nov. 23
     Tomatoes, stuffed with chestnuts, Jan. 3
     Turnips glaces, Dec. 20
     Turnips, mashed, Dec. 11
     Wax beans in butter, April 26


WINE JELLIES

     Anisette jelly, Feb. 9
     Benedictine jelly, Feb. 9
     Brandy jelly, Feb. 9
     Burgundy jelly, Feb. 9
     Champagne jelly, Feb. 9
     Chartreuse jelly, Feb. 9
     Claret jelly, Feb. 9
     Cognac jelly, Feb. 9
     Fine champagne jelly, Feb. 9
     Fruit jelly, Feb. 9
     Jelly a la Russe, Feb. 9
     Kirsch jelly, Feb. 9
     Maraschino jelly, Feb. 9
     Moselle jelly, Feb. 9
     Port wine jelly, Feb. 9
     Rhine wine jelly, Feb. 9
     Sherry jelly, Feb. 9
     Wine jelly, Feb. 9
     Wine jelly with Apricots, Sept. 14
     Wine jelly with berries, Sept. 14
     Wine jelly with peaches, Sept. 14
     Wine jelly with whipped cream, Aug. 23




GENERAL INDEX


     Admiral (see Fish), 31

     Afternoon teas (selections), 100, 317, 334, 337

     Alaska black cod, broiled, 35

     Alaska black cod, kippered in cream, 232

     Alaska black cod, smoked, broiled, 298

     Alaska black cod, smoked, in cream, 312

     Alaska candlefish, broiled, 57

     Alhambra ice cream, 308

     Allemande sauce, 64

     Alexandria pudding, 217

     Alligator pear cocktail, 136

     Alligator pear salad, 54

     Allumettes (pastry), 161

     Almond biscuits, 312

     Almond cake, and almond cream cake, 96

     Almond milk (potage Reine Margot), 379

     Almond rocks (pastry), 213

     Almonds, salted (hors d'oeuvre), 320

     Almond wafers, 214

     Alsatian fish, 312

     American gugelhoff (pastry), 291

     Anchovy butter, 197

     Anchovy butter (sauce), 349

     Anchovy salad, 353

     Anchovy sauce, 29

     Anchovy toast, 139

     Angel cake or Angel food, 174

     Angels on horseback (oysters), 117

     Anglaise sauce (for fish), 387

     Anise seed cake, 52

     Anise toast, 277

     Anisette cake, 221

     Anisette jelly (wine), 40

     Antipasto (hors d'oeuvre), 37

     Apple, baked, 351

     Apple butter, 195

     Apple charlotte, 21

     Apple cobbler, 208

     Apple compote, 179

     Apple cottage pudding, 201

     Apple dressing, 355

     Apples, fried, 352

     Apple jelly, 133

     Apple Moscovite (pastry), 54

     Apple pie, 366

     Apples and quinces, canned, 194

     Apple roll, baked, 170

     Apple sauce, 103

     Apple snow (pastry), 304

     Apples, spiced, sweet, 237

     Apple strudel (pastry), 104

     Apple turnover, 152

     Apple water ice, 91

     Apricot compote, 179

     Apricot layer cake, 59

     Apricot marmalade, 172

     Apricot meringue, 210

     Apricot pie, 86

     Apricot roll, baked, 170

     Artichoke au gratin (individual), 51

     Artichokes, Barigoule, 282

     Artichokes, boiled, 323

     Artichokes en cocotte, 268

     Artichokes, filled with cauliflower, 55

     Artichokes d', fonds Feypell, 72

     Artichokes, fresh, a la Russe (hors d'oeuvre), 296

     Artichokes, fried, 63

     Artichokes, Jardiniere, 123

     Artichokes, Jerusalem, in cream, 249

     Artichokes, pickled, 287

     Artichokes, quartered, 119

     Asparagus, boiled, 73

     Asparagus, Polonaise, 35, 73

     Asparagus, stewed, 74, 95

     Asparagus tips au gratin, 27, 108

     Asparagus tips in cream, 261

     Asparagus tips salad, 325

     Asparagus and Westphalia ham, 282

     Assorted cakes, 344

     Avocado salad, French dressing, 313


     Baba au Rhum (pastry), 384

     Baby lamb steak, horticulture, 88

     Bacon and cabbage, 41

     Bacon and eggs, 331

     Bacon, fried, 331

     Bain marie, 26

     Baises (chocolate drops), 277

     Baked Alaska (see Ices, etc.), 84

     Bananas, baked, 275

     Banana coupe (see Ices, etc.), 129

     Banana cream pie, 145

     Banana ice cream, 8

     Bananas in cream, 325

     Banana pie, 292

     Bananas, sliced, with whipped cream, 156

     Bananas, sweet-sour (hors d'oeuvre), 379

     Banana whipped cream, 290

     Barquette a l'Aurore (hors d'oeuvre), 14

     Barracouda, aux fines herbes, 328

     Barracouda, broiled, sauce Rougemont, 256

     Bavarois a la Vanille, 379

     Bavarois with Bar le Duc, 33

     Bavarois, noisette (pastry), 88

     Bavarois, raspberry (pastry), 29

     Bass, aiguillettes of, a la Russe, 13

     Bass, aiguillettes of, Massena, 74

     Bass, Dijonaise, 72

     Bass, fillet of (1905), 348

     Bass, fillet of, Argentine, 172

     Bass, fillet of, Brighton, 193

     Bass, fillet of, Dieppoise, 366

     Bass, fillet of, Duglere, 130

     Bass, fillet of, Menton, 77

     Bass, Nicoise, 153

     Bass, paupiettes of, 80

     Bass, Provencale, 6

     Bass, fillet of, shrimp sauce, 362

     Bass, timbale of, 42

     Bean and cabbage soup, 279

     Beans, baked, Boston style, 351

     Beans, Bretonne, 69;
       Normandie, 77;
       Spanish, 270

     Beans, white, with tomatoes, 114

     Bearnaise sauce, 13

     Bearnaise tomato (sauce), 13

     Bechamel sauce, 322

     Beef a la mode, 143;
       cold, 206

     Beef boiled with vegetables, 329

     Beef, braised, 167;
       comfortable, 262

     Beef, braised, with calf's feet, 362

     Beef, chipped, on toast, 162

     Beef, corned, and cabbage, 27

     Beef, corned, hash, 91;
       browned, 91

     Beef, corned, hash, au gratin, 91

     Beef (see Classified Index), 400

     Beef, fillet of, Cendrillon, 126

     Beef, fillet of, Charentiere, 106

     Beef, fillet of, Dumas, 238

     Beef, fillet of, Lombarde, 134

     Beef, filet mignon, 105;
       Athenienne, 171;
       Bayard, 64

     Beef, filet mignon, Cheron, 147, 357

     Beef, filet mignon, Du Barry, 267;
       Marechale, 142

     Beef, filet mignon, Trianon, 105

     Beef, fillet of saute, Balzag, 183

     Beef, goulash (stew), 321

     Beef, hashed fillet of, Sam Ward, 120

     Beef, larded rump of, 167

     Beef, larded sirloin of, 348

     Beef, larded tenderloin of, 119

     Beef, larded tenderloin of, Lili, 189

     Beef, larded tenderloin of, Montbasson, 119

     Beef, larded tenderloin of, Sigurd, 273

     Beef, larded tenderloin of, St. Martin, 154

     Beef, larded tenderloin of, Vigo, 178

     Beef marrow, Princess, 197

     Beef, miroton of, en bordure, 360

     Beef, planked sirloin steak, 22;
       St. Francis, 209

     Beef, porterhouse, baked, 301

     Beef, porterhouse steak, Bercy, 142;
       Jolly, 176

     Beef, Rheinbraten, 354

     Beef, roast, Jules Albert, 242

     Beef, roast sirloin, fermiere, 169;
       Mounet-Sully, 231

     Beef, roast sirloin of, Porte Maillot, 385

     Beef, roast tenderloin, Berthieu, 203;
       Boucicault, 300

     Beef, roast tenderloin, vert pre, 216

     Beef, roast top sirloin of, 349

     Beef, rump of, 103

     Beef, rump steak, Bercy, 326;
       Dickinson, 249

     Beef, Salisbury steak, Stanley, 270

     Beef, sirloin of, Clermont, 3

     Beef, sirloin of, roasted, 331

     Beef, sirloin steak, Braconiere, 296

     Beef, sirloin steak, broiled, Cliff House, 164

     Beef, sirloin steak, Dickinson, 98

     Beef, sirloin steak, marchand de vin, 42

     Beef, sirloin steak, sauce Madere, 330

     Beef, sirloin steak, Saxonne, 287

     Beef, small sirloin steak, a la Russe, 221

     Beef, small tenderloin steak, Cercle Militaire, 281

     Beef, small tenderloin steak, Demidoff, 108

     Beef, small tenderloin steak, Fedora, 149

     Beef, small tenderloin steak, Nicholas II, 289

     Beef, sour schmorrbraten, 138

     Beefsteak and kidney pie, 344

     Beefsteak, Bismarck, 18;
       Jussien, 292

     Beefsteak, Provencale, 13;
       Tartare, 213

     Beef stew, homemade, 333

     Beef tenderloin, minced, a l'estragon, 53

     Beef, tenderloin of, Brillat Savarin, 137

     Beef tenderloin, Bristol, 374;
       Cardinalice, 250

     Beef, tenderloin of, Cubaine, 110;
       Cumberland, 113

     Beef, tenderloin of, Gambetta, 233

     Beef, tenderloin of, larded, 328

     Beef, tenderloin of, Malvina, 38

     Beef, tenderloin of, Moderne, 227

     Beef, tenderloin of, Parisienne, 165

     Beef, tenderloin of, Voisin, 158

     Beef, tenderloin steak, Bernardi, 303

     Beef, tenderloin steak, broiled, 334

     Beef, tenderloin steak, Florentine, 19

     Beef, tenderloin steak, Marseillaise, 182

     Beef, tenderloin steak, Polonaise, 116

     Beef, tenderloin steak, Rachel (small), 213

     Beef tongue, boiled, 29

     Beef tongue, Menschikoff, 305

     Beef tongue, Parisienne, 71

     Beef tongue, smoked, with spinach, 144

     Beef tongue, sweet-sour, 61

     Beef, tournedos, Bayard, 152

     Beef, tournedos, Bordelaise, 129;
       Cafe Julien, 256

     Beef, tournedos, Massenet, 350;
       Nicoise, 139

     Beef, tournedos, Porte Maillot, 199;
       Vaudeville, 186

     Beets a la Russe, 196

     Beets, boiled, 326

     Beets, Californienne, 260;
       Frouard, 108

     Beets, young, in butter, 76

     Beignets souffles (pastry), 169

     Benedictine jelly, 40

     Bercy (garniture), 38

     Bercy (sauce), 38, 326

     Berliner Pfannenkuchen (pastry), 187

     Berries with whipped cream, 157

     Bignon (see Fish), 11

     Bird's nests (pastry), 222

     Biscuits, almond, 312

     Biscuits, bran, 318

     Biscuit glace, apple, 385

     Biscuit glace, chocolate, 385;
       coffee, 385

     Biscuit glace, foundation, 385

     Biscuit glace, Kirsch, 385;
       mapeline, 385

     Biscuit glace, peppermint, 385;
       pineapple, 385

     Biscuit glace, pistache, 385;
       raspberries, 385

     Biscuit glace, St. Francis, 385;
       strawberry, 385

     Biscuits, Maryland beaten, 344

     Biscuits, seed, 273

     Biscuits, tea, 329

     Biscuit Tortoni, 90

     Bisque d'ecrevisses, 383

     Bisque of California oysters, 9

     Bisque of clams, 350

     Blanc mange aux fruits, 171;
       aux liqueurs, 171

     Blanc mange, chocolate, 171;
       coffee, 171

     Blanc mange, corn starch, 248;
       with berries, 248

     Blanc mange, corn starch, with Sabayon, 248

     Blanc mange, corn starch, with stewed fruits, 248

     Blanc mange, vanilla, 171

     Black bass, Cambaceres, 373;
       Heydenreich, 208

     Black bass, planked, 258

     Black bass, Tournon, 201

     Blackberry cordial (for medicinal purpose), 205

     Blackberry jam, 133

     Blackberry jelly, 133

     Blackberry meringue, 210

     Blackberry pie, 86

     Blackberry roll, baked, 170

     Black cake, 273

     Bloater, Yarmouth, 342

     Bloater, Yarmouth, in oil (hors d'oeuvre), 98

     Blood pudding, 379;
       sauce Robert, 152

     Bluefish, broiled, maitre d'hotel, 339

     Buckwurst, hot (pork), 81

     Boneless squab en aspic, 209

     Bordelaise sauce, 334

     Boston baked beans, 351

     Boston brown bread, 365

     Boston brown pudding, 201

     Bouchettes, coffee (pastry), 170

     Bouchettes, Palmyra (pastry), 207

     Bouchettes (pastry), 170

     Bouillabaise, Marseillaise, 370

     Bouillon (consomme), 329

     Boulanger (garniture), 360

     Bouquet garni, 333

     Bran biscuits, 318

     Bran bread, 318

     Bran bread, four o'clock tea, 318

     Brandied cherries, 173

     Brandied peaches, 173

     Brandy jelly, 40

     Brandy, lemon or orange, for flavoring, 224

     Brandy sauce, 49

     Brandy, vanilla, 205

     Brazil nuts, salted (hors d'oeuvre), 135

     Bread, etc. (see Classified Index)

     Bread and butter sandwich, 337

     Bread, Boston brown, 365

     Bread, bran, 318

     Bread, bran, 4 o'clock tea, 318

     Bread, corn, 316, 365

     Bread crumbs sauce, 9;
       for game, 47

     Bread custard pudding, 197

     Bread, French, 356

     Bread, Graham, 316

     Bread, homemade, 356

     Bread, pulled, 271

     Bread, raisin, 316

     Bread sauce, 9;
       for game, 47

     Bread, spoon or mush, 315

     Breakfast rolls, 353

     Brioche (pastry), 317

     Bristol (garniture), 374

     Brook trout, boiled, Romanoff, 304

     Brook trout, broiled, with bacon, 99

     Brook trout, Cafe de Paris, 316;
       Cambaceres, 297

     Brook trout, Meuniere, 95;
       Miller style, 104

     Brook trout, Volper, 242

     Broth, fish, 212

     Broth, oyster, 99

     Brown Betty (pastry), 100

     Brown bread pudding, baked, 289

     Brown butter sauce, 336

     Brown gravy sauce, 341

     Brussels sprouts and chestnuts, 5

     Brussels sprouts, boiled, 5

     Brussels sprouts in bouillon, 32

     Buckwheat cakes, 325

     Buckwurst, hot, 81

     Burgundy jelly (wine), 40

     Burned farina soup, 115

     Butter, apple, 195

     Butterball duck, roasted, 344

     Butterfish, saute Meuniere, 326

     Butter, lobster, 383

     Butter, royal (pastry), 268


     Cabbage, boiled, 3

     Cabbage, German style, 251

     Cabbage, red, 376

     Cabbage soup, Normande, 170

     Cabbage, stuffed, 271

     Cabinet pudding, 31

     Cactus fruit with lemon, 38

     Cake, almond, 96;
       almond cream, 96

     Cake, angel, 174

     Cake anise seed, 52

     Cake, anisette, 221

     Cake, apricot layer, 59

     Cakes assorted, 344

     Cake, black, 273

     Cakes, buckwheat, 325

     Cake, Caroline, 76

     Cake, cheese, 317

     Cake, chocolate layer, 59

     Cake, Christmas, 273

     Cake, cinnamon, 191

     Cake, cocoa, 100

     Cake, coffee, 317;
       coffee cream, 191

     Cake, coffee fruit, 190

     Cake, Danish apple, 303

     Cake, devil, 277

     Cakes, flannel, 109

     Cake, French layer, 59;
       French sponge, 291

     Cake, fruit, 336

     Cake, German apple, 325;
       German coffee, 190

     Cake, German huckleberry, 181

     Cakes, griddle, war, 313

     Cake, honey, 180

     Cake, lady, 259

     Cake, layer, 59, 367

     Cake, lemon, 234

     Cake, moka (Mocha), 50

     Cake, Napoleon, 48

     Cake, orange, 234

     Cake, patience, 210

     Cake, pound, 336

     Cakes, rice, 109

     Cake, royal, 268

     Cakes, silver, 265

     Cake, sponge, 76

     Cake, streusel, 190

     Cake, tango, 275

     Cake, wedding, 293

     Calf's brains au beurre noir, 73

     Calf's brains, boiled, 154

     Calf's brains fried, tomato sauce, 154

     Calf's foot jelly, 202

     Calf's head a la Francaise, 69

     Calf's head, Poulette, 41

     Calf's head, plain, boiled, 389

     Calf's head, Providence, 127

     Calf's head, sauce piquante, 104;
       vinaigrette, 59

     Calf's liver and bacon, 358

     Calf's liver dumplings (leberkloese), 116

     Calf's liver, Lyonnaise, 235

     Calf's liver, saute, 345;
       saute, Robert, 145

     Calf's liver, saute, Spanish style, 228

     California marmalade, 140

     California raisins, 313

     California sherbet, 113

     Canape of anchovies (hors d'oeuvre), 328

     Canape of caviar (hors d'oeuvre), 321

     Canape of chicken (hors d'oeuvre), 63

     Canape Eldorado (hors d'oeuvre), 292

     Canape Hambourgeoise (hors d'oeuvre), 324

     Canape Julia (hors d'oeuvre), 54

     Canape of lobster (hors d'oeuvre), 237

     Canape Martha (hors d'oeuvre), 369

     Canape Monte Carlo (hors d'oeuvre), 387

     Canape Norway (hors d'oeuvre), 153

     Canape P. P. I. E. (hors d'oeuvre), 315

     Canape of raw beef (hors d'oeuvre), 144

     Canape of raw meat (hors d'oeuvre), 51

     Canape Regalia (hors d'oeuvre), 338

     Canape Riga (hors d'oeuvre), 347

     Canape Romanoff (hors d'oeuvre), 92

     Canape St. Francis, 72

     Canape St. Francis (hors d'oeuvre), 201

     Canape of sardines (hors d'oeuvre), 332

     Canape Thon Marine (hors d'oeuvre), 245

     Candied lemon or orange peel, 205

     Cannelons a la creme, 150

     Cantaloup Water ice, 1

     Canteloupe and watermelon, surprise, 258

     Canvas-back duck, roasted, 336

     Capon, galantine of, 211

     Caper sauce, 369

     Capon, stuffed, Bruxelloise, 59

     Capon, stuffed, St. Antoine, 4

     Caramel custard, 28

     Caramel ice cream, 145

     Cardinal sauce, 124

     Cardon a la Moelle, 358

     Caroline cake, 76

     Carrots in butter, 71

     Carrots, Vichy, 364

     Catfish, saute, Meuniere, 97

     Cauliflower au gratin, 331

     Cauliflower Polonaise, 338

     Cauliflower, puree of, 79

     Cauliflower salad, 196

     Caviar, 343

     Celery broth, cold, 251

     Celery plain (hors d'oeuvre), 320

     Celery root, field and beet salad, 378

     Celery salad, Victor, 330

     Celery sauce, 245

     Celery stewed in cream, 332

     Celery, stewed, au Madere, 345

     Cepes saute, 371;
       Tyrolienne, cold, 30

     Cereals (see Classified Index)

     Chambord (see Fish), 52

     Chambord (sauce), 254

     Champagne jelly, 40;
       fine, 40

     Champagne punch, 163, 223

     Champagne sauce, 232

     Charlotte Russe, 107

     Chartreuse jelly, 40

     Cheese (see Classified Index)

     Cheese balls, 323

     Cheese cake, 14, 317

     Cheese, cottage, 146

     Cheese, cream, with Bar le Duc, 387

     Cheese, Olympic club, 314

     Cheese, Petaluma cream, 275

     Cheese, St. Francis, 188

     Cheese souffle (fromage), 95

     Cheese straws, 61

     Cheese toast, 309

     Cheron (garniture), 357

     Cherries, brandied, 173

     Cherries, jellied, 205

     Cherry pie, 86

     Cherry preserves, 173

     Cherries, spiced, 236

     Cherry tartlette, 369

     Chestnuts, boiled, 3

     Chestnuts, boulettes, 295

     Chestnut dressing, 355

     Chestnuts, glace, 38;
       glace au Madere, 38

     Chicken (see Classified Index)

     Chicken a l'Estragon, 68

     Chicken a la King, 337

     Chicken, Austrian fritters, 113

     Chicken, baked with rice, 79

     Chicken, breast of, Alexandra, 379

     Chicken, breast of, en aspic, 218

     Chicken, breast of, with figs, 280

     Chicken, breast of, James Woods, 316

     Chicken, breast of, with Virginia ham, 54

     Chicken, broiled, Tyrolienne, 150

     Chicken broth (consomme), 322

     Chicken, cold, Isabella, 277

     Chicken, coquille of, Mornay, 302

     Chicken croquettes, 381

     Chicken, Diva, 339

     Chicken dumplings, 388

     Chicken, Edward VII, 367

     Chicken en cocotte, Bazar, 310

     Chicken, essence of, in cup, 37

     Chicken, fricassee, a l'ancienne, 184

     Chicken, fried, country style, 338

     Chicken, fried, Maryland, 20

     Chicken, fried, Savoy, 264

     Chicken, fried, Villeroi, 183

     Chicken, galantine of, 211

     Chicken hash, a l'Italienne, 298

     Chicken hash on toast, 46

     Chicken hash, Victor, 361

     Chicken jelly, 206

     Chicken's legs, deviled, 121;
       with Virginia ham, 258

     Chicken, Leon X, 307

     Chicken livers, saute, forestiere, 39

     Chicken livers, saute, au Madere, 372

     Chicken okra soup, 365

     Chicken patties, Toulouse, 134

     Chicken, plain, roasted, 319

     Chicken pot pie, home style, 50

     Chicken salad, Victor, 3

     Chicken sandwich, 334

     Chicken, saute, Alsacienne, 255;
       Ambassadrice, 364

     Chicken, saute, Amphitian, 138;
       Archiduc, 169

     Chicken, saute, au Madere, 135

     Chicken, saute, bordelaise, 371;
       Chasseur, 94

     Chicken, saute, D'Austin, 107

     Chicken, saute, demi-deuil, 153

     Chicken, saute, Demidoff, 124;
       Hongroise, 77

     Chicken, saute, Josephine, 303;
       Lafitte, 196

     Chicken, saute, Madeleine, 120;
       Marengo, 366

     Chicken, saute, Montmorency, 55;
       Montpensier, 122

     Chicken, saute, Parisienne, 43;
       Portugaise, 78

     Chicken, saute, Salonika, 63;
       Viennoise, 190

     Chicken soup, Bresilienne, 184;
       Florentine, 242

     Chicken soup, Fougarmont, 242;
       Francaise, 298

     Chicken soup, Mulligatawny, 204;
       Piedmontaise, 208

     Chicken soup, Portugaise, 193;
       San Remo, 281

     Chicken, stuffed with California raisins, 313

     Chicken, Tyrolienne, 86

     Chicken, Valencienne, 7

     Chicory, puree of, 240

     Chicory salad, 322;
       with chapon, 155

     Chocolate, 364

     Chocolate Bouchettes, 170

     Chocolate cream pie, 276

     Chocolate drops (baises), 277

     Chocolate eclairs, 352

     Chocolate ice cream, 331

     Chocolate layer cake, 59, 367

     Chocolate macaroons, 97

     Chocolate profiterole, 20

     Chocolate pudding, cold, 279

     Chocolate sauce, cold, 279

     Choron (sauce), 13

     Chops, Badoise (pork), 215

     Chowder, clam, 363;
       Boston style, 84

     Chowder, fish, 101

     Chowder, lobster, 363

     Christmas cake, 273

     Cider, boiled, 141

     Cinnamon cake, 191

     Citron preserves, 89

     Clams, Bateliere, 66

     Clam broth, Chantilly (consomme), 363

     Clam broth (consomme), 363

     Clam chowder, 363;
       Boston style, 84

     Clams en cocotte, Californienne, 190

     Clams, Creole, 32

     Clams, fried soft, Tartar, 250

     Clams, little neck, on half shell, 331

     Clams, scalloped, 227

     Clams, soft, Newburg, 36

     Clam soup, homemade, 283

     Clam soup, soft, Salem, 161

     Clams stuffed, 196

     Clams with wine sauce, 96

     Claret jelly, 40

     Claret punch, 218

     Clear green turtle soup, 93

     Clermont (garniture), 3

     Cobbler, apple, 208;
       apricot, 208;
       peach, 208;
       pear, 208

     Cocktail, alligator pear, 136

     Cocktail, crab, Cremiere, 189

     Cocktail, crab, Victor, 84

     Cocktail, grapefruit, 111

     Cocktail, oyster, 23;
       sauce for, 23

     Cocktail, raisin, 80

     Cocoa, 366

     Cocoa cake, 100

     Cocoanut custard pie, 111

     Cocoanut meringue pie, 111

     Cocoanut pudding, 197

     Cocotte en (see Eggs), 402

     Codfish balls, 370

     Codfish (or other white fish) boiled, 321

     Codfish, boiled, Flamande, 244;
       Horose, 374

     Codfish cakes, 107

     Codfish, picked, in cream, 377

     Codfish, salt, Biscayenne, 181;
       Nova Scotia, 83

     Codfish steak, a l'Anglaise, 238

     Coffee, and after dinner coffee, 320

     Coffee bouchettes (pastry), 170

     Coffee cake, 317;
       coffee cake dough, 187

     Coffee cream cake, 191

     Coffee custard, 101

     Coffee fruit cake, 190

     Coffee ice cream, 389

     Cognac jelly, 40

     Colache (vegetable), 272

     Colbert sauce, 347

     Cold beef a la mode, 206

     Cold celery broth, 251

     Cold pheasant pie, 199

     Cole slaw (salad), 331;
       ravigote, 110

     Compote (see Fruit, cooked), 168, 179, 186, 192

     Compote with rice, 223

     Consomme (see Classified Index)

     Consomme Ab-del-Cader, 169;
       Alexandria, 224

     Consomme Allemande, 178;
       Andalouse, 171

     Consomme aux eclairs, 140

     Consomme aux pluches, 148

     Consomme aux quenelles, 105;
       quenelles, Doria, 144

     Consomme, Bellevue, 363

     Consomme Bretonne, 22;
       Bohemienne, 185

     Consomme (bouillon), 329

     Consomme Brunoise, 368

     Consomme Brunoise and vermicelli, 258

     Consomme Cameroni, 201;
       Camino, 77;
       Caroline, 155

     Consomme, celery and rice, 243

     Consomme Celestine, 119;
       Charles Quint, 197

     Consomme Chartreuse, 278;
       Chatelaine, 250

     Consomme Chevalier, 215

     Consomme, (Chicken broth), 322

     Consomme chiffonade, 124

     Consomme cialdini, 348

     Consomme (clam broth), 363;
       (Chantilly), 363

     Consomme Colbert, 57, 246

     Consomme, creme de volaille, 14

     Consomme Creole, 181

     Consomme, Croute au pot, 126

     Consomme D'Artagnan, 12;
       Daumont, 107

     Consomme de la mariee, 16

     Consomme Diable, 136;
       Diane, 311;
       Ditalini, 371

     Consomme Doria, 360;
       Du Barry, 71

     Consomme Favorite, 7;
       Federal, 260;
       Fermiere, 236

     Consomme Fleury, 380;
     Florentine, 53, 192

     Consomme Frascati, 292;
       Garibaldi, 207;
       Georgia, 290

     Consomme, gumbo strained, in cups, 59

     Consomme Imperatrice, 18;
       Inauguration, 220

     Consomme Irma, 174

     Consomme Italian paste, 248

     Consomme Japonnaise, 158;
       Julienne, 4;
       Leopold, 307

     Consomme Madrilene, 387;
       Magadore, 183

     Consomme Marchand, 160

     Consomme Marie Louise, 189;
       Massenet, 379

     Consomme Medina, 287

     Consomme Monaco, 232;
       Monte Cristo, 218

     Consomme Montesquieu, 241

     Consomme Napier, 269;
       National, 285

     Consomme Nelson, 302;
       Nicoise, 194

     Consomme with noodles, 295

     Consomme Oriental, 234;
       Orleans, 378

     Consomme, oyster broth, 99

     Consomme Palestine, 203

     Consomme parfait, 24, 97

     Consomme paysanne, 230

     Consomme Pemartin, 297;
       Perles de Nizam, 146

     Consomme, plain, 319

     Consomme Portugaise, 264

     Consomme Printanier, 121

     Consomme Profiteroles, 150;
       Rachel, 49

     Consomme Ravioli, 134;
       Rothschild, 228;
       Rivoli, 375

     Consomme Royal, 349;
       Royal, with carrots, 129

     Consomme Royal, green, 280;
       Royal, red, 280

     Consomme Russe, 117

     Consomme sago, 333

     Consomme Sarah Bernhardt, 142

     Consomme Scotch, 11

     Consomme Sevigne, 359, 109

     Consomme Sicilienne, 213;
       Soubise, 113

     Consomme stuffed cabbage, 271

     Consomme Talleyrand, 209

     Consomme tapioca, 337;
       with ecrevisse butter, 253

     Consomme Theodora, 111;
       Tosca, 138

     Consomme Trianon, 211, 280

     Consomme Turbigo, 165;
       Valencienne, 131

     Consomme Vanderbilt, 222;
       Venitienne, 152

     Consomme vermicelli, 41

     Consomme Vivieurs, 128;
       Xavier, 178

     Cookies, homemade, 33

     Cooper soup, 145

     Corn a la Marie, 259

     Corn bread, 316, 365

     Corn bread, Maryland, 339

     Corn (canned), stewed, 106

     Corn fritters, 375;
       (canned), 264

     Corn fritters, Susan Jones, 274

     Corn, green, 163

     Corn, hulled, 336

     Corn muffins, 361

     Corn oysters, 270

     Corn pone, Southern, 144

     Corn, pudding, 315

     Corn saute in butter, 192

     Corn meal pudding, 43

     Corn starch, blanc mange, 248;
       with berries, 248

     Corn starch, blanc mange, with Sabayon, 248

     Corn starch, blanc mange, with stewed fruits, 248

     Corn starch food (for invalids), 248

     Corn starch pudding, 188

     Cornet a la creme (pastry), 150

     Cosmopolitan salad, 230

     Cottage cheese, 146

     Cottage pudding, 201;
       cottage pudding, apple, 201

     Coupe Oriental (see Ices, etc.), 16

     Coupe St. Jacques, 7

     Coupe Victor (see Ices, etc.), 298

     Court Bouillon (see Fish), 58

     Crab, a la Louise, 82

     Crab, boiled, 347

     Crab cocktail, Cremiere, 189;
       Victor, 84

     Crab, curried, 98

     Crab, deviled, 30;
       deviled in shell, 108

     Crab en brochette, 97

     Crab gumbo soup, 212

     Crab legs, Josephine, 126

     Crab legs, stock (hors d'oeuvre), 156

     Crab meat au beurre noisette, 347

     Crab meat au gratin, 82

     Crab meat, Belle Helene, 83

     Crab meat in chafing dish, 82

     Crab meat in cream, 388

     Crab meat, Gourmet, 82;
       Monza, 388;
       Suzette, 82

     Crab or oyster poulette, 82

     Crab Portola, 104

     Crab, Ravigote, cold, 130

     Crab salad, 48;
       Louis, 128

     Crab apple marmalade and jelly, 172

     Cranberry jelly, 172

     Cranberry sauce, 274

     Cranberry water ice, 299

     Crayfish butter (ecrevisse), 383

     Cream of almond sandwich, 100

     Cream of artichokes, 166

     Cream of asparagus, Favori, 308

     Cream of asparagus (soup), 354

     Cream of bananas (soup), 65

     Cream of cauliflower, 325

     Cream of celery, 328

     Cream of celery, Kalamazoo, 39

     Cream of chicken, 335

     Cream of corn and onions, 273

     Cream of endives, 364

     Cream of farina, 67

     Cream of farina lie, 266

     Cream of flageolets, 216

     Cream, fried (pastry), 71

     Cream fritters, 159

     Cream of green corn, 69, 157

     Cream of lettuce soup, 62

     Cream of lima beans, 51

     Cream of parsnips I, 120

     Cream of parsnips II, 172

     Cream, pastry, 352

     Cream of peas, 305;
       Suzon, 305

     Cream of peas, St. Germain, 305

     Cream of potatoes, 334

     Cream puffs, 352

     Cream of rice, 386

     Cream sauce, 322

     Cream sauce (pastry), 24

     Cream soups (see Classified Index)

     Cream soup a l'Algerienne, 147

     Cream soup, Chicken a la Reine, 375

     Cream soup, Chicken Hortense, 92

     Cream soup, frog legs, 56

     Cream of summer squash, 300

     Cream of watercress (soup), 214

     Creme Bagration (soup), 139

     Creme Cardinal (soup), 149

     Creme Congolaise, 153

     Creme Countess (soup), 182

     Creme de volaille (consomme), 14

     Creme maintenon (soup), 18

     Creme Parisienne (soup), 104

     Creme, Reine Mogador, 97

     Creole sandwich, 100

     Creole sauce, 371

     Crepes Suzette (pastry), 294

     Crescents, puff paste (see Bread), 341

     Croquettes, chicken, 381;
       ham, 241

     Croquettes Livannienne (hors d'oeuvre), 6

     Croquettes, lobster, 381

     Croquettes, meat, 301

     Croquettes, rice, 223, 374

     Croquettes, sweetbreads, 381

     Croquettes, Virginia ham, 241

     Croustades, 55

     Croustades Cancalaise (hors d'oeuvre), 380

     Croustades, Financiere, 62

     Croustades, Laquipierre, 70

     Croute a l'Ananas (pastry), 215

     Croute aux fruits (fruit crust), 215

     Croute au pot (consomme), 126

     Croute Bretonne, soup, 190

     Croutons, Diable (for soup), 128

     Croutons Parmesanne, 135

     Crullers, 187

     Crusts with apples, 287;
       peaches, 286;
       pears, 287

     Cucumber salad, 9

     Cucumbers, stuffed, 113

     Cucumbers on toast, 301

     Cucumber sweet pickles, ripe, 288

     Cumberland style (with braised beef), 362

     Curry sauce, 377

     Culemo salad, sliced, 228

     Cup custard, 26

     Currant jelly, 167

     Currant pie, and English currant pie, 86

     Custard, caramel, 28

     Custard, boiled, 206

     Custard, coffee, 101

     Custard, cup, 26

     Custard, vanilla, with meringue, 206


     Dandelion salad, 103;
       German style, 103

     Danish apple cake, 303

     Dariole Duchesse (pastry), 257

     Dartois Chantilly (pastry), 114

     De Goncourt (garniture), 368

     Devil cake, 277

     Devil sauce, 121

     Deviled crab, 30;
       in shell, 108

     Deviled ham, 269

     Diplomate pudding, 78;
       glace, 85

     Diplomate sauce, 154

     Ditalini a la Royal (soup), 272

     Diva (see Chicken), 339

     Doughnuts, 187

     Dressings (see Salad dressings)

     Dressing, chestnut, 355

     Dressing for chicken, turkey, pig, etc., 355

     Dressing, Moscovite (fish), 262

     Dressing, salad, 314

     Ducale (garniture), 54

     Duck, breast of (tame), 117;
       Virginia style, 117

     Duck, roast Muscovy (tame), 282

     Ducks, tame (see Classified Index)

     Duckling, roast tame, 335

     Dumplings, fish, 42

     Dumpling, flour, 336

     Dumplings for stews, pot-pies, etc., 283

     D'Uxelles, 10


     Easter kid, roasted, 56

     Eau de vie de Dantzig (see Ices, etc.), 144

     Eclairs, pistache, 362

     Ecrevisse butter (crayfish), 383

     Ecrevisses en buisson, 333

     Ecrevisses, Georgette, 306

     Ecrevisses, Lafayette, 157

     Ecrevisses mayonnaise, 357

     Ecrevisses, mousse de, 220

     Ecrevisse salad, gourmet, 351

     Ecrevisse sauce, 220

     Ecrevisses, Voltaire, 306

     Eels, fried, sauce remoulade, 280

     Eels, Mariniere, 252

     Eels, smoked, 45

     Eggs (see Classified Index)

     Eggs, Agostini (poached), 165

     Eggs a l'Aurore (mollet), 306

     Eggs a la Reine (poached), 60

     Eggs a la Russe, 29

     Eggs a la tripe, 43

     Eggs, Amiral (shirred), 177

     Eggs, with anchovies (scrambled), 357

     Eggs, Andalouse (poached), 300

     Eggs Antoine (shirred), 171

     Eggs, Argenteuil (poached), 298

     Eggs, Argenteuil (shirred), 162

     Eggs, aromatic (poached), 362

     Eggs with asparagus tips (scrambled), 366

     Eggs Auben (mollet), 260

     Eggs au beurre noir (shirred), 335

     Eggs au fondu (poached), 166

     Eggs, bacon and, 331

     Eggs with bacon (scrambled), 37

     Eggs, Bagration, 46

     Eggs, Balti (poached), 241

     Eggs with bananas (shirred), 149

     Eggs, Bar le Duc (poached), 212

     Eggs, Basque, 179

     Eggs, Beaujolais (poached), 6

     Eggs, Belley (scrambled), 281

     Eggs, Belmont, 160

     Eggs, Benedict (poached), 34

     Eggs, Bennett, 285

     Eggs, Benoit (poached), 253

     Eggs, Bercy (shirred), 352

     Eggs, Bernadotte (poached), 255

     Eggs, Biarritz, 153

     Eggs, Bienvenue (shirred), 204

     Eggs, Blanchard (poached), 172

     Eggs, Bombay (poached), 176

     Eggs, Bonne femme, 296

     Eggs, Bordelaise, 62;
       Bordelaise (mollet), 236

     Eggs Boremis (en cocotte), 366

     Eggs, Boston style (poached), 297

     Eggs, Bresilienne (poached), 42

     Eggs, Brunswick (shirred), 289

     Eggs, Buckingham, 240

     Eggs, Bullitt (scrambled), 293

     Eggs, Canada, 252

     Eggs, Careme (shirred), 81

     Eggs, Caroli (shirred), 258

     Eggs, Caroline (scrambled), 194

     Eggs, Castro, 290

     Eggs, with celery (cold), 229

     Eggs, Celestine (poached), 183

     Eggs, Chambery (poached), 266

     Eggs, Chambord (poached), 254

     Eggs, Chateaubriand (poached), 127

     Eggs with cheese (scrambled), 169

     Eggs with cheese, Swiss, (scrambled), 193

     Eggs, with chives (fried) 152;
       (scrambled), 90

     Eggs, Chipolata (shirred), 24

     Eggs with clams, Creole (poached), 32

     Eggs, Colbert (poached), 168

     Eggs, Colonel (poached), 58

     Eggs, Columbus (poached), 150

     Eggs Commodore (en cocotte), 120

     Eggs, Conte (shirred), 302

     Eggs Coquelicot (en cocotte), 368

     Eggs, Coquelin, 104

     Eggs, Crossy (poached), 95

     Eggs, Cream sauce (mollet), 227

     Eggs, Creole (poached), 192

     Eggs, Creole (shirred), 371

     Eggs, Danoise (cold), 158

     Eggs, d'Artois (poached), 118

     Eggs, Dauphine (poached), 273

     Eggs, De Lesseps (shirred), 249

     Eggs Derby (poached), 277

     Eggs Diane (poached), 378

     Eggs, Don Juan, 250

     Eggs d'Orleans (poached), 233

     Eggs Du Barry (en cocotte), 79

     Eggs D'Uxelles (en cocotte), 156

     Eggs, Epicurienne (shirred), 109

     Eggs, Fedora, 155

     Eggs Florentine (mollet), 242

     Eggs, Florentine (poached), 264

     Eggs with fine herbs (scrambled), 380

     Eggs, fried, 322

     Eggs Gambetta (poached), 13

     Eggs, Gastronome, 73

     Eggs Germaine (poached), 262

     Eggs Gourmet (poached), 117, 201

     Eggs, Grazienna, 256

     Eggs, ham and, 322

     Eggs with ham (scrambled), 332

     Eggs, hard boiled, vinaigrette (hors d'oeuvre), 310

     Eggs, Havemeyer (scrambled), 198

     Eggs Henry IV (poached), 351

     Eggs Hongroise (poached), 145

     Eggs, Imperial (shirred), 276

     Eggs Indienne (poached), 377

     Eggs, Infante (fried), 243

     Eggs Isabella (poached), 275

     Eggs Italienne (en cocotte), 361

     Eggs, Jockey Club (shirred), 261

     Eggs Lackmee (poached), 38

     Eggs, Lenox, 246

     Eggs with lobster (scrambled), 267

     Eggs, Lorraine (shirred), 106

     Eggs, Lucullus (scrambled), 211

     Eggs, Magda (scrambled), 303

     Eggs Malakoff (poached), 124

     Eggs Maltaise (poached), 69

     Eggs Marigny (en cocotte), 348

     Eggs Marlborough (poached), 208

     Eggs, Marseillaise (scrambled), 147

     Eggs Martha (poached), 57

     Eggs, Mauresque (scrambled), 237

     Eggs, Mayence (scrambled), 213

     Eggs, McKenzie, 301

     Eggs, Mery, 21

     Eggs, Metternich (shirred), 309

     Eggs, Mexicaine (poached), 282

     Eggs, Meyerbeer, 244;
       (shirred), 65

     Eggs, Ministerielle (shirred), 383

     Eggs, Mireabeau, 12

     Eggs Mirabel (poached), 138

     Eggs Moliere (mollet), 267

     Eggs, Monaco (shirred), 159

     Eggs, Montebello, 230

     Eggs, Mornay (shirred), 5

     Eggs with Morocquaine (scrambled), 350

     Eggs with morilles (scrambled), 22

     Eggs, Moscow, 202

     Eggs Mounet-Sully (poached), 63

     Eggs, Nantaise (scrambled), 269

     Eggs, Nicoise (shirred), 216

     Eggs, Nantaise (poached), 304

     Eggs, Norwegian (scrambled), 286

     Eggs, in oil (fried), 29

     Eggs, Opera (shirred), 248

     Eggs Oriental (poached), 1

     Eggs, Oudinot, 20, 175

     Eggs with parsley (shirred), 38

     Eggs Patti (poached), 224

     Eggs Paulus (poached), 107

     Eggs with peppers (shirred), 197

     Eggs Perigordine (poached), 220

     Eggs Persanne (poached), 387

     Eggs Piedmontaise (poached), 222

     Eggs plain (en cocotte), 115

     Eggs, Pluche (scrambled), 223

     Eggs, poached, 324

     Eggs, poached, a l'Estragon (cold), 181

     Eggs poached, with clams, Creole, 32

     Eggs, poached, mayonnaise (cold), 326

     Eggs, Pocahontas (scrambled), 83

     Eggs Porto Rico (en cocotte), 142

     Eggs Presidential (poached), 149

     Eggs Princesse (poached), 77

     Eggs, Raspail (scrambled), 105

     Eggs Renaissance (en cocotte), 70

     Eggs Ribeaucourt (en cocotte), 305

     Eggs, Riche (cold), 245

     Eggs Rothschild (poached), 52

     Eggs St. Catherine, 209

     Eggs, St. George, 100

     Eggs St. Laurent (poached), 94

     Eggs St. Pierre (poached), 139

     Egg salad, 268;
       Egg salad dressing, 386

     Egg salad (hors d'oeuvre), 268

     Eggs, with salt pork (fried), 257

     Eggs Sans Gene (poached), 353

     Eggs, Sarah Bernhardt, 67;
       (scrambled), 295

     Egg sauce, 322

     Eggs scrambled, 321;
       Turbico, 15

     Eggs shirred, 333

     Eggs with smoked beef (scrambled), 321

     Eggs with smoked salmon (scrambled), 216

     Eggs, stuffed with anchovies (cold), 193

     Eggs, stuffed, with crab meat (hors d'oeuvre), 349

     Eggs, stuffed, Epicure (hors d'oeuvre), 270

     Eggs, stuffed (hors d'oeuvre), 343

     Eggs, stuffed, Nantua (hors d'oeuvre), 354

     Eggs, Suzette, 221

     Eggs Taft (poached), 292

     Eggs Talleyrand (poached), 56, 98

     Eggs, Texas clover (scrambled), 93

     Eggs, Tivoli (poached), 360

     Eggs with tomatoes (scrambled), 249

     Eggs Troubadour (poached), 44

     Eggs with truffles (scrambled), 71

     Eggs, Turque (shirred), 121

     Eggs Valentine (en cocotte), 111

     Eggs Vanderbilt (poached), 148

     Eggs Velour (poached), 294

     Eggs, Venetian in chafing dish, 92

     Eggs Vilna (poached), 228

     Eggs, Virginia ham and, 103

     Eggs Virginia (poached), 103

     Eggs Voltaire (en cocotte), 92

     Eggs Zingara (poached), 389

     Eggs Zurlo (poached), 307

     Eggs Waterloo (poached), 141

     Egg plant, broiled, 163;
       fried, 345

     Egg plant, in casserole, 264

     Egg plant, Sicilienne, 258

     Egg plant, stuffed, 261

     Egg nog, frozen, 110

     Endive sala, 361

     Endive with beets salad, 239

     English chuck steak (lamb) maitre d'hotel, 114

     English gooseberry pie, 86

     English grape pie, 86

     English huckleberry pie, 86

     English rhubarb pie, 86

     English rice pudding, 115

     English walnuts, salted (hors d'oeuvre), 386

     Escarole salad, 322

     Estragon sauce, tarragon, 106


     Fancy Ices (see Classified Index)

     Farina, boiled in milk, 194

     Farina pudding, 43

     Farina soup, Francis Joseph, 123

     Fidgi (sauce), 136

     Field salad, 324

     Figaro sauce, 231;
       (cold), 231

     Figs, fresh, in cream, 327

     Fig jam, 205

     Figs Roma, 318

     Figs, sliced, with cream, 158

     Filet mignon (see Classified Index, beef)

     Filet mignon, Monegasque, 294

     Filling, lemon butter, 234;
       orange butter, 234

     Financiere (garniture), 62

     Fine champagne jelly, 40

     Finnan haddie, broiled, 386

     Finnan haddie in cream, 326

     Fish (see Classified Index)

     Fish, Admiral, 31

     Fish broth, 212;
       with whipped cream, 256

     Fish chowder, 101

     Fish, cold, Michels, 186

     Fish dumplings, 42

     Fish, fillet of, au gratin, Italian, 193

     Fish salad, Ravigote (hors d'oeuvre), 364

     Flageolets au cerfeuil, 162

     Flageolet beans, 386

     Flamande sauce, 244

     Flannel cakes, 109

     Fleurette sauce, 330

     Fleurons, 357

     Floating Island, 2

     Florentine (garniture), 19

     Flounder, aiguillettes of, Rouchefoult, 175

     Flounder, fillet of, Cafe Riche, 386

     Flounder, fillet of, Cansale, 38

     Flounder, fillet of, Chevreuse, 364

     Flounder, fillet of, Chilienne, 261

     Flounder, fillet of, Circassienne, 139

     Flounder, fillet of, Meissonier, 7

     Flounder, fillet of, Norvegienne, 300

     Flounder, fillet of, Piombino, 166

     Flounder, fillet of, Pompadour, 123

     Flounder, fillet of, St. Avertin, 203

     Flounder, paupiette of, St. Avertin, 203

     Flour, dumpling, 336

     Foie gras, terrine de, a la gelee, 359

     Foie gras, terrine de, en aspic, 202, 216

     Fonds d'artichauts, Du Barry (cold), 234

     Force and cream, 324, 334

     Forcemeat, tongue and truffles, 79

     Forestiere sauce, 349

     Four o'clock tea, bran bread, 318

     Fowl, boiled, 322;
       celery sauce, 245

     Frankfort pudding, 112

     Frankfurter sausages, imported, 243

     French bread, 356

     French layer cake, 59

     French pastry, 44

     French salad dressing, 320

     French sponge cake (Genoise legere), 291

     Fricadellen (balls of cooked meat), 136

     Fried cream (pastry), 71

     Fritters (canned corn), 263

     Fritters, corn, 375;
       Susan Jones, 274

     Fritters cream, 159

     Fritters, surprise, 212

     Frogs' legs, Dilloise, 176

     Frogs' legs, fried, Espagnole, 214

     Frogs' legs, Greenway, 149, 267

     Frogs' legs, Jerusalem, 51

     Frogs' legs, Mariniere, 23

     Frogs' legs, saute a sec, 323, 385

     Frosting or icing, 352

     Frozen egg nog, 110

     Frozen loganberry juice, 317

     Fruit (see Classified Index)

     Fruit cake, 336;
       white, 57

     Fruit, cooked (see Classified Index)

     Fruit crust, 215

     Fruits dried, stewed, 253

     Fruits glace, 224

     Fruit jelly (wine), 40

     Fruit salad, au kirsch, 34;
       au marasquin, 34

     Fruit salad, Chantilly, 34

     Fruit salad glace, 109

     Fruits, sliced, with whipped cream, 156


     Galantine of capon; of chicken; of squab, 211

     Game (see Classified Index)

     Game, puree of, 52;
       for garnishing, 52

     Garnitures for entrees, etc. (see Classified Index)

     Gelee (meat jelly), 359

     Gems, wheat bran, 318

     Genoise legere (pastry), 291

     Genoise sauce, 327

     German almond strips, 180

     German apple cake, 325

     German carrot soup, 262

     German coffee cake, 190

     German huckleberry cake, 181

     German lentil soup, 89

     German pancake, 381

     Germea (cereal), 350

     Giblet sauce, 74

     Giblet soup a l'Anglaise, 323

     Ginger bread, 297

     Ginger snaps, 137

     Glace fruit, 224

     Gnocchis a la Romaine, 182;
       au gratin, 182

     Golden buck, 63

     Golfin sauce, 377

     Goosebreast, smoked (hors d'oeuvre), 44

     Goose liver saute, 364;
       aux truffles, 364

     Goose, stuffed, with chestnuts, 18

     Gooseberry compote, 186

     Gooseberry jam, 236

     Gooseberry pie, 86

     Goulash, Hungarian (stew), 321

     Graham bread, 316

     Grape jelly, 236

     Grape juice, sweet, 289

     Grapefruit, a l'Anisette, 99;
       a la Rose, 116

     Grapefruit, Cardinal, 199

     Grapefruit with cherries, 344

     Grapefruit with chestnut, 30

     Grapefruit cocktail, 109

     Grapefruit coupe, 129

     Grapefruit en supreme, 367;
       with kirsch, 106

     Grapefruit marmalade, 101

     Grape-nuts (cereal), 342

     Green coloring (vert d'epinards), 44

     Green gage plums, preserved, 173

     Green Hollandaise sauce, 44

     Griddle cakes, war, 313

     Gugelhoff, American (pastry), 291

     Gumbo file, Louisiana, 372

     Gumbo strained, in cups (consomme), 59


     Halibut, Boitel, 189

     Halibut, broiled, Alcide, 144;
       maitre d'hotel, 333

     Halibut, fillet of, Bristol, 125

     Halibut, fillet of, Cubaine, 234

     Halibut, fillet of, Lilloise, 152

     Halibut, fillet of, Mornay, 373

     Halibut, fillet of, Pondicherry, 295

     Halibut, fillet of, Venitienne, 148

     Halibut, Metternich, 301;
       Richmond, 121

     Halibut, scalloped, with cheese, 106

     Ham, boiled, Leonard, 79

     Ham croquettes, 241

     Ham, deviled, 269

     Ham and eggs, 322

     Ham, fried, 322

     Ham, pickled, 376

     Ham and spinach, boiled, 103

     Ham, sugar cured, glace, 247

     Ham, Virginia, broiled, 134

     Ham, Virginia, croquettes, 241

     Ham, Virginia, glace, 232

     Hamburg steak, 335

     Hangtown fry, 64

     Hard sauce, 49

     Hare, saddle of, sour cream sauce, 90

     Hare soup, Uncle Sam, 294

     Hare stew (hasenpfeffer), 12

     Haricot of mutton (stew), 44

     Hasenpfeffer (hare stew), 12

     Hash, corned beef, 91

     Hash, chicken, a l'Italienne, 298

     Hash, chicken, on toast, 46

     Hash, chicken, Victor, 361

     Hash, turkey, on toast, 356

     Hazlenut ice cream, 8

     Hazlenut macaroons, 290

     Hearts of Palm, Victor, 317

     Herring, fillet of, Marine (hors d'oeuvre), 53

     Herring, fresh, a l'Egyptienne, 310

     Herring, kippered, broiled, 81

     Herring, Livonienne (hors d'oeuvre), 305

     Herring salad, 221;
       Moscovite, 262

     Herring salad (hors d'oeuvre), 221

     Hollandaise sauce, 319

     Homemade apple pudding, 80

     Homemade bread, 356

     Homemade cookies, 33

     Hominy (cereal), 321

     Hominy, fried, 323

     Honey cake, 180

     Horose sauce, 374

     Hors d'oeuvres (see Classified Index)

     Hors d'oeuvres varies, 343

     Horseradish, en bouillon (sauce), 329

     Horseradish, in cream (sauce), 329

     Horseradish sauce, cold, English style, 329

     Hubbard squash, baked, 362

     Huckleberry roll, baked, 170

     Hungarian goulash (stew), 311, 321

     Hussarde sauce, 171

     Hungarian soup, 301


     Ice cream, Alhambra, 308

     Ice cream, banana, 8

     Ice cream, caramel, 145

     Ice cream, coffee, 389

     Ice cream, chocolate, 331

     Ice cream, fancy, 332

     Ice cream, hazlenut, 8

     Ice cream, loganberry, 315

     Ice cream, Neapolitan, 95

     Ice cream, peach, 8

     Ice cream, Philadelphia, 323

     Ice cream, pineapple, 8

     Ice cream, pistache, 377

     Ice cream, raspberry, 8

     Ice cream, Romaine, 309

     Ice cream, strawberry, 340

     Ice cream, vanilla, 320

     Ices (see Classified Index)

     Icing or frosting, 352

     Icing, pistache, 362

     Icing, royal, 161, 293

     Imperial pancake, 117

     Imperial salad, 188

     Indian canape (hors d'oeuvre), 88

     Indian soy sauce, 255

     International (garniture), 389

     Irish lamb stew, 328

     Irish stew, spring lamb with dumplings, 283

     Italian meringue, 177

     Italian salad, 14

     Italian paste (consomme), 248

     Italienne sauce, 361

     Italian wine sauce (pastry), 279


     Jam, blackberry, 133

     Jam, fig, 205

     Jam, gooseberry, 236

     Jam, loganberry, 133;
       raspberry, 133

     Jellied cherries, 205

     Jelly, anisette (wine), 40

     Jelly, apple, 133

     Jelly, Benedictine, 40

     Jelly, blackberry, 133

     Jelly, brandy, 40

     Jelly, Burgundy (wine), 40

     Jelly, champagne, 40;
       fine champagne, 40

     Jelly, chartreuse, 40

     Jelly, chicken, 206

     Jelly, claret, 40

     Jelly, cognac, 40

     Jelly, cranberry, 172

     Jelly, currant, 167

     Jelly, fruit (wine), 40

     Jelly, grape, 236

     Jelly, kirsch, 40

     Jelly, maraschino, 40

     Jelly, meat, 359

     Jelly, Moselle, 40

     Jelly, port wine, 40

     Jelly, quince, 89

     Jellies recipes (suggestions), 131

     Jelly, Rhine wine, 40

     Jelly roll, 151

     Jelly a la Russe (wine), 40

     Jelly, sherry, 40

     Jelly, wine with apricots, 270

     Jelly, wine, 40;
       with berries, 270

     Jelly, wine, with peaches, 270

     Jelly, wine, with whipped cream, 247

     Jerusalem artichokes in cream, 249

     Jets de Houblons (vegetable), 350

     Julienne, 19


     Kalte schale (beverage), 273

     Kalter Aufschnitt, 204

     Kentucky sauce, 253

     Kid, Easter, roasted, 56

     Kieler sprotten (hors d'oeuvre), 101

     Kingfish, Argentine, 221;
       Meuniere, 375;
       Ubsala, 182

     Kippered herring, broiled, 81

     Kirsch jelly, 40

     Kisses (pastry), 161

     Knickerbocker salad, 130

     Koenigsberger Klobs, 137

     Kohl rabi baked, 260


     Lady cake, 259

     Lady fingers, 344

     Lallah Rookh (see Ices, etc.), 103

     Lamb (see Classified Index)

     Lamb, baby, steak, horticulture, 88

     Lamb broth a la Grecque, 127

     Lamb broth a la Reine, 226

     Lamb broth, Olympic Club, 164

     Lamb chops with bacon, 325

     Lamb chops, Beaugeney, 292

     Lamb chops, Beau-sejour, 291

     Lamb chops, Bignon, 297;
       Bradford, 155

     Lamb chops, breaded, 349;
       Reforme, 127

     Lamb chops, Charcutiere, 67

     Lamb chops, English, tavern, 58

     Lamb chops, English, XX Century Club, 362

     Lamb chuck steak, English, maitre d'hotel, 114

     Lamb chops, Maison d'Or, 206

     Lamb chops, Marechal, 6;
       Robinson, 192

     Lamb chops, sauce Soubise, 102

     Lamb chops, saute aux cepes, 357

     Lamb chops, saute aux fines herbes, 262

     Lamb chops, Victor Hugo, 62

     Lamb curried, with rice, 15

     Lamb cutlets in papers, 91

     Lamb hash, 322;
       J. A. Britton, 316

     Lamb hash, with peppers, 139

     Lamb hash, Sam Ward, 260

     Lamb kidneys, en brochette, with bacon, 231

     Lamb kidneys en Pilaff, 312

     Lamb kidney stew, 356

     Lamb, leg of, Boulangere, 24

     Lamb loin chops, fried, 284

     Lamb loin chops, Jardiniere, 131

     Lamb, leg of, Renaissance, 141

     Lamb, navarin of, printanier (stew), 353

     Lamb, noisettes, 54;
       Ducale, 265;
       Montpensier, 197

     Lamb, rack of, 87;
       jardiniere, 87

     Lamb, rack of, Montjo, 130

     Lamb saddle, Carnot, 136

     Lamb saddle, International, 389

     Lamb saddle, jardiniere, 217

     Lamb saddle, Souvaroff, 174

     Lamb, shoulder of, in baker's oven, 146

     Lamb steak, 38

     Lamb steak, Bercy, 38

     Lamb stew, Irish, 328

     Lamb tenderloin, Thomas, 386

     Lamb trotters, Poulette, 350

     Langues de chat (pastry), 179

     Layer cake, 59, 367

     Leberkloese (calf's liver dumplings), 116

     Lemon butter filling, 234

     Lemon cake, 234

     Lemon custard pie, 111

     Lemon Darioles (pastry), 240

     Lemon meringue pie, 111

     Lemon or orange brandy for flavoring, 224

     Lemon or orange peel, candied, 205

     Lemon pie, special, 111, 312

     Lemon sauce (pastry), 87

     Lemon water ice, 1

     Lemonade, 222

     Lentils, 33

     Lentil salad, 33

     Lettuce, boiled, 35

     Lettuce braise, 385

     Lettuce salad, 323

     Lettuce and tomato salad, 83

     Lillian Russell (see Ices, etc.)

     Lima beans, 16

     Lima beans au paprika, 250

     Lima beans, curried, 6

     Lima beans, puree of, 39

     Lima beans with shallots, 284

     Limes, to preserve, 204

     Lobster with anchovies salad, 2

     Lobster baked, Cardinal, 284;
       Lincoln, 185

     Lobster, Becker, 198

     Lobster broiled, 382

     Lobster butter, 383

     Lobster chowder, 363

     Lobster corals, 80

     Lobster en court bouillon, 246

     Lobster croquettes, 381

     Lobster Newburg, 334

     Lobster salad, 2

     Lobster sauce, 274

     Lobster stuffed, 5

     Lobster, Thermidor, 22

     Loganberry jam, 133

     Loganberry juice, frozen, 317

     Loganberry ice cream, 315

     Loganberry roll, baked, 170

     Loin pork, baker's oven style, 75

     Loin pork, roasted, 319

     Lunch rolls, 358

     Lyon sausage (hors d'oeuvre), 330, 343


     Macaronade Celestine (pastry), 206

     Macaroni, Caruso, 254

     Macaroni in cream, 376

     Macaroni soup with leeks, 261

     Macaroons, 344

     Macaroons, chocolate, 97;
       fancy, 346;
       hazlenut, 290

     Macedoine (vegetable), 77

     Macedoine water ice, 6

     Mackerel, broiled, anchovy butter, 239

     Mackerel, salted, boiled, 328

     Madere, sauce, 330

     Maitre d'hotel sauce, 324

     Mallard duck, roasted, 327

     Malta vita (cereal), 343

     Malvina (garniture), 38

     Maraschino jelly, 40

     Maraschino sauce for iced pudding, 80

     Mariniere sauce, 64

     Marinite herring (hors d'oeuvre), 345

     Marmalade, apricot, 172;
       peach, 172

     Marmalade, California, 140

     Marmalade and jelly, crabapple, 172

     Maryland beaten biscuits, 344

     Maryland corn bread, 339

     Matjes herring Krasnapolsky (hors d'oeuvre), 217

     Matelote of fish, 69;
       sauce for, 69

     Maximilienne sauce, 267

     Mayonnaise sauce, 325

     Meat croquettes, 301

     Meringue (for baked Alaska), 84

     Meringue a la creme chantilly, 359

     Meringue glacee a la chantilly, 348

     Meringue glacee au chocolate, 18

     Meringue, Italian, 177

     Meringue paste for pie, 111

     Meringue, peach, 210;
       raspberry, 210;
       strawberry, 210

     Meringued peaches, 70

     Meringue shells, 320

     Merry widow cocktail (hors d'oeuvre), 299

     Meuniere, sauce, 375

     Mignonnette sauce, 355

     Milk toast, 327

     Millionaire punch, 141

     Mince meat, 350;
       canned, 290

     Mince pie, 350

     Mint sauce, 373

     Mint wafers, 307

     Mirlitons (pastry), 250;
       au rhum, 259

     Mixed grill, 26

     Mocha (see Moka), 50

     Mock turtle soup, 46

     Moka cake, 50

     Moka (Mocha) filling, 50

     Mollet (see Eggs)

     Montebello (see Fish), 17

     Montebello sauce, 230

     Montmorency pudding, 300

     Mornay sauce, 373

     Mortadella (hors d'oeuvre), 249, 307

     Moscovite dressing (fish), 262

     Moselle jelly, 40

     Mousse au cafe (see Ices, etc.), 152

     Mousse au chocolate (see Ices, etc.), 152

     Mousseline sauce, 331

     Muffins, corn, 361

     Muffins, popover, 212

     Mushrooms, fresh, broiled, 330

     Mushrooms, fresh, puree of, 293

     Mushrooms, fresh, saute in butter, 52

     Mushrooms, fresh, stuffed, 10

     Mussels, Mariniere, 64

     Mustard sauce, 211, 358

     Mutton (see Classified Index)

     Mutton chops, Argenteuil, 233

     Mutton chops, Bignon, 297

     Mutton chops, braised, 128

     Mutton chops, Daumont, 55

     Mutton chops, English, Kentucky sauce, 253

     Mutton chops, English, Tavern, 58

     Mutton chops, English, XX Century Club, 146

     Mutton chops, grilled, 354

     Mutton chops, Maison d'Or, 207

     Mutton chops, Robinson, 48;
       Signora, 70

     Mutton, haricot of (stew), 44

     Mutton, leg, boiled, caper sauce, 369

     Mutton, leg, Bretonne, 69

     Mutton, leg of, a la Busse, 52

     Mutton, leg, Choiseul, 118;
       Clamart, 83

     Mutton, leg, Mexicaine, 241

     Mutton, leg, Reforme, 60

     Mutton, leg, roasted, 26

     Mutton, loin, Charcutiere, 375

     Mutton rack, roasted, 105

     Mutton saddle, roasted, 94

     Mutton shoulder, Budapest, 304

     Mutton soup, Kitchener, 263


     Napoleon cake, 48

     Nasturtion seeds, pickled, 287

     Navarin of lamb, printanier (stew), 353

     Neapolitan ice cream, 95

     Neapolitan sandwich (see Ices, etc.), 139

     Nectarine compote, 179

     Nesselrode pudding, 65

     Newburg sauce, 36

     New England boiled dinner, 12

     Noodles, 20;
       Polonaise, 57

     Noisettes of lamb, 54

     Nonpareil sauce, 240

     Normandie water ice, 6


     Oatmeal, 319

     Okra and tomatoes, saute, 162

     Olive and anchovy salad (hors d'oeuvre), 252

     Olives, ripe, with garlic and oil (hors d'oeuvre), 113

     Olives, ripe (hors d'oeuvre), 320

     Olive sandwich, 100

     Olive sauce, 121

     Olives, stuffed, 139

     Ombrelle d'Ostende, 168

     Omelets (see Classified Index)

     Omelet Argentine, 185

     Omelet, Bayonnaise, 271

     Omelet, Celestine, 263

     Omelet with cepes, 130

     Omelet, Cherbourg, 308

     Omelet with chives, 243

     Omelet au cognac, 120

     Omelet au confiture, 370

     Omelet du Czar, 328, 376

     Omelet with egg plant, 164

     Omelet fines herbes, 102

     Omelet with ham, 369

     Omelet Imperatrice, 247

     Omelet with jelly, 333

     Omelet with kidneys, 87

     Omelet, Levy, 231

     Omelet, Lorraine, 374

     Omelet, Louis XIV, 39

     Omelet, Meissonier, 215

     Omelet with onions, 139

     Omelet with oysters, 2

     Omelet with parsley, 156

     Omelet with peas, 287

     Omelet, plain and for sweet dessert, 320

     Omelet, potato, 71

     Omelet with potatoes, 179

     Omelet, Robespierre, 93

     Omelet, Schofield, 101

     Omelet with soft clams, 9, 36

     Omelet with soft clams, Newberg, 36

     Omelette soufflee, 37, 68

     Omelet, Spanish, 66

     Omelet with strawberries, 320

     Omelet en surprise, 68

     Omelette Suzanne, 61

     Omelet, sweet, plain, 320

     Omelet with Virginia ham and peppers, 59

     Omelet, Vogeleier, 16

     Onion au gratin soup, 61, 342

     Onions, fried, 371

     Onions, glacees, 52

     Onions, Hongroise, 85

     Onions, puree of, Soubise, 91

     Onions, stewed, 269

     Onions, stuffed, with cabbage, 3

     Onion and tomato soup, 296

     Onions, pickled, 288

     Orange baskets (see Ices, etc.), 213

     Orange butter filling, 234

     Orange cake, 234

     Orange compote, 192

     Orange coupe (see Ices, etc.), 129

     Orange custard pie, 111

     Orange Darioles, 240

     Orange and grapefruit, St. Francis, 313

     Orange juice, 335

     Orange or lemon brandy for flavoring, 224

     Orange or lemon peel, candied, 205

     Orange meringue pie, 111

     Orange sauce, 87

     Oranges, sliced, 324

     Orange souffle, St. Francis, 58

     Orange souffle glace, St. Francis, 275

     Orange en supreme, 78;
       au curacao, 126

     Orange water ice, 1

     Orangeade, 222

     Oysters (see Classified Index)

     Oysters a l'Ancienne, 50

     Oysters, baked, au Gruyere, 259

     Oysters, Bellevue, 315

     Oysters en brochette, 286;
       a la Diable, 286

     Oysters, broiled, with bacon, 272

     Oyster broth (consomme), 99

     Oyster cocktail, 23

     Oyster crab patties, 272

     Oyster or crab poulette, 82

     Oysters, curried, 99

     Oysters on half shell, 320, 330

     Oysters a la Hyde, 370

     Oysters, Kirkpatrick, 31

     Oysters, Louis, 283

     Oysters marine (hors d'oeuvre), 114

     Oysters, mignonette, 108

     Oysters, Mornay, 269

     Oysters, Newburg, 263

     Oysters, Pickled, cold, 339

     Oysters a la Poulette, 82, 364

     Oyster sauce, 16

     Oyster soup, family style, 338

     Oysters stewed, 13

     Oysters, Supreme, St. Francis, 124

     Oysters Victor, 70

     Oysters, Victor Hugo, 281

     Oysters, Yaquino, 10

     Oxtail, braise, 125

     Oxtail soup, English style, 32


     Pain mane (hors d'oeuvre), 17

     Palm, hearts of, Victor, 317

     Pancakes, 374

     Pancakes, French and English, 374

     Pancake, Imperial, 117

     Pancakes, Lieb, 374

     Pancake, German, 381

     Pancake Molosol (hors d'oeuvre), 11

     Pancakes with rapsberry syrup, 267

     Pannade soup, 63

     Papillote, 40;
       Club style (for fish), 40

     Paprika sauce, 354

     Paprika schnitzel (veal), 65

     Paprika veal (stew), 212

     Parfaits (several), 386

     Parsnips, boiled, 112

     Parsnips in cream, 112

     Parsley fried, 332

     Partridge, roasted, 46

     Pastry (see Classified Index)

     Pastry cream, 352

     Pate dough, 199

     Pate de foie gras, 343

     Patience cake, 210

     Patties, Bagration (fish), 378

     Patties, oyster crab, 272

     Patties, shrimp, 235

     Peas and carrots in cream, 333

     Peas au cerfeuil, 63

     Peas in cream, 16

     Peas, farmer style, 75

     Peas a la Francaise, 177

     Peas, new, plain, 327

     Peas and shallots in cream, 262

     Pea soup, with vermicelli, 238

     Peaches, baked, 178

     Peaches, Bourdaloue, 135

     Peaches brandied, 173

     Peaches with brandy sauce, 141

     Peaches, canned, 194

     Peach cobbler, 208

     Peach compote, 179

     Peach ice cream, 8

     Peach marmalade, 172

     Peaches, meringued, 70

     Peach meringue, 210

     Peach Melba (see Ices, etc.), 85

     Peach Mona Lisa (see Ices, etc.), 48

     Peach Norelli, 118

     Peach pie, 86

     Peaches, sliced, with whipped cream, 156

     Peaches, sweet pickled, 288

     Peach whipped cream, 290

     Pears, baked, 178;
       baked, for canning, 225

     Pears Bourdaloue, 119

     Pear cobbler, 208

     Pears, mayonnaise, 309

     Pears, peaches or plums, canned, 194

     Pear pie, 86

     Pears, Piedmont, 292

     Pears, preserved, 89

     Pear salad, mayonnaise, 309

     Pears, stewed with claret, 276

     Pears in syrup, 92

     Pearl grits (cereal), 65;
       with cream, 337

     Pecans, salted (hors d'oeuvre), 386

     Pepper pot, Philadelphia, 336

     Pepper sauce, 151

     Peppers, stuffed, green, 229

     Perch au Bleu, 178

     Perch, fillet of, St. Charles, 146

     Perch, Meuniere, 2

     Perigord, sauce, 67; 364

     Perigordine, sauce, 351

     Perigueux sauce, 67

     Petaluma cream cheese, 275

     Petite marmite (soup), 382

     Pettijohns (cereal), 322

     Pheasant pie, cold, 199

     Pheasant, roasted, 9

     Philadelphia ice cream, 323

     Philadelphia pepper pot, 336

     Pickles, 131; 288

     Pickles (see Classified Index), 409

     Pickled beets salad, 326

     Pickles, cucumber, sweet, ripe, 288

     Pickled nasturtion seeds, 287

     Pickled onions, 288

     Pickled oysters (hors d'oeuvre), 339

     Pickled peaches, sweet, 288

     Pickles recipes (suggestions), 131

     Pickles, spiced vinegar for, 236

     Pickled tomatoes, green, 287

     Pickelsteiner, stew, 135

     Pie (see Classified Index)

     Pie, apple, 366

     Pie, apricot, 86

     Pie, banana, 292;
       banana cream, 145

     Pie, blackberry, 86

     Pie, cherry, 86

     Pie, chocolate cream, 276

     Pie, cocoanut custard, 111

     Pie, cocoanut meringue, 111

     Pie, currant, 86;
       English currant, 86

     Pie, English grape, 86

     Pie, English huckleberry, 86

     Pie, English rhubarb, 86

     Pie, gooseberry, 86;
       English gooseberry, 86

     Pie, lemon custard, 111

     Pie, lemon meringue, 111

     Pie, lemon special, 111, 310

     Pie, meringue paste for, 111

     Pie, mince, 350

     Pie, orange custard, 111;
       orange meringue, 111

     Pie paste, 366

     Pie, peach, 86

     Pie, pear, 86

     Pie, pheasant, cold, 199

     Pie, pineapple, 86

     Pie, pumpkin, 226;
       pumpkin, pulp, 226

     Pie, raspberry, 86;
       raspberry cream, 145

     Pie, strawberry, 86;
       strawberry cream, 145

     Pie, vanilla custard, 111; 328

     Pie, vanilla meringue, 111

     Pig's feet, boiled, 352

     Pig's feet, broiled, chili sauce, 38

     Pig's feet, broiled, special, 352

     Pig's feet, St. Menehould, 189

     Pig's knuckles and sauerkraut, 272

     Pilaff a la Turc (stew), 8

     Pimentos a l'huile (hors d'oeuvre), 24

     Pimentos, stuffed, Creole, 241

     Pimentos Suedoise (hors d'oeuvre), 284

     Pimentos vinaigrette (hors d'oeuvre), 227

     Pim olas (hors d'oeuvre), 160

     Pineapple, compote of, 168

     Pineapple Creole, 105

     Pineapple crust (pastry), 215

     Pineapple ice cream, 8

     Pineapple pie, 86

     Pineapple preserves, 89

     Pink mayonnaise sauce, 14

     Pink pudding, Victor, 318

     Piquante sauce, 345

     Pistache eclairs, 362

     Pistache ice cream, 377

     Pistache icing, 362

     Planked black bass, 258

     Planked steaks, 22; 209

     Planked shad and roe, 94

     Planked smelts, en bordure, 347

     Planked striped bass, 355

     Plombiere aux fruits, 165

     Plombiere aux marrons (see Ices, etc.), 165

     Plombiere a la vanilla (see Ices, etc.), 165

     Plums, canned, 194

     Plum compote, 179

     Plum pudding, 49

     Poivrade sauce, 60

     Pommes d'Arbre 1915 (apple), 88

     Pompano, Bateliere, 175

     Pompano, broiled, Havanaise, 83

     Pompano, Cafe Anglaise, 78

     Pompano, fillet of, en papillote, 39

     Pompano, fillet of, Pocharde, 305

     Pompano, meuniere, 330

     Pompano, saute, D'Orsay, 304

     Pompano, Vatel, 168

     Popover muffins, 212

     Pork (see Classified Index)

     Pork Chop, Badoise, 215

     Pork loin, baker's oven style, 75

     Pork loin, roasted, 319

     Pork, roast leg of, 21

     Porte Maillot (garniture), 385

     Port wine jelly, 40

     Port wine sauce, 64; 235

     Porterhouse (see beef), 142; 176

     Postum cereal, 338

     Pot au feu (soup), 75

     Potage Albert, 151

     Potage Alexandra, 378

     Potage Americaine, 389

     Potage Andalouse, 17

     Potage a l'Anglaise, 7

     Potage Arlequin, 168

     Potage Bagration, 11

     Potage Bourgeoisie, 251

     Potage Brunoise, with rice, 244

     Potage Bonne Femme, 384

     Potage Bouqetiere, 310

     Potage Cambridge, 339

     Potage Cameroni, 231

     Potage Carpure, 276

     Potage Champenoise, 304

     Potage Chatelaine, 102

     Potage Coburg, 198

     Potage Colbert, 252

     Potage Coquelin, 83

     Potage Dagobert, 199

     Potage Dieppoise, 239

     Potage Duchesse, 382

     Potage Eliza, 81

     Potage Esau, 85

     Potage Faubonne, 380

     Potage Ferneuse, 309

     Potage Flamande, 374; 385

     Potage Fontange, 137

     Potage gentilhomme, 19

     Potage grande mere, 10

     Potage grenade, 306

     Potage Hollandaise, 368

     Potage Honolulu, 196

     Potage Italienne, 240

     Potage Jackson, 388

     Potage Kroumir, 55

     Potage Lamballe, 331

     Potage Livonien, 312

     Potage Lord Mayor, 203

     Potage Maintenon, 257

     Potage Marie Louise, 15

     Potage Marquis, 5

     Potage Mathilda, 381

     Potage McDonald, 20, 221

     Potage Mexicaine, 223;
       Mongol, 371

     Potage Montglas, 255

     Potage Nassau, 237

     Potage Navarraise, 286

     Potage Normande, 3

     Potage Parmentier, 235

     Potage Paysanne, 175;
       Plessy, 254

     Potage Portugaise, 103;
       Quirinal, 8

     Potage Reine Margot, 379

     Potage Ruffo, 259

     Potage St. Marceau, 188

     Potage Sante, 347

     Potage Saxe, 98

     Potage Schorestene, 289

     Potage Solferino, 95

     Potage Talleyrand, 36

     Potage tapioca, Crecy, 30

     Potage Turinoise, 135

     Potage Velour, 219

     Potage Venetienne, 13; 99

     Potage vert pre, 210

     Potage Victoria, 6

     Potage Viennoise, 99

     Potage Villageoise, 303

     Potage Voisin, 44

     Potage Waldaise, 42

     Potage Westmoreland, 50

     Potage Windsor, 31

     Potatoes (see Classified Index)

     Potatoes, Alsatian, 90

     Potatoes, Anna, 11

     Potatoes, Allumette, 158

     Potatoes au gratin, 338

     Potatoes, Bischwiller, 265

     Potatoes, Brioche, 256

     Potatoes, browned hashed, 2

     Potato cakes, 61

     Potatoes, candied sweet, 110

     Potatoes, Chateau, 326

     Potatoes, Cleo, 382

     Potatoes, cottage fried, 189

     Potatoes, croquettes, 321

     Potatoes, Delmonico, 330

     Potatoes Duchesse, 353

     Potatoes Flambe with rum (sweet), 114

     Potatoes Fondante, 94

     Potatoes French fried, 332

     Potatoes Gauffrette, 53

     Potatoes gendarme, 334; 378

     Potatoes Georgette, 357

     Potatoes Hollandaise, 327

     Potatoes Jeanette, 107

     Potatoes Julienne, 342

     Potatoes Laurette, 331

     Potato and leek soup, 333

     Potatoes Lorraine, 335

     Potatoes Louis, 242

     Potatoes Lyonnaise, 324

     Potatoes maitre d'hotel, 5

     Potatoes Marquise, 154

     Potatoes, mashed, au gratin, 19

     Potatoes, mashed browned, 333

     Potatoes Nature, 331

     Potatoes O'Brien, 37

     Potatoes Olivette, 17

     Potatoes paille (straw), 346

     Potatoes Palestine, 90

     Potato pancakes, 189

     Potatoes paprika, 354

     Potatoes Parisienne, 42;
       Parisienne, Hollandaise, 230

     Potatoes, Paul Stock, 296

     Potatoes persillade, 73

     Potatoes Pont Neuf, 383

     Potato, puree of, salad, 162

     Potatoes a la Reine, 10

     Potatoes Rissolees, 17; 373

     Potatoes Ritz, 72

     Potatoes St. Francis, 330

     Potato salad, 337

     Potatoes, Saratoga chips, 354

     Potatoes, saute, 56

     Potatoes souffle, 360

     Potato soup, Dieppoise, 114;
       Faubonne, 96

     Potatoes Steamboat fried, 275

     Potatoes en surprise, 252

     Potatoes, sweet, Southern style, 25; 113

     Potatoes, sweet baked, with sugar, 268

     Potatoes, sweet, broiled, 32

     Potato, sweet, pudding, 315

     Potatoes, Sybil, 53

     Potatoes, Waffle, 53

     Potatoes, York, 269

     Pound cake, 336

     Poulette sauce, 350

     Preserves (see Classified Index)

     Preserves, amount of fruit required, 132

     Preserves, cherry, 173

     Preserves, citron, 89

     Preserved greengage plums, 173

     Preserved pears, 89;
       pineapple, 89

     Preserves recipes (suggestions), 131

     Preserves, strawberry, 132

     Preserves, tomato, 195

     Preserved violets, 289

     Preserves, watermelon, 194

     Prunes, 343;
       Victor, 313

     Prune compote, 179

     Prune souffle, 82

     Pudding, apple, cottage, 201

     Pudding, Alexandria, 216

     Pudding, blood (pork), 379

     Pudding, Boston brown, 201

     Pudding, bread custard, 197

     Pudding, brown bread, baked, 289

     Pudding cabinet, 31

     Pudding, chocolate, cold, 279

     Pudding, cocoanut, 197

     Pudding, corn, 315

     Pudding, cornmeal, 43

     Pudding, corn starch, 188

     Pudding, cottage, 201

     Pudding, diplomate, 78

     Pudding, English rice, 115

     Pudding, farina, 43

     Pudding, Frankfort, 112

     Pudding, Gastaner, 99

     Pudding, homemade apple, 80

     Pudding, jam roll, 118

     Pudding, Montmorency, 300

     Pudding, nesselrode, 65

     Pudding, pink, Victor, 318

     Pudding, plum, 49

     Pudding, rice, 43

     Pudding, rolled oats, 24

     Pudding, roly poly, 296

     Pudding, Rossini, 87

     Pudding, tapioca, 43

     Pudding, tutti frutti, 297

     Pudding, sago, 43

     Pudding, Saxony, 97

     Pudding souffle, Dame Blanche, 134

     Pudding, sweet potato, 315

     Puff paste, 341

     Puff paste baskets, 231

     Puff paste crescents, 341

     Puff paste roses, 224

     Puff paste sandwich, 233

     Pulled bread, 271

     Pumpkin, to can, 289

     Pumpkin pie, 226;
       pulp, 226

     Pumpkin and rice, scalloped, 269

     Pumpkin, stewed, 269

     Punch, champagne, 223

     Punch, claret, 218

     Punch, millionaire, 141

     Punch Palermitaine (see Ices, etc.), 106

     Punch, raisin, 375

     Punch, Roman, 108

     Punch, Victoria, 147

     Puree (see soups, thick)

     Puree Camelia, 143

     Puree Celestine, 80

     Puree of Chicory, 240

     Puree Crecy, 26

     Puree of cucumbers, 177

     Puree d'Artois, 68

     Puree of game, 52, 345

     Puree of game, for garnishing, 52

     Puree of game, St. Hubert, 345

     Puree of green asparagus, 118

     Puree of lentils, 324;
       with tapioca, 245

     Puree of lima beans, 372

     Puree Paysanne, 76

     Puree of peas, aux croutons, 319

     Puree of peas with noodles, 268

     Puree of pheasant, St. Hubert, 41

     Puree of peas, plain, 319;
       Varsovienne, 319

     Puree of potatoes, 80

     Puree of potato salad, 162

     Puree of red kidney beans, 125

     Puree of turnips, Caroline, 249

     Puree St. Germain, 106;
       (vegetable), 342

     Puree of spinach, 110

     Puree of tomatoes, 321;
       with rice, 334

     Puree of white beans, 376;
       Allemande, 247

     Puree of white beans, Soubise, 130


     Quail, broiled, on toast, 285

     Quince jelly, 89


     Radishes (hors d'oeuvre), 334

     Ragout a la Deutsch (stew), 380

     Ragout Fin (stew), 387

     Raisin bread, 316

     Raisins, California, 313

     Raisin cocktail, 80

     Raisin punch, 375

     Raspberries a la mode, 149

     Raspberry coupe, fresh, 129

     Raspberry cream pie, 145

     Raspberry ice cream, 8

     Raspberry jam, 133

     Raspberry juice, 141

     Raspberry pie, 86

     Raspberry Melba sauce (see Ices, etc.), 85

     Raspberry meringue, 210;
       meringue glacee, 11

     Raspberry shortcake, 102

     Raspberry water ice, 1, 337

     Raspberry whipped cream, 290

     Red cabbage salad, 223

     Red currant water ice, 300

     Reindeer chops, 64

     Reindeer, roast leg of, 108

     Reindeer stew, 67

     Remoulade, 388;
       sauce, 388

     Rheinbraten (see Beef), 354

     Rhine wine jelly, 40

     Rhubarb, 342

     Rice, boiled, 372

     Rice cakes, 109

     Rice, Californienne, 313

     Rice, Creole, 381

     Rice croquettes, 223; 374

     Rice Darioles, 266

     Rice pudding, 43

     Rice soup a l'Allemande, 217;
       Palermo, 233

     Rice stuffing, 339

     Rice, timbale of, 153;
       Creole, 138

     Riche sauce, 379

     Richelieu (garniture), 348

     Risotto, 8

     Robert sauce, 145

     Rock cod, boiled, Fleurette, 330

     Rock cod, en court bouillon, 58

     Rock cod, fillet of, Nantaise, 87

     Rocol soup, a la Russe, 154

     Rolls, breakfast, 353;
       lunch, 358

     Rolled oats pudding, 24

     Roly poly pudding, 296

     Roman punch, 108

     Romaine ice cream, 309

     Romaine salad, 323

     Roquefort salad dressing, 19

     Rougemont sauce, 256

     Rosabelle (garniture), 375

     Rossini (garniture), 36

     Royale (see Fish), 10

     Royal butter (pastry), 268

     Royal cake, 268

     Royal icing, 161; 293

     Ruddy duck, roasted, 384

     Russe (see Fish), 13

     Russian salad dressing, 179


     Sabayon sauce (pastry), 112

     Sago pudding, 43;
       family style, 43

     St. Francis salad dressing, 316

     Salads (see Classified Index)

     Salads (see Fruit), 34; 109

     Salad, Algerienne, 316

     Salad, alligator pear, 54

     Salad, Americaine, 374

     Salad, anchovy, 353

     Salad, asparagus tips, 325

     Salad, Avocado, French dressing, 313

     Salad, beets, pickled, 326

     Salad, Brazilian, 330;
       Bresilienne, 203

     Salad, Bretonne, 184

     Salad, cauliflower, 196

     Salad, celery, mayonnaise, 336

     Salad, celery root, field and beet, 378

     Salad, celery, Victor, 330

     Salad, Cendrillon, 182

     Salad, Chateau de Madrid, 239

     Salad, chicken, Victor, 3

     Salad, chicory, 322;
       chicory, with chapon, 155

     Salad, Chiffonade, 354

     Salad, Chilian, 234

     Salad, Cole slaw, 331;
       cole slaw, Ravigote, 110

     Salad, Cosmopolitan, 230

     Salad, crab, 48;
       crab, Louis, 128

     Salad, cucumber, 9

     Salad, culemo, sliced, 228

     Salad, Cupid d'Azure, 211

     Salad, dandelion, 103;
       German style, 103

     Salad, Doucette, 348

     Salad dressing, 314;
       with chapon, 155

     Salad dressing, egg, 386

     Salad dressing, Escoffier, 255

     Salad dressing, French, 319

     Salad dressing, Roquefort, 19

     Salad dressing, Russian, 179

     Salad dressing, St. Francis, 316

     Salad dressing, Thousand Island, 335

     Salad dressing, Victor, 112

     Salad, ecrevisse, gourmet, 351

     Salad, egg, 268

     Salad, endive, 361;
       endive with beets, 239

     Salad, escarole, 322

     Salad, field, 324

     Salad, fresh vegetable, 17

     Salad, herring, 221;
       herring, Moscovite, 262

     Salad, Imperial, 188

     Salad, Italian, 14

     Salad, Knickerbocker, 130

     Salad, lentil, 33

     Salad, lettuce, 323;
       lettuce and tomato, 83

     Salad, Livermore, 373

     Salad, lobster, 2;
       with anchovies, 2

     Salad, Lorenzo, 273

     Salad, Lorette, 308

     Salad, Louis, 218

     Salad, Louise, 212

     Salad Majestic, 209

     Salad, Mirabeau, 7

     Salad, Nivernaise, 377

     Salad, Olga, 353;
       Orloff, 174

     Salad, panachee, 134

     Salad pear, mayonnaise, 309

     Salad, potato, 337;
       puree of potato, 162

     Salad, puree of, 74

     Salad, Rachel, 170

     Salad, Ravachol, 357

     Salad, red cabbage, 223

     Salad, Rejane, 377

     Salad, Romaine, 323

     Salad, Russe, 28

     Salad, shrimp, 342;
       shrimp, Anastine, 276

     Salad, Stanislaus, 387

     Salad, string beans, 145; 382

     Salad, string beans and tomato, 261

     Salad, tomatoes, sliced, 328; 343

     Salad, Tosca, 387

     Salad, tuna, 332

     Salad, Waldorf, 347

     Salad, watercress, 48

     Salad, white bean, 226

     Salisbury steak (see Beef), 270

     Salmon belly, salted, melted butter, 159

     Salmon, boiled, Badu-Cah, 274

     Salmon, boiled, Diplomate, 154;
       Fidgi, 136

     Salmon, boiled, Princesse, 4

     Salmon, boiled, sauce Anglaise, 387

     Salmon, boiled, sauce Mousseline, 331

     Salmon, boiled, Villers, 112

     Salmon, braised, Parisienne, 369

     Salmon, broiled, a la Russe, 197;
       St. Germaine, 213

     Salmon, Chambord, 52

     Salmon, cold, smoked, 327

     Salmon, Concourt, 183

     Salmon, Mirabeau, 106

     Salmon, smoked, broiled, 65

     Salmon, smoked (hors d'oeuvre), 327

     Salmon steak, broiled, 349

     Salmon steak, Calcutta, 230

     Salmon steak, Colbert, 265

     Salmon steak, Hongroise, 170

     Salmon, vol au vent of, Genoise, 122

     Sand dabs, Carnot, 272;
       David, 135

     Sand dabs, fried fillet of, sauce verte, 116

     Sand dabs, Gaillard, 262

     Sand dabs, Grenobloise, 150

     Sand dabs, Meuniere, 319

     Sand tart (sable), 69

     Sandwich, bread and butter, 337

     Sandwich, Careme, 96

     Sandwich, chicken, 334

     Sandwich, cream of almond, 100

     Sandwich, Creole, 100

     Sandwich, Dubney, 100

     Sandwich, Neapolitan (see Ices, etc.), 139

     Sandwich, olive, 100

     Sandwich, puff paste, 233

     Sandwich, Schlemmerbroedchen, 223

     Sandwich, Windsor, 100

     Saratoga chips, 354

     Sardines (hors d'oeuvre), 343

     Sardines on toast, 29

     Sardines, vinaigrette (hors d'oeuvre), 76

     Sauce Allemande, 64

     Sauce, anchovy, 29

     Sauce, anchovy butter, 349

     Sauce Anglaise, 387;
       Anglaise (for fish), 387

     Sauce Bearnaise, 13;
       Bearnaise tomatee, 13

     Sauce Bechamel (cream), 322

     Sauce Bercy, 38; 326

     Sauce Bordelaise, 334

     Sauce, brandy, 49

     Sauce bread, 9;
       bread crumbs, 47

     Sauce bread (for game), 9;
       bread crumbs, 47

     Sauce brown butter, 336

     Sauce, brown gravy, 341

     Sauce Cardinal, 124

     Sauce Caper, 369

     Sauce, celery, 245

     Sauce, Chambord, 254

     Sauce, champagne, 232

     Sauce, chocolate, cold, 279

     Sauce, choron, 13

     Sauce, cocktail, for oysters, 23

     Sauce, Colbert, 347

     Sauce, cranberry, 274

     Sauce, cream, 322;
       cream (pastry), 24

     Sauce, Creole, 371

     Sauce, curry, 377

     Sauce, devil, 121

     Sauce, Diplomate, 154

     Sauce, ecrevisse, 220

     Sauce, egg, 322

     Sauce estragon (tarragon), 106

     Sauce, Fidgi, 136

     Sauce Figaro, 231;
       cold, 231

     Sauce Flamande, 244

     Sauce fleurette, 330

     Sauce Forestiere, 349

     Sauce Genoise, 327

     Sauce giblet, 74

     Sauce Golfin, 377

     Sauce green Hollandaise, 44

     Sauce, hard (pastry), 49

     Sauce Hollandaise, 319

     Sauce Horose, 374

     Sauce, horseradish, cold, English style, 329

     Sauce, horseradish en bouillon, 329

     Sauce, horseradish in cream, 329

     Sauce Hussarde, 171

     Sauce, Indian soy, 255

     Sauce, Italian wine (pastry), 279

     Sauce Italienne, 361

     Sauce Kentucky, 253

     Sauce, lemon (pastry), 87

     Sauce, lobster, 273

     Sauce Madere, 330

     Sauce maitre d'hotel, 324

     Sauce, maraschino (for iced pudding), 80

     Sauce Mariniere, 64

     Sauce matelote (fish), 69

     Sauce Maximilienne, 267

     Sauce mayonnaise, 325

     Sauce Meuniere, 375

     Sauce mignonette, 355

     Sauce mint, 373

     Sauce Montebello, 230

     Sauce Mornay, 373

     Sauce Mousseline, 331

     Sauce mustard, 211; 358

     Sauce Newburg, 36

     Sauce nonpareil, 240

     Sauce, olive, 121

     Sauce, orange, 87

     Sauce, oyster, 16

     Sauce, paprika, 354

     Sauce, pepper, 151

     Sauce Perigord, 67; 364

     Sauce, Perigordine, 351

     Sauce, Perigueux, 67

     Sauce, pink mayonnaise, 14

     Sauce piquante, 345

     Sauce poivrade, 60

     Sauce port wine, 64; 235

     Sauce poulette, 350

     Sauce remoulade, 388

     Sauce Riche, 379

     Sauce Robert, 145

     Sauce Rougemont, 256

     Sauce Sabayon (pastry), 112

     Sauce shrimp, 362

     Sauce Soubise, 14

     Sauce, special, 352

     Sauce Supreme, 339

     Sauce, sweet-sour, 61

     Sauce tarragon (estragon), 106

     Sauce, tartar, 332

     Sauce, vanilla cream, 24

     Sauce Venetienne, 148

     Sauce verte, 116

     Sauce au vin blanc, 324

     Sauce vinaigrette, 389

     Sauce, white wine, 324

     Sauce, wine, 208

     Sauerkraut, 45

     Sausages, breakfast, 371

     Sausages, Frankfurter, imported, 243

     Savarin au Kirsch, 384

     Savarin Chantilly, 384;
       Mirabelle, 384

     Savarin Montmorency, 384

     Saxony pudding, 97

     Scallops a la Mornay, 62

     Scallops, Newburg, 56

     Scallops, Poulette, 299

     Schlemmerbroedchen (sandwich), 223

     Schmorrbraten, sour (see Beef), 138

     Scotch consomme, 11

     Sea bass, boiled, Hollandaise, 63

     Sea bass, Montebello, 216

     Seed biscuits, 273

     Shad, baked with raisins, 107

     Shad, broiled, Albert, 68

     Shad, broiled, maitre d'hotel, 51

     Shad and roe, baked, a l'Americaine, 115

     Shad roe, bordelaise, 134; 151

     Shad roe, en bordure, 158

     Sheepshead, boiled, cream sauce, 49

     Sheepshead, boiled, sauce Hollandaise, 339

     Shad roe, broiled, with bacon, 80

     Shad roe, broiled, maitre d'hotel, 7

     Shad roe, broiled, ravigote, 84

     Shad and roe, planked, 94

     Shell fish (see Classified Index)

     Sherbets (see Classified Index)

     Sherbet California, 113

     Sherry jelly, 40

     Shrimps with mushrooms, 85

     Shrimp patties, 235

     Shrimp salad, 342;
       Anastine, 276

     Shrimp sauce, 362

     Shrimp soup, family style, 291

     Shortcake, raspberry, 102

     Shortcake, strawberry, 102;
       old-fashioned, 102

     Shredded wheat biscuit, 336

     Silver cake, 265

     Sirloin (see Classified Index, beef)

     Skate, au beurre noir, 349

     Smelts, broiled, Americaine, 307

     Smelts, fillet of, Stanley, 124

     Smelts, fried, 332

     Smelts, planked, en bordure, 347

     Snails (see Bread), 314

     Snails (pastry), 192

     Soft clam soup, Salem, 161

     Sole, aiguillettes of, Hoteliere, 46;
       Mariniere, 55

     Sole, Colbert, 147

     Sole, cold fillet of, Raven, 359

     Sole, Dejazet, 311

     Sole, fillet of, Bercy, 53

     Sole, fillet of, Bretonne, 101

     Sole, fillet of, Cardinal, 115

     Sole, fillet of, Castelanne, 15

     Sole, fillet of, Choisy, 44

     Sole, fillet of, Diplomate, 368

     Sole, fillet of, Doria, 137

     Sole, fillet of, Florentine, 384

     Sole, fillet of, Francaise, 200

     Sole, fillet of, Gasser, 4

     Sole, fillet of, Joinville, 371

     Sole, fillet of, Judic, 303

     Sole, fillet of, Lord Curzon, 18; 140

     Sole, fillet of, Mantane, 160

     Sole, fillet of, Marechale, 40

     Sole, fillet of, Marguery, 122; 382

     Sole, fillet of, Maximilian, 375

     Sole, fillet of, Meissonier, 271

     Sole, fillet of, Montmorency, 188; 215

     Sole, fillet of, Normande, 8

     Sole, fillet of, Orly, 78

     Sole, fillet of, Paul Bert, 283

     Sole, fillet of, Paylord, 229

     Sole, fillet of, Pondichery, 266

     Sole, fillet of, Royal, 10

     Sole, fillet of, Rose Caron, 25

     Sole, fillet of, St. Cloud, 109

     Sole, fillet of, St. Malo, 360

     Sole, fillet of, St. Nazaire, 167

     Sole, fillet of, Suchet, 128

     Sole, fillet of, Talleyrand, 174

     Sole, fillet of, Turbigo, 71

     Sole, fillet of, under glass, 84

     Sole, fillet of, Valeska, 389

     Sole, fillet of, Victoria, 60

     Sole, fillet of, Villeroi, 73

     Sole, fillet of, au vin blanc, 324

     Sole, fillet of, Voisin, 105

     Sole, fried fillet of, 388

     Sole, fried fillet of, Remoulade, 388

     Sole, Heloise, 308

     Sole, medaillon of, Victor, 380

     Sole, small fried fillet of, 78

     Sorrel, 28

     Sorrel soup a l'eau, 159

     Sorrel soup with rice, 186

     Soubise (for stuffing chops, etc.), 14

     Soubise sauce, 14

     Souffle au fromage, 95

     Souffle glace aux fraises and with raspberries, 166

     Souffle glace, plain, 148

     Souffle glace, St. Francis, 160

     Souffle glace, Pavlowa, 160

     Soup, Algerienne (cream), 147

     Soup, artichokes (cream), 166

     Soup, asparagus (cream), 354

     Soup, asparagus, Favori (cream), 308

     Soup, Bagration (cream), 139

     Soup, bananas (cream), 65

     Soup, bean and cabbage, 279

     Soup, bisque d'ecrivisses (cream), 383

     Soup, bisque of California oysters (cream), 9

     Soup, bisque of clams (cream), 350

     Soup, bisque of crabs (cream), 23

     Soup, burned farina, 115

     Soup, cabbage, Normande, 170

     Soup, Cardinal (cream), 149

     Soup, cauliflower (cream), 325

     Soup, celery, 328

     Soup, celery broth, cold, 251

     Soup, celery, Kalamazoo (cream), 39

     Soup, chicken, Bresilienne, 184

     Soup, chicken (cream), 335

     Soup, chicken, Florentine, 242

     Soup, chicken, Francaise, 298

     Soup, chicken Hortense (cream), 92

     Soup, chicken, Mulligatawny, 204

     Soup, chicken okra, 365

     Soup, chicken, Piedmontaise, 208

     Soup, chicken, Portugaise, 193

     Soup, chicken, a la Reine (cream), 375

     Soup, chicken, San Remo, 281

     Soup, clam, homemade, 283

     Soup, clear green turtle, 93

     Soup, Congolaise (cream), 153

     Soup, Cooper, 145

     Soup, corn and onions (cream), 273

     Soup, Countess (cream), 182

     Soup, crab gumbo, 212

     Soup, croute Bretonne, 190

     Soup, Ditalini a la Royal, 272

     Soup, endives (cream), 364

     Soup, farina (cream), 67

     Soup, farina, Francis Joseph, 123

     Soup, farina lie (cream), 266

     Soup, flageolets (cream), 216

     Soup, frogs' legs (cream), 56

     Soup, German carrot, 262

     Soup, German lentil, 89

     Soup, giblet a l'Anglaise, 323

     Soup, green corn (cream), 69; 157

     Soup, hare, Uncle Sam, 294

     Soup, Hungarian, 301

     Soup, lamb broth a la Greque, 127

     Soup, lamb broth a la Reine, 226

     Soup, lamb broth, Olympic Club, 164

     Soup, lettuce (cream), 62

     Soup, lima beans (cream), 51

     Soup, macaroni with leeks, 261

     Soup, maintenon (cream), 18

     Soup, mock turtle, 46

     Soup, mutton, Kitchener, 263

     Soup, onion au gratin, 61; 342

     Soup, onion and tomato, 296

     Soup, ox tail, English style, 32

     Soup, oyster, family style, 338

     Soup Pannade, 63

     Soup, Parisienne (cream), 104

     Soup, parsnips (cream), 120; 172

     Soup, peas (cream), 305

     Soup, pea, St. Germain (cream), 305

     Soup, potatoes (cream), 334

     Soup, pea Suzon, 305

     Soup, pea, with vermicelli, 238

     Soup, petite marmite, 382

     Soup, pot au feu, 75

     Soup, potato, Dieppoise, 114

     Soup, potato, Faubonne, 96

     Soup, potato and leek, 333

     Soup, Reine Mogador (cream), 97

     Soup, rice, a l'Allemande, 217

     Soup, rice (cream), 386

     Soup, rice, Palermo, 233

     Soup, Rocol, a la Russe, 154

     Soup, shrimp, family style, 291

     Soup, soft clam, Salem, 161

     Soup, sorrel, a l'eau, 159

     Soup, sorrel, with rice, 186

     Soup, stock for, 341

     Soup, summer squash (cream of), 300

     Soup, terrapin, Southern style, 227

     Soups, thick (see Classified Index)

     Soup, tomato broth, hot or cold, 221

     Soup, Veloute of chicken, 368

     Soup, Velautine Aurore, 141

     Soup, Velvet, 79

     Soup, Viennese bean, 86

     Soup, watercress (cream), 214

     Soup, white bean, 74

     Spaghetti, Caruso, 98

     Spaghetti in cream, 148

     Spaghetti, Milanaise, 349

     Spanish mackerel, broiled, aux fines herbes, 9

     Spanish mackerel, fillet of, Montebello, 17

     Spareribs, broiled, with lentils, 33

     Spaetzel, 65

     Special sauce, 352

     Spiced apples, sweet, 237

     Spiced cherries, 236

     Spiced tomatoes, 237

     Spiced vinegar, for pickles, 236

     Spinach, boiled, 5

     Spinach, English style, 5

     Spinach in cream, 52

     Spinach, timbale of, 232

     Sponge cake, 76

     Spoon or mush bread, 315

     Spring lamb Irish stew with dumplings, 283

     Squab (see Classified Index)

     Squab, boneless, en aspic, 209

     Squab, breast of, au jus, 276

     Squab, breast of, Eveline, 297;
       Perigord, 123

     Squab, breast of, saute in butter, 158

     Squab, breast of, under glass, St. Francis, 35

     Squab, broiled, 93;
       with fresh mushrooms, 93

     Squab chicken, broiled, 351

     Squab chicken, Michels, 214

     Squab chicken, plain potted, 10

     Squab chicken, saute, Sutro, 58

     Squab en compote, 15

     Squab, galantine of, 211

     Squab pot pie, English style, 1

     Squab roast, au jus, 53

     Squash, to can, 289

     Squash, Hubbard, baked, 362

     Steak, Tartare, 213

     Stews (see Classified Index)

     Stock for soup, 341

     Strawberries a la mode, 149

     Strawberries, canned, 133

     Strawberry cream pie, 145

     Strawberry coupe, fresh, 129

     Strawberry ice cream, 340

     Strawberry meringue, 210

     Strawberries, Parisienne, 144

     Strawberry pie, 86

     Strawberry preserves, 132

     Strawberries, Romanoff, 109

     Strawberry shortcake, 102;
       old-fashioned, 102

     Strawberries, stewed, 320

     Strawberry water ice, 1

     Strawberry whipped cream, 290

     String beans, 322

     String beans, Alsacienne, 102

     String beans salad, 145; 382

     String beans with shallots, 252

     String beans sweet-sour, 214

     String beans, with tomatoes, 256

     String beans and tomato salad, 261

     Striped bass, Portugaise, 376

     Striped bass, stewed, Americaine, 248

     Striped bass, boiled, Indian soy sauce, 255

     Striped bass, Buena Vista, 184

     Striped bass, planked, 355

     Strips, German almond, 180

     Streusel cake, 190

     Succotash, 189

     Stuffing, rice, 339

     Sugar, to cook to a blow, 177

     Sugar cured ham glace, 247

     Summer squash au beurre, 327

     Summer squash, cream of, soup, 300

     Summer squash, mashed, 157

     Summer squash, Native Son, 158

     Supper selections, 63, 64, 73, 83, 92, 96, 117, 122, 333, 335,
       353, 356, 364, 371

     Supreme sauce, 339

     Sweetbreads braise, Ancienne, 105

     Sweetbreads braise, Clamart, 96

     Sweetbreads braise, Georginette, 260

     Sweetbreads braise (glace), 383

     Sweetbreads braise, Godard, 128

     Sweetbreads braise, Henry IV, 87

     Sweetbreads braise, Marie Louise, 92

     Sweetbreads braise, Montebello, 166

     Sweetbreads braise, Pompadour, 359

     Sweetbreads braise, Princess, 188

     Sweetbreads braised, Soubise, 181

     Sweetbreads braise, Elizabeth, 213

     Sweetbreads braise, St. George, 162

     Sweetbreads braise, Zurich, 125

     Sweetbreads broiled, 327

     Sweetbread croquettes, 381

     Sweetbreads Egyptienne, 229

     Sweetbreads, Figaro, 231

     Sweetbreads Lavaliere, 178

     Sweetbreads, Lieb, 239

     Sweetbreads Liencourt, 293

     Sweetbreads Marigny, 216

     Sweetbreads, Metropolitan Club, 219

     Sweetbread patties in cream, 11; 110

     Sweetbreads Poulette, 208

     Sweetbreads Royal, 285

     Sweetbreads, St. Albans, 236

     Sweetbreads, Saint Monde, 306

     Sweetbreads, Sans Gene, 244

     Sweetbreads, Theodora, 57

     Sweet omelet, plain, 320

     Sweet potatoes, Southern style, 25; 113

     Sweet potato croquettes, 90

     Sweet potato pudding, 315

     Sweet-sour sauce, 61


     Tahoe trout, boiled, pepper sauce, 151

     Tahoe trout, boiled, sauce mousseline, 161

     Tahoe trout, boiled, Vatchette, 142

     Tango cake, 275

     Tapioca pudding, 43

     Tapioca royal (consomme parfait), 97

     Tarragon sauce (estragon), 106

     Tart, sand (sable), 69

     Tartar sauce, 332

     Tartelette au Bar le Duc, 16

     Tartelette of pears, 325

     Tartine Russe (hors d'oeuvre), 97

     Tea biscuits, 329

     Tea, English breakfast (see Ices, etc.), 19

     Teas, selections, 100, 317, 334, 337

     Teal duck, roasted, 323

     Tenderloin (see Classified Index, beef)

     Terrapin au beurre, 278

     Terrapin Baltimore, 81

     Terrapin, how to boil, 81

     Terrapin, Jockey Club, 81

     Terrapin Maryland, 81

     Terrapin soup, Southern style, 227

     Terrine de foie gras en aspic, 202; 216

     Terrine de foie gras a la gelee, 93; 359

     Thick soups (see Classified Index)

     Thon marine salad (hors d'oeuvre), 27

     Thousand Island salad dressing, 335

     Tipsy parsons, 206

     Toast, anchovy, 139

     Toast, anise, 278

     Toast, cheese, 309

     Toast, Melba, 65

     Toast, milk, 327

     Tomatoes, baked, 164

     Tomato broth, hot or cold, 221

     Tomatoes, glacees, 368

     Tomate Parisienne (hors d'oeuvre), 28

     Tomatoes, pickled, green, 287

     Tomato preserves, 195

     Tomatoes, scalloped, 260

     Tomatoes, sliced, 306

     Tomatoes sliced (salad), 328; 343

     Tomatoes, spiced, 237

     Tomatoes, stewed, 30;
       stewed, Brazilian, 79

     Tomatoes, stewed, family style, 121

     Tomatoes stuffed with anchovies, 104

     Tomatoes, stuffed, with chestnuts, 3

     Tomatoes, stuffed, Creole, 178

     Tomatoes, stuffed, Nana (hors d'oeuvre), 358

     Tomatoes, stuffed, Noyer, 351

     Tomato en surprise (hors d'oeuvre), 214; 249

     Tomcods, fried, 66

     Tomcods, meuniere, 33

     Tomcods, Montmorency, 120

     Toulouse (garniture), 25

     Tournedos, 36

     Tournedos (see Classified Index, beef)

     Tournedos, Boulanger, 360

     Tournedos, Goncourt, 368

     Tripe a la mode de Caen, 60

     Tripe, Blanchard, 385

     Tripe, boiled honeycomb, 324

     Tripe, broiled honeycomb, Chili sauce, 132

     Tripe, broiled honeycomb, maitre d'hotel sauce, 324

     Tripe in cream with peppers, 117

     Tripe Creole, 378

     Tripe Etuve, Bonne Femme, 264

     Tripe, honeycomb, saute aux fines herbes, 286

     Tripe saute, Lyonnaise, 49

     Tripe and oysters in cream, 368

     Tripe and potatoes, family style, 1

     Tripe, Wm. H. Crane, 313

     Trout, boiled, plain, 327

     Trout, fillet of, Rachel, 155

     Tuna salad, 332

     Turbot, aiguillettes of, Bayard, 169

     Turbot, boiled, nonpareil, 240

     Turbot, fillet of, Bagration, 291

     Turbot, fillet of, bateliere, 219

     Turbot, fillet of, Bonnefoy, 67

     Turbot, fillet of, Daumont, 3

     Turbot, fillet of, Jean Bart, 163

     Turbot, fillet of, Nesles, 94

     Turbot, fillet of, Sarcey, 103

     Turbot, fillet of, Tempis, 223

     Turbot, fillet of, Windsor, 118

     Turkey, broiled baby, 192

     Turkey, deviled legs with chow chow, 19

     Turkey hash, Chateau de Madrid, 185

     Turkey hash on toast, 356

     Turkey livers en brochette, 66

     Turkey, roast, 66

     Turkey stuffed with chestnuts, 355

     Turnips glaces, 378

     Turnips, mashed, 369

     Tutti frutti (see Ices, etc.), 41

     Tutti frutti pudding, 297


     Vanilla brandy, 205

     Vanilla Charlotte glacee, 114

     Vanilla cream sauce, 24

     Vanilla custard pie, 111; 328

     Vanilla custard with meringue, 206

     Vanilla Darioles, 240

     Vanilla ice cream, 320

     Vanilla meringue pie, 111

     Varsovienne (soup garnish), 319

     Veal, breast, stuffed, au jus, 27

     Veal chops, broiled, 330

     Veal chops en papillote, 40

     Veal cutlets, breaded, tomato sauce, 148

     Veal, fricandeau of, au jus, 98

     Veal fricassee, 20

     Veal kidney, broiled, English style, 168

     Veal kidney, roast, 378

     Veal kidney, saute au Madere, 258

     Veal, leg of, au jus, 333

     Veal, loin of, roasted, 179

     Veal, (paprika schnitzel), 65

     Veal paprika (stew), 212

     Veal, rolled, Huguenin, 85

     Veal saute, Catalane, 302

     Veal, shoulder, au jus, 325

     Veal sweetbreads (see Classified Index, veal)

     Veal, Wiener schnitzel, 34

     Vegetables (see Classified Index)

     Vegetable salad, fresh, 17

     Velvet soup, 79

     Veloutine Aurore (soup), 141

     Veloute of chicken (soup), 368

     Venitienne sauce, 148

     Venison chop (steak), port wine sauce, 235

     Venison, roast saddle of, 198

     Vert d'epinards (green coloring), 44

     Verte sauce, 116

     Victor salad dressing, 112

     Victoria (see Fish), 60

     Viennese bean soup, 86

     Vinaigrette sauce, 389

     Vinegar, spiced, for pickles, 236

     Violets, preserved, 289

     Virginia ham and eggs, 104

     Vol au vent patty shells, 25

     Vol au vent of salmon, Genoise, 122

     Vol au vent, Toulouse, 373


     Wafers, almond, 214

     Wafers, mint, 307

     Waffles, 331; 176

     Waldorf salad, 347

     Water ice, apple, 91

     Water ice, cantaloup, 1

     Water ice, cranberry, 299

     Water ice, lemon, 1

     Water ice, macedoine, 6

     Water ice, Normandie, 6

     Water ice, orange, 1

     Water ice, raspberry, 1, 337

     Water ice, red currant, 300

     Water ice, strawberry, 1

     Watercress salad, 48

     Watermelon preserves, 194

     Wax beans in butter, 117

     Wedding feast selections, 293, 390

     Wedding cake, 293

     Welch rabbit, 356

     Welch rabbit, special, 317

     Wheat bran gems, 318

     Whipped cream, 156

     Whipped cream, banana, 290

     Whipped cream in cup, 246

     Whipped cream, peach, 290

     Whipped cream, raspberry, 290

     Whipped cream, strawberry, 290

     White bean salad, 226

     White bean soup, 74

     White wine sauce, 324

     Whitebait, fried, 75

     Whitebait on graham bread, 354

     Whitefish, baked, St. Menehould, 226

     Whitefish boiled, Golfin, 377

     Whitefish, boiled, Netherland style, 1

     Whitefish, broiled, maitre d'hotel, 342

     Wiener schnitzel (veal), 34

     Windsor sandwich, 100

     Wine jelly, 40

     Wine jelly with apricots, 270

     Wine jelly with berries, 270

     Wine jelly with peaches, 270

     Wine jelly with whipped cream, 247

     Wine sauce, 208


     Yarmouth bloater, 342

     Yarmouth bloater in oil (hors d'oeuvre), 98

     Yorkshire buck, 122

     Yorkshire pudding, 349




_The Epicurean_

_By_ CHAS. RANHOFER

An All-Around Cook Book for the Kitchen, Pastry Room, Pantry, Storeroom,
and Beverage Room


The opening chapter is on "Table Service," and leads off with the
arrangement of the bill of fare, followed with a chapter on wines,
including a list of the different wines appropriate for the different
courses, and the wines usually called for at dinners of Americans,
Frenchmen and Germans, respectively. This is followed by a system of
menu-compiling for course dinners ranging from 4 to 36 covers, and
stating the time it should take to serve the dinners.

How to lay and decorate the table; the seating of the host and guests;
the fixing of the sideboard; the duties of the steward and waiters;
dinner table etiquette, the manner of serving the different courses,
including wines, and the windup with the tea service are cleverly
explained. The French and Russian service are explained and a list is
presented of the china, glassware, silver, etc., required for a dinner
of twenty-four persons. Next comes valuable information regarding
breakfasts, luncheons and suppers.


Note the Diversity of the Contents

      There is a table of supplies in which is given the French
      and English names of the foods and the time of year each is
      in season. This table includes "fish and shell fish,"
      "poultry," "fruits," "game," "meats," and "vegetables."
      This is followed with a model market list to show at a
      glance quantities received, on hand, and needed.

      We have so far got to page 24 and we come to "Bills of
      Fare." These occupy 144 pages and present specimens for
      breakfasts, luncheons, dinners, buffet or standing suppers,
      collations, hunting parties, garden parties served ambigue,
      sit down suppers, and dancing parties, including the
      refreshments and supper. Every dish is numbered to
      correspond with a recipe for its preparation in another
      part of the book, the 3,715 recipes given being all
      represented in these bills of fare.

      Next comes a chapter on "Elementary Methods," in which is
      taught such information as how to peel almonds, to blanch
      vegetables, to make paste borders, to prepare bouchees, to
      braise, bread, carve, mold jellies, make vegetable colors,
      prepare different style creams, make puff paste, beat up
      eggs, clean fish, prepare forcemeats and bread stuffing and
      gelatines, grate cheese, cook icing, prepare jellies, cut
      fat pork for larding, lard meat, poultry and game, cut
      lemons, dress meringues, make mince meat, flute mushrooms,
      stone olives, fix parsley for garnishing, make almond and
      many other pastes; press meats, gelatines, breasts,
      sweetbreads, etc., prepare quenelles, clean currants,
      reduce and strain sauces, prepare rissoles, cut roots with
      a spoon and with a vegetable cutter; to prepare salpicon;
      to scald and sieve; the use of spices, aromatics and
      seasonings for cooking purposes; to cast and color
      stearine, to strain purees, cook sugar, make tarts; make
      thickenings for soups, sauces and stews; to line and bake
      timbale crusts, brush and peel truffles, dress, singe and
      truss poultry and game for entrees and roasting; make
      vol-au-vent crust, white stock for meats and vegetables,
      etc., etc., etc.

      Then follows a chapter on "Kitchen Utensils," in which
      about every known article of kitchen furniture and
      equipment (when the book was written) is described and
      illustrated. This includes the cold storage department, as
      well. Next comes the department of "Soups," of which the
      making of two hundred kinds is explained. This is followed
      by "Sauces--Stocks, Essences and Auxiliaries," for which
      251 recipes are given. Following the sauces is a department
      of "garnishings," for which there are 133 recipes. Next is
      a chapter on "Side Dishes," in which recipes for 63 cold
      and 158 hot are given. Then follows a chapter on "Mollusks
      and Crustaceans," with 101 recipes. A chapter on "Fish"
      comes next with 218 recipes. This is followed with chapters
      on "Beef," 165 recipes; "Veal," 165 recipes; "Mutton," 75
      recipes; "Lamb," 109 recipes; "Pork," 48 recipes;
      "Poultry," 224 recipes; and "Game," 163 recipes. As yet we
      have got only about half way through the book. The next
      chapter is headed "Miscellaneous Entrees," and gives 198
      recipes. Next is a department of "Cold Service," including
      garnishings for cold dishes, the making of cooked salads,
      cooked and raw vegetable salads, green salads, etc. There
      are 267 recipes in this department. Following comes a
      chapter on "Vegetables," with 172 recipes. Then one on
      "Eggs," with 100 different ways of cooking. Then comes a
      chapter headed "Farinaceous," with 37 recipes. This is
      followed with "Sweet Entremets," of which there are recipes
      for 134 hot and 99 cold.

      We now come to the "Pastry," beginning with large cakes for
      entremets, 40 recipes; breakfast cakes, 19 recipes; small
      cakes for entremets, 52 recipes; tea cakes, 24 recipes; and
      fancy cakes, 40 recipes.

      Next is the "Bakery" department with 17 recipes, together
      with full information regarding utensils, yeast, ferment,
      leaves, etc., etc.

      Then follows a chapter on "Ices," including "Iced Drinks,"
      with 189 recipes. Following this is a department of
      "Confectionery," with 90 recipes, including large pieces,
      candies, preserves, salted almonds, cheeses and fresh
      fruits, chocolate, coffees, raccahout, teas, etc.

      Then follows a very interesting chapter on "Wines," with
      information regarding the care of bottling, clarifying,
      decanting, and freezing; punches, dessert, drinks, etc.

      This is followed with a pictorial display of "last century"
      tables, and a "Collection of Delmonico's Menus," occupying
      64 pages of the book.

      The volume ends with a comprehensive index occupying 44
      double column pages.

The book is profusely illustrated--there being no less than 806 cuts
interspersed among the reading matter. The pictures are very good of
their kind, too. Another most excellent feature of this great cook book
is that every recipe in it appears under a good, honest English name,
alongside of which is the translation of it into the French.

     PRICE $7.00 Postage Prepaid
     For Sale by
     THE HOTEL MONTHLY BOOKSHOP
     950 Merchandise Mart     JOHN WILLY, _Inc._       CHICAGO 54, ILL.




     Popular Handbooks

     for Hotel, Restaurant, Transportation
     Catering, Institution and Club Use


     The Epicurean (Ranhofer)                                    $7.00

     The king of cook books is "The Epicurean," by
     Charles Ranhofer, of Delmonico's. This book is
     1,200 pages and weighs about ten pounds. It is
     the most extensive, the most complete, the most
     readable, the most attractive and the best all-around
     cook book that has ever been published.
     The first chapter is devoted to table service, with
     instruction in menu-making and the care and
     service of wines, the decoration of the table, the
     fixing of the sideboard, complete dining room
     instructions for the service of course dinners.
     French and Russian service is explained. There
     are lists of china, glass and silver, etc.; a table
     of supplies in which the French and English
     names are given, and a market list. Then follows
     144 pages of menus for breakfasts, luncheons,
     dinners, buffet or standing suppers, collations,
     hunting parties, garden parties, dancing parties,
     etc. All dishes in these menus are numbered to
     conform with recipes for them in the body of the
     book. There is a chapter on elementary methods,
     in which even the drudgery work in the kitchen is
     explained, and all the work done by apprentices
     in the early stages of hotel kitchen work. The
     chapter on kitchen utensils is very full, every
     utensil illustrated. Then come the recipes: 200
     soups, 251 sauces, 133 garnishes, 191 side dishes,
     101 shell fish, 218 fish, 165 beef, 165 veal, 75
     mutton, 109 lamb, 48 pork, 224 poultry, 163
     game, 198 miscellaneous entrees, 67 salads, 172
     vegetables, 100 eggs, 37 farinaceous foods, 233
     sweet entrees, 170 cakes, 17 breads, 189 ices and
     iced drinks, 90 confectionery, and several illustrations
     of centerpieces. There is an exhaustive
     chapter on wines, several recipes for mixed
     drinks, and 64 pages devoted to a collection of
     Delmonico menus. The index occupies 44 double-column
     pages. There are more than 800 illustrations.
     A most excellent feature of The Epicurean
     is that every recipe in it appears under a good
     honest English name, alongside of which is the
     translation of it into French. It is beautifully
     bound in Keratol Levant grain, embossed in gold.


     The Palmer House Cook Book (Amiet)                          $3.00

     Here is the book you have been waiting for ... the
     _new_ Palmer House Cook Book ... newly revised,
     new recipes ... illustrated with 20 beautiful natural
     color and 20 black and white illustrations. The
     _new_ Palmer House Cook Book contains all the
     menus and recipes that made the first edition a
     best seller, _plus_ many new recipes and color illustrations.
     Recipes for world-famous dishes just
     as they are prepared by Chef Amiet in Chicago's
     Palmer House, and in other leading hotels, clubs,
     restaurants and in private homes. Yet, the instructions
     are so clear and simple, even a beginner
     can produce the dishes with wonderful results.
     The book is divided into two sections. The
     first section gives menus with recipes for seventy-six
     consecutive days. The second part is devoted
     to a choice of 339 recipes which may be substituted
     for any of those on the daily menus; and
     instructions for preparing the sauces, garnishes
     and dressings called for on the menus. Outstanding
     feature of this book is its 40 beautiful color
     and black and white illustrations showing the
     proper manner of service, and how the finished
     dish will look. The _new_ Palmer House Cook Book
     is truly a masterpiece of culinary literature ...
     a book which every manager, chef and steward ... in
     every hotel, club, and restaurant should
     own and use. 318 pages of recipes and menus,
     plus 40 pages of illustrations, 5-1/3 x 8 inches, cloth
     bound.


     The Hotel St. Francis Cook Book (Hirtzler)                  $3.00

     The author was chef of Hotel St. Francis, San
     Francisco. Adapted for hotels, restaurants, clubs,
     coffee rooms, families and every place where
     high-class, wholesome cuisine is desired. This is
     the most important culinary book that has come
     from any press in the last twenty-five years. Mr.
     Hirtzler is known thruout Europe and America
     as one of the ablest chefs of the day. He made
     the cuisine of the Hotel St. Francis world-famous.
     A feature of the Hotel St. Francis Cook Book
     that will be appreciated by thousands of hotel
     people, caterers, families and all interested in
     home economics, is the selection and preparation
     of foods in season; the presentation of breakfast,
     luncheon and dinner menus for every day in the
     year--the selections appropriate, and all dishes
     actually prepared and served in the Hotel St.
     Francis. This feature of the book gives a suggestive
     quality, a reminder attribute, and a
     knowledge of food economies and food attributes
     that is hereby brought to the aid of the proficient
     and the learner, also enables even the inexperienced
     to produce the well-balanced menu. The Hotel
     St. Francis Cook Book is indexed and cross indexed
     so that every recipe can be referred to on
     the instant.


     The Edgewater Salad Book (Shircliffe)                       $5.00

     Contains more than 600 tested recipes for salads
     and salad dressings. Mr. Shircliffe has not only
     given the recipes, but in many cases has supplemented
     them with author's notes, calling attention
     to special health-giving features, and suggesting
     diets for the different ailments that afflict
     humans. He also takes opportunity to preach
     many a short sermon on the importance of right
     eating and what is best for health from the
     cradle to old age. He also intersperses much of
     human interest in the way of anecdote, legend
     and historic events. In this way it is more than
     a cook book--it is readable to those who are not
     so much interested in how to make salads as in
     the enjoyment of them. The great charm of the
     book is the illustrations, which are from direct
     photographs in the natural colors, so that the
     dishes illustrated have the eye-appeal and the
     enticing qualities of the real dish. It is a book
     that fits into every kitchen--home, hotel, club,
     hospital, restaurant, lunch room, cafeteria, steamship,
     dining car, industrial catering plant, institution,
     army mess--in fact, wherever information
     is desired as to the why and how to prepare for
     the table.


     The Edgewater Salad Portfolio (Shircliffe)                  $2.00

     A set of beautiful illustrations of salads taken
     from the Edgewater Beach Salad Book. They are
     mounted on heavy green cover stock, 8-7/8 x 11-1/4
     inches, each showing one or two of the salads,
     and are suitable for framing. The portfolio may
     be used by the maitre d'hotel to assist him in selling
     party menus. The illustrations are so natural
     and appetizing that they make strong appeal to
     patrons when selecting the salad course for special
     menus. Also these pictures serve as a guide to
     pantry girls, showing them how the finished salad
     should look.


     The Edgewater Sandwich Book (Shircliffe)                    $2.00

     Supplemented with chapters on hors d'oeuvres,
     supremes, canapes and relishes. More than 600
     recipes. This book is by the author of the Edgewater
     Salad Book, the most important culinary
     book produced in recent years. There are thirty
     illustrations of sandwiches and hors d'oeuvres.
     It will meet the requirements of all kinds of refreshment
     places from the soda fountain to lunch
     room, tea room and high-class restaurant. Bound
     in convenient pocket size.


     A Selection of Dishes and the Chef's Reminder
     (Fellows)                                                   $1.00

     The book that has met with the largest sale and
     is in most demand from managers, stewards and
     cooks. It is in vest pocket form, 220 pages. The
     most complete and serviceable pocket reference
     book to culinary matters that has ever been published.
     It is not a cook book, in the general sense
     of the word, but is full of ideas and suggestions
     regarding bill-of-fare dishes. Chapters are devoted
     to entrees of all kinds, salads, soups, consommes,
     fish and their sauces, sauces in general,
     garnishes, fancy potatoes, miscellaneous recipes,
     hints to cooks and stewards, suggestion for breakfast,
     lunch and supper dishes, chafing dish cookery,
     menus, and a pronouncing glossary of culinary
     terms. Hundreds of the dishes listed are
     given with their bill-of-fare names only, as the
     cooks understand the basic work in preparing
     dishes, and the sauces and garnishes are treated
     separately, with information as to their component
     parts. Thousands of men who possess a
     copy of this book say it is their greatest help.
     Printed on bond paper, bound in flexible cover.


     The Hotel Butcher, Garde Manger and Carver
     (Frank Rivers)                                              $2.00

     The author has cultivated a new field in culinary
     literature, and produced a book both novel and
     useful. His experience as butcher, carver, chef
     and steward enabled him to compile facts regarding
     meats and meat economics, from the butcher
     shop to the dining-room table, that will be invaluable
     to managers, stewards, chefs, and all
     persons employed in culinary work. His book
     digests the subjects of buying, handling, sale,
     and service of meats, poultry and fish for hotels,
     restaurants, clubs and institutions. It is varied
     with suggestions for the use of meats and trimmings
     for particular dishes; the composition of
     these dishes set forth in concise form. The information
     is clarified by the use of about 300 illustrations.
     The index is so comprehensive that any
     item may be referred to on the instant. 125 pages.


     Ideas for Refreshment Rooms                                 $1.00

     This book is composed mainly of expositions of
     catering systems, in particular, tea room, lunch
     room, department store, cafeteria, school, industrial
     plant, dining car, club and outside. A valuable
     feature of it is the illustrating of different
     accounting systems and report forms; also plans
     of lunch rooms, kitchens and pantries, showing
     consistent lay-out. There are more than a hundred
     beautiful half-tone illustrations picturing
     refreshment rooms of many kinds, their decoration,
     and furnishment. Complete sets of menus
     of famous catering establishments are presented;
     also a large number of menus to fit the lunch
     room, cafeteria, industrial plant, or school. Thruout
     the book there is a plea for the balanced
     ration and right eating, the advocacy of plain
     foods simply prepared and appetizingly served,
     the nutritive value given careful consideration.
     There is a chapter on service; a chapter on the
     brewing and serving of tea and coffee; several
     pages devoted to pantry prepared foods; illustrations
     of kitchens, of restaurant checks, and of
     many interesting things, as electric equipment;
     questions of fuel economy, illumination, and a
     hundred and one clever ideas in the marketing
     of prepared foods in public eating houses. The
     book is thoroly indexed and cross indexed to
     assure quick finding. 385 pages, cloth bound.


     The Culinary Handbook (Fellows)                             $2.00

     Presents in concise form information regarding
     the preparation and service of nearly 4,000 different
     bill-of-fare dishes; also gives much information
     of encyclopedic nature regarding foods
     of all kinds. Quick reference to every dish described
     is facilitated with an index of 39 columns
     arranged in alphabetical order, and cross indexed
     so that no matter what one is looking for, all he
     has to do is to find the initial letter and under it,
     in alphabetical order, for second, third and fourth
     letters, etc., the article wanted, with page on
     which it is found. Referring, for instance, to a
     sauce of any particular kind. Find the word Sauce
     in the index, and under it will be found in alphabetical
     order 149 different sauces; and under
     Salads 71 different kinds, exclusive of the variations
     in making. Under head of Sausage there are
     45 different kinds described, with directions for
     making as well as cooking and serving. In fact,
     the sausage information in this book is more
     complete than in any other published. 190 pages;
     7 x 10 inches.


     The Menu Maker (Fellows)                                    $2.00

     This is the last of the successful ready reference
     books compiled by Chas. Fellows, author of "A
     Selection of Dishes and the Chef's Reminder"
     and "The Culinary Handbook." In this book Mr.
     Fellows has compiled in concise form thousands
     of suggestions for daily changes on the bills-of-fare,
     both American and European plan, for
     breakfast, luncheon and dinner cards, and so arranged
     as to give popular changes from day to
     day to give acceptable variety. The book is supplemented
     with 110 pages of sample menus and
     bills-of-fare, several of them photographic reproductions,
     and representing the cards of hotels and
     restaurants of both first and second class, lunch
     rooms, transportation catering menus, club menus,
     wine list, caterer's list, and several illustrations
     of glass, china and silverware and banquet
     scenes. The book is indexed; printed on fine
     quality paper; page 7 x 10 inches, cloth bound.


     Paul Richards' Pastry Book                                  $2.00

     This is the title in brief of "Paul Richards' Book
     of Breads, Cakes, Pastries, Ices and Sweetmeats,
     Especially Adapted for Hotel and Catering Purposes."
     The author is known as one of the most
     skillful all around bakers, pastry cooks and confectioners
     in America, and has demonstrated the
     quality of his work in leading hotels. In writing
     this book he took particular pains to have the
     recipes reliable and worded in such simple fashion
     that all who read them may readily understand
     and work from them. The book is in seven parts.
     Part I is devoted to fruit jellies and preserves;
     jams, jellies, compotes and syrups; preserved
     crushed fruits for sherbets and ices; preserving
     pie fruits; sugar boiling degrees; colors. Part II,
     pastry and pie making, pastes and fillings; pastry
     creams, patty cases, tarts and tartlets; icings.
     Part III, cake baking; Part IV, puddings and
     sauces. Part V, ice creams, ices, punches, etc.
     Part VI, breads, rolls, buns, etc. Part VII, candy
     making and miscellaneous recipes; bread economies
     in hotel; caterers' price list. The recipes are
     readily found with the aid to 36 columns of index
     and cross index in the back of the book, this
     index forming in itself a complete directory, so
     to speak, of breads, pastry, ices and sugar foods.
     Printed on strong white paper; pages 7 x 10
     inches, 168 pages, bound in cloth.


     Pastry for the Restaurant (Richards)                        $1.00

     A vest pocket book of 158 pages, is, as its title
     indicates, especially produced for the use of bakers
     employed in restaurants and European plan
     hotels. The style of work required for the American
     plan hotel with table d'hote meal, and that
     for the European plan hotel restaurant, where
     each article is sold for a separate price, has
     brought about a demand for a book with recipes
     and methods especially adapted for the preparation
     of bakery and pastry goods for individual
     sale. The first chapter is devoted to French
     pastries, which are now so generally sold, yet so
     little understood, because of the misnomer title;
     then follows cakes and tarts of every kind; pies,
     in great variety; puddings, hot and cold; ices,
     ice creams, and many specialties, all set forth
     with ingredients, quantities, and methods of mixing
     and preparing, and instructions for oven or
     temperature control. Mr. Richards' other books
     have become standard the world over, and this
     one will be equally reliable. The index to this
     book makes a very complete reference to popular
     pastry goods and will be found valuable as a reminder.
     The book is printed on bond paper.


     Candy for Dessert (Richards)                                $1.00


     Ice Cream for Small Plants (Etta H. Handy)                  $2.50

     Whether you make your own ice cream or buy it
     on specification from a local manufacturer, you
     need this book. It has many practical suggestions
     for retailing and service; also special chapters
     on the selection of manufacturing and storage
     equipment. There are 23 pages of pictures of
     specialty dishes. The book shows how high grade
     frozen foods can be made economically and advantageously
     in small quantity, as in the hotel
     or restaurant. It is a practical handbook on the
     making of ice cream, and is written in non-technical
     language so that it can be easily understood
     by those not familiar with ice cream production.
     The formulas are written for use in a
     forty-quart freezer, but may be easily adapted
     to one-half or one-quarter that amount, or for
     even smaller quantity. The recipes are carefully
     standardized and have been successfully used to
     yield products of uniformly high quality that can
     be sold at a consistent profit. For those who buy
     ice cream from a local manufacturer, and want
     to control the quality, _Ice Cream For Small Plants_
     enables them to specify formulas for an almost
     unlimited variety of frozen desserts. 180 pages,
     5 x 71/2 inches, durable cloth binding.


     The Vest Pocket Pastry Book (Meister)                       $1.00

     This little book contains 500 recipes, includes 57
     for hot puddings, pudding sauces, etc.; 77 for
     cold puddings, side dishes, jellies, etc.; 90 for ice
     creams, water ices, punches, etc.; 68 for pastes,
     patties, pies, tarts, etc.; 77 for cakes; 17 for
     icings, colorings, sugars, etc.; 60 for bread, rolls,
     yeast raised cakes, griddle cakes, etc., as well as
     55 miscellaneous recipes. Mr. Meister wrote this
     book at the request of the editor of The Hotel
     Monthly, who had heard his work highly complimented
     by his employers, who said they believed
     him to have no superior as a first-class workman.
     The recipes, while given in few words, yet
     are easily understandable and have helped thousands
     of bakers to improve their work. Book is
     indexed; printed on bond paper.


     The Vest Pocket Vegetable Book (Moore)                      $1.00

     This book has done more to popularize the cooking
     and serving of vegetables in hotels and restaurants
     than any other book ever published. It
     was written with this idea. The author took
     particular pains to make this little volume a
     classic and his masterpiece, and he succeeded remarkably
     well. Into 120 pages he has condensed
     more information regarding the history, cultivation,
     nutritive qualities and approved forms of
     cooking and serving vegetables than can be
     found in any other book, no matter how large;
     and it has been demonstrated to be a book without
     mistakes. Recipes for soups, sauces, garnishings
     and salads supplement the general recipes.
     There are 78 ways of preparing potatoes, 19 of
     mushrooms, 19 of onions, 15 of cabbage, etc., 27
     of beans, 15 of rice, 25 of tomatoes, and others
     in number in proportion to their importance.
     The vegetables are given with their English
     names and the French and German translations.
     The book is indexed and printed on bond paper.


     The Book of Sauces (Senn)                                   $1.00

     Mr. Senn is the author of the famous Twentieth
     Century Cookery Book, The Menu Book, Practical
     Gastronomy, and ten other culinary books that
     have become standard in Europe, and that have
     extensive sale in America. His Book of Sauces
     is the most complete work of the kind that has
     ever been produced. It treats the subject thoroly
     from every angle and covers all kinds of sauces
     for meat, poultry, fish and salad dishes; also
     sweet sauces. This book is adapted not alone
     for the hotel and catering trades, but also for
     family use the world over. Epicures will find it
     invaluable for the suggestions and practical instructions,
     together with the culinary lore therein
     contained. Book is vest pocket size, printed
     on bond paper.


     The Fish and Oyster Book (Kientz)                           $1.00

     The author was for many years chef of Rector's
     (the noted sea foods restaurant in Chicago), is a
     handy vest pocket volume, the leaf measuring
     3 x 61/2 inches. In this book Mr. Kientz tells in
     concise manner how to cook practically every
     kind of fish that is brought to the American
     market; and not only explains the method of
     cooking, but also the making of the sauces and
     the manner of service. Every recipe is given with
     its bill-of-fare name in English and its translation
     into the French. The recipes include also such
     dishes as frogs' legs, all kinds of shell fish, snails,
     terrapin, and the fish force-meats. Also there is
     an appendix with specimen fish and oyster house
     luncheon and dinner menus, with and without
     wines. The book is indexed, printed on bond
     paper, bound in flexible cover.


     Economical Soups and Entrees (Vachon)                       $1.00

     This book was written in response to a demand
     for a book that would tell how to prepare savory
     dishes from inexpensive materials at small cost;
     and, in particular, how to use up leftovers; by
     which is meant good cooked foods not served at
     a previous meal, and which have not in any way
     lost their marketable value in the sense of deterioration
     of quality, but which can be served
     in hotel or restaurant in the same appetizing
     manner that leftovers are served in well-to-do
     families. Mr. Vachon was selected to write this
     book because of his reputation as an economical
     chef. In it he has given recipes in particular for
     meat entrees of the savory order, stews, pies and
     croquettes, hash, salads and fried meats. The
     soups include creams, broths, bouillons, chowders,
     purees, pepper-pots and the like. It is two books
     in one, separately indexed, printed on bond paper,
     leaf 3 x 7 inches, bound in flexible cover.


     Eggs In a Thousand Ways (Meyer)                             $1.00

     This book gives more reliable information regarding
     eggs and their preparation for the table than
     can be found in any other book. Is indexed and
     cross indexed so that any method of cooking eggs
     and any of the garnishings can be referred to on
     the instant. The book starts with boiled eggs.
     Then (following the departmental index in alphabetical
     order) are cold eggs, 79 ways; egg
     drinks, 22 kinds; eggs in cases, 25 ways; in
     cocottes, 24 ways; mollet, 79 ways; molded in
     timbales, 29 ways; fried, 33; fried poached, 38;
     hard eggs, 32; miscellaneous recipes, 27; omelets
     in 210 ways; poached, 227 ways; scrambled, 123;
     shirred, 95; stuffed, hard, 34; surprise omelets,
     9; sweet eggs, 16; sweet omelets, 38. The recipes
     are in condensed form. The book is vest pocket
     size, 150 pages, printed on bond paper.


     Drinks (Jacques Straub)                                     $1.00

     This book is full of genuine pre-prohibition recipes
     for mixed Drinks. The author was wine steward
     of the famous Blackstone Hotel Bar in
     Chicago. It is an authoritative treatise on how
     mixed drinks should be made. In addition to 700
     practical recipes, it has a preface by "Oscar" of
     the Waldorf, and an opening chapter outlining
     the care and medicinal value of wines.

     We recommend "Drinks" as the book being
     used by the finest hotels and clubs, by connoisseurs
     of beverages, and as a book that is authoritative
     and exceedingly practical because it was
     written by one who knew how, and was first
     published in the days before prohibition (1914).


     The Menu Translator (Duchamp & Jenning)                     $3.00

     This book was formerly known as the "Universal
     Dictionary of Menus" and served as a
     guide to thousands of menu-makers, stewards,
     and chefs. Today, it has been completely revised,
     greatly enlarged and lists about 12,000
     translations in French, English and German.
     Items are carefully arranged under 25 headings,
     making it easy to find any item. Now in
     its seventh edition, and one of the newest and
     most complete works of its kind. 137 pages,
     5 x 71/2 inches.


     Advertising of Hotels (Clarence Madden)                     $2.00

     This is the first practical, comprehensive inquiry
     into hotel advertising ever made available. It is
     the only book which treats the problem of selling
     rooms and service in its entirety--promotion,
     publicity, "in-the-house", "word-of-mouth", copy,
     appropriation, media selection, and agency contact.
     Mr. Madden is acquainted with both sides
     of the advertising picture. His book brings the
     two into sharp focus and shows their proper relationship....
     Anyone who is in any way affected
     by hotel advertising should be sure to have on
     hand a copy of "THE ADVERTISING OF
     HOTELS" for study, reference, and guidance.


     The Van Orman System of Hotel Control                       $ .50

     A book illustrating and describing the many forms
     used in the hotels of the Van Orman Chain of
     hotels.


     American Plan Check System (Lewis)                          $1.00


     Hospitality (McGovern)                                      $1.00


     The American Waiter (Goins)                                 $1.00

     This is the only published book that treats intelligently
     of the waiter's work from bus boy to
     head waiter, for both hotel and restaurant requirements.
     Interspersed are chapters on the care
     of table wares, salad making, table setting, carving,
     dishing up, handling of sea foods, building
     of banquet tables, and many other useful items
     of information. The book is illustrated, vest
     pocket size, printed on bond paper.


     The Hotel Monthly Bookshop
     John Willy, Inc.
     950 Merchandise Mart      Chicago 54, Illinois





End of Project Gutenberg's The Hotel St. Francis Cook Book, by Victor Hirtzler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOTEL ST. FRANCIS COOK BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 39550.txt or 39550.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/5/5/39550/

Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

