The Project Gutenberg EBook of An Alphabet of History, by Wilbur D. Nesbit

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: An Alphabet of History

Author: Wilbur D. Nesbit

Illustrator: Ellsworth Young

Release Date: May 5, 2012 [EBook #39626]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ALPHABET OF HISTORY ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Paul Marshall and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









  [Illustration]




  AN ALPHABET
  OF HISTORY

  _The Words by Wilbur D. Nesbit_
  _The Pictures by Ellsworth Young_

      Who frets about the mystery
      Enshrouding all of history
      On reading this will, maybe, see
      We've made it plain as A, B, C.

  _Paul Elder and Company Publishers,_
  _San Francisco_




  ACKNOWLEDGMENT

    In their original form, the contents of this book appeared
    in the _Chicago Sunday Tribune_, which newspaper is hereby
    thanked for the privilege of reproducing this Alphabet


  Copyright, 1905
  by Paul Elder and Company
  San Francisco


  The Tomoye Press
  San Francisco




ALEXANDER THE GREAT


[Illustration]

  Alexander the Great was a victim of fate,
    And he sighed there was naught to delight him
  When he brandished his sword and defiantly roared
    And could not get a country to fight him.

  All the armies he'd chased, all the lands laid to waste,
    And he clamored for further diversions;
  And our history speaks of his grip on the Greeks
    And his hammerlock hold on the Persians.

  Though the Gordian knot, cut in two, in a spot
    In his palace was labeled a relic,
  Though Bucephalus, stuffed, gave him fame, he was huffed--
    He was grouchy and grumpy, was Aleck.

  And the cause of his woe, he would have you to know,
    Was the fact that he never was able
  To conduct a big scrap that a versatile chap
    Of a war correspondent would cable.

  'Stead of being quite glad, he would grow very sad
    When he told of the fellows who'd fought him,
  As he thought of the lack of the clicking kodak
    In the hands of a man to "snapshot" him.

  We are told that he wept, and in dolefulness crept
    Through his palace--the reason is hinted:
  There were not at that time magazines for a dime,
    And his articles could not be printed.

  Though it may seem unkind, ere his life we've outlined,
    We must say in some ways he was hateful;
  And in truth, we have heard he went back on his word,
    And was not Alexander the Grateful.




BRUTUS


[Illustration]

  Back in the time of Rome sublime,
    There lived great Julius Caesar
  Who wore the crown with haughty frown
    And was a frosty geezer.

  Three times, they say, upon the way
    Called Lupercal, they fetched it
  For him to wear, but then and there
    He said they should have stretched it.

  And we are told that Jule was cold
    And frigid as Alaska,
  Ambitious, too,--that would not do
    For Cassius and Casca.

  They told their friends: "It all depends
    On having things to suit us.
  We think that Jule is much too cool;
    Let us conspire with Brutus."

  They furthermore let out this roar:
    "Shall Caesar further scoff us?
  Next week, they say, he'll have his way
    About the Rome postoffice."

  With dirk and sword in togas stored--
    You know those times they wore 'em--
  They made a muss of Ju-li-us
    One morning in the Forum.

  With "Et tu, Brute?" J. C. grew mute.
    (Some claim it's "Et tu, Bru-te";
  We mention it both whole and split
    As is our bounden duty.)

  Mark Antony arose, and he
    Talked some,--we shall not quote it;
  We've understood 'twas not as good
    As when Bill Shakespeare wrote it.

  Then Brutus skipped lest he be nipped--
    And since his dissolution
  He's been accused and much abused
    In schools of elocution.




CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS


[Illustration]

  When Christopher Columbus stood the egg upon its end,
  He solved a weighty problem that no one could comprehend--
  Perhaps it was the puzzle whose solution clearly showed
  The psychologic motives of the hen that crossed the road.
  Perhaps cold storage minstrels never might have heard of this
      If it hadn't been for Chris.

  Columbus packed his little grip and got upon the train
  And went to see that noble man, King Ferdinand of Spain.
  Result: He found America--oh, do not idly nod,
  For if it hadn't been for this we couldn't go abroad!
  Just think of all the travel and the voyages we'd miss
      If it hadn't been for Chris.

  Columbus found America and won a lot of fame--
  Nobody ever thought to ask him how he knew its name;
  Nobody ever booked him for some lectures to declare
  In eloquent assertions how he knew the land was there.
  Today we might be savages, unknowing modern bliss,
      If it hadn't been for Chris.

  He landed near Havana, and he said: "It seems to me
  That sometime in the future little Cuby shall be free."
  His vision was prophetic--far adown the future's track
  He saw the dauntless Hobson and the sinking Merrimac.
  We might have still been tyros in the ethics of the kiss
      If it hadn't been for Chris.

  Today there are big cities and big buildings named for him,
  And yet he was so poor that once he thought he'd have to swim
  To find this wondrous country, for he was so badly broke;
  But Isabella nobly put her watch and ring in soak.
  Who knows but Isabella never might have thought of this
      If it hadn't been for Chris?




DIOGENES


[Illustration]

  Diogenes lived in a tub
    His fellows analyzing;
  These words were carved upon his club:
    "First Class Philosophizing."
  If any question came his way
    Involving people's morals,
  The things that he felt moved to say
    Were sure to start some quarrels.
  In fact, his tub became a booth
  In which he dealt in wholesale truth.

  This world was but a fleeting show--
    He knew a lot about it;
  When he was told a thing was so
    He then began to doubt it.
  He seldom left his narrow home--
    Not even on a Sunday;
  The only time that he would roam
    Abroad was on a Monday.
  He had to roam then, anyway,
  For that, you know, is washing day.

  Society, with all its sham,
    Gave him a paroxysm;
  He always spoke in epigram
    And thought in aphorism.
  One day he took his lantern down
    And polished it and lit it--
  But first he frowned a peevish frown
    And growled: "The wick don't fit it."
  And then, with pessimistic scan,
  He sought to find an honest man.

  Diogenes has long been dead;
    His search was not well heeded,
  For no historian has said
    If ever he succeeded.
  But there's this thought for you and me:
    It would not be quite pleasant
  If on that quest the sage should be
    With his fierce light, at present.
  For, if he were, one may but think
  How much that light would make him blink.




EURIPIDES


[Illustration]

  Euripides, of ancient Greece,
      Excelled in things dramatic;
  He could sit down and write a piece
      Mild tempered or emphatic;
  The dramatists of modern days--
      No matter how much they write--
  Can never equal Rippy's ways,
      For he was quite a playwright.

  When Rippy took his pen in hand
      The scenes would flow like magic;
  Though humor came at his command
      His penchant was the tragic;
  He often wrote a little speech
      That was extremely pleasant--
  His jests were lasting--all and each
      Are still used at the present.

  Euripides was serious--
      He thought he had a mission.
  He said, "By writing thus and thus
      I'll elevate the Grecian."
  However, though he oft produced
      His works in manner spurty,
  He never wrote a thing to boost
      The vogue of ten, twent', thirty.

  In fact, his works could have been played
      In goodly style with no girls--
  He never used the soubrette maid
      Or based his play on show girls;
  And, this for old Euripides:
      In none of all his dramas
  Did he observe the modern pleas
      For chorus in pajamas.

  Euripides was Athens' Fitch
      Or her Augustus Thomas--
  It's really hard to say just which,
      But he was full of promise.
  It's time that Rippy had his due
      And got his share of glory,
  For royalties he never knew
      And no press agent's story.




FRANKLIN


[Illustration]

  Fame twined a wreath on Franklin's brow
      A-many years ago--
  And yet, how many people now
      The reason for it know?
  Was it because he wisely wrote
      Poor Richard's Almanac
  (One of the few, we pause to note,
      Which testimonials lack)?

  Was Franklin's fame the sure result
      Of his philosophy?
  (No mental cure or psychic cult
      Or Great Uplift had he.)
  Was it because for years and years
      He was a diplomat?
  Why, no. What person ever hears
      About such things as that?

  Then what did wise Ben Franklin do
      That he should merit fame?
  That each edition of "Who's Who"
      In bold type puts his name?
  He flew his kite; he had the key
      His front door to unlock--
  Like countless other men, then he
      Acquired a sudden shock.

  The trolley cars and dynamos
      And incandescent light
  And buzzing fan which coolness blows
      All date from Franklin's kite.
  But, what an oversight of Fame!
      Ben Franklin's wife--'twas she,
  That thoughtful, gentle, kindly dame,
      Who let him have the key.




GALILEI GALILEO


[Illustration]

  Galilei Galileo was an early man of science;
  He was happy when inventing, or discussing an appliance;
  Pendulums, he found by study, were precise in every wobble--
  Showing how old Father Time went in his never-ending hobble.

  Galilei Galileo the thermometer invented
  And informed the gaping public what its figures represented.
  "O you foolish Galileo," cried the public, "you shall rue it!
  Why get up a thing to tell us we are hot? We always knew it."

  Galilei Galileo took a tube and got some lenses
  And discovered things that made him rather disbelieve his senses;
  He would point his telescope up to the sky and then he'd scan it,
  Then go in to breakfast smiling, for he'd found another planet.

  Galilei Galileo viewed the luminary solar
  (That's the sun) and found it spotted on the belt and regions polar;
  But he didn't figure out that when the sun was thickly freckled
  Then the world with lights and fusses was continually speckled.

  Galilei Galileo wrote a thing and then denounced it--
  But we often read his name and wonder how the man pronounced it.
  Maybe when he tried to he was all at sixes and at sevens,
  Which is why he turned his studies to the dim and distant heavens.

  Galilei Galileo! What a musical cognomen!
  Possibly some bright librettist will find in this name an omen
  That presages fortune for him, and the stage will pay what we owe
  To that honest old star gazer, Galilei Galileo.




HIPPOCRATES


[Illustration]

  Hippocrates was father to an awful lot of bother, for 'tis claimed
          that as to medicine he was the pioneer,
  That but for him the surgeon or the latter-day chirurgeon might never
          have been tinkering the human running gear.

  Hippocrates' diploma never threw him into coma in his efforts to
          decipher what its classic diction said,
  For when he was seeking practice--long ago--the simple fact is that
          the Latin tongue was common and was very far from dead.

  He often growled, "Dad gum it!" when he felt the glossy summit of his
          head, which was as bald as any shiny billiard ball--
  But old Hip had to endure it, for he knew he couldn't cure it, and
          that once his hair was falling, why, he had to let it fall.

  He was written up by Plato (who was quite a hot potato when it came to
          mental effort, for you know he reasoned well);
  Plato praised his diagnosis, called him healing's patient Moses, and
          though facts were hard to gather, found a goodly lot to tell.

  Hippocrates had knowledge, though he didn't go to college; he could
          speak of all diseases that he knew, in Latin terms
  (Still, 'twas only second nature to affect that nomenclature), but he
          never even thought of, much less heard of, any germs.

  Streptococcus or bacillus such as get in us and kill us to Hippocrates
          were always undiscovered and unknown,
  And the grim appendicitis which today is sure to fright us, was by Dr.
          Hip considered but a stomach-achic groan.

  Were he living at this moment, would the world be in a foment? Would
          physicians of the present take him out to see the town?
  From New Jersey clear to Joppa not a one would call him "Papa," and
          his theories and treatments would be greeted with a frown.

  We must say that he was clever, and that in one way, however, he
          resembled all the others who are treating human ills--
  He was constantly complaining that in spite of all his training he
          could never cure his patients of the trait of dodging bills.




IAGO


[Illustration]

  Iago as a villain was a master of his craft,
      And yet he did not work at all as modern villains do;
  No one can rise and say that bold Iago hoarsely laughed
      When some one demonstrated that his stories were untrue.
  He did not swagger on the stage in evening clothes, and mutter,
      Nor bite his finger nails in baffled anger now and then;
  He never turned and left the stage with nothing else to utter
      Except: "Aha! Proud beauty! I shall not be foiled again!"

  Iago did not hover near the old deserted mill
      To hurl the daring hero in the waters of the race;
  He never frowned and ground his teeth and burned the hidden will
      Or kidnapped any children just to complicate the case.
  Iago was not like the villains that we have at present;
      He didn't even try to scowl or to look like the part.
  Iago as a villain was continually pleasant,
      And never gave the notion that he had a stony heart.

  Othello was his victim--and Iago's work was good,
      But still Iago doesn't seem to get the proper praise;
  Othello, as the hero--as all proper heroes should--
      Stood calmly in the spotlight and corralled the wreathing bays.
  Since then there is no villain of the art of good Iago--
      At least we haven't seen an actor who approached him yet;
  The villains we have noticed from Galveston to Chicago
      Have hissed through black mustaches and have smoked the cigaret.




JONSON


[Illustration]

  O rare Ben Jonson, you who wrote
        "To Celia,"
  Presager of that later note,
        "Bedelia,"
  To you, rare Ben, our hat we raise
  For all your poems and your plays.

  You knew, forsooth, if Shakespeare's work
        Was taken,
  Like copies by a scrawling clerk,
        From Bacon;
  You would have known of that flimflam
  Without a hidden cryptogram.

  O rare Ben Jonson, with your pen
        You labored,
  And with brave lords and gentlemen
        You neighbored--
  You never turned out feeble farce
  In sentences that would not parse.

  To managers you ne'er were made
        To grovel,
  And, Ben, you never called a spade
        A shovel--
  Where you wrote sentences risque
  We now have costumes very gay.

  O rare Ben Jonson, when you asked
        That lady
  To drink, her name you never masked
        As "Sadie,"
  Nor did you call her "Creole Belle"
  Or half the song names we might tell.

  "Drink to me only with thine eyes!"
        Your sighing
  Showed you no steins of any size
        Were buying.
  But from the way the stanzas run,
  You, rare Ben Jonson, were well done.




KIDD


[Illustration]

  Oh, William Kidd was a pirate bold,
        Yo ho, my lads, yo ho!
  He sailed the seas in search of gold,
        Yo ho, my lads, yo ho!
  He sailed on both sides of the line,
  The skull and bones he made his sign;
  Where he found wealth, he said: "That's mine!"
        Three centuries ago.

  Oh, William Kidd was a pirate bad,
        Three centuries ago,
  A very dark repute he had--
        Yo ho, my lads, yo ho!
  He'd board a ship and take its hoard,
  Then: "Walk the plank!" he fiercely roared,
  "The ship is all that I can board,"
        Yo ho, my lads, yo ho!

  Oh, William Kidd was a pirate great,
        Yo ho, my lads, yo ho!
  He said: "I'll rob you while you wait"--
        Three centuries ago.
  He had a long, low, rakish craft
  With Long Toms both before and aft,
  And wickedly and loud he laughed,
        Yo ho, my lads, yo ho!

  Oh, William Kidd was a pirate big,
        Yo ho, my lads, yo ho!
  He feared no frigate, bark or brig,
        Yo ho, my lads, yo ho!
  And while his grim flag flapped and tossed
  Above the ship that Bill Kidd bossed,
  His victims knew just how they lost,
        Three centuries ago.

  Oh, William Kidd was a pirate then,
        Three centuries ago.
  If he should come to life again--
        Yo ho, my lads, yo ho!
  The chances are that he would just
  Go out and organize a trust--
  He knew the way to raise the dust
        Three centuries ago.




LUCULLUS


[Illustration]

  Lucullus was a fighter for a portion of his life;
  He won the bay and laurel by his prowess in the strife.
  He came back home a hero (and no doubt, just as today,
  They named a cocktail for him ere they looked the other way).
  But when Lucullus noticed he was losing grips on fame,
  He struck a happy notion to perpetuate his name.

  He took to giving dinners in a palace he had built--
  'Tis said that lots was eaten and a sea of wine was spilt;
  That guests might order anything in dishes old or new
  And get the very rarest, and a second order, too!
  Quick lunches or course dinners--anything a man could wish
  In the line of drinks or dainties; yet he was no _nouveau riche_.

  Lucullus won great battles, victories that he might boast,
  Yet today we recollect him merely as a lavish host.
  It is said that once he ordered quite the richest feast prepared
  But no guests came to enjoy it, and the busy chef was scared.
  "Is nobody here for dinner?" asked the flustered, pestered chef.
  "I am dining with Lucullus!" roared Lucullus. "Are you deaf?"

  But we think that one great reason for his never-dying fame,
  For the pure, unfading luster of his dinner-eating name,
  Is that though Lucullus feasted at a very great expense
  And sat down to simple breakfasts where the health foods were immense,
  He was gracious to his fellows, was considerate of each,
  And he never put his chestnuts in an after-dinner speech.




METHUSELAH


[Illustration]

  Methuselah lived long ago--
      He was the Old Inhabitant
  Those times, but never had a show;
      His opportunities were scant.
  Although he lived nine centuries
      And three-score years and nine beside,
  The times he saw were not like these,
      A chance to spread he was denied.

  He could not seek the corner store
      And lunch on crackers, cheese and prunes,
  And there display his helpful lore
      Through mornings and through afternoons;
  He could not talk about the days
      When folks first saw the telegraph
  Or telephone; how their amaze
      Made better posted people laugh.

  He could not take the stranger out
      To some tall building, then say: "Here,
  An' for a good ways hereabout,
      I used to shoot the bear and deer."
  Skyscrapers were an unknown thing,
      Excepting Babel, in his land,
  And Babel only served to bring
      Speech that he could not understand.

  (Perhaps this Babel item is
      Anachronistic; as to that
  We'll say one pleasant thing was his:
      He never had to rent a flat.)
  Another joy in his career
      Was this: nobody ever told
  Methuselah the stated year
      When he should be considered old.

  At thirty-five he was not barred
      From working if he wanted to;
  He did not need a union card
      His daily labors to pursue;
  And when his hair was snowy white
      And age his manly form had bent,
  Nobody called him young and bright
      And ran him for vice-president.




NEWTON


[Illustration]

  Now, Newton in the orchard felt an apple strike his head.
  "'Tis gravity! 'Tis gravity!" excitedly he said.
  Had you or I been sitting there a-thinking of this earth,
  As Newton was, and wondering about its size and girth,
  And just when we were figuring a long and heavy sum,
  The apple hit us on the mind and made our bald spot numb!

  We say, had you or I been there, as Newton was that day,
  Would there have been much gravity in what we had to say?

  This shows how great it is to have a scientific mind--
  An intellect that reaches out to see what it may find.
  Perchance an ordinary man in such a circumstance
  Would have got up and rubbed his head and done a little dance,
  And muttered things that gentle folks should scarcely ever state,
  And not concede the apple simply had to gravitate.

  Again we say, if Newton's place was held by you or I,
  Instead of gravity we might have thought of apple pie.

  You see (again we make the point that scientific minds
  Discover facts which any brain that's common never finds),
  You see, when Newton felt the jolt, his science did not stop--
  He simply meditated on "What made the apple drop?"
  And while in cogitation deep beneath the tree he lay,
  He mused: "It's odd that apples never drop the other way."

  Once more: If you or I had been beneath the apple tree,
  We might have howled: "Who was it threw that apple and hit me?"
  To finish this, however, with becoming gravity,
  We'll state that Newton lingered there beneath the apple tree;
  With logarithmic tables he discovered that the speed
  At which the apple fell was based on whence it fell--indeed,
  Had it dropped from the moon, we'll say, it would have grown so hot
  That it would have been melted up before to earth it got.

  Again, and finally, had you or I held Newton's seat,
  We should, like he did, take the apple up and start to eat.




OMAR


[Illustration]

  Old Omar, in a Tent he had to live,
  Yet gave to Verse such Time as he could give;
      Whereat the Critics rose and Hurled at Him:
  "The Stuff you write is only Tentative."

  Yet Khayyam never worried over that--
  He kept his Troubles underneath his Hat
      Except such Times as when he worked them up
  Into an Apt and Pleasing Rubaiyat.

  Fitzgerald, the Translator, took his Pen
  And made a flowing Version; yes, and then
      To show that he could keep it up a While,
  Translated all the Rubaiyat again.

  Now, is there any Home that Don't reveal
  O. Khayyam's volume resting by "Lucille,"
      Bound in Limp Leather, with each Edge uncut,
  To show the Literary Sense we feel?

  And is there any town from York to Butte
  Wherein some Maiden fair don't Elocute
      Through Khayyam's easy-speaking poetry,
  With Musical Accomp'niment to suit?

  Aye, verily! And where the Parodist
  Who does not seek through all upon his List
      And come back at the last to Khayyam's work
  Each time to find New Chances he has missed?

  A Good Cigar, a ready Fountain Pen
  Or a Typewriter one can use, and then
      A book of Omar whence to draw the Thought--
  Oh, Parodies one will turn out again!

  Some black initial letters here and there,
  Perchance he also had E. Hubbard Hair--
      But anyhow old Khayyam set a Task
  To fill all his Successors with despair!




PEPYS


[Illustration]

  Perchance when he was working on
      The diary that bears his name
  In those far days, now dead and gone,
      He never dreamed about his fame.
  Yet now, from time to time, it is
      Heard from 'most everybody's lips--
  That magic, mellow name of his,
      The soft and pleasing name of Pepys.

  Again, when reading what he wrote,
      We live anew that ancient time
  (The book is one we often quote--
      The cheap editions are a dime);
  We mark his course through dingy streets
      And climb with him the palace steps;
  In fancy all of those one meets
      Remark: "Why, there goes Mr. Pepys!"

  He always had a seeing eye
      And hearing ear, and what he saw
  And what he heard he fain would try
      To set down, but evade the law
  And that is why in cipher dark
      The tale originally creeps--
  'Twas thus, also, he made his mark,
      This man of truth and trouble, Pepys.

  Throughout his life he had his griefs
      And also had a little fun--
  He kept his eye upon his chiefs
      And tells the things they might have done
  If they had not done what they did.
      Ah, if each person now should keep his
  Own diary and raise the lid
      As did this honest Samuel Pepys!

  And so, you see, he made a name
      Whereon the critics sometimes pounce;
  It hardly ever sounds the same,
      It is so easy to pronounce.
  But still, there is an hour or so
      Of pleasure for the man who dips
  Into his book and comes to know
      Good Samuel Pepys, Peps or Pips.




QUINTILIAN


[Illustration]

  Quintilian, years and years ago,
      Was It on oratory;
  Demosthenes and Cicero
      He studied con amore;
  He ran an elocution school
      And taught the Roman lispers
  The reason and the rote and rule
      For requesting father, dear father, to come home with me now, in
          most pathetic whispers.

  'Twas he who showed that thus and thus
      One should appear when stating
  The last remarks of Spartacus
      On ceasing gladiating.
  (Perchance the word we just have used
      Escaped your dictionary.
  We mean when Spartacus refused
      To be butchered to make a Roman holiday exceedingly exciting and
          otherwise gladsome and merry.)

  Quintilian's book on How to Speak
      Is classic at this moment;
  It tells the speaker when to shriek
      And when his rage to foment.
  The boy who on commencement day
      Cites Patrick Henry's speeches
  Must do so in Quintilian's way
      When a single order of liberty, with a supplemental second choice
          of death, he beseeches.

  The actor who would thrill the crowd
      (A blood and marrow freezer)
  By handing out in accents proud
      "Mark Antony on Caesar,"
  Must heed the rules set down by Quint.,
      And so must he who rises
  To heights of glowing fame by dint
      Of the justly famous to be or not to be, center of the stage, two
          spotlights sizzling, when he as Hamlet soliloquizes.

  Quintilian, we are fain to say,
      Was It on oratory,
  And even in this later day
      Receives his share of glory,
  Except when elocutionists
      Our peace and comfort mangle,
  By showing how fair Bessie's wrists
      Were strained and bruised while swinging around in the belfry the
          time she said the curfew should not jangle.




RALEIGH


[Illustration]

  Sir Walter Raleigh was a man
      Of excellent deportment;
  He could advise a King or Khan
      What going into court meant;
  When Spenser wrote his Faerie Queene
      Sir Walter Raleigh said it
  Betrayed a wit both sharp and clean
      (We wonder if he read it).

  Good Queen Elizabeth one day
      Was out (perhaps for shopping),
  And Raleigh chanced along the way
      Where she in wrath was stopping.
  "How can I get across that mud?"
      She asked; and in the muddle
  Sir Walter showed his gentle blood--
      His cloak soon bridged the puddle.

  A smile replaced the good queen's frown,
      She paused there for a minute
  To set more straight the royal crown
      (It had no hat pin in it).
  And then she murmured low to Walt.:
      "Sir, you shall see my tailor."
  He answered: "If I'm worth my salt,
      Good queen, make me a sailor!"

  And so good Queen Elizabeth
      Gave him a high position--
  He drew his pay like drawing breath
      And led an expedition
  That sailed across the raging seas
      For gold and slaves and cocoa,
  And battled with the biting breeze
      Along the Orinoco.

  Alas! It may have been the cloak
      That was in mire imbedded,
  Or possibly some words he spoke
      That made him be beheaded.
  But let us learn this lesson here
      From poor Sir Walter Raleigh:
  The favor of the great, 'tis queer,
      Oft has a grim finale.




SHAKSPEARE


[Illustration]

  Shakspeare, as all of us have read,
      Once asked: "What's in a name?"
  An alias for the rose, he said,
      Would make it smell the same.
  But Shakspeare was so frivolous--
      Excuse us if we say
  That it has always seemed to us
      His work was mostly play.

  As "Shaxpere," "Shakspere," "Shaikspeare," too,
      His signature is found;
  His autographs are much too few
      To be passed all around.
  This shows the cumulative worth
      Of honest, solid fame;
  The bidders come from all the earth
      To buy his misspelled name.

  He dramatized the thrilling scene
      Where Caesar met his end,
  Where Casca, hungry, lank and lean,
      And Brutus, Caesar's friend,
  Stabbed swiftly with their daggers bright
      When Julius came in reach--
  Then Antony, thrilled at the sight,
      Arose and made a speech.

  No chorus girls were in his shows;
      In them no "social queens"
  Were given princely wage to pose
      And dignify the scenes.
  But there be those who say there are
      Odd facts that can't be passed:
  For instance, oft we see a star
      With ciphers in the cast--

  And this leads many to declare
      That Bacon wrote the shows;
  A cryptic secret hidden there
      They say they will disclose.
  It may be that each drama hoards
      A Bacon cryptogram,
  For often, proud upon the boards
      There struts and strides a ham.




TELL


[Illustration]

  The tale of Tell is simply told;
      He would not heed the tyrant,
  But, big and brave and bluffly bold
      He spurned the cold aspirant--
  He simply came out plain and flat
      And his own rights defended;
  He would not bow to Gessler's hat
      Upon the pole suspended.

  Then Gessler came upon the scene
      And ordered Tell to knuckle;
  Tell fixed him with his glances keen
      And gave a scornful chuckle.
  Then Gessler frowned and knit his brows
      (A most portentous omen);
  "Risk your boy's life or make those bows!"
      (We've lost the boy's cognomen.)

  Tell smiled, and got his trusty bow,
      Likewise his trusty arrow
  (Now, William Tell, as you should know,
      Could wing the fleeting sparrow
  Or he could truly shoot the chutes)--
      So Gessler said: "Now grapple
  With this one fact--for you the boots
      Unless you cleave the apple."

  Did Tell succeed? In your school books
      The tale is very well told,
  And Gessler looked some haughty looks
      When he heard what Bill Tell told.
  "What did you hide this arrow for?"
      Asked Gessler of the wizard.
  "I meant to split that apple, or
      I'd have to harm your gizzard!"

  That's all, except it shall endure
      As acted by Salvini.
  (But was it?) And the overture
      Composed by one Rossini
  Shall prove that Tell is not a myth
      Concocted to deceive us.
  We've seen the bow he did it with;
      We hope you will believe us.




ULYSSES


[Illustration]

  Unusually popular with mythologic misses,
      And rather wont to wander when he should have stayed at home,
  We find is why our hero, the redoubtable Ulysses,
      Went rambling into trouble when he thought that he would roam.
  Penelope, good lady, left behind in their apartment,
      Had trouble in her efforts to get cash to pay the rent--
  Telemachus, their scion, knew not then what being smart meant;
      He should have helped his mamma, but he never earned a cent.

  Ulysses, in the meantime, found the land of the Cyclopes,
      And came within an ace of being made into a stew.
  He drugged old Polyphemus, then skedaddled with: "I hope 'e's
      Laid up with indigestion," and went onward with his crew.
  From there he ambled farther till he reached the realm of Circe;
      We translate rather freely from the Odyssean log:
  "She proved to be a lady with no tenderness or mercy,
      Each comrade of Ulysses, for her sport, was made a hog."

  He got away, however, and he steered his trusty ship so
      That it would take him quickly where more trouble might be found--
  He grounded on the island of the nymph they called Calypso,
      And dallied in her presence till eight years had rolled around.
  Homesickness must have struck him not so many years thereafter;
      He sighed: "I think the time has come for me to pull my freight."
  The listeners had trouble when they tried to hold their laughter
      At thinking of how long it was before he knew 'twas late.

  Penelope, fond woman, had been wooed by many suitors;
      To each and every one of them she firmly whispered "No."
  Ulysses, on appearing, changed the suitors into scooters--
      He strode into the parlor and said: "Take your hats and go!"
  Old Homer tells us fully how Penelope received him,
      And how, to give her pleasure, all these stories he would weave:
  He also tells us solemnly Penelope believed him!
      (That portion of the Odyssey we never can believe.)




VILLON


[Illustration]

  Villon--bard of the early times,
      Familiarly called Francois--
  'Twas he who juggled so with rhymes
      That we regard him now with awe;
  His Pegasus knew "Gee" from "Haw".
      He drove with all a jockey's art
  And ran each race without a flaw--
      Villon gave these ballades their start.

  Must he flee to some safer climes?
      Did hunger at his vitals gnaw?
  Or was he jailed for varied crimes?
      In that he inspiration saw
  And, pen held in a grimy paw
      Would let his flashing fancy dart
  Ofttimes in measures rather raw--
      Villon gave these ballades their start.

  His purse was ever bare of dimes;
      He often felt the grip of law;
  Yet he, the jolliest of mimes,
      Who slept most nights upon the straw
  And wakened to the raucous caw
      Of ravens, never shirked his part;
  He never stopped at fate to jaw--
     Villon gave these ballades their start.

  L'ENVOI

  Princess, the moral's here to draw:
      When poets go into the mart
  The editors say coldly: "Pshaw!
      Villon gave these ballades their start."




WATT


[Illustration]

  When Watt was but a little boy--
  His papa's pride, his mama's joy--
  He sat beside the kitchen fire
  The bubbling teapot to admire;
  And as he watched the hissing steam
  He straightway then began to dream
  Of what the vapor hot could do
  If how to use it he but knew.

  Eventually he devised
  A neat invention which surprised
  The people of that early day--
  He made an engine, anyway.
  This poor contrivance he improved
  Until by it great loads were moved
  And horses were displaced by rails,
  While sidewheels took the place of sails.

  Observe, my child, how one small thing
  A wondrous lot of change will bring:
  Because wise little Jimmy Watt
  Could turn to some account his thought,
  Today the trains go whizzing through
  The land, and o'er the ocean blue
  The mighty ships scoot night and day
  From here to countries far away.

  Great thanks are due to this James Watt,
  Also to his mama's teapot,
  By porters who on every trip
  Hold up the tourist for a tip,
  And also by that mighty mass
  Of folks who travel on a pass,
  And by the ones who rake in rocks
  Through squeezes that they work in stocks.

  But that it would like punning seem
  We'd say Watt has the world's esteem
  (But since we've said it that way now
  We'll let the pun go, anyhow).
  But, somehow, when we chanced to stop
  Beside some busy boiler shop,
  We cannot say that peace was brought
  To all of us by Jimmy Watt.




XANTIPPE


[Illustration]

  Xantippe was the lady who was wed to Socrates--
      And their life was not a grand, sweet song;
  'Twas a study--just a study--done in all the minor keys
      With the gloomy measures turned on strong.
  When old Socrates was busy at the office, she would wait
      Till he ambled in at 3 a.m.
  And she met him in the moonlight 'twixt the doorway and the gate--
      Then the neighbors heard a lot from them.

  But Socrates--he didn't mind when she pulled out his hair,
  When she would box his ears for him he didn't seem to care--
      In a manner bland and wise
      He would then philosophize
  On the Whyness of the Whichness of the Neither Here Nor There.

  Xantippe did the cooking, and (we have to tell the truth)--
      Indigestion quickly seized on him,
  And in one of her biscuits on a time he broke a tooth,
      Yet he smiled across at wifey grim.
  When she tried her hand at pastry was the only time he spoke,
      And of course he had to make a break--
  'Twas perhaps the first appearance of the ever-lasting joke
      On the pies that mother used to make.

  Poor Socrates! He never even ducked his head or dodged
  But merely rubbed the spot whereon the flying platter lodged,
      Then he murmured: "Xanty, dear,
      You have made a problem clear"--
  Then he went to get the swelling on his cranium massaged.

  Xantippe wouldn't let him smoke at all about the place,
      And she wouldn't let him take a drink.
  He never learned the value of a two-spot or an ace--
      For 'most all that he could do was think.
  Thus you see that though Xantippe has been fiercely criticized,
      Yet she really made her husband's fame,
  For 'twas while she bossed him sorely that the great man analyzed
      All the subjects that have made his name.

  Xantippe made him famous; but for her the man had been
  Forgotten like the others of the time that he lived in.
      "Oh, my darling, such a help!"
      He most gratefully would yelp
  When she gave him an impression with a busy rolling-pin.




YVETOT


[Illustration]

  There was a king of Yvetot,
      And easy was his head,
  Serene his rest--naught would suggest
      The words so often said,
  That crowned heads are not peaceful;
      He never wore a frown--
  He laughed away the night and day.
      With gayly tilted crown.

  The jester of his palace
      Was never forced to work,
  He never had to make things glad
      With oily smile and smirk.
  This jolly king of Yvetot
      Had no need of his fool--
  He made his own jests from the throne
      And pleasure was his rule.

  He never had a quarrel
      With any other king;
  "Why should we fight?" he asked. "Delight
      Is such an easy thing."
  He told no one his troubles--
      In truth, he reigned so well
  No one could know, in fair Yvetot,
      Of troubles fit to tell.

  The little realm of Yvetot--
      A wee spot on the map--
  Has made a name secure in fame
      Because of this rare chap
  Who put his crown on sidewise
      And lolled upon his throne
  With scepter set so that it met
      His active funny bone.

  He was to war a stranger;
      His kingdom had no debt;
  Each of his laws possessed a clause
      That barred out care and fret--
  'Tis told that when expiring
      He wasted his last breath
  In one long laugh in life's behalf,
      And thus went to his death.

  There was a king of Yvetot--
      There are such kings today;
  They never sigh for things gone by
      But laugh along the way.
  So, crown yourself with laughter,
      Put pleasure on the throne,
  And you'll possess in happiness
      An Yvetot of your own.




ZENOBIA


[Illustration]

  Zenobia was empress of the people of Palmyra;
      She tried to boss the army when she should have stayed at home.
  Aurelian, the soldier, led a sort of a hegira
      Of armies up to fight her--they came all the way from Rome.

  Full soon he was pursuing them, with spears and daggers "shooing" them,
      At last he sent them to defeat and caught the doughty queen.
  He captured her regretfully, he said, but she said fretfully
      That she considered him a spiteful thing, and very, very "mean."

  He led her back a captive with her hands in jeweled fetters,
      Though she cast on Aurelian a look of proud disdain;
  Her manacles were carved and chased and decked by jewel setters,
      And to securely hold her he had made a golden chain.

  There is a lot of mystery connected with all history--
      Zenobia, they tell us, didn't want to go to jail,
  But, think of such a fate as that! Why, such a jeweled weight as that
      Was better than to pawn your clothes and be released on bail!

  Zenobia was taken to the royal Roman palace
      And there the charming prisoner, we read, was quite the rage--
  Had she lived in this time of ours (we say this without malice),
      She might have made a lasting hit by going on the stage.

  Aurelian was nice to her--he hinted more than twice to her
      That he was getting pretty tired of kinging it alone.
  You see, she might have captured him--already she enraptured him--
      And had that handcuff jewelry to wear upon the throne.

  But, no! Zenobia was like 'most any other lady--
      They've been the same since mother Eve; they have the same way still:
  No matter if it's Princess May, or Susie, Sal or Sadie,
      No lady will consent to be convinced against her will.

  At last they told her civilly, "You'll have to live in Tivoli"
      (Which may or may not be the way to speak that city's name).
  She answered very prettily: "I'll love to live in Italy"--
      And there she stayed until she was an old, forgotten dame.






End of Project Gutenberg's An Alphabet of History, by Wilbur D. Nesbit

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ALPHABET OF HISTORY ***

***** This file should be named 39626.txt or 39626.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/6/2/39626/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Paul Marshall and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
