The Project Gutenberg EBook of Exultations, by Ezra Pound

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Exultations

Author: Ezra Pound

Release Date: July 10, 2012 [EBook #40200]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXULTATIONS ***




Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(Images generously made available by the Internet Archive.)





EXULTATIONS

OF

EZRA POUND



LONDON

ELKIN MATHEWS, VIGO STREET

M CM IX



     _I am an eternal spirit and the things I_
   _make are but ephemera, yet I endure:_
     _Yea, and the little earth crumbles beneath_
   _our feet and we endure._



TO CARLOS TRACY CHESTER

"_amicitiae longaevitate_"



     I have to thank the Editors of the _English Review_ and the
     _Evening Standard_ and _St. James's Gazette_ for permission to
     include in this volume certain poems which originally appeared in
     those papers.




CONTENTS



   GUIDO INVITES YOU THUS
   NIGHT LITANY
   SANDALPHON
   SESTINA: ALTAFORTE
   PIERE VIDAL OLD
   BALLAD OF THE GOODLY FERE
   HYMN III FROM THE LATIN OF FLAMINIUS
   SESTINA FOR YSOLT
   PORTRAIT (FROM "LA MERE INCONNUE")
   FAIR HELENA
   LAUDANTES DECEM
   AUX BELLES DE LONDRES
   FRANCESCA
   GREEK EPIGRAM
   COLUMBUS' EPITAPH
   PLOTINUS
   ON HIS OWN FACE IN A GLASS
   HISTRION
   THE EYES
   DEFIANCE
   SONG
   NEL BIANCHEGGIAR
   NILS LYKKE
   A SONG OF THE VIRGIN MOTHER
   PLANH FOR THE YOUNG ENGLISH KING
   ALBA INNOMINATA
   PLANH




EXULTATIONS


   Guido invites you thus[1]


   "Lappo I leave behind and Dante too,
   Lo, I would sail the seas with thee alone!
   Talk me no love talk, no bought-cheap fiddl'ry,
   Mine is the ship and thine the merchandise,
   All the blind earth knows not th' emprise
   Whereto thou calledst and whereto I call.

   Lo, I have seen thee bound about with dreams,
   Lo, I have known thy heart and its desire;
   Life, all of it, my sea, and all men's streams
   Are fused in it as flames of an altar fire!

   Lo, thou hast voyaged not! The ship is mine."


[Footnote 1: The reference is to Dante's sonnet "Guido vorrei...."]



   Night Litany


   O Dieu, purifiez nos coeurs!
           purifiez nos coeurs!

   Yea the lines hast thou laid unto me
                  in pleasant places,
   And the beauty of this thy Venice
                  hast thou shown unto me
   Until is its loveliness become unto me
                  a thing of tears.

   O God, what great kindness
                  have we done in times past
                  and forgotten it,
   That thou givest this wonder unto us,
                  O God of waters?

   O God of the night
                  What great sorrow
   Cometh unto us,
                  That thou thus repayest us
   Before the time of its coming?

   O God of silence,
                  Purifiez nos coeurs,
                  Purifiez nos coeurs,
   For we have seen
   The glory of the shadow of the
       likeness of thine handmaid,
   Yea, the glory of the shadow
       of thy Beauty hath walked

   Upon the shadow of the waters
       In this thy Venice.
                  And before the holiness
   Of the shadow of thy handmaid
       Have I hidden mine eyes,
                  O God of waters.

   O God of silence,
                  Purifiez nos coeurs,
                  Purifiez nos coeurs,
   O God of waters,
                  make clean our hearts within us
   And our lips to show forth thy praise,
                  For I have seen the
   Shadow of this thy Venice
   Floating upon the waters,
                  And thy stars
   Have seen this thing out of their far courses
   Have they seen this thing,
                  O God of waters,
   Even as are thy stars
   Silent unto us in their far-coursing,
   Even so is mine heart
       become silent within me.

                  _Purifiez nos coeurs_
   _O God of the silence,_
                  _Purifiez nos coeurs_
   _O God of waters._



   Sandalphon


     The angel of prayer according to the Talmud stands unmoved among
     the angels of wind and fire, who die as their one song is finished,
     also as he gathers the prayers they turn to flowers in his hands.


   And these about me die,
   Because the pain of the infinite singing
   Slayeth them.
   Ye that have sung of the pain of the earth-horde's
         age-long crusading,
   Ye know somewhat the strain,
       the sad-sweet wonder-pain of such singing.
   And therefore ye know after what fashion
   This singing hath power destroying.

   Yea, these about me, bearing such song in homage
   Unto the Mover of Circles,
   Die for the might of their praising,
   And the autumn of their marcescent wings
   Maketh ever new loam for my forest;
   And these grey ash trees hold within them
   All the secrets of whatso things
   They dreamed before their praises,
   And in this grove my flowers,
   Fruit of prayerful powers,
   Have first their thought of life
                     And then their being.

   Ye marvel that I die not! _forsitan_!
   Thinking me kin with such as may not weep,
   Thinking me part of them that die for praising
   --yea, tho' it be praising,
   past the power of man's mortality to
   dream or name its phases,
   --yea, tho' it chant and paean
   past the might of earth-dwelt
   soul to think on,
   --yea, tho' it be praising
   as these the winged ones die of.

   Ye think me one insensate
                   else die I also
   Sith these about me die,
   And if I, watching

   Ever the multiplex jewel, of beryl and jasper and sapphire
   Make of these prayers of earth ever new flowers;
   Marvel and wonder!
   Marvel and wonder even as I,
   Giving to prayer new language
   And causing the works to speak
   Of the earth-horde's age-lasting longing,
   Even as I marvel and wonder, and know not,
   Yet keep my watch in the ash wood.



   Sestina: Altaforte


   LOQUITUR: _En_ Bertrans de Born.
      Dante Alighieri put this man in hell for that he was a stirrer-up
      of strife.
      Eccovi!
      Judge ye!
      Have I dug him up again?
   The scene is at his castle, Altaforte. "Papiols" is his jongleur.
   "The Leopard," the _device_ of Richard (Coeur de Lion).



   I


   Damn it all! all this our South stinks peace.
   You whoreson dog, Papiols, come! Let's to music!
   I have no life save when the swords clash.
   But ah! when I see the standards gold, vair, purple, opposing
   And the broad fields beneath them turn crimson,
   Then howl I my heart nigh mad with rejoicing.

   II

   In hot summer have I great rejoicing
   When the tempests kill the earth's foul peace,
   And the light'nings from black heav'n flash crimson,
   And the fierce thunders roar me their music
   And the winds shriek through the clouds mad, opposing,
   And through all the riven skies God's swords clash.

   III

   Hell grant soon we hear again the swords clash!
   And the shrill neighs of destriers in battle rejoicing,
   Spiked breast to spiked breast opposing!
   Better one hour's stour than a year's peace
   With fat boards, bawds, wine and frail music!
   Bah! there's no wine like the blood's crimson!

   IV

   And I love to see the sun rise blood-crimson.
   And I watch his spears through the dark clash
   And it fills all my heart with rejoicing
   And pries wide my mouth with fast music
   When I see him so scorn and defy peace,
   His lone might 'gainst all darkness opposing.

   V

   The man who fears war and squats opposing
   My words for stour, hath no blood of crimson
   But is fit only to rot in womanish peace
   Far from where worth's won and the swords clash
   For the death of such sluts I go rejoicing;
   Yea, I fill all the air with my music.

   VI

   Papiols, Papiols, to the music!
   There's no sound like to swords swords opposing,
   No cry like the battle's rejoicing
   When our elbows and swords drip the crimson
   And our charges 'gainst "The Leopard's" rush clash.
   May God damn for ever all who cry "Peace!"

   VII

   And let the music of the swords make them crimson!
   Hell grant soon we hear again the swords clash!
   Hell blot black for alway the thought "Peace"!



   Piere Vidal Old


     It is of Piere Vidal, the fool par excellence of all Provence, of
     whom the tale tells how he ran mad, as a wolf, because of his love
     for Loba of Penautier, and how men hunted him with dogs through the
     mountains of Cabaret and brought him for dead to the dwelling of
     this Loba (she-wolf) of Penautier, and how she and her Lord had him
     healed and made welcome, and he stayed some time at that court. He
     speaks:


   When I but think upon the great dead days
   And turn my mind upon that splendid madness,
   Lo! I do curse my strength
   And blame the sun his gladness;
   For that the one is dead
   And the red sun mocks my sadness.

   Behold me, Vidal, that was fool of fools!
   Swift as the king wolf was I and as strong
   When tall stags fled me through the alder brakes,
   And every jongleur knew me in his song,
   And the hounds fled and the deer fled
   And none fled over long.

   Even the grey pack knew me and knew fear.
   God! how the swiftest hind's blood spurted hot
   Over the sharpened teeth and purpling lips!
   Hot was that hind's blood yet it scorched me not
   As did first scorn, then lips of the Penautier!
   Aye ye are fools, if ye think time can blot

   From Piere Vidal's remembrance that blue night,
   God! but the purple of the sky was deep!
   Clear, deep, translucent, so the stars me seemed
   Set deep in crystal; and because my sleep
   --Rare visitor--came not,--the Saints I guerdon
   For that restlessness--Piere set to keep

   One more fool's vigil with the hollyhocks.
   Swift came the Loba, as a branch that's caught,
   Tom, green and silent in the swollen Rhone,
   Green was her mantle, close, and wrought
   Of some thin silk stuff that's scarce stuff at all,
   But like a mist wherethrough her white form fought,

   And conquered! Ah God! conquered!
   Silent my mate came as the night was still.
   Speech? Words? Faugh! Who talks of words and love?!
   Hot is such love and silent,
   Silent as fate is, and as strong until
   It faints in taking and in giving all.

   Stark, keen, triumphant, till it plays at death.
   God! she was white then, splendid as some tomb
   High wrought of marble, and the panting breath
   Ceased utterly. Well, then I waited, drew,
   Half-sheathed, then naked from its saffron sheath
   Drew full this dagger that doth tremble here.

   Just then she woke and mocked the less keen blade.
   Ah God, the Loba! and my only mate!
   Was there such flesh made ever and unmade!
   God curse the years that turn such women grey!
   Behold here Vidal, that was hunted, flayed,
   Shamed and yet bowed not and that won at last.

   And yet I curse the sun for his red gladness,
   I that have known strath, garth, brake, dale,
   And every run-way of the wood through that great madness,
   Behold me shrivelled as an old oak's trunk
   And made men's mock'ry in my rotten sadness!

   No man hath heard the glory of my days:
   No man hath dared and won his dare as I:
   One night, one body and one welding flame!
   What do ye own, ye niggards! that can buy
   Such glory of the earth? Or who will win
   Such battle-guerdon with his "prowesse high"?

   O Age gone lax! O stunted followers,
   That mask at passions and desire desires,
   Behold me shrivelled, and your mock of mocks;
   And yet I mock you by the mighty fires
   That burnt me to this ash.
             *  *  *  *  *  *  *
   Ah! Cabaret! Ah Cabaret, thy hills again!
             *  *  *  *  *  *  *
   Take your hands off me!...  [_Sniffing the air_.
                           Ha! this scent is hot!



   Ballad of the Goodly Fere[1]


    Simon Zelotes speaketh it somewhile after the Crucifixion.


   Ha' we lost the goodliest fere o' all
   For the priests and the gallows tree?
   Aye lover he was of brawny men,
   O' ships and the open sea.

   When they came wi' a host to take Our Man
   His smile was good to see,
   "First let these go!" quo' our Goodly Fere,
   "Or I'll see ye damned," says he.

   Aye he sent us out through the crossed high spears
   And the scorn of his laugh rang free,
   "Why took ye not me when I walked about
   Alone in the town?" says he.

   Oh we drank his "Hale" in the good red wine
   When we last made company,
   No capon priest was the Goodly Fere
   But a man o' men was he.

   I ha' seen him drive a hundred men
   Wi' a bundle o' cords swung free,
   That they took the high and holy house
   For their pawn and treasury.

   They'll no' get him a' in a book I think
   Though they write it cunningly;
   No mouse of the scrolls was the Goodly Fere
   But aye loved the open sea.

   If they think they ha' snared our Goodly Fere
   They are fools to the last degree.
   "I'll go to the feast," quo' our Goodly Fere,
   "Though I go to the gallows tree."

   "Ye ha' seen me heal the lame and blind,
   And wake the dead," says he,
   "Ye shall see one thing to master all:
   'Tis how a brave man dies on the tree."

   A son of God was the Goodly Fere
   That bade us his brothers be.
   I ha' seen him cow a thousand men.
   I have seen him upon the tree.

   He cried no cry when they drave the nails
   And the blood gushed hot and free,
   The hounds of the crimson sky gave tongue
   But never a cry cried he.

   I ha' seen him cow a thousand men
   On the hills o' Galilee,
   They whined as he walked out calm between,
   Wi' his eyes like the grey o' the sea.

   Like the sea that brooks no voyaging
   With the winds unleashed and free,
   Like the sea that he cowed at Genseret
   Wi' twey words spoke' suddently.

   A master of men was the Goodly Fere,
   A mate of the wind and sea,
   If they think they ha' slain our Goodly Fere
   They are fools eternally.

   I ha' seen him eat o' the honey-comb
   Sin' they nailed him to the tree.


[Footnote 1: Fere = Mate, Companion.]


_*** The Publisher desires to state that the "Ballad of the
Goodly Fere"--by the wish of the Author--is reproduced exactly
as it appeared in the "English Review."_


   Hymn III


   From the Latin of Marc Antony Flaminius, sixteenth century.


   As a fragile and lovely flower unfolds its gleaming
       foliage on the breast of the fostering earth, if
       the dew and the rain draw it forth;
   So doth my tender mind flourish, if it be fed with the
       sweet dew of the fostering spirit,
   Lacking this, it beginneth straightway to languish,
       even as a floweret born upon dry earth, if the
       dew and the rain tend it not.



   Sestina for Ysolt


   There comes upon me will to speak in praise
   Of things most fragile in their loveliness;
   Because the sky hath wept all this long day
   And wrapped men's hearts within its cloak of greyness,
   Because they look not down I sing the stars,
   Because 'tis still mid-March I praise May's flowers.

   Also I praise long hands that lie as flowers
   Which though they labour not are worthy praise,
   And praise deep eyes like pools wherein the stars
   Gleam out reflected in their loveliness,
   For whoso look on such there is no greyness
   May hang about his heart on any day.

   The other things that I would praise to-day?
   Besides white hands and all the fragile flowers,
   And by their praise dispel the evening's greyness?
   I praise dim hair that worthiest is of praise
   And dream upon its unbound loveliness,
   And how therethrough mine eyes have seen the stars.

   Yea, through that cloud mine eyes have seen the stars
   That drift out slowly when night steals the day,
   Through such a cloud meseems their loveliness
   Surpasses that of all the other flowers.
   For that one night I give all nights my praise
   And love therefrom the twilight's coming greyness.

   There is a stillness in this twilight greyness
   Although the rain hath veiled the flow'ry stars,
   They seem to listen as I weave this praise
   Of what I have not seen all this grey day,
   And they will tell my praise unto the flowers
   When May shall bid them in in loveliness.

   O ye I love, who hold this loveliness
   Near to your hearts, may never any greyness
   Enshroud your hearts when ye would gather flowers,
   Or bind your eyes when ye would see the stars;
   But alway do I give ye flowers by day,
   And when day's plucked I give ye stars for praise.

   But most, thou Flower, whose eyes are like the stars,
   With whom my dreams bide all the live-long day,
   Within thy hands would I rest all my praise.



   Portrait


   From "La Mere Inconnue."


   Now would I weave her portrait out of all dim splendour.
   Of Provence and far halls of memory,
   Lo, there come echoes, faint diversity
   Of blended bells at even's end, or
   As the distant seas should send her
   The tribute of their trembling, ceaselessly
   Resonant. Out of all dreams that be,
   Say, shall I bid the deepest dreams attend her?

   Nay! For I have seen the purplest shadows stand
   Alway with reverent chere that looked on her,
   Silence himself is grown her worshipper
   And ever doth attend her in that land
   Wherein she reigneth, wherefore let there stir
   Naught but the softest voices, praising her.



   "Fair Helena" by Rackham


   "_What I love best in all the world?_"


   When the purple twilight is unbound,
   To watch her slow, tall grace
            and its wistful loveliness,
   And to know her face
            is in the shadow there,
   Just by two stars beneath that cloud--
   The soft, dim cloud of her hair,
   And to think my voice
            can reach to her
   As but the rumour of some tree-bound stream,
   Heard just beyond the forest's edge,
   Until she all forgets I am,
   And knows of me
   Naught but my dream's felicity.



   Laudantes Decem Pulchritudinis

   Johannae Templi


   I

   When your beauty is grown old in all men's songs,
   And my poor words are lost amid that throng,
   Then you will know the truth of my poor words,
   And mayhap dreaming of the wistful throng
   That hopeless sigh your praises in their songs,
   You will think kindly then of these mad words.

   II

   I am torn, torn with thy beauty,
   O Rose of the sharpest thorn!
   O Rose of the crimson beauty,
   Why hast thou awakened the sleeper?
   Why hast thou awakened the heart within me,
   O Rose of the crimson thorn?

   III

   The unappeasable loveliness
             is calling to me out of the wind,
   And because your name
             is written upon the ivory doors,
   The wave in my heart is as a green wave, unconfined,
   Tossing the white foam toward you;
   And the lotus that pours
   Her fragrance into the purple cup,
   Is more to be gained with the foam
   Than are you with these words of mine.

   IV

   _He speaks to the moonlight concerning the Beloved_.

   Pale hair that the moon has shaken
   Down over the dark breast of the sea,
   O magic her beauty has shaken
   About the heart of me;
   Out of you have I woven a dream
   That shall walk in the lonely vale
   Betwixt the high hill and the low hill,
   Until the pale stream
   Of the souls of men quench and grow still.

   V

   _Voices speaking to the sun_.

   Red leaf that art blown upward and out and over
   The green sheaf of the world,
   And through the dim forest and under
   The shadowed arches and the aisles,
   We, who are older than thou art,
   Met and remembered when his eyes beheld her
   In the garden of the peach-trees,
   In the day of the blossoming.

   VI

   I stood on the hill of Yrma
               when the winds were a-hurrying,
   With the grasses a-bending
               I followed them,
   Through the brown grasses of Ahva
               unto the green of Asedon.
   I have rested with the voices
               in the gardens of Ahthor,
   I have lain beneath the peach-trees
               in the hour of the purple:

   Because I had awaited in
               the garden of the peach-trees,
   Because I had feared not
               in the forest of my mind,
   Mine eyes beheld the vision of the blossom
   There in the peach-gardens past Asedon.

   O winds of Yrma, let her again come unto me,
   Whose hair ye held unbound in the gardens of Ahthor!

   VII

   Because of the beautiful white shoulders and the rounded breasts
   I can in no wise forget my beloved of the peach-trees,
   And the little winds that speak when the dawn is unfurled
   And the rose-colour in the grey oak-leaf's fold

   When it first comes, and the glamour that rests
   On the little streams in the evening; all of these
   Call me to her, and all the loveliness in the world
   Binds me to my beloved with strong chains of gold.

   VIII

   If the rose-petals which have fallen upon my eyes
   And if the perfect faces which I see at times
   When my eyes are closed--
   Faces fragile, pale, yet flushed a little, like petals of roses:
   If these things have confused my memories of her
   So that I could not draw her face
   Even if I had skill and the colours,
   Yet because her face is so like these things
   They but draw me nearer unto her in my thought
   And thoughts of her come upon my mind gently,
   As dew upon the petals of roses.

   IX

   _He speaks to the rain_.

   O pearls that hang on your little silver chains,
   The innumerable voices that are whispering
   Among you as you are drawn aside by the wind,
   Have brought to my mind the soft and eager speech
   Of one who hath great loveliness,

   Which is subtle as the beauty of the rains
   That hang low in the moonshine and bring
   The May softly among us, and unbind
   The streams and the crimson and white flowers and reach
   Deep down into the secret places.

   X

   The glamour of the soul hath come upon me,
   And as the twilight comes upon the roses,
   Walking silently among them,
   So have the thoughts of my heart
   Gone out slowly in the twilight
   Toward my beloved,
   Toward the crimson rose, the fairest.



   Aux Belles de Londres


   I am aweary with the utter and beautiful weariness
   And with the ultimate wisdom and with things terrene,
   I am aweary with your smiles and your laughter,
   And the sun and the winds again
   Reclaim their booty and the heart o' me.



   Francesca


   You came in out of the night
   And there were flowers in your hands,
   Now you will come out of a confusion of people,
   Out of a turmoil of speech about you.

   I who have seen you amid the primal things
   Was angry when they spoke your name
   In ordinary places.
   I would that the cool waves might flow over my mind,
   And that the world should dry as a dead leaf,
   Or as a dandelion seed-pod and be swept away,
   So that I might find you again,
   Alone.



   Greek Epigram


   Day and night are never weary,
   Nor yet is God of creating
   For day and night their torch-bearers
   The aube and the crepuscule.

   So, when I weary of praising the dawn and the sun-set,
   Let me be no more counted among the immortals;
   But number me amid the wearying ones,
   Let me be a man as the herd,
   And as the slave that is given in barter.



   Christophori Columbi Tumulus


   From the Latin of Hipolytus Capilupus, Early Cent XVI.

   Genoan, glory of Italy, Columbus thou sure light,
   Alas the urn takes even thee so soon out-blown.
   Its little space

   Doth hold thee, whom Oceanus had not the might
   Within his folds to hold, altho' his broad embrace
   Doth hold all lands.

   Bark-borne beyond his bound'ries unto Hind thou wast
   Where scarce Fame's volant self the way had cast.



   Plotinus


   As one that would draw through the node of things,
     Back sweeping to the vortex of the cone,
     Cloistered about with memories, alone
   In chaos, while the waiting silence sings:

   Obliviate of cycles' wanderings
     I was an atom on creation's throne
     And knew all nothing my unconquered own.
   God! Should I be the hand upon the strings?!

   But I was lonely as a lonely child.
   I cried amid the void and heard no cry,
   And then for utter loneliness, made I
   New thoughts as crescent images of _me_.
   And with them was my essence reconciled
   While fear went forth from mine eternity.



   On His Own Face in a Glass


   O strange face there in the glass!
   O ribald company, O saintly host,
   O sorrow-swept my fool,
   What answer? O ye myriad
   That strive and play and pass,
   Jest, challenge, counterlie?
   I? I? I?
             And ye?



   Histrion


   No man hath dared to write this thing as yet,
   And yet I know, how that the souls of all men great
   At times pass through us,
   And we are melted into them, and are not
   Save reflexions of their souls.
   Thus am I Dante for a space and am
   One Francois Villon, ballad-lord and thief
   Or am such holy ones I may not write,
   Lest blasphemy be writ against my name;
   This for an instant and the flame is gone.

   'Tis as in midmost us there glows a sphere
   Translucent, molten gold, that is the "I"
   And into this some form projects itself:
   Christus, or John, or eke the Florentine;
   And as the clear space is not if a form's
   Imposed thereon,
   So cease we from all being for the time,
   And these, the Masters of the Soul, live on.



   The Eyes


   Rest Master, for we be a-weary, weary
   And would feel the fingers of the wind
   Upon these lids that lie over us
   Sodden and lead-heavy.

       Rest brother, for lo! the dawn is without!
   The yellow flame paleth
   And the wax runs low.

   Free us, for without be goodly colours,
   Green of the wood-moss and flower colours,
   And coolness beneath the trees.

       Free us, for we perish
   In this ever-flowing monotony
   Of ugly print marks, black
   Upon white parchment.

      Free us, for there is one
   Whose smile more availeth
   Than all the age-old knowledge of thy books:
   And we would look thereon.



   Defiance


   Ye blood-red spears-men of the dawn's array
   That drive my dusk-clad knights of dream away,
   Hold! For I will not yield.

   My moated soul shall dream in your despite
   A refuge for the vanquished hosts of night
   That _can_ not yield.



   Song


   Love thou thy dream
   All base love scorning,
   Love thou the wind
   And here take warning
   That dreams alone can truly be,
   For 'tis in dream I come to thee.



   Nel Biancheggiar


   Blue-Grey, and white, and white-of-rose,
   The flowers of the West's fore-dawn unclose.
   I feel the dusky softness whirr
   Of colour, as upon a dulcimer
   "Her" dreaming fingers lay between the tunes,
   As when the living music swoons
   But dies not quite, because for love of us
   --knowing our state
   How that 'tis troublous--
   It wills not die to leave us desolate.



   Nils Lykke


   Beautiful, infinite memories
   That are a-plucking at my heart,
   Why will you be ever calling and a-calling,
   And a-murmuring in the dark there?
   And a-reaching out your long hands
   Between me and my beloved?

   And why will you be ever a-casting
   The black shadow of your beauty
   On the white face of my beloved
   And a-glinting in the pools of her eyes?



   A Song of the Virgin Mother


   _In the play "Los Pastores de Belen."_

      From the Spanish of Lope de Vega.


   As ye go through these palm-trees
   O holy angel;
   Sith sleepeth my child here
   Still ye the branches.

   O Bethlehem palm-trees
   That move to the anger
   Of winds in their fury,
   Tempestuous voices,
   Make ye no clamour,
   Run ye less swiftly,
   Sith sleepeth the child here
   Still ye your branches.

   He the divine child
   Is here a-wearied
   Of weeping the earth-pain,
   Here for his rest would he
   Cease from his mourning,
   Only a little while,
   Sith sleepeth this child here
   Stay ye the branches.

   Cold be the fierce winds,
   Treacherous round him.
   Ye see that I have not
   Wherewith to guard him,
   O angels, divine ones
   That pass us a-flying,
   Sith sleepeth my child here
   Stay ye the branches.



   Planh for the Young English King


   _That is, Prince Henry Plantagenet, elder brother to
   Richard "Coeur de Lion."_

   From the Provencal of Bertrans de Born "Si tuit li dol elh
                      plor elh marrimen."


   If all the grief and woe and bitterness,
   All dolour, ill and every evil chance
   That ever came upon this grieving world
   Were set together they would seem but light
   Against the death of the young English King.
   Worth lieth riven and Youth dolorous,
   The world o'ershadowed, soiled and overcast,
   Void of all joy and full of ire and sadness.

   Grieving and sad and full of bitterness
   Are left in teen the liegemen courteous,
   The joglars supple and the troubadours.
   O'er much hath ta'en Sir Death that deadly warrior
   In taking from them the young English King,
   Who made the freest hand seem covetous.
   'Las! Never was nor will be in this world
   The balance for this loss in ire and sadness!

   O skilful Death and full of bitterness,
   Well mayst thou boast that thou the best chevalier
   That any folk e'er had, hast from us taken;
   Sith nothing is that unto worth pertaineth
   But had its life in the young English King,
   And better were it, should God grant his pleasure
   That he should live than many a Irving dastard
   That doth but wound the good with ire and sadness.

   From this faint world, how full of bitterness
   Love takes his way and holds his joy deceitful,
   Sith no thing is but turneth unto anguish
   And each to-day 'vails less than yestere'en,
   Let each man visage this young English King
   That was most valiant mid all worthiest men!
   Gone is his body fine and amorous,
   Whence have we grief, discord and deepest sadness.

   Him, whom it pleased for our great bitterness
   To come to earth to draw us from misventure,
   Who drank of death for our salvacioun,
   Him do we pray as to a Lord most righteous
   And humble eke, that the young English King
   He please to pardon, as true pardon is,
   And bid go in with honoured companions
   There where there is no grief, nor shall be sadness.



   Alba Innominata


   From the Provencal.


   In a garden where the whitethorn spreads her leaves
   My lady hath her love lain close beside her,
   Till the warder cries the dawn--Ah dawn that grieves!
   Ah God! Ah God! That dawn should come so soon!

   "Please God that night, dear night should never cease,
   Nor that my love should parted be from me,
   Nor watch cry 'Dawn'--Ah dawn that slayeth peace!
   Ah God! Ah God! That dawn should come so soon!

   "Fair friend and sweet, thy lips! Our lips again!
   Lo, in the meadow there the birds give song!
   Ours be the love and Jealousy's the pain!
   Ah God! Ah God! That dawn should come so soon!

   "Sweet friend and fair take we our joy again
   Down in the garden, where the birds are loud,
   Till the warder's reed astrain
   Cry God! Ah God! That dawn should come so soon!

   "Of that sweet wind that comes from Far-Away
   Have I drunk deep of my Beloved's breath,
   Yea! of my Love's that is so dear and gay.
   Ah God! Ah God! That dawn should come so soon!"

   _Envoi_.

   Fair is this damsel and right courteous,
   And many watch her beauty's gracious way.
   Her heart toward love is no wise traitorous.
   Ah God! Ah God! That dawns should come so soon!



   Planh


   _It is of the white thoughts that he saw in the Forest_.


   White Poppy, heavy with dreams,
   O White Poppy, who art wiser than love,
   Though I am hungry for their lips
           When I see them a-hiding
   And a-passing out and in through the shadows
   --There in the pine wood it is,
   And they are white, White Poppy,
   They are white like the clouds in the forest of the sky
   Ere the stars arise to their hunting.

   O White Poppy, who art wiser than love,
   I am come for peace, yea from the hunting
   Am I come to thee for peace.
   Out of a new sorrow it is,
   That my hunting hath brought me.

   White Poppy, heavy with dreams,
   Though I am hungry for their lips
           When I see them a-hiding
   And a-passing out and in through the shadows
   --And it is white they are--
   But if one should look at me with the old hunger in her eyes,
   How will I be answering her eyes?

   For I have followed the white folk of the forest.

   Aye! It's a long hunting
   And it's a deep hunger I have when I see them a-gliding
   And a-flickering there, where the trees stand apart.

   But oh, it is sorrow and sorrow
   When love dies-down in the heart.




BY THE SAME AUTHOR

Personae

_Choicely Printed at the Chiswick Press on fine paper. Foolscap Octavo,
2s. 6d. net_

SOME EARLY REVIEWS

_The Observer_ says:--"It is something, after all, intangible and
indescribable that makes the real poetry. Criticism and praise alike
give no idea of it Everyone who pretends to know it when he sees it,
should read and keep this little book."

_The Bookman_:--"No new book of poems for years past has had such a
freshness of inspiration, such a strongly individual note, or been more
alive with undoubtable promise."

_The Daily Chronicle_:--" All his poems are like this, from beginning to
end, and in every way, his own, and in a world of his own. For brusque
intensity of effect we can hardly compare them to any other work. It is
the old miracle that cannot be defined, nothing more than a subtle
entanglement of words, so that they rise out of their graves and sing."

From a 3 1/2 page detailed critique, by Mr. Edward Thomas, in _The
English Review_.--"He has ... hardly any of the superficial good
qualities of modern versifiers;... He has not the current melancholy or
resignation or unwillingness to live; nor the kind of feeling for nature
that runs to minute description and decorative metaphor. He cannot be
usefully compared with any living writers;... full of personality and
with such power to express it, that from the first to the last lines of
most of his poems he holds us steadily in his own pure, grave,
passionate world.... The beauty of it ('In praise of Ysolt') is the
beauty of passion, sincerity and intensity, not of beautiful words and
images and suggestions;... the thought dominates the words and is
greater than they are. Here ('Idyl for Glaucus') the effect is full of
human passion and natural magic, without any of the phrases which a
reader of modern verse would expect in the treatment of such a subject.
This admirable poet...."

_The Oxford Magazine_:--"This is a most exciting book of poems."

_The Evening Standard_:--"A queer little book which will irritate many
readers."

_The Morning Post_:--" Mr. Ezra Pound ... immediately compels our
admiration by his fearlessness and lack of self-consciousness."

_The Isis_(Oxford):--"This book has about it the breath of the open
air,... physically and intellectually the verse seems to reproduce the
personality with a brief fulness and adequacy. It is only in flexible,
lithe measures, such as those which Coventry Patmore chose in his
'Unknown Eros,' and Mr. Pound chooses here that a fully suitable form
for the recital of spiritual experience is to be found. Mr. Pound has a
true and invariable feeling for the measures he employs ... this
wonderful little book...."

_The Daily Telegraph_:--"A poet with individuality.... Thread of true
beauty.... lifts it out of the ruck of those many volumes, the writers
or which toe the line of poetic convention, and please for no more than
a single reading."

_Mr. Punch_, concerning a certain Mr. Ezekiel Ton:--"By far the newest
poet going, whatever other advertisements may say;" and announced as
"the most remarkable thing in poetry since Robert Browning," says:--"He
has succeeded where all others have failed, in evolving a blend of the
imagery of the unfettered west, the vocabulary of Wardour Street, and
the sinister abandon of Borgaic Italy."

Mr. Scott-James, in _The Daily News_:--"At first the whole thing may
seem to be mere madness and rhetoric, a vain exhibition of force and
passion without beauty. But, as we read on, these curious metres of his
seem to have a law and order of their own; the brute force of Mr.
Pound's imagination seems to impart some quality of infectious beauty to
his words.... With Mr. Pound there is no eking out of thin sentiment
with a melody or a song. He writes out of an exuberance of incontinently
struggling ideas and passionate convictions.... He plunges straight into
the heart of his theme, and suggests virility in action combined with
fierceness, eagerness, and tenderness.... he has individuality, passion,
force, and an acquaintance with things that are profoundly moving." Mr.
Scott-James begins his half-column review of Mr. Pound's book with a
remark that he would "Like much more space in which to discuss his
work," and also notes a certain use of spondee and dactyl which "Comes
in strangely and, as we first read it, with the appearance of discord,
but afterwards seems to gain a curious and distinctive vigour."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Exultations, by Ezra Pound

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXULTATIONS ***

***** This file should be named 40200.txt or 40200.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/2/0/40200/

Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(Images generously made available by the Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
