The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Modern Railroad, by Edward Hungerford

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Modern Railroad

Author: Edward Hungerford

Release Date: July 15, 2012 [EBook #40242]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MODERN RAILROAD ***




Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)









THE MODERN RAILROAD




[Illustration: READY FOR THE DAY'S RUN]




  THE MODERN RAILROAD


  BY EDWARD HUNGERFORD
  AUTHOR OF "LITTLE CORKY," "THE MAN WHO STOLE A
  RAILROAD," ETC.


  WITH MANY ILLUSTRATIONS
  FROM PHOTOGRAPHS


  CHICAGO
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1911




  COPYRIGHT
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1911

  Published November, 1911
  Entered at Stationers' Hall, London, England


  PRESS OF THE VAIL COMPANY
  COSHOCTON, U. S. A.




  TO MY FATHER
  IN RECOGNITION OF HIS
  INTEREST AND APPRECIATION
  THIS BOOK
  IS DEDICATED




PREFACE


To bring to the great lay mind some slight idea of the intricacy and the
involved detail of railroad operation is the purpose of this book. Of the
intricacies and involved details of railroad finance and railroad
politics; of the quarrels between the railroads, the organizations of
their employees, the governmental commissions, or the shippers, it says
little or nothing. These difficult and pertinent questions have been and
still are being competently discussed by other writers.

The author wishes to acknowledge the courtesy of the editors and
publishers of _Harper's Monthly_, _Harper's Weekly_, _The Saturday Evening
Post_, and _Outing_ in permitting the introduction into this work of
portions or entire articles which he has written for them in the past. He
would also feel remiss if he did not publish his sincere acknowledgments
to "The American Railway," a compilation from _Scribner's Magazine_,
published in 1887, Mr. Logan G. McPherson's "The Workings of the
Railroad," Mr. C. F. Carter's "When Railroads Were New," and Mr. Frank H.
Spearman's "The Strategy of Great Railroads." Out of a sizable reference
library of railroad works, these volumes were the most helpful to him in
the preparation of certain chapters of this book.

E. H.

  BROOKLYN, NEW YORK,
  _August 1, 1911_.




CONTENTS


                                                                      PAGE
  CHAPTER I

  THE RAILROADS AND THEIR BEGINNINGS                                     1

    Two great groups of railroads; East to West, and North to
    South--Some of the giant roads--Canals--Development of the
    country's natural resources--Railroad projects--Locomotives
    imported--First locomotive of American manufacture--Opposition
    of canal-owners to railroads--Development of Pennsylvania's
    anthracite mines--The merging of small lines into systems.

  CHAPTER II

  THE GRADUAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE RAILROAD                               15

    Alarm of canal-owners at the success of railroads--The making of
    the Baltimore & Ohio--The "Tom Thumb" engine--Difficulties in
    crossing the Appalachians--Extension to Pittsburgh--Troubles of
    the Erie Railroad--This road the first to use the telegraph--The
    prairies begin to be crossed by railways--Chicago's first
    railroad, the Galena & Chicago Union--Illinois Central--Rock
    Island, the first to span the Mississippi--Proposals to run
    railroads to the Pacific--The Central Pacific organized--It and
    the Union Pacific meet--Other Pacific roads.

  CHAPTER III

  THE BUILDING OF A RAILROAD                                            34

    Cost of a single-track road--Financing--Securing a charter--
    Survey-work and its dangers--Grades--Construction--Track-laying.

  CHAPTER IV

  TUNNELS                                                               48

    Their use in reducing grades--The Hoosac Tunnel--The use of
    shafts--Tunnelling under water--The Detroit River tunnel.

  CHAPTER V

  BRIDGES                                                               56

    Bridges of timber, then stone, then steel--The Starucca
    Viaduct--The first iron bridge in the United States--Steel
    bridges--Engineering triumphs--Different types of railroad
    bridge--The deck span and the truss span--Suspension
    bridges--Cantilever bridges--Reaching the solid rock with
    caissons--The work of "sand-hogs"--The cantilever over the Pend
    Oreille River--Variety of problems in bridge-building--Points in
    favor of the stone bridge--Bridges over the Keys of Florida.

  CHAPTER VI

  THE PASSENGER STATIONS                                                80

    Early trains for suburbanites--Importance of the towerman--
    Automatic switch systems--The interlocking machine--Capacities
    of the largest passenger terminals--Room for locomotives,
    car-storage, etc.--Storing and cleaning cars--The concourse--
    Waiting-rooms--Baggage accommodations--Heating--Great
    development of passenger stations--Some notable stations in
    America.

  CHAPTER VII

  THE FREIGHT TERMINALS AND THE YARDS                                  107

    Convenience of having freight stations at several points in a
    city--The Pennsylvania Railroad's scheme at New York as an
    example--Coal handled apart from other freight--Assorting the
    cars--The transfer house--Charges for the use of cars not
    promptly returned to their home roads--The hard work of the
    yardmaster.

  CHAPTER VIII

  THE LOCOMOTIVES AND THE CARS                                         119

    Honor required in the building of a locomotive--Some of the
    early locomotives--Some notable locomotive-builders--Increase
    of the size of engines--Stephenson's air-brake--The workshops--
    The various parts of the engine--Cars of the old-time--
    Improvements by Winans and others--Steel cars for freight.

  CHAPTER IX

  REBUILDING A RAILROAD                                                138

    Reconstruction necessary in many cases--Old grades too heavy--
    Curves straightened--Tunnels avoided--These improvements
    required especially by freight lines.

  CHAPTER X

  THE RAILROAD AND ITS PRESIDENT                                       152

    Supervision of the classified activities--Engineering,
    operating, maintenance of way, etc.--The divisional system as
    followed in the Pennsylvania Road--The departmental plan as
    followed in the New York Central--Need for vice-presidents--The
    board of directors--Harriman a model president--How the
    Pennsylvania forced itself into New York City--Action of a
    president to save the life of a laborer's child--"Keep right on
    obeying orders"--Some railroad presidents compared--High
    salaries of presidents.

  CHAPTER XI

  THE LEGAL AND FINANCIAL DEPARTMENTS                                  170

    Functions of general counsel, and those of general attorney--A
    shrewd legal mind's worth to a railroad--The function of the
    claim-agent--Men and women who feign injury--The secret service
    as an aid to the claim-agent--Wages of employees the greatest of
    a railroad's expenditures--The pay-car--The comptroller or
    auditor--Division of the income from through tickets--Claims for
    lost or damaged freight--Purchasing-agent and store-keeper.

  CHAPTER XII

  THE GENERAL MANAGER                                                  187

    His duty to keep employees in harmonious actions--"The
    superintendent deals with men; the general manager with
    superintendents"--"The general manager is really king"--Cases
    in which his power is almost despotic--He must know men.

  CHAPTER XIII

  THE SUPERINTENDENT                                                   202

    His headship of the transportation organism--His manner of
    dealing with an offended shipper--His manner with commuters--His
    manner with a spiteful "kicker"--A dishonest conductor who had a
    "pull"--A system of demerits for employees--Dealing with
    drunkards--With selfish and covetous men.

  CHAPTER XIV

  OPERATING THE RAILROAD                                               220

    Authority of the chief clerk and that of the assistant
    superintendent--Responsibilities of engineers, firemen, master
    mechanic, train-master, train-despatcher--Arranging the
    time-table--Fundamental rules of operation--Signals--Selecting
    engine and cars for a train--Clerical work of conductors--A trip
    with the conductor--The despatcher's authority--Signals along
    the line--Maintenance of way--Superintendent of bridges and
    buildings--Road-master--Section boss.

  CHAPTER XV

  THE FELLOWS OUT UPON THE LINE                                        243

    Men who run the trains must have brain as well as muscle--Their
    training--From farmer's boy to engineer--The brakeman's
    dangerous work--Baggagemen and mail clerks--Hand-switchmen--The
    multifarious duties of country station-agents.

  CHAPTER XVI

  KEEPING THE LINE OPEN                                                256

    The wrecking train and its supplies--Floods dammed by an
    embankment--Right of way always given to the wrecking-train--
    Expeditious work in repairing the track--Collapse of the roof of
    a tunnel--Telegraph crippled by storms--Winter storms the
    severest test--Trains in quick succession help to keep the line
    open in snowstorms--The rotary plough.

  CHAPTER XVII

  THE G. P. A. AND HIS OFFICE                                          276

    He has to keep the road advertised--Must be an after-dinner
    orator, and many-sided--His geniality, urbanity, courtesy--
    Excessive rivalry for passenger traffic--Increasing luxury in
    Pullman cars--Many printed forms of tickets, etc.

  CHAPTER XVIII

  THE LUXURY OF MODERN RAILROAD TRAVEL                                 292

    Special trains provided--Private cars--Specials for actors,
    actresses, and musicians--Crude coaches on early railroads--
    Luxurious old-time sleeping-cars--Pullman's sleepers made at
    first from old coaches--His pioneer--The first dining-cars--The
    present-day dining-cars--Dinners, _table d'hote_ and _a la
    carte_--_Cafe_-cars--Buffet-cars--Care for the comfort of women.

  CHAPTER XIX

  GETTING THE CITY OUT INTO THE COUNTRY                                311

    Commuters' trains in many towns--Rapid increase in the volume of
    suburban travel--Electrification of the lines--Long Island
    Railroad almost exclusively suburban--Varied distances of
    suburban homes from the cities--Club-cars for commuters--
    Staterooms in the suburban cars--Special transfer commuters.

  CHAPTER XX

  FREIGHT TRAFFIC                                                      325

    Income from freight traffic greater than from passenger--
    Competition in freight rates--Afterwards a standard rate-sheet--
    Rate-wars virtually ended by the Interstate Commerce Commission
    classification of freight into groups--Differential freight
    rates--Demurrage for delay in emptying cars--Coal traffic--
    Modern methods of handling lard and other freight.

  CHAPTER XXI

  THE DRAMA OF THE FREIGHT                                             343

    Fast trains for precious and perishable goods--Cars invented for
    fruits and for fish--Milk trains--Systematic handling of the
    cans--Auctioning garden-truck at midnight--A historic city
    freight-house.

  CHAPTER XXII

  MAKING TRAFFIC                                                       355

    Enticing settlers to the virgin lands of the West--Emigration
    bureaus--Railways extended for the benefit of emigrants--The
    first continuous railroad across the American continent--
    Campaigns for developing sparsely settled places in the West--
    Unprofitable branch railroads in the East--Development of
    scientific farming--Improved farms are traffic-makers--New
    factories being opened--How railroad managers have developed
    Atlantic City.

  CHAPTER XXIII

  THE EXPRESS SERVICE AND THE RAILROAD MAIL                            369

    Development of express business--Railroad conductors the first
    mail and express messengers--William F. Harnden's express
    service--Postage rates--Establishment and organization of great
    express companies--Collection and distribution of express
    matter--Relation between express companies and railroads--
    Beginnings of post-office department--Statistics--Railroad mail
    service--Newspaper delivery--Handling of mail matter--Growth of
    the service.

  CHAPTER XXIV

  THE MECHANICAL DEPARTMENTS                                           388

    Care and repair of cars and engines--The locomotive cleaned and
    inspected after each long journey--Frequent visits of engines to
    the shops and foundries at Altoona--The table for testing the
    power and speed of locomotives--The car shops--Steel cars
    beginning to supersede wooden ones--Painting a freight car--Lack
    of method in early repair shops--Search for flaws in wheels.

  CHAPTER XXV

  THE RAILROAD MARINE                                                  404

    Steamship lines under railroad control--Fleet of New York
    Central--Tugs--Railroad connections at New York harbor--Handling
    of freight--Ferry-boats--Tunnel under Detroit River--Car-ferries
    and lake routes--Great Lakes steamship lines under railroad
    control.

  CHAPTER XXVI

  KEEPING IN TOUCH WITH THE MEN                                        418

    The first organized branch of the Railroad Y. M. C. A.--
    Cornelius Vanderbilt's gift of a club-house--Growth of the
    Railroad Y. M. C. A.--Plans by the railways to care for the sick
    and the crippled--The pension system--Entertainments--Model
    restaurants--Free legal advice--Employees' magazines--The Order
    of the Red Spot.

  CHAPTER XXVII

  THE COMING OF ELECTRICITY                                            432

    Electric street cars--Suburban cars--Electric third-rail from
    Utica to Syracuse--Some railroads partially adopt electric
    power--The benefit of electric power in tunnels--Also at
    terminal stations--Conditions which make electric traction
    practical and economical--Hopeful outlook for electric
    traction--The monorail and the gyroscope car, invented by Louis
    Brennan--A similar invention by August Scherl.

  APPENDIX                                                             449

    Efficiency through Organization.

  INDEX                                                                465




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                      PAGE

  Ready for the day's run                                   _Frontispiece_

  An early locomotive built by William Norris for the
  Philadelphia & Reading Railroad                                       18

  The historic "John Bull" of the Camden & Amboy
  Railroad--and its train                                               18

  A heavy-grade type of locomotive built for the Baltimore
  & Ohio Railroad in 1864. Its flaring stack was typical of
  those years                                                           19

  Construction engineers blaze their way across the face of
  new country                                                           38

  The making of an embankment by dump-train                             39

  "Small temporary railroads peopled with hordes of restless
  engines"                                                              39

  Cutting a path for the railroad through the crest of the
  high hills                                                            44

  A giant fill--in the making                                           44

  The finishing touches to the track                                    45

  This machine can lay a mile of track a day                            45

  "Sometimes the construction engineer ... brings his line
  face to face with a mountain"                                         52

  Finishing the lining of a tunnel                                      52

  The busiest tunnel point in the world--at the west portals
  of the Bergen tunnels, six Erie tracks below, four
  Lackawanna above                                                      53

  The Hackensack portals of the Pennsylvania's great tunnels
  under New York City                                                   53

  Concrete affords wonderful opportunities for the
  bridge-builders                                                       68

  The Lackawanna is building the largest concrete bridge in
  the world across the Delaware River at Slateford, Pa.                 68

  The bridge-builder lays out an assembling-yard for
  gathering together the different parts of his new
  construction                                                          69

  The new Brandywine Viaduct of the Baltimore & Ohio, at
  Wilmington, Del.                                                      69

  The Northwestern's monumental new terminal on the West
  Side of Chicago                                                       82

  The Union Station at Washington                                       83

  A model American railroad station--the Union Station of
  the New York Central, Boston & Albany, Delaware & Hudson,
  and West Shore railroads at Albany                                   102

  The classic portal of the Pennsylvania's new station in
  New York                                                             102

  The beautiful concourse of the new Pennsylvania Station,
  in New York                                                          103

  "The waiting-room is the monumental and artistic
  expression of the station"--the waiting-room of the Union
  Depot at Troy, New York                                              103

  Something over a million dollars' worth of passenger cars
  are constantly stored in this yard                                   114

  A scene in the great freight-yards that surround Chicago             114

  The intricacy of tracks and the "throat" of a modern
  terminal yard: South Station, Boston, and its approaches             115

  One of the "diamond-stack" locomotives used on the
  Pennsylvania Railroad in the early seventies                         126

  Prairie type passenger locomotive of the Lake Shore
  Railroad                                                             126

  Pacific type passenger locomotive of the New York Central
  lines                                                                126

  Atlantic type passenger locomotive, built by the
  Pennsylvania Railroad at its Altoona shops                           126

  One of the great Mallet pushing engines of the Delaware &
  Hudson Company                                                       127

  A ten-wheeled switching locomotive of the Lake Shore
  Railroad                                                             127

  Suburban passenger locomotive of the New York Central
  lines                                                                127

  Consolidation freight locomotive of the Pennsylvania
  system                                                               127

  Where Harriman stretched the Southern Pacific in a
  straight line across the Great Salt Lake                             140

  Line revision on the New York Central--tunnelling through
  the bases of these jutting peaks along the Hudson River
  does away with sharp and dangerous curves                            140

  Impressive grade revision on the Union Pacific in the
  Black Hills of Wyoming. The discarded line may be seen at
  the right                                                            141

  The old and the new on the Great Northern--the "William
  Crooks," the first engine of the Hill system, and one of
  the newest Mallets                                                   154

  The Southern Pacific finds direct entrance into San
  Francisco for one of its branch lines by tunnels piercing
  the heart of the suburbs                                             155

  Portal of the abandoned tunnel of the Alleghany Portage
  Railroad near Johnstown, Pa., the first railroad tunnel in
  the United States                                                    155

  The freight department of the modern railroad requires a
  veritable army of clerks                                             176

  The farmer who sued the railroad for permanent injuries--
  as the detectives with their cameras found him                       177

  Oil-burning locomotive on the Southern Pacific system                190

  The steel passenger coach such as has become standard upon
  the American railroad                                                190

  Electric car, generating its own power by a gasoline
  engine                                                               190

  Both locomotive and train--gasoline motor car designed for
  branch line service                                                  190

  The biggest locomotive in the world: built by the Santa Fe
  Railroad at its Topeka shops                                         191

  The conductor is a high type of railroad employee                    208

  The engineer--oil-can in hand--is forever fussing at his
  machine                                                              208

  Railroad responsibility does not end even with the track
  walker                                                               209

  The fireman has a hard job and a steady one                          209

  How the real timetable of the division looks--the one used
  in headquarters                                                      222

  The electro-pneumatic signal-box in the control tower of a
  modern terminal                                                      228

  The responsible men who stand at the switch-tower of a
  modern terminal: a large tower of the "manual" type                  228

  "When winter comes upon the lines the superintendent will
  have full use for every one of his wits"                             229

  Watchful signals guarding the main line of a busy railroad           229

  "When the train comes to a water station the fireman gets
  out and fills the tank"                                              248

  A freight-crew and its "hack"                                        248

  A view through the span of a modern truss bridge gives an
  idea of its strength and solidity                                    249

  The New York Central is adopting the new form of "Upper
  quadrant" signal                                                     249

  The wrecking train ready to start out from the yard                  262

  "Two of these great cranes can grab a wounded Mogul
  locomotive and put her out of the way"                               262

  "The shop-men form no mean brigade in this industrial army
  of America"                                                          263

  "Winter days when the wind-blown snow forms mountains upon
  the tracks"                                                          272

  "The despatcher may have come from some lonely country
  station"                                                             273

  "The superintendent is not above getting out and bossing
  the wrecking-gang once in a great while"                             273

  The New York Central Railroad is building a new Grand
  Central Station in New York City, for itself and its
  tenant, the New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad                  284

  The concourse of the new Grand Central Station, New York,
  will be one of the largest rooms in the world                        284

  South Station, Boston, is the busiest railroad terminal in
  the world                                                            285

  The train-shed and approach tracks of Broad Street
  Station, Philadelphia, still one of the finest of American
  railroad passenger terminals                                         285

  Connecting drawing-room and stateroom                                296

  "A man may have as fine a bed in a sleeping-car as in the
  best hotel in all the land"                                          296

  "You may have the manicure upon the modern train"                    297

  "The dining-car is a sociable sort of place"                         297

  An interior view of one of the earliest Pullman
  sleeping-cars                                                        302

  Interior of a standard sleeping-car of to-day                        303

  "Even in winter there is a homely, homey air about the
  commuter's station"                                                  314

  Entrance to the great four-track open cut which the Erie
  has built for the commuter's comfort at Jersey City                  314

  A model way-station on the lines of the Boston & Albany
  Railroad                                                             315

  The yardmaster's office--in an abandoned switch-tower                315

  "The inside of any freight-house is a busy place"                    328

  St. John's Park, the great freight-house of the New York
  Central Railroad in down-town New York                               328

  The great ore-docks of the West Shore Railroad at Buffalo            329

  The great bridge of the New York Central at Watkins Glen             340

  Building the wonderful bridge of the Idaho & Washington
  Northern over the Pend Oreille River, Washington                     341

  Inside the West Albany shops of the New York Central:
  picking up a locomotive with the travelling crane                    350

  A locomotive upon the testing-table at the Altoona shops
  of the Pennsylvania                                                  350

  "The roundhouse is a sprawling thing"                                351

  Denizens of the roundhouse                                           351

  "In the Far West the farm-train has long since come into
  its own"                                                             360

  "Even in New York State the interest in these itinerant
  agricultural schools is keen, indeed"                                361

  Interior of the dairy demonstration car of an agricultural
  train                                                                361

  The famous Thomas Viaduct, on the Baltimore & Ohio at
  Relay, Md., built by B. H. Latrobe in 1835, and still in
  use                                                                  366

  The historic Starucca Viaduct upon the Erie                          366

  The cylinders of the Delaware & Hudson Mallet                        367

  The interior of this gasoline-motor-car on the Union
  Pacific presents a most unusual effect, yet a maximum of
  view of the outer world                                              367

  A portion of the great double-track Susquehanna River
  bridge of the Baltimore & Ohio--a giant among American
  railroad bridges                                                     372

  "In summer the brakemen have pleasant enough times of
  railroading"                                                         373

  A famous cantilever rapidly disappearing--the substitution
  of a new Kentucky river bridge for the old, on the Queen &
  Crescent system                                                      373

  Triple-phase, alternating current locomotive built by the
  General Electric Co. for use in the Cascade Tunnel, of the
  Great Northern Railway                                               390

  Heavy service, alternating and direct current freight
  locomotive built by the Westinghouse Company for the New
  York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad                                  390

  The monoroad in practical use for carrying passengers at
  City Island, New York                                                391

  The cigar-shaped car of the monoroad                                 391

  A modern railroad freight and passenger terminal: the
  terminal of the West Shore Railroad at Weehawken, opposite
  New York City                                                        406

  High-speed, direct-current passenger locomotive built by
  the General Electric Company for terminal service of the
  New York Central at the Grand Central Station                        407

  This is what New York Central McCrea did for the men of
  the Canadian Pacific up at Kenora                                    420

  A clubhouse built by the Southern Pacific for its men at
  Roseville, California                                                420

  The B. & O. boys enjoying the Railroad Y. M. C. A.,
  Chicago Junction                                                     421

  "The Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company has organized a brass
  band for its employees"                                              421

  A high-speed electric locomotive on the Pennsylvania
  bringing a through train out of the tunnel underneath the
  Hudson River and into the New York City terminal                     434

  High-speed, direct-current locomotive built by the
  Westinghouse Company for the terminal service of the
  Pennsylvania Railroad, in New York                                   434

  Two triple-phase locomotives of the Great Northern Railway
  helping a double-header steam train up the grade into the
  Cascade Tunnel                                                       435

  The outer shell of the New Haven's freight locomotive
  removed, showing the working parts of the machine                    435




_The railroad is a monster. His feet are dipped into the navigable seas,
and his many arms reach into the uplands. His fingers clutch the treasures
of the hills--coal, iron, timber--all the wealth of Mother Earth. His busy
hands touch the broad prairies of corn, wheat, fruits--the yearly produce
of the land. With ceaseless activity he brings the raw material that it
may be made into the finished. He centralizes industry. He fills the ships
that sail the seas. He brings the remote town in quick touch with the busy
city. He stimulates life. He makes life._

_His arms stretch through the towns and over the land. His steel muscles
reach across great rivers and deep valleys, his tireless hands have long
since burrowed their way through God's eternal hills. He is here, there,
everywhere. His great life is part and parcel of the great life of the
nation._

_He reaches an arm into an unknown country, and it is known! Great tracts
of land that were untraversed become farms; hillsides yield up their
mineral treasure; a busy town springs into life where there was no
habitation of man a little time before, and the town becomes a city.
Commerce is born. The railroad bids death and stagnation begone. It
creates. It reaches forth with its life, and life is born._

_The railroad is life itself!_




THE MODERN RAILROAD




CHAPTER I

THE RAILROADS AND THEIR BEGINNINGS

    TWO GREAT GROUPS OF RAILROADS; EAST TO WEST, AND NORTH TO SOUTH--SOME
    OF THE GIANT ROADS--CANALS--DEVELOPMENT OF THE COUNTRY'S NATURAL
    RESOURCES--RAILROAD PROJECTS--LOCOMOTIVES IMPORTED--FIRST LOCOMOTIVE
    OF AMERICAN MANUFACTURE--OPPOSITION OF CANAL-OWNERS TO RAILROADS--
    DEVELOPMENT OF PENNSYLVANIA'S ANTHRACITE MINES--THE MERGING OF SMALL
    LINES INTO SYSTEMS.


Fifteen or twenty great railroad systems are the overland carriers of the
United States. Measured by corporations, known by a vast variety of
differing names, there are many, many more than these. But this great
number is reduced, through common ownership or through a common purpose in
operation, to less than a score of transportation organisms, each with its
own field, its own purposes, and its own ambitions.

The greater number of these railroads reach from east to west, and so
follow the natural lines of traffic within the country. Two or three
systems--such as the Illinois Central and the Delaware & Hudson--run at
variance with this natural trend, and may be classed as cross-country
routes. A few properties have no long-reaching routes, but derive their
incomes from the transportation business of a comparatively small
exclusive territory, as the Boston & Maine in Northern New England, the
New Haven in Southern New England, both of them recently brought under a
more or less direct single control, and the Long Island. Still other
properties find their greatest revenue in bringing anthracite coal from
the Pennsylvania mountains to the seaboard, and among these are the
Lackawanna, the Lehigh Valley, the Central Railroad of New Jersey, and the
Philadelphia & Reading systems.

The very great railroads of America are the east and west lines. These
break themselves quite naturally into two divisions--one group east of the
Mississippi River, the other west of that stream. The easterly group aim
to find an eastern terminal in and about New York. Their western arms
reach Chicago and St. Louis, where the other group of transcontinentals
begin.

Giants among these eastern roads are the Pennsylvania and the New York
Central. Of lesser size, but still ranking as great railroads within this
territory are the Chesapeake & Ohio, the Baltimore & Ohio, and the Erie.
Several of the anthracite roads enjoy through connections to Chicago and
St. Louis, breaking at Buffalo as an interchange point, about half way
between New York and Chicago. There are important roads in the South,
reaching between Gulf points and New York and taking care of the traffic
of the centres of the section, now rapidly increasing its industrial
importance.

The western group of transcontinental routes are the giants in point of
mileage. The eastern roads, serving a closely-built country, carry an
almost incredible tonnage; but the long, gaunt western lines are reaching
into a country that has its to-morrow still ahead. Of these, the so-called
Harriman lines--the Southern Pacific and the Union Pacific--occupy the
centre of the country, and reach from the Mississippi to the Pacific. The
Santa Fe and the Gould roads share this territory.

To the north of the Harriman lines, J. J. Hill has his wonderful group of
railroads, the Burlington, the Great Northern, and the Northern Pacific,
together reaching from Chicago to the north Pacific coast. Still farther
north Canada has her own transcontinental in the Canadian Pacific Railway,
another approaching completion in the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway. The
"Grangers" (so called from their original purpose as grain carriers), that
occupy the eastern end of this western territory,--the St. Paul, the Gould
lines, the Northwestern and the Rock Island--are just now showing
pertinent interest in reaching the Pacific, with its great Oriental trade
in its infancy. The first two of these have already laid their rails over
the great slopes of the Rocky Mountains and so it is that the building of
railroads in the United States is nowhere near a closed book at the
present time.

The better to understand the causes that went to the making of these great
systems, it may be well to go back into the past, to examine the eighty
years that the railroad has been in the making. These busy years are
illuminating. They tell with precise accuracy the development of American
transportation. Yet, as we can devote to them only a few brief pages, our
review of them must be cursory.

When the Revolution was completed and the United States of America firmly
established as a nation, the people began to give earnest attention to
internal improvement and development. Under the control of a distant and
unsympathetic nation there had been very little encouragement for
development; but with an independent nation all was very different. The
United States began vaguely to realize their vast inherent wealth. How to
develop that wealth was the surpassing problem. It became evident from the
first that it must depend almost wholly on transportation facilities. To
appreciate the dimensions of this problem it must be understood that at
the beginning of the last century a barrel of flour was worth five dollars
at Baltimore. It cost four dollars to transport it to that seaport from
Wheeling; so it follows, that flour must be sold at Wheeling at one dollar
a barrel for the Baltimore market. With a better form of transportation it
would cost a dollar a barrel to carry the flour from Wheeling to
Baltimore, making the price of the commodity at the first of these points
under transit facilities four dollars a barrel. It did not take much of
that sort of reasoning to make the States appreciate from the very first
that a great effort must be made toward development. That effort, having
been made, brought its own reward.

The very first efforts toward transportation development lay in the canal
works. Canals had already proved their success in England and within
Continental Europe, and their introduction into the United States
established their value from the beginning. Some of the earliest of these
were built in New England before the Revolution. After the close of that
conflict many others were planned and built. The great enterprise of the
State of New York in planning and building the Erie, or Grand Canal, as it
was at first called, from Albany to Buffalo--from Atlantic tidewater to
the navigable Great Lakes was a tremendous stimulus to similar enterprises
along the entire seaboard. Canals were built for many hundreds of miles,
and in nearly every case they proved their worth at the outset. Canals
were also projected for many, many hundreds of additional miles, for the
success of the earliest of these ditches was a great encouragement to
other investments of the sort, even where there existed far less necessity
for their construction. Then there was a halt to canal-building for a
little time.

The invention of the steamboat just a century ago was an incentive
indirectly to canal growth but there were other things that halted the
minds of farsighted and conservative men. Canals were fearfully expensive
things; likewise, they were delicate works, in need of constant and
expensive repairs to keep them in order. Moreover, there were many winter
months in which they were frozen and useless. It was quite clear to these
farsighted men from the outset that the canal was not the real solution of
the transportation problem upon which rested the internal development of
the United States.

They turned their attention to roads. But, while roads were comparatively
easy to maintain and were possible routes of communication the entire year
round, they could not begin to compare with the canals in point of tonnage
capacity, because of the limitations of the drawing power of animals. Some
visionary souls experimented with sail wagons, but of course with no
practical results.

At this time there came distinct rumors from across the sea of a new
transportation method in England--the railroad. The English railroads were
crude affairs built to handle the products of the collieries in the
northeast corner of the country, to bring the coal down to the docks. But
there came more rumors--of a young engineer, one Stephenson, who had
perfected some sort of a steam wagon that would run on rails--a locomotive
he called it,--and there was to be one of these railroads built from
Stockton to Darlington to carry passengers and also freight. These reports
were of vast interest to the earnest men who were trying to solve this
perplexing problem of internal transportation. Some of them, who owned
collieries up in the northeastern portion of Pennsylvania and who were
concerned with the proposition of getting their product to tidewater, were
particularly interested. These gentlemen were called the Delaware & Hudson
Company, and they had already accomplished much in building a hundred
miles of canal from Honesdale, an interior town, across a mountainous land
to Kingston on the navigable Hudson River. But the canal, considered a
monumental work in its day, solved only a part of the problem. There still
remained the stiff ridge of the Moosic Mountain that no canal work might
ever possibly climb.

To the Delaware & Hudson Company, then, the railroad proposition was of
absorbing interest, of sufficient interest to warrant it in sending
Horatio Allen, one of the canal engineers, all the way to England for
investigation and report. Allen was filled with the enthusiasm of youth.
He went prepared to look into a new era in transportation.

In the meantime other railroad projects were also under way in the
country, short and crude affairs though they were. As early as 1807 Silas
Whitney built a short line on Beacon Hill, Boston, which is accredited as
being the first American railroad. It was a simple affair with an inclined
plane which was used to handle brick; and it is said that it was preceded
twelve years by an even more crude tramway, built for the same purpose.
Another early short length of railroad was built by Thomas Leiper at his
quarry in Delaware County, Pennsylvania. It has its chief interest from
the fact that it was designed by John Thomson, father of J. Edgar Thomson,
who became at a much later day president of the Pennsylvania Railroad
Company, and who is known as one of the master minds in American
transportation progress. Similar records remain of the existence of a
short line near Richmond, Va., built to carry supplies to a powder mill,
and other lines at Bear Creek Furnace, Pennsylvania, and at Nashua, N. H.
But the only one of these roads that seems to have attained a lasting
distinction was one built by Gridley Bryant in 1826 to carry granite for
the Bunker Hill Monument from the quarries at Quincy, Mass., to the docks
four miles distant. This road was built of heavy wooden rails attached in
a substantial way to stone sleepers imbedded in the earth. It attained
considerable distinction and became of such general interest that a public
house was opened alongside its rails to accommodate sightseers from afar
who came to see it. This railroad continued in service for more than a
quarter of a century.

But the motive power of all these railroads was the horse; and it was
patent from the outset that the horse had neither the staying nor the
hauling powers to make him a real factor in the railroad situation. So
when Horatio Allen returned to New York from England in January, 1829,
with glowing accounts of the success of the English railroads, he found
the progressive men of the Delaware & Hudson anxiously awaiting an
inspection of the _Stourbridge Lion_, the first of four locomotives
purchased by Allen for importation into the United States. Three of these
machines were from the works of Foster, Rastrick & Co., of Stourbridge;
the fourth was the creation of Stephenson's master hand. The _Lion_
arrived in May of that year, and after having been set up on blocks and
fired for the benefit of a group of scientific men in New York it was
shipped by river and canal to Honesdale.

Allen placed the _Stourbridge Lion_--which resembled a giant grasshopper
with its mass of exterior valves, and joints--on the crude wooden track of
the railroad, which extended over the mountain to Carbondale, seventeen
miles distant. A few days later--the ninth of August, to be exact--he ran
the _Lion_, the first turning of an engine wheel upon American soil.
Details of that scene have come easily down to to-day. The track was built
of heavy hemlock stringers on which bars of iron, two and a quarter inches
wide and one-half an inch thick were spiked. The engine weighed seven
tons, instead of three tons, as had been expected. It so happened that the
rails had become slightly warped just above the terminal of the railroad,
where the track crossed the Lackawaxen Creek on a bending trestle. Allen
had been warned against this trestle and his only response was to call for
passengers upon the initial ride. No one accepted. There was a precious
Pennsylvania regard shown for the safety of one's neck. So, after running
the engine up and down the coal dock for a few minutes, Allen waved
good-bye to the crowd, opened his throttle wide open and dashed away from
the village around the abrupt curve and over the trembling trestle at a
rate of ten miles an hour. The crowd which had expected to see the engine
derailed, broke into resounding cheers. The initial trial of a locomotive
in the United States had served to prove its worth.

The career of the _Stourbridge Lion_ was short lived. It hauled coal cars
for a little time at Honesdale; but it was too big an engine for so slight
a railroad, and it was soon dismantled. Its boiler continued to serve the
Delaware & Hudson Company for many years at its shops on the hillside
above Carbondale. The fate of the three other imported English locomotives
remains a mystery. They were brought to New York and stored, eventually to
find their way to the scrap heap in some unknown fashion.

Mr. Allen held no short-lived career. His experiments with the locomotive
ranked him as a railroad engineer of the highest class, and before the
year 1829 closed he was made chief engineer of what was at first known as
the Charleston & Hamburg Railroad, and afterwards as the South Carolina
Railroad. This was an ambitious project, designed to connect the old
Carolina seaport with the Savannah River, one hundred and thirty-six miles
distant. It achieved its greatest fame as the railroad which first
operated a locomotive of American manufacture.

This engine, called the _Best Friend of Charleston_, was built at the West
Point Foundry in New York City and was shipped to Charleston in the Fall
of 1830. It was a crude affair, and on its trial trip, on November 2, of
that year, it sprung a wheel out of shape and became derailed. Still it
was a beginning; and after the wheels had been put in good shape it
entered into regular service, which was more than the _Stourbridge Lion_
had ever done. It could haul four or five cars with forty or fifty
passengers at a speed of from fifteen to twenty-five miles an hour, so the
Charleston & Hamburg became the first of our steam railroads with a
regular passenger service. A little later, a bigger and better engine,
also of American manufacture and called the _West Point_, was sent down
from New York.

Word of these early railroad experiments travelled across the country as
if by some magic predecessor of the telegraph. Other railroad projects
found themselves under way. Another colliery railroad, a marvellous thing
of planes and gravity descents, was built at Mauch Chunk in the Lehigh
Valley, and this stout old road is in use to-day as a passenger-carrier.

But it was already seen that the future of the railroad was not to be
limited to quarries or collieries. Up in New England the railroad fever
had taken hold with force; and in 1831, construction was begun on the
Boston & Lowell Railroad. This line was analogous to the Manchester &
Liverpool, which proved itself from the beginning a tremendous
money-earner. Boston, a seaport of sixty thousand inhabitants was to be
linked with Lowell, then possessing but six thousand inhabitants. Still,
even in those days, Lowell had developed to a point that saw fifteen
thousand tons of freight and thirty-seven thousand passengers handled
between the two cities over the Middlesex Canal in 1829.

Then there developed the first of a new sort of antagonism that the
railroad was to face. The owners of the canals were keen-sighted enough to
discover a dangerous new antagonist in the railroads. They protested to
the Legislature that their charter gave them a monopoly of the carrying
privileges between Boston and Lowell, and for two years they were able to
strangle the ambitions of the proposed railroad. This fight was a type of
other battles that were to follow between the canals and the railroads.
The various lines that reached across New York State from Albany to
Buffalo, paralleling the Erie Canal, were once prohibited from carrying
freight, for fear that the canal's supremacy as a carrier might be
disturbed. The Baltimore & Ohio Railroad, struggling to blaze a path
toward the West, was for a long time halted by the Chesapeake & Ohio
Canal, which proposed to hold to its monopoly of the valley of the
Potomac.

The Boston & Lowell, however, conquered its obstacles and was finally
opened to traffic, June 26, 1835. Within a few months similar lines
reaching from Boston to Worcester on the west, and Providence on the south
had also been opened. By 1839 Boston & Worcester had been extended through
to Springfield on the Connecticut River, where it connected with the
Western Railroad, extending over the Berkshires to Greenbush, opposite
Albany. The Providence Road was rapidly extended through to Stonington,
Connecticut. From that point fast steamboats were operated through to New
York, and a quick line of communication was established between Boston and
New York. Before that time the fastest route between these two cities had
been by steamboat to Norwich, then by coach over the post-road up to
Boston. Norwich saw the railroad take away its supremacy in the through
traffic. Finally it awoke to its necessity, and arranged to build a
railroad to reach the existing line at Providence.

Between New York and Philadelphia railroad communication came quickly into
being, the first route opened being the Camden & Amboy, which terminated
at the end of a long ferry ride from New York. Even after more direct
routes had been established and the Delaware crossed at Trenton, it was
many years before the trains ran direct from Jersey City into the heart of
the Quaker City. The cars from New York used to stop at Tacony,
considerably above the city and there was still a steamboat ride down the
river.

The railroad route to Baltimore was only a partial one. A steamboat took
the traveller to New Castle, Delaware, where a short pioneer railroad
crossed to French Town, Maryland. After that there was another long
steamboat ride down the flat reaches of the Chesapeake Bay before
Baltimore was finally reached. A little later there developed an all-rail
route between Philadelphia and Baltimore although not upon the line of the
present most direct route.

From Philadelphia an early double-track railroad extended west to
Columbia, upon the Susquehanna River. An early route extended due north
from Baltimore to York, and then to Harrisburg; the parent stem of what
afterwards became the Northern Central. A branch from this line was
extended through to Columbia, and the New Castle and French Town route
lost popularity.

But the Columbia and Philadelphia route was destined to more important
things than merely affording an all-rail route to Baltimore. At Columbia
it connected with the important Pennsylvania State system of internal
canals and railroads, affording a direct line of communication with
Pittsburgh and the headwaters of the Ohio River.

This was accomplished by use of a canal through to Hollidaysburgh upon the
east slope of the Alleghanies, and the well-famed Alleghany Portage
Railroad over the summit of those mountains to Johnstown, where another
canal reached down into Pittsburgh and enjoyed unexampled prosperity from
1834 to 1854. The Alleghany Portage railroad was a solidly constructed
affair and its rails after the fashion of almost all railroads of that day
were laid upon stone sleepers, rows of which may still be seen where the
long-since abandoned railroad found its path across the mountains. The
Portage Railroad was operated by the most elaborate system of inclined
planes ever put to service within the United States; one has only to turn
to the pages of Dickens's "American Notes" to read:

    "We left Harrisburg on Friday. On Sunday morning we arrived at the
    foot of the mountain, which is crossed by railroad. There are ten
    inclined planes, five ascending and five descending; the carriages are
    dragged up the former and slowly let down the latter by means of
    stationary engines, the comparatively level spaces between being
    traversed sometimes by horse and sometimes by engine power, as the
    case demands.... The journey is very carefully made, however, only two
    carriages travelling together; and while proper precaution is taken,
    is not to be dreaded for its dangers."

The Portage Railroad was the first to surmount the Alleghanies although in
course of time its elaborate system of planes disappeared, as they
disappeared elsewhere, under the development of the locomotive.

An interesting feature of the operation of the eastern end of this route
of communication across the Keystone State, which was afterwards to
develop into the mighty Pennsylvania Railroad, was the communal nature of
the enterprise. The railroad was regarded as a highway. Any person was
supposedly free to use its rails for the hauling of his produce in his own
cars. The theory of the Columbia & Philadelphia Railroad was simply that
of an improved turnpike. For ten years after the opening of the line in
1834, the horse-teams of private freight haulers alternated upon the
tracks between steam locomotives hauling trains. A team of worn-out horses
hauling a four-wheeled car, loaded with farm produce could, and frequently
did keep a passenger train hauled by a steam locomotive fretting along for
hours behind it. In the end the use of horses was abolished on the
Philadelphia & Columbia--the name of the road had been reversed--and in
1857 the road was sold by the State to the newly organized Pennsylvania
Railroad Company. The Pennsylvania had already built a through rail route
from Columbia over the Alleghanies, and, by the aid of the wonderful Horse
Shoe Curve and the Gallitzin Tunnel, through to Pittsburgh; it had created
its shop-town of Altoona and abandoned for all time the Alleghany Portage
Railroad. But before the consolidation came to pass, two companies had
been organized to control freight-carrying upon the tracks of the
Philadelphia & Columbia Railroad. One of these was the People's line, the
other the Union line; and in them was the germ of the private car lines,
which in recent years have become so vexed a problem to the Interstate
Commerce Commission.

There were other short railroad lines in Pennsylvania, most of them built
to bring the products of the rapidly developing anthracite district down
to tidewater. Across New York State another chain of little railroads,
which were in their turn to become the main stem of one of America's
mightiest systems, was under construction. The first of this chain to be
built was the Mohawk & Hudson, extending from the capital city of Albany,
by means of a sharply graded plane, to a tableland which brought it in
turn to a descending plane at Schenectady. At this last city it enjoyed a
connection with the Erie Canal, and for a time the packet-boat men hailed
the new railroad as a great help to their trade. It shortened a great
time-taking bend in the canal, and helped to popularize that waterway just
so much as a passenger carrier.

Afterwards the packet-boat men thought differently. Hardly had the Mohawk
& Hudson been opened on August 9, 1831, by an excursion trip behind the
American built locomotive _DeWitt Clinton_, when the railroad fever took
hold of New York State as hard as the canal fever had taken hold of it but
a few years before. Railroads were planned everywhere and some of them
were built. Men began to dream of a link of railroads all the way through
from Albany to Buffalo and even the troubles of a decade, marked with a
monumental financial crash, could not entirely avail to stop
railroad-building. The railroads came, step by step; one railroad from
Schenectady to Utica, another from that pent-up city to Syracuse, still
another from Syracuse to Rochester. From Rochester separate railroads led
to Tonawanda and Niagara Falls; to Batavia, Attica, and Buffalo. But the
panic of '37 was a hard blow to ambitious financial schemes, and it was
six years thereafter before the all-rail route from Albany to Buffalo was
a reality.

Even after that it was a crude sort of affair. At several of the large
towns across the State the continuity of the rails was broken. Utica was
jealous of this privilege and defended it on one occasion through a
committee of eminent draymen, 'bus-drivers, and inn-keepers, who went down
to Albany to keep two of the early routes from making rail connections
within her boundaries. At Rochester there was a similar break, wherein
both passengers and freight had to be transported by horses across the
city from the railroad that led from the east to the railroad that led
towards the west. This matter of carrying passengers across a city has
always stimulated local pride. Along in the fifties Erie, Pa., waged a
bitter war to prevent the Lake Shore Railroad from making its gauge
uniform through that city and abandoning a time-honored transfer of
passengers and freight there.

But there seems to be no stopping of the hand of ultimate destiny in
railroading. The little weak roads across the Empire State were first
gathered into the powerful New York Central, and after a time they were
permitted to carry freight, the privilege denied them a long time because
of the power of the Erie Canal. After a little longer time there was a
great bridge built across the Hudson River at Albany, and soon after the
close of the Civil War shrewd old Commodore Vanderbilt brought the
railroad that had been built up the east shore of the Hudson, his pet New
York & Harlem, and the merged chain of railroads across the State, into
the New York Central & Hudson River Railroad, his great lifework. That
system spread itself steadily. It built a new short line from Syracuse to
Rochester, another from Batavia to Buffalo. It absorbed and it
consolidated; gradually it sent its tentacles over the entire imperial
strength of New York State.




CHAPTER II

THE GRADUAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE RAILROAD

    ALARM OF CANAL-OWNERS AT THE SUCCESS OF RAILROADS--THE MAKING OF THE
    BALTIMORE & OHIO--THE "TOM THUMB" ENGINE--DIFFICULTIES IN CROSSING THE
    APPALACHIANS--EXTENSION TO PITTSBURGH--TROUBLES OF THE ERIE
    RAILROAD--THIS ROAD THE FIRST TO USE THE TELEGRAPH--THE PRAIRIES BEGIN
    TO BE CROSSED BY RAILWAYS--CHICAGO'S FIRST RAILROAD, THE GALENA &
    CHICAGO UNION--ILLINOIS CENTRAL--ROCK ISLAND, THE FIRST TO SPAN THE
    MISSISSIPPI--PROPOSALS TO RUN RAILROADS TO THE PACIFIC--THE CENTRAL
    PACIFIC ORGANIZED--IT AND THE UNION PACIFIC MEET--OTHER PACIFIC ROADS.


All the railroad projects already related were timid projects in the
beginning, with hardly a thought of ultimate greatness. Yet there were
men, even in the earliest days of railroading, whose minds winged to great
enterprises, whose dreams were empire-wide. Of such men was the Baltimore
& Ohio born.

Baltimore, like Philadelphia, had greedily watched the success of the Erie
Canal upon its completion, and noted with alarm its possible effects upon
its own wharves. Philadelphia, with the wealth of the great State of
Pennsylvania behind, had sought to protect herself by the construction of
the long links of canal and railroad to Pittsburgh, of which you have
already read. But Baltimore had no great State to call to her support. She
must look to herself for strength. Out of her eminent necessity for
self-preservation came men of the strength and the fibre to meet the
emergency. Baltimore might have retreated from the situation, as some of
the New England towns had retreated from it, and become a somnolent
reminiscence of a prosperous Colonial seaport. She did nothing of the
sort. Instead she made herself the terminal and inspiration of a great
railroad, laid the foundations of a great and lasting growth.

The Baltimore & Ohio Railroad was born February 12, 1827. On the evening
of that day, a little group of citizens of the sturdy old Southern
metropolis gathered at the house of George Brown. Mr. Brown together with
Philip E. Thomas, a distinguished merchant and philanthropist of
Baltimore, had been making investigation into the possibilities of
railroads. The fact that the Chesapeake & Ohio Canal, which was already
well advanced in construction, would have its eastern terminus at the
Potomac River, near Washington, brought no comfort to the merchants of
Baltimore. Wonder not then, that the stern old traders of that city
assembled to consider "the best means of restoring to the city of
Baltimore that portion of the western trade which has lately been diverted
from it by the introduction of steam navigation and other causes." From
that February day to this the corporate title of the Baltimore & Ohio has
been unchanged, despite the career of the most extreme vicissitudes--long
years of shadows that were almost complete despair, other years that were
brilliant with success.

It was decided at the outset that the commercial supremacy of Baltimore
rested on her conquest of the Appalachian Mountains, of her reaching by an
easy artificial highway the almost limitless waterways of the West that
linked themselves with the navigable Ohio. But for the beginning it was
agreed that Cumberland, long an important point on the well-famed National
Highway, and even then a centre in the coal traffic, was a far enough
distant goal to be worthy of the most ambitious enterprise. Indeed a long
cutting through a hill in the first section of the road proved a serious
financial obstacle to the directors of the struggling railroad. But these
last were men who persevered. They started to lay their track for the
thirteen miles from Baltimore to Ellicott's Mills on July 4, 1828. That
occasion was honored by an old-time celebration in which the chief figure
was Charles Carroll, of Carrollton, who laid the first stone of the new
line. After his services were finished he said to a friend:

"I consider this among the most important things of my life, second only
to the signing of the Declaration of Independence, if even it be second to
that." Of that act President Hadley, of Yale, has written: "One man's life
formed the connecting link between the political revolution of the one
century and the industrial revolution of the other."

No sooner had actual construction begun on the new line, than the
directors found themselves beset by many difficulties. Their enterprise
was then so unusual, that they went blindly, stumbling ahead in the dark.
Even the construction of the track itself was experimental. It was first
planned to use wooden rails hewn from oak, and these were to be mounted
upon stone sleepers set in a rock ballast. The money spent in such track
was obviously wasted. All such construction had to be torn out before the
traffic was at all sizable, and replaced by iron rails and wooden
sleepers.

But the track was the least of the company's problems. It had gone ahead
to build a railroad with a very vague conception as to its permanent
motive-power. It was soon seen there, too, that horses were out of the
question for hauling the passengers and freight any considerable distance.
The Baltimore & Ohio Company gravely experimented at one time with a car
which was carried before the wind by means of mast and sail.

Sturdy old Peter Cooper, of New York, finally solved that motive-power
problem. He had been induced to buy three thousand acres of land in the
outskirts of Baltimore for speculation. Requests sent by his Baltimore
partners for remittances, for taxes and other charges, became so frequent
that he went to the Maryland city to investigate. One glance showed him
that the future of his investment rested upon the future of the
struggling little railroad which was trying to poke its nose west from
Baltimore. He came to the aid of its directors in their problem of
motive-power.

That problem consisted, for one thing, in the practical use of a
locomotive around curves of 400 feet radius. Cooper went back to New York,
bought an engine with a single cylinder, rigged it on a car--not larger
than a hand-car, geared it to the wheels of that car and solved the chief
problem of the B. & O. His little engine--the _Tom Thumb_--was a primitive
enough affair, but it pointed the way to these Baltimore merchants who
were pinning their entire faith to their railroad project.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two years after the beginning of the work, "brigades" of horse-cars were
in regular service to Ellicott's Mills; by the first of December, 1831,
trains--steam-drawn--ran through to Frederick, Md.; five months later, to
a day, they had reached Point of Rocks on the Potomac, seventy miles from
Baltimore. At Point of Rocks the road was halted for a long time. The
power of the powerful Chesapeake & Ohio Canal, which had been great enough
to keep State or national grants from struggling railroads, was raised to
defend its claim to a monopoly of the Potomac Valley, by right of
priority. This right was sustained in the courts, and the railroad held
back two years, until it could buy a compromise.

In 1835, a highly profitable branch was opened to Washington, while early
in the following year, trains were running through to Harpers Ferry, at
the mouth of the Shenandoah.

During that same Summer of 1835, definite steps were taken toward the
extension of the railroad to Pittsburgh, as well as Wheeling. But it was
three years later before the struggling company was ready to make a
surveying reconnaissance of these extensions of the road. All through that
time actual construction work was slowly but quite surely progressing
westward from Harpers Ferry, and on November 5, 1842, trains entered
Cumberland, the one-time objective point of the enterprise.

[Illustration: AN EARLY LOCOMOTIVE BUILT BY WILLIAM NORRIS FOR THE
PHILADELPHIA & READING RAILROAD]

[Illustration: THE HISTORIC "JOHN BULL" OF THE CAMDEN & AMBOY
RAILROAD--AND ITS TRAIN]

[Illustration: A HEAVY-GRADE TYPE OF LOCOMOTIVE BUILT FOR THE BALTIMORE &
OHIO RAILROAD IN 1864. ITS FLARING STACK WAS TYPICAL OF THOSE YEARS]

But beyond Cumberland the road gradually left the comfortable valley of
the Potomac, and these early railroad builders found themselves confronted
with new difficulties. To build a railroad across the range of the
Appalachians, with the primitive methods and machinery of those days was
no simple task. For nine years the construction work dragged. In 1851 the
line had only been finished to Piedmont, twenty-nine miles west of
Cumberland, and its builders were well-nigh discouraged. Let us quote from
the ancient history of the B. & O., from which we derive these facts, in
an exact paragraph:

    "In the Fall of 1851, the Board found themselves, almost without
    warning, in the midst of a financial crisis, with a family of more
    than 5,000 laborers and 1,200 horses to be provided for, while their
    treasury was rapidly growing weaker. The commercial existence of the
    city of Baltimore depended on the prompt and successful prosecution of
    the unfinished road."

In October, 1852, it was found that there had been expended for
construction west of Cumberland, $7,217,732.51. But the road was going
ahead once more. Its Board had dug deep into their pockets and the
commercial crisis that hovered over Baltimore was passed. Two years later
the road entered Wheeling, and its corporate title was no longer a
misnomer.

A little later, a more direct line was built to Parkersburg, West
Virginia, and direct connection entered with the Ohio & Mississippi
Railroad, which reached St. Louis. The railroad was beginning to feel its
way out across the land.

War between North and South had been declared before the long delayed
extension to Pittsburgh was finished. In that time a real master-hand had
come to the Baltimore & Ohio. In its early days the names of Philip E.
Thomas, Peter Cooper, Ross Winans, and B. H. Latrobe were indissolubly
linked with this pioneer railroad; in its second era John W. Garrett gave
brilliancy to its administration. Even before, as well as throughout the
four trying years of the war, when the road's tracks were being repeatedly
torn up and its bridges burned, Mr. Garrett was laying down his masterly
policy of expansion. It was a discouraging beginning that confronted him.
The two expensive extensions to the Ohio River had been a severe drain on
the company's treasury, traffic was at low ebb, the great financial panic
of 1857 had been hard to surmount.

But Mr. Garrett was one of the first of American railroaders to see that a
trunk-line should start at the seaboard and end at Chicago or the
Mississippi. He pushed his line to Pittsburgh, to Cleveland, to Sandusky,
to Chicago. It began to reach new and growing traffic centres. The
Baltimore & Ohio entered upon an era of magnificent prosperity.

The first cloud upon that era came in the early seventies, when its
powerful rival, the Pennsylvania, secured control of the Philadelphia,
Wilmington & Baltimore, the B. & O.'s connecting link on its immensely
profitable through route from New York to Washington. Pennsylvania
interests tunnelled for long miles through the rocky foundations of
Baltimore, purchased an independent line to Washington--the Baltimore &
Potomac--and the B. & O. found itself deprived of its best congested
traffic district. For eleven years it was unable to retaliate, though not
a soul believed the Baltimore & Ohio to be other than a splendid,
conservative property. It owned its own sleeping-car company, its own
express company, its own telegraph company. The name of Garrett was behind
it. Logan G. McPherson says:

    "When it was desired to obtain additional funds, bonds were always
    issued instead of the capital stock being increased. Interest on bonds
    has always to be met, whereas dividends on stocks can be passed. It
    was announced, however, that the retention of the stock
    capitalization at less than fifteen millions of dollars was an
    evidence of conservatism, as the continuance of semi-annual dividends
    of five per cent was thereby permitted."

John W. Garrett died in 1884, and was succeeded in the presidency by his
son Robert Garrett, who announced himself ready to continue a policy of
expansion. The younger Garrett sought to regain an entrance for his
traffic to New York. To that end he built a line into Philadelphia and
prepared to strike across the State of New Jersey. He failed in that end
by the failure of one of his confidential aides; the line that he had
counted on for entrance into the American metropolis was snapped up by his
greatest rival just as his own fingers were almost upon it. Later the B. &
O. was permitted a trackage entrance into Jersey City, but the terms of
that entrance were so stringent as to mean a practical surrender upon its
part.

If Baltimore & Ohio had won that battle, a different story might have been
chronicled. As it was, it stood a loser in a fearfully expensive fight;
the English investors in the property became investigators--of a sudden
the bottom dropped out of things. The stock went slipping down as only a
mob-chased stock in Wall Street can drop; the road that had been the pride
of Baltimore became, for the moment, her shame. It was shown, upon
investigation, that the road had long gone upon a slender standing:
millions of dollars that should actually have been charged to loss had
been charged against its capital and included in the surplus. Ten years
after Mr. Garrett's death the road found itself in even more bitter
straits. It was a laughing stock and a reproach among railroad men. Its
profitable side-properties--the sleeping-car company, the express company,
the telegraph company,--the first two of which should never be permitted
to go outside of the control of any really great railroad company--had
been sold, one after another, in attempts to save the day of reckoning.
Just before the Chicago Fair the road reached low-water mark. Its
passenger cars were weather-beaten and ravaged almost beyond hope of
paint-shops; it was sometimes necessary to hold outgoing trains in the
famous old Camden station at Baltimore, until the lamps and drinking
glasses could be secured from some incoming train. In that day of
low-water mark it was actually and seriously proposed to abandon the
passenger service of the road!

Out of that chaos came the B. & O. of to-day, a substantial and
well-managed railroad property. Mr. Garrett was the first of the
railroaders to construct a single property from the Atlantic seaboard to
the Mississippi; John F. Cowan, L. F. Loree, Oscar G. Murray, and Daniel
Willard have been his successors in the revamping of the B. & O.,
eliminating its costly grades, enlarging yard and terminal facilities, and
making the historic road a carrier of the first class.

       *       *       *       *       *

The history of the Erie Railroad is hardly less dramatic than that of the
Baltimore & Ohio; its financial disasters were not owing to the errors
that come of crass stupidity. For the Erie did its good part in the making
of railroad law. Built and operated in the earliest railroad days as a
single enterprise through the southern tier of counties of New York State
from the Hudson River to Lake Erie, while the roads to the north that were
eventually to be welded by Commodore Vanderbilt into the great New York
Central were still quarrelling among themselves, it was wrecked time and
time again by unscrupulous schemes of high finance. It was made to wear
mill-stones in the shape of outrageous bonded indebtednesses that acted as
a fearful handicap for many years and prevented a remarkably well located
property from standing to-day as the peer of the Pennsylvania or of the
New York Central. The story of these outrages has been told and
retold--they are integral parts of the financial history of the country.
Suffice it to say here and now that the Erie has been operated with more
or less success by no less than four struggling corporations; that it has
never come closer to achieving success than under its present president,
F. D. Underwood; and that no one save those who have stood close to
Underwood has known or appreciated the heritage of handicap that was given
to him to shoulder. For it has been part of our railroad principle in this
country--a mighty sad part, too--that no matter how villainously stocks
and bonds may have been issued at any time--only to bring failure swiftly
and inevitably,--such bogus paper has always been protected in
reorganization. A railroad which becomes bankrupt cannot be abandoned.
That has been done only in rare cases. Even the Baltimore & Ohio, at the
end of its rope less than twenty years ago, was not permitted to abandon
its passenger service. It must pull itself up out of the difficulties,
and--in America at least--it must pull its trashy paper up too, in order
that no holder of such paper may be unprotected. The paper can no more be
abandoned than the right-of-way. The result is seen in railroads
staggering under vast and questionable capitalization (there is no
cleaning of the slate); but the sins of those that have gone before are
truly visited upon the third and the fourth generation, as well as upon
the poor humans who, under such burdens, are trying to operate a railroad
property.

From the beginning the story of Erie has been a story of difficulties. The
original scheme of building a New York railroad from Piermont-on-Hudson to
Dunkirk on Lake Erie--some 450 miles--seems in the face of the resources
of the State at that time and the engineering difficulties to be solved,
almost quixotic. But the road was built step by step, section by section,
until in May, 1851, a triumphal first train was operated over its entire
length. President Fillmore was the guest of honor on the train, but shared
attention with Daniel Webster on the trip. Webster, in order that he might
see the country, insisted on making the entire tedious journey in a
rocking-chair, which was lashed upon a flat-car. Another flat-car was
occupied by a railroad officer who was designated to receive the flags. C.
F. Carter, in his interesting sketch on the early days of the Erie,
writes:

    "By a singular coincidence, the ladies at every one of the more than
    sixty stations between Piermont and Dunkirk had conceived the idea
    that it would be as original as it was appropriate to present a flag
    wrought by their own fair hands to the railroad company when the first
    train passed through to Lake Erie. As it would have consumed
    altogether too much time to make a stop for each of these flag
    presentations, the engineer merely slowed down at three-fourths of the
    stations long enough to permit the man on the flat-car to scoop up the
    banners in his arms, much like the hands on the old-fashioned Marsh
    harvesters gathered up armfuls of grain for binding. At the end of the
    journey the Erie Railroad had a collection of flags that would have
    done credit to a victorious army."

Mr. Carter has also told how in that same eventful year 1851 the telegraph
came into use on the Erie, first of all railroads: A crude telegraph line,
built for commercial purposes, had been stretched along the eastern end of
the road. People did not think very much of the telegraph in those days.
It was only seven years old; and when a man wired another man he wrote his
message like a letter, beginning with "Dear sir" and ending with "Yours
truly." The railroads scorned its use. Their trains ran by hard and fast
train rules. Then, as now, north and east-bound trains held the
right-of-way over those south and west-bound, and the meeting places on
single-track lines were each carefully designated on the time-card. If a
train was waiting for another coming in an opposite direction, and the
train came not after an hour, the first train proceeded forward "under
flag." That meant that a man, walking with a flag in his hand preceded the
train to protect it. The locomotive and its train of cars necessarily
proceeded at snail's pace.

It was not so very long after that observation-car trip that Daniel
Webster took in the rocking-chair up to Dunkirk, before the Erie's
superintendent, Charles Minot, was taking a trip up over the east end of
the road. The train on which he was riding was due to meet a west-bound
express at Turner's. After waiting nearly an hour there, without seeing
the opposing train, Minot was seized with an inspiration. He telegraphed
up the line fourteen miles to Goshen to hold that west-bound train until
he should arrive there. He then ordered his train-crew to proceed. They
rebelled. Engineer Isaac Lewis had too much regard for his own precious
neck to break the time-card rules, even under the superintendent's orders.
So finally Minot took charge of the engine himself, while Lewis cautiously
seated himself in the last seat of the last car and awaited the worst.

It never came, of course. When they reached Goshen, the agent had received
the message, and was prepared to hold the west-bound train. But it had not
arrived, and Minot by repeating his method was enabled first to reach
Middletown and then Port Jervis before meeting the delayed train. By the
use of the telegraph he had saved his own train some three hours in
running time; and it was not long thereafter until the operation of trains
by telegraph order became standard on the Erie and all others of the early
railroads.

At the beginning, one of the promoters of the Erie announced his belief
that the road would eventually earn, by freight alone, "some two hundred
thousand dollars in a year," and his neighbors laughed at him for his
extravagant promise. Yet, in the first six months' operation of the road
the receipts--mostly from freight--were $1,755,285.

To tell the full story of Erie would require a sizable book. It has not
yet been told. It is a story of intrigue and deceit, of trickery and of
scheming; the story of Daniel Drew and Jim Fisk and Jay Gould; the
monumental tragedy of the wrecking of a great railroad property--a
property with possibilities that probably will never now be realized. The
present management of the road has labored valiantly and well. It has seen
the future of Erie as a great freighting road, has carefully laid its
lines for the full development of the property as a carrier of goods,
rather than of through passengers.

       *       *       *       *       *

The history of the railroad divides itself sharply into epochs. In the
beginning, the different roads--such as Erie, Pennsylvania, Baltimore &
Ohio, and New York Central--were being pushed west over the Alleghany
Mountains to the Great Lakes and the Ohio River. There followed an era
where the railroads were reaching Chicago and St. Louis. That was the era
which saw the weird railroads of the Middle West, the strange
stock-watering companies that made the very names of Ohio, Michigan, and
Illinois financial bywords in the late forties and the early fifties. The
first railroad in Ohio was the old Mad River & Lake Erie, which was built
in 1835, from Sandusky, south about a hundred miles to Columbus, the State
capital. The pioneer engine on the road, the _Sandusky_, was the first
locomotive ever equipped with a whistle.

The first railroad of the prairies was the Northern Cross railroad--now a
part of the Wabash--extending from Merodosia on the Illinois River, to
Springfield. It was started in 1837, and late in the following fall a
locomotive built by Rogers, Grosvenor, and Ketchum of Paterson, N.
J.,--the founders of a famous locomotive works--was landed from a
packet-steamer at Merodosia. Then was the first puff of a locomotive heard
upon the prairies of the great West. A contemporary account says:

    "The little locomotive had no whistle, no spark-arrester, no
    cow-catcher, and the cab was open to the sky. Its speed was about six
    miles an hour, and where the railroad and the highway lay parallel to
    each other there was frequently a trial of speed between the
    locomotive with its 'pleasure cars' and the stage-coaches. Sometimes
    the stage-coaches came in ahead. Six inches of snow were sufficient to
    blockade the trains drawn by this American engine."

In 1846 James M. Forbes was building the Michigan Central west from
Detroit, 145 miles to Kalamazoo. A little later it was extended to the
east shore of Lake Michigan, at New Buffalo; eventually it reached Chicago
with its own rails. While the Michigan Central was pushing its rails, its
chief competitor to the south, the Michigan Southern,--afterwards a part
of the Lake Shore, and eventually united with its traditional rival in the
extended New York Central system--was also pushing toward Chicago as a
goal. Both roads reached Chicago in 1852. But railroad building was slow
work. The country expanded too quickly after the golden promises of the
railroad promoters. Money came too easily; then there would come a fearful
financial time, and the reputable railroad enterprises would be halted
beside the "fly-by-night" schemes. As late as 1850, Ohio had only the
single trunk-line connecting Sandusky and Cincinnati; but the railroad to
Cleveland that was afterwards the main stem of the Big Four and the
trunk-line connection east to the Baltimore & Ohio, were nearing
completion.

       *       *       *       *       *

Chicago's first railroad was the Galena & Chicago Union, and it was the
cornerstone of the great Chicago and Northwestern system, one of the
really great railroads of America. The Galena & Chicago Union was
incorporated in 1836, but not until eleven years later was work begun in
laying tracks, for a short ten-mile stretch from the Chicago River to Des
Plaines; and its first locomotive, the _Pioneer_, had been bought
second-hand from the Buffalo & Attica Railroad, away east in New York
State. The rails were second-hand, too, of the strap variety, which the
Western railroads were already discarding in favor of solid rails. But it
was a railroad, and it was with a deal of pride that John B. Turner, its
president, used to ascend to an observatory on the second floor of the old
Halsted Street depot to sight with a telescope the smoke of his morning
train coming across the prairie. The Chicago and Northwestern, itself, was
organized in 1859. For a time it was so desperately poor that it could not
pay the interest on its bonds, and there was a time when its officers had
to meet the pay-roll out of their own pockets; but it succeeded in
absorbing about six hundred miles of railroad at the beginning. In another
decade the Union Pacific Railroad, first uniting the Far West with the
populous Middle and Eastern States, was completed. The Chicago and
Northwestern formed one of the most direct links between the Lakes and the
eastern terminal of the Union Pacific at Council Bluffs. The business that
came to it because of that linking was the first strong impulse that led
to the ultimate greatness of the Northwestern.

The distinctive mid-Western road was and always has been the Illinois
Central. Originally incorporated in 1836, it was nearly twenty years later
when, through substantial aid from the State whose name it bears,
construction actually began. The first track was laid from Chicago to
Calumet to give an entrance to the Michigan Central in its heart-breaking
race to the Western metropolis against the Michigan Southern. The main
line through to Cairo was pushed forward rapidly, however, and was ready
for traffic at the end of 1855. A large number of Kentucky slaves promptly
showed their appreciation of the new railroad enterprise by using it to
effect their escape to the North.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course with the railroad pushing its way westward all the while (the
Rock Island in April, 1859, was the first to span the Mississippi with a
bridge), it was only a question of time when some adventurous soul should
seek to reach the Pacific coast. Indeed it was away back in 1832, while
there was still less than a hundred miles of track in the United States,
that Judge Dexter of Ann Arbor, Michigan, proposed a railroad through to
the Pacific Ocean, through thousands of miles of untrodden forest. Six
years later, a Welsh engineer, John Plumbe, held a convention at Dubuque,
Iowa, for the same purpose. The idea would not down. Hardly had Plumbe and
his convention disappeared from the public notice when Asa Whitney, a New
York merchant of considerable reputation, began to agitate the Pacific
railroad. Whitney was a good deal of a theorist and a dreamer; but he was
a shrewd publicity man, and he held widely attended meetings for the
propagation of his idea, in all the Eastern cities. Eventually, like Judge
Dexter and John Plumbe, he was doomed to disappointment. After Whitney had
died broken-hearted and bankrupt because of his devotion to an idea, came
Josiah Perham, of Boston. Josiah Perham was the Raymond & Whitcomb of the
fifties. He began by organizing excursions for New England folk to come to
Boston to see the Boston Museum and the panoramas, which were the gay
diversion of that day. In one year he brought two hundred thousand folk
into that sacred Massachusetts town, and he began to be rated as a rich
man. He absorbed the Pacific railroad idea and freely spent his money in
its propagation. He organized the People's Pacific Railroad,--and a part
of his scheme formed the foundation of the Northern Pacific. Perham, like
the others, spent his money and failed to see the fruition of his plan.
There seemed to be something ill-fated about that plan of a railroad to
the Pacific. Even the citizens of St. Louis, who had gathered on the
Fourth of July, 1851, to see soil broken for the first real
transcontinental railroad, found that it could only manage to reach Kansas
City by 1856. That particular railroad--the Missouri Pacific--through its
western connection, the Western Pacific, only succeeded in reaching the
coast within the past year.

When Theodore D. Judah brought himself to the seemingly hopeless task of
trying to build a Pacific railroad, he brought with him all the enthusiasm
of Asa Whitney, and with it the experience of a trained railroad engineer.
The thing was beginning to take shape. The men, like Whitney and Perham,
who had been before Congress at session after session, finally brought
that august body, even when the nation stood on the verge of civil war,
into making an appropriation for a survey for a scheme, which nine out of
ten men regarded as a mere visionary dream. Theodore D. Judah, filled with
enthusiasm for his mighty plan, went West that he might roughly plan the
location of the railroad. He went to San Francisco and he went to
Sacramento, where the little twenty-two-mile Sacramento Valley Railroad
had been running since 1856. The Californians listened to him with
interest, but they proffered him no financial aid. Then Judah went up into
the high passes of the Sierras, through which a railroad to the east would
certainly have to reach, to find a crossing for the line in which he
believed so earnestly. He found it--making a route that would save 148
miles and $13,500,000 over that proposed by the Government authorities.
When he went back to Sacramento, to the hardware store of his old friends,
Huntington & Hopkins, in K Street, it was with a rough profile of that
pass in his pocket. What Judah said to Collis P. Huntington and Mark
Hopkins has never been known, but certain it is that in a little time they
were sending for the three other capitalists of Sacramento--the Crocker
brothers, who had a dry-goods store down the street, and Leland Stanford,
a wholesale grocer. Out of the efforts of those six men the Central
Pacific Railroad was organized with a capital of $125,000. Work began on
the new line at Sacramento on the first day of 1863, while California
shook with laughter at the idea of a parcel of country store-keepers
building a railroad across the crest of the Sierras.

How they built their railroad successfully and amassed six really great
American fortunes is all history now. Sufficient is it that they turned a
deaf ear to the ridicule (the project was considered so visionary that
bankers dared not subscribe to the stock of the road for fear of injuring
their credit), found their route through the mountains just as Judah had
promised, brought their materials around the Horn, imported ten thousand
Chinese laborers, hurled thousands of tons of solid rock down among the
pines by a single charge of nitro-glycerine, bolted their snow-sheds to
the mountains, and filled up or bridged hundreds of chasms and valleys.
"Two thousand feet of granite barred the way upon the mountain-top where
eagles were at home. The Chinese wall was a toy beside it. It could
neither be surmounted nor doubled; and so they tunnelled what looks like a
bank swallow's hole from a thousand feet below. Powder enough was expended
in persuading the iron crags and cliffs to be a thoroughfare, to fight
half the battles of the Revolution."

While the Central Pacific was being built east from the coast, the Union
Pacific was pushing its rails west from the Missouri River to meet it. A
Federal subsidy was paid to each road for each mile of transcontinental
track it laid, and the result was the Credit Mobilier, the worst financial
blot upon the pages of American government transactions. Early in the
Spring of 1868 the companies were on equal terms in this great game of
subsidy getting. Each finally had ample funds and each was about 530 miles
away from the Great Salt Lake. So in 1868 a construction campaign began
that has never been approached in the history of railroad building.
Twenty-five thousand men, and 6,000 teams, together with whole brigades of
locomotives and work-trains, were engaged in the work; in a single day ten
miles of track was laid and that was a world-beating record. The result of
such speed was that the two railroads met, May 9, 1869. Leland Stanford,
who was ridiculed when he first turned earth for the Central Pacific at
Sacramento six years before, drove the last spike, and was for that moment
the central figure in an attention that was world-wide.

After the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific came the Southern Pacific,
and after them came Collis P. Huntington binding them into a tight single
railroad. But close on the heels of the Southern Pacific, and right into
its own territory, reached the Santa Fe, while to the north, first the
Northern Pacific and then the Great Northern was built from the lake
country straight to Puget Sound. On a November day in 1885 the last spike
was driven in the great transcontinental Canadian Pacific, the first and
so far the only railroad to lay its rails from the North Atlantic to the
Pacific. Within a year the Western Pacific--the westernmost of the chain
of Gould roads--has begun to run its through trains to the Golden Gate. As
this volume goes to press finishing touches are being placed upon the
Puget Sound extension of the Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul, probably the
last transcontinental to be stretched across these United States for a
number of years to come. Far to the north, the Grand Trunk Pacific is
finding its way across the wilderness of the Canadian Rockies, creating a
great city--Prince Rupert--at its western terminal. It should be ready for
its through traffic within the next three years.

       *       *       *       *       *

This then, in brief, is the history of American railroading--an
eighty-year struggle from East to West. The railroad has passed through
many vicissitudes; days of wild-cat financing, and days when men refused
to invest their money under any inducements whatsoever. It has been
assailed by legislatures and by Congress; it has been scourged because of
the so-called "pooling agreements," and it has cut its own strong arms by
building foolish competing lines. But it has survived masterfully, while
the highroads have become grass-grown, and the once proud canals have
fallen into decay. Railroading is to-day in the full flush of successful
existence. Science has been brought to each of the infinite details of the
business; and for the first time the country sees practically every line,
large or small, honestly earning its way. The railroad receiver has all
but passed into history.




CHAPTER III

THE BUILDING OF A RAILROAD

    COST OF A SINGLE-TRACK ROAD--FINANCING--SECURING A CHARTER--SURVEY-WORK
    AND ITS DANGERS--GRADES--CONSTRUCTION--TRACK-LAYING.


The railroad has its beginning in the inspiration and in the imagination
of men. Perchance a great tract of country, rich in possibilities, stands
undeveloped for lack of transportation facilities. The living arm of the
railroad will bring to it both strength and growth. It will bring to it
the materials, the men, and the machinery needed for its development. It
will take from it its products seeking markets in communities already
established.

In that way the first railroads began, reaching their arms carefully in
from the Atlantic and the navigable rivers and bays that emptied into it.
In the beginning there was hardly any inland country. All the important
towns were spread along the sea-coast or along those same navigable
tributaries, and it was sorry shrift for any community that did not
possess a wharf to which vessels of considerable tonnage might attain.
Where such communities did not possess natural water-ways, they sought to
obtain artificial ones; and the result was the extraordinary impetus that
was given to the building of canals during the first half of the
nineteenth century--a page of American industrial history that has been
told in another chapter.

It was found quite impossible to handle bulky freight economically by
wagon, no matter how romantic the turnpike might be for passenger traffic
in the old-time coaches. The canal was so much better as a carrier that it
was hailed with acclaim, and waxed powerful. In the height of its power
it laughed at the puny efforts of the railroad, and then, as you have
seen, sought by every possible means to throttle the growth of the steel
highway. Within eighty years it was powerless, and the railroad was
conqueror. There were hundreds of miles of abandoned canal within the
country, many of them being converted into roadbeds of railroads; and the
water-highway, with its slow transit and its utter helplessness during the
frozen months of the year, was not able to exist except where quantities
of the coarsest sort of freight were to be moved.

Without railroads, the United States to-day would, in all probability, not
be radically different from the United States of a hundred years ago. All
the large towns and cities would still be clustered upon the coast and
waterways, and back of them would still rest many, many square miles of
undeveloped country; the nation would have remained a sprawling, helpless
thing, weakened by its very size, and subject both to internal conflict
and to attacks of foreign invaders. It has been repeatedly said that if
there had been a through railroad development in the South during the
fifties, there would have been no Civil War. France for five hundred years
before the signing of our Declaration, was a civilized and progressive
nation. Yet century after century passed without her inland towns showing
material change; and her seaports, lacking the impetus of interior growth,
remained quiescent. Such a metropolis as Marseilles is to-day, became
possible only when the railroad made this seaport the south gate of a
mightily developing nation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us assume that we are about to build a railroad. If we are going to
strike our road in from some existing line or some accessible port into
virgin country, we may hope for land or money grants from the State,
county, town, or city Government. That is a faint hope, however, in these
piping days of the twentieth century. So much scandal once attached itself
to these grants that they have become all but obsolete. We shall have to
fall back upon the individual enterprise and help of the persons who are
to benefit by the coming of the railroad. They may be folk who simply
regard our project as a good investment, and place their money in it with
hopes of a fair return.

Even if we are not going into virgin territory to give whole townships and
counties their first sight of the locomotive, but are going to strike into
a community already provided with railroad facilities but seemingly
offering fair opportunity for profit in a competitive traffic, we shall
find capital ready to stand back of us. A railroad will cost much money,
the mere cost of single-track construction generally running far in excess
of $35,000 a mile; and it should have resources, particularly in a highly
competitive territory, to enable it to carry on a losing fight at the
first.

For the money it receives it will issue securities, upon incorporation and
legal organization, almost invariably in the form of capital stock and of
mortgage-bonds. The stock will probably be held by the men who wish to
control the construction and the operation of the line; the bonds will be
issued to those persons who invest their money in it, either for profit or
as an aid to the community it seeks to enter. The bonds are, in almost all
cases, the preferable security. They pay a guaranteed interest at a
certain rate, and at the end of a designated term of years they are
redeemable at face value, in cash or in the capital stock of the company.
There are other forms of loan obligations which the railroad
issues--debenture bonds, second-mortgage bonds, short-term notes, and the
like. To enter upon a description of these would mean a detour into the
devious highways and byways of railroad finance--an excursion which we
have no desire to make in this book.

In building our line we will issue as few bonds in proportion to our stock
as will make our company fairly stable in organization, and its
proposition attractive to investors. For we shall have to pay our
interest coupons upon the bonds from the beginning. We can begin even
moderate dividends upon our stock after our enterprise has entered upon
fair sailing. The all-important initial problem of financing having been
at least partly settled, we will go before the Legislature and secure a
charter for our road. In these modern days we shall probably have also to
make application to some State railroad or public utility commission. It
will consider our case with great care, granting hearings so that we may
state our plans, and that folk living in the territory which we are about
to tap may urge the necessity of our coming, and that rival railroads or
other opponents may state their objections. After the entire evidence has
been sifted down and weighed in truly judicial fashion, we may hope for
word to "go ahead," from the official commission, which, though it assumes
none of our risk of loss in projecting the line, will gratuitously assume
many of the details of its management.

Perhaps the politicians will poke their noses into our plan; they
sometimes do. If we have plenty of capital behind us; if it becomes
rumored that the P---- or the N---- or the X----, one of the big existing
properties, is back of us, or some "big Wall Street fellow" is guiding our
bonds, we can almost confidently expect their interference. After that it
becomes a matter of diplomacy--and may the best man win!

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us assume that some of these big obstacles have already been passed,
that the politicians have been placed at arm's length, that the money
needed is in sight--we are ready to begin the construction of our line.
The location is the thing that next vexes us. A few errors in the placing
of our line may spell failure for the whole enterprise. Obviously, these
errors will be of the sort that admit of no easy correction.

If our line is to link two important traffic centres and is to make a
specialty of through traffic it will have to be very much of a town that
will bend the straightness of our route. If, on the other hand, the line
is to pick up its traffic from the territory it traverses we can afford to
neglect no place of possibilities. We must make concessions, even if we
make many twists and turns and climb steep grades; we cannot afford to
pass business by. Perhaps we may even have to worm our way into the hearts
of towns already grown and closely built, and this will be expensive work.
But it will be worth every cent of that expense to go after competitive
business.

We roughly outline our route, and the engineers get their camping duds
ready, particularly in these days when new railroads almost invariably go
into a new country. Their first trip over the route will be known as the
reconnaissance. On it they will make rough plotting of the territory
through which the new line is to place its rails. Our engineers are
experienced. They survey the country with practised eyes. The line must go
on this side of that ridge, because of the prevailing winds and their
influence upon snowdrifts (it costs a mint of money to run ploughs through
a long winter), and on the other side of the next ridge, because the other
side has easily worked loam, and this side heavy rock. There must be
passes through hills and through mountains to be selected now and then,
and all the while the engineer must bear in mind that the amount of his
excavation should very nearly balance the amount of embankment-fill.
Bridges are to be avoided and tunnels must come only in case of absolute
necessity.

There will be several of these reconnaissances and from them the engineers
who are to build the line, and the men who are to own and operate it, will
finally pick a route close to what will be the permanent way.

[Illustration: CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERS BLAZE THEIR WAY ACROSS THE FACE OF
NEW COUNTRY]

[Illustration: THE MAKING OF AN EMBANKMENT BY DUMP-TRAIN]

[Illustration: "SMALL TEMPORARY RAILROADS PEOPLED WITH HORDES OF RESTLESS
ENGINES"]

Then the real survey-work begins. The engineers divide the line, if it is
of any great length, and the several divisions prosecute their work
simultaneously. Each surveying party consists of a front flag-man, who
is a captain and commands a brigade of axe-men in their work of cutting
away trees and bushes; the transit-man, who makes his record of distances
and angles and commands his brigade of chain-men and flag-men; and the
leveller, who studies contour all the while, and supervisors, rod-men and
more axe-men. Topographers are carried, their big drawing boards being
strapped with the camp equipment; and a good cook is a big detail not
likely to be overlooked.

In soft and rolling country this is a form of camp life that turns back
the scoffer: busy summer days and indolent summer nights around the
camp-fire, pipes drawing well and plans being set for the morrow's work.
Another summer all this will be changed. The resistless path of the
railroad will be stepped through here, the group of nodding pines will be
gone, for a culvert will span the creek at this very point.

Sometimes the work of these parties becomes intense and dramatic. The
chief, lowered into a deep and rocky river canon, is making rough notes
and sketches, following the character of the rock formation, and dreaming
the great dreams that all great engineers, great architects, great
creators must dream perforce. He is dreaming of the day when, a year or
two hence, the railroad's path shall have crowded itself into this
_impasse_, and when the folk who dine luxuriously in the showy cars will
fret because of the curve that spills their soup, and who never know of
the man who was slipped down over a six-hundred-foot cliff in order that
the railroad might find its way.

It is then that the surveying party begins to have its thrills. Perhaps to
put that line through the canon the party will have to descend the river
in canoes. If the river be too rough, then there is the alternative of
being lowered over the cliffsides. Talk of your dangers of Alpine
climbing! The engineers who plan and build railroads through any
mountainous country miss not a single one of them. Everywhere the lines
must find a foothold. This is the proposition that admits of but one
answer--solution. Sometimes the men who follow the chief in the deep river
canyons, the men with heavy instruments to carry and to operate--transits,
levels, and the like--must have lines of logs strung together for their
precarious foothold as they work. Sometimes the foothold is lost; the rope
that lowers the engineer down over the cliffside snaps, and the folk in
the cheerful dining-room do not know of the graves that are dug beside the
railroad's resistless path.

It is all new and wonderful, blazing this path for civilization; sometimes
it is even accidental. An engineer, baffled to find a crossing over the
Rockies for a transcontinental route saw an eagle disappear through a
cleft in the hills that his eye had not before detected. He followed the
course of the eagle; to-day the rails of the transcontinental reach
through that cleft, and the time-table shows it as Eagle Pass.

       *       *       *       *       *

Possibly there are still alternative routes when the surveyers return in
the fall and begin to make their finished drawings. Final choices must now
be made, and land-maps that show the property that the railroad will have
to acquire, prepared. The details, of infinite number, are being worked
out with infinite care.

The great problem of all is the problem of grades; in a mountainous
stretch of line this is almost the entire problem. Obviously a perfect
stretch of railroad would be straight and without grades. The railroad
that comes nearest that practically impossible standard comes nearest to
perfection. But as it comes near this perfection, the cost of construction
multiplies many times. Most new lines must feel their way carefully at the
outset. Moreover it is not an impossible thing to reconstruct it after
years of affluence--of which more in another chapter.

A three-per-cent grade is almost the extreme limit for anything like a
profitable operation; even a two-per-cent grade is one in which the
operating people look forward to reconstruction and elimination. Yet there
are short lengths of line up in the mining camps of Colorado, where grades
of more than four per cent are operated; and it is a matter of railroad
history that away back in 1852, when the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad was
being pushed through toward Parkersburg, and the great Kingwood tunnel was
being dug, B. H. Latrobe, the chief engineer of the company, built and
successfully operated a temporary line over the divide at a grade of ten
per cent--528 feet to the mile. A locomotive which weighed 28 tons on its
driving-wheels carried a single passenger car, weighing 15 tons, in safety
and in regular operation over this stupendous grade for more than six
months. The ascent was made by means of zigzag tracks on the so-called
switchback principle. That scheme succeeded earlier planes operated by
endless chains; an instance of which is the quite famous road of Mauch
Chunk, originally operated for coal, and now a side scenic trip for
passengers. Other planes of this sort, you will remember, were in
operation at Albany and Schenectady on the old Mohawk & Hudson route, now
a part of the New York Central lines; but all of them involved a change of
passengers and freight to and from their cars, and the zigzag switchback
was considered quite an advance in its day. Two of these ancient
switchbacks are still in regular use for passengers and freight--one at
Honesdale, Pa., and the other at Ithaca, N. Y.

The matter of grades being settled, and with it as a corrollary the
question of minor curves, minor details next claim attention. Perhaps the
water supply along the new line is defective. Then arrangements must be
made for impounding, and perhaps suitable dams and waterworks will be
built for this purpose. The water must be soft, to protect the locomotive
boilers; if hard, an apparatus is erected for the softening process.
Grade crossings are to be avoided, highway crossings being built, wherever
possible, over or under the railroad.

A railroad crossing another railroad at grade is an abomination not to be
permitted nowadays. The universal use of the air-brake has permitted a
reduction of the "head-room,"--the necessary clearance between the rail
and overhead obstruction--from 20 feet to 14 feet. The old "head-room" was
necessary to protect the brakeman who worked atop of the box-cars. This
reduction of six feet in clearance was a matter of infinite relief to
engineers, particularly in the bridging of one railroad over another.

       *       *       *       *       *

The entire problem of bridges is so intricate a phase of American railroad
construction as to demand attention in a subsequent chapter. In actual
railroad practice it is apt to demand a separate branch of engineering
skill, both in construction and in maintenance. We turn our attention back
to the main problem of the building of our railroad.

When all plans are finished, contracts remain to be divided and
sub-divided; for it would be a brave contractor, indeed, who in these days
would consent to essay himself, any considerable length of railroad line.
In fact, in recent work of heavy nature, the price is almost invariably
placed at an indefinite figure, a certain definite percentage of profit
being allowed the contractor on each cubic yard of rock or soil. In such a
case the contractor's business becomes far less a game of chance; he is,
in effect, the railroad's agent supervising its construction at a certain
set stipend.

Let us say that the construction on our railroad begins in the early
spring. As a matter of real fact it would not be halted long because of
adverse weather conditions. Even up in the frozen and uninhabitable wilds
of the Canadian Northwest, work has been prosecuted on the new Grand Trunk
Pacific throughout the entire twelve months. But in summer the
construction gangs rejoice. The great proposition of bringing mile after
mile of future railroad to sub-grade--the level upon which the cross-ties
are to be set--fairly sweeps forward under the genial warmth of the sun.
The construction is under the supervision of competent engineers, who are,
of course, under the direct supervision of the railroad's own
organization. Every six to twelve or fifteen miles of new line is divided
into sections, better known as residencies, for each is under the eye of
its own resident engineer. He reports to the construction engineer, who in
turn reports to the chief engineer of the railroad, an officer who reports
to no less person than the president of the company.

This great force--for each engineer has gathered about him a competent
staff of young men as expert with compass, with level, and with transit as
were the men who first projected the line--is in the field as quickly as
the contractor. They are to see him bring the line to sub-grade; to see
him place bridges and culverts, bisect high hills with cuttings, bore
tunnels through even higher hills and mountains, span deep valleys with
great embankments. To facilitate quick construction the residencies are
made numerous; work begins at as many initial points as possible. These
points, of course, are situated, where possible, close to water
communication or existing railroad lines, in order that material may be
brought with the least possible delay and expense.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course, if the country has a sharp contour, the ordinary difficulties
of line-construction multiply very rapidly. The great cuttings through the
hills may have to be carved out of resisting rock, a work that is carried
on through many levels, known to the engineers as ledges or as benches. If
there are high hills to be notched there will probably be great hollows
where the circumstances do not justify carrying the line on bridge or
trestle. In these cases come the fills, or embankments. We have already
shown how the locating engineer in the first instance has tried to plan
his line so that the earth or rock from his cutting will be as nearly as
possible sufficient to form the near-by embankments. Sometimes it is not,
and then the resident engineers must locate borrow-pits, where the hungry
demand of the railroad for dirt will cause a great hollow to show itself
on the face of the earth. The borrow-pit must be carefully
located--convenient of access, far enough from the track not to be a
danger spot to it. This is one of the infinity of problems that come to
the construction engineer.

For these big jobs laborers' camps will be established close to them; and
small temporary railroads peopled with hordes of restless dummy-engines
and forcing their narrow-gauged rails here and there and everywhere, will
be busy for long weeks and months. There will not be much hand-cutting in
the ledges. Steam shovels, mounted like locomotives upon the rails, and
pushing forward all the while, will fairly eat out the hillside. One of
these will catch up in a single dip of his giant arm more than a wagon
load of soft earth or of rock that has been blasted apart for his coming.

To make the fills the engineers must often build rough wooden trestles out
of the permanent level of the line. The dummy-engines, with their trails
of dump-cars, coming from the back of the steam shovels in the cutting, or
from the nearest borrow-pit, will hardly seem in a single day to make an
appreciable effect upon the fill. But the days and weeks together count,
and the dumping multiplies until the rough trestle has completely
disappeared, and the railroad has a firm and permanent path across the
edge of the dizzy embankment. And these embankments can be made truly
dizzy. The passenger going west from Omaha on the new Lane cut-off of the
Union Pacific finds his path for almost twenty miles through deep cuttings
of the crests of the rolling Nebraska hills, across the edge of the long
fills over wide valleys. The Lackawanna railroad building a great
cut-off on its main line where it passes through New Jersey has just
finished the largest railroad embankment ever built--an earthen structure
for two tracks, three miles long and seventy-five to one hundred and ten
feet in height.

[Illustration: CUTTING A PATH FOR THE RAILROAD THROUGH THE CREST OF THE
HIGH HILLS]

[Illustration: A GIANT FILL--IN THE MAKING]

[Illustration: THE FINISHING TOUCHES TO THE TRACK]

[Illustration: THIS MACHINE CAN LAY A MILE OF TRACK A DAY]

As the line goes forward, the track follows. The new railroad has probably
popularized itself from the outset by hiring the near-by farmers and their
teams to grade the line through their localities, particularly where an
almost level country makes the grading a slight matter. Sometimes in level
country, grading machines, drawn by horses, or by traction engines, have
been used to advantage. These machines are equipped with ploughs which
loosen the soil and place it on conveyor belts. Material can be deposited
twenty-two feet away from the line, and a four-foot excavation can be made
by these machines with ease.

But the laying of the track--the line having been finished at sub-grade
with a top width of from 14 to 20 feet for each standard gauge track to be
laid--the line begins to assume the appearance of a real railroad. Upon
the first stretches of completed track, locomotives and cars employed in
construction service begin to operate. As the track grows, their field of
operation increases. Then comes the day when the track sections begin to
be joined; the railroad is beginning to be a real pathway of steel.

To build this pathway is comparatively a simple matter, once the sub-grade
is finished. A mile a day is not too much for any confident contractor to
expect of his construction gangs. There was that time, back in '69, when a
world's record of ten miles of track laid in a single day was established
on the Central Pacific. For that mile of standard track the contractor
will need 3,168 ties--eight carloads; 352 rails--five carloads; and a
carload of angle irons, bolts, and spikes, as fasteners.

The track-layers are as proud of their profession as any man might be of
his. Their skill is a wondrous thing. Two men who follow the wake of a
wagon roughly place the ties as fast as they are dropped upon the
right-of-way. Another man aligns them with a line that has been strung by
one of the young engineers, a fourth with a notched board, marks the
location of one rail. That rail--the line side--follows close to the
location marks. It is roughly banded and lightly fastened in place. The
other rail--the gauge side--quickly follows. The wonderfully accurate
gauge representing the 4 feet, 8-1/2 inches that is almost the standard of
the work, and which is tested every morning by the engineers, is in
constant use. The railroad track must be true; there is not room for even
the variation of a fraction of an inch in the gauge of the two rails.

In fastening the two long lines of rails, the profession of track-laying
rises to almost supreme heights. The men who fasten the rail with angle
iron and a single roughly-adjusted bolt in each rail-end are
head-strappers and past masters in their art. After them in due season
come the back-strappers, finishing that fine work of solidly bolting the
rail against the vast strain of a thousand-ton train being shot over it at
lightning speed. And after the back-strappers and the men who have spiked
the rail to the ties, comes the locomotive itself, bringing more ties,
more rails, more angle-bars and bolts, and more spikes to the front. Then
sometime later the road-bed is ballasted and the line made ready for heavy
operation.

But track-laying is frequently machine systematized these days; and in
this, as in so many smaller things, the mechanical device has supplanted
the man. A real giant is the track-laying machine. It is mounted upon
railroad tracks and is a form of overhead carrier with a tremendous
overhang. The carrier is fed with the cross-ties from supply cars just
back of the machine and the ties are dropped, each close to its appointed
place, as a locomotive slowly pushes the entire apparatus forward. In a
smaller way the heavy steel rails are delivered from under the overhang
of the carrier. A gang of men make short work of the fastening of the rail
to the cross-ties and the machine moves steadily forward. It has been
known to make two miles a day at this work.

       *       *       *       *       *

Culverts have been laid for each small run or kill or creek; the
bridge-builders along the new line finish their work and cart off their
kits; the day comes when there is an unbroken railroad from one end of the
new line to the other. It links new rails and new towns; its localities
produce for new markets, commerce from strange quarters pours down upon
the land that has known it not. Passenger trains begin regular operation,
the fresh-painted depots are brilliant in their newness, the shriek of the
locomotive sounds where it has never before sounded.

Life is awakened. The railroad, which is life, has reached forth a new
arm, and creation is begun.




CHAPTER IV

TUNNELS

    THEIR USE IN REDUCING GRADES--THE HOOSAC TUNNEL--THE USE OF SHAFTS--
    TUNNELLING UNDER WATER--THE DETROIT RIVER TUNNEL.


Sometimes the construction engineer of the railroad brings his new line
face to face with a mountain too steep to be easily mounted. Then he may
prepare to pierce it. Tunnels are not pleasant things through which to
ride. They are, moreover, expensive to construct, and when once
constructed are an unending care, necessitating expensive and constant
inspection. But--and that "but" in this case is a very large one--they
reduce grades and distances in a wholesale fashion; and when you reduce
grades you are pretty sure to be reducing operating expenses. A railroad
man will think twice in his opposition to a smoky bore of a tunnel that
will cost some three to five million dollars, when his expert advisers
tell him that that same smoky bore will save him a hundred thousand tons
of coal in the course of a year.

From almost its very beginnings the American railroad has been dependent
upon tunnels, and thus has closely followed European precedent. The
Alleghany Portage Railroad, to which reference has already been made,
passed through what is said to have been the first railroad tunnel in the
United States. It pierced a spur in the Alleghany Mountains, and it was
901 feet in length, 20 feet wide, and 19 feet high within the arch, 150
feet at each end being arched with cut stone. The old tunnel, built in
1832, which has not echoed with the panting of the locomotive for more
than half a century, is still to be found not far from Johnstown, Pa. It
simply serves the purpose to-day of calling attention to the durable
fashion in which the earliest of our railroad-builders worked.

Of the building of the Baltimore & Ohio, tunnel-construction formed an
early part, several paths being found across the steep profiles of the
Alleghanies. The Kingwood Tunnel, which B. H. Latrobe drove, was nearly a
mile long and the chief of these bores. But when the Hoosac Tunnel was
first proposed--piercing the rocky heart of one of the greatest of the
Berkshires--the country stood aghast. Four miles and a half of tunnel!
That seemed ridiculous away back in 1854, when the plan was first broached
and folk were not slow to say what they thought of such an absurd plan.
For twenty years it looked as though these scoffers were in the right--the
work of digging that monumental tunnel was a fearful drain on the treasury
of the commonwealth of Massachusetts, which was lending its aid to the
project. But the tunnel-diggers finally conquered--they almost always
do--and the Hoosac remains to-day the greatest of all mountain tunnels in
America. The system of continuous tunnels, by which the Pennsylvania
Railroad recently reached its terminal in New York, stretches from Bergen
Hill in New Jersey to Sunnyside, Long Island, a distance of some ten
miles. In fact the largest feature of recent tunnel-work in this country
has been in connection with terminal and rapid-transit development in the
larger cities. For a good many years New York and Baltimore, in
particular, have been pierced with these sub-surface railroads; it is a
construction feature that increases as our great cities themselves
increase. No river is to-day too formidable to be conquered by these
underground traffic routes. A river such as the Hudson or the Detroit may
sometimes halt the bridge-builders; it has but slight terror for the
tunnel engineers.

The tunnel-work is apt to be a separate part of the work of building a
railroad. It calls for its own talent, and that of an exceedingly expert
sort. If the tunnel is more than a half or three-quarters of a mile long
it will probably be dug from a shaft or shafts as well as from its
portals. In this way the work will not only be greatly hastened but the
shafts will continue in use after the work is completed as vents for the
discharge of engine smoke and gases from the tube. The work must be under
the constant and close supervision of resident engineers. The survey lines
must be corrected daily, for the tunnel must not go astray. It must drive
a true course from heading to heading. In the shafts plumb lines, with
heavy bobs, to lessen vibration, will be hung. Sometimes these bobs are
immersed in water or in molasses.

From the portals and from the bottoms of the shafts the headings are
driven. If the tunnel is to accommodate no more than a single track it
will be built from 15 to 16-1/2 feet wide, and from 21 to 22 feet high,
inside of its lining; so the general method is first to drive a top
heading of about 10 feet in height up under the roof of the bore. The rest
of the material is taken out in its own good season on two following
benches or levels.

Piercing a granite mountain is no rapid work. When the Pennsylvania
Railroad built its second Gallitzin Tunnel in 1903, 13 men, working 4
drills in the top heading, were able to drill 16 holes, each 10 feet deep,
in a single day. The engineers there figured that each blast removed
twenty-three cubic yards of the rock. At night, when the "hard-rock men"
were sleeping and their drills silent, a gang of fourteen "muckers"
removed the loosened material.

Slow work that. The Northern Pacific finding its way through the crest of
the Cascade Mountains by means of the great Stampede Tunnel, nearly two
miles in length, demanded that the contractor work under pressure and make
13-1/2 feet of tunnel a day. The contractor, working under the bonus plan,
did better. With his army of 350 "hard-rock men," "muckers," and their
helpers, and his tireless battery of 36 drills he sometimes made as high
as eighteen feet a day from the two headings. On a three-year job he beat
his contract time by seven days. The Northern Pacific paid the price, $118
for each lineal foot of tunnel. That was a high price, occasioned largely
by the fact that the work was carried forward in what was then an almost
unbroken wilderness. The Wabash finding its way through the great and
forbidding hills of Western Pennsylvania to Pittsburgh a dozen years later
was able to dig its succession of tunnels at an average cost of $4,509 for
100 feet. Of that amount $2,527 went for labor; and $260 was the price of
a ton of dynamite.

When the tunnel engineer finds that his bore is not to pierce hard-rock,
of whose solidity he is more than reasonably assured, he prepares to use
cutting-shields. These shields, proceeding simultaneously from the portals
and from the footings of the shafts, are steel rings of a circumference
only slightly greater than that of the finished tunnel. With pick and with
drill and dynamite, they constantly clear a path for it, whereupon it is
pressed forward in that path. Dummy tracks follow the cutting-shield; and
dummy locomotives--more likely electric than steam in these days--are used
in removing the material. Electricity has been a boon to latter-day
tunnel-workers. Its use for light and power keeps the tunnel quite clear
of all gases during the work of boring.

In rare cases, the rock through which the shield has been forced is strong
enough to support itself; in most works the engineers prefer to line the
bore, with brick and concrete, as a rule. This lining is set in the path
of the cutting-shield before its protection is entirely withdrawn; and so
the heavy roof-timbering which was formerly a trade-mark of the successful
tunnel engineer is no longer used.

Tunnel-boring becomes doubly difficult when the railroad is to be carried
under a river or some broad arm of the sea. Men work in an unnatural
environment when they work below the surface of great waters, and the
record of such work is a record of many tragedies. At any instant firm
rock may cease, silt or sand or an underground stream may make its
appearance and the helpless workmen find a ready grave. In work where
there is even the slightest expectation of such a contingency the
air-lock, with its artificial pressure to hold back the soft earth and
moisture is brought into use. In another chapter we shall see how the
caisson is operated. Suffice it to say now that the necessity of "working
under the air," brings no comfort to any one. It vastly hinders and
complicates the work of construction, and adds greatly to the expense.
Moreover, it has its own record of tragedies. Still it remains, to the
infinite credit of a national persistence, that there is no record in the
annals of American engineering where the workers have finally given up a
tunnel job. Lives have been sacrificed, good-sized fortunes swept away,
but in the end the resistless railroad has always found its underground
path.

The tunnel-workers can tell you of the accident when the subway was being
driven under the East River from Manhattan to Brooklyn, three years ago.
The cutting-shield, which was advancing from the Brooklyn side, suddenly
slipped out from the rock into the unprotected soft mud of the river
bottom. The heavily compressed air shot a geyser straight up to the
surface of the river some fifty feet above. A workman shot through the
geyser, pirouetted gayly for a fraction of a second above the river, then
dropped, to be picked up by the crew of a passing ferryboat. In a week he
was back at work again inside the cutting-shield. His fortune was the
opposite of that which generally awaits a man caught in a tunnel accident.

"It ain't as bad as it used to be," one of them informs you. "When I first
got into this profession, they didn't have the electricity for lights or
moving the cars or nothing. We used to try and get along with safety
lamps an' near choke to death. It was more like hell then than it is now."

[Illustration: "SOMETIMES THE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEER ... BRINGS HIS LINE
FACE TO FACE WITH A MOUNTAIN"]

[Illustration: FINISHING THE LINING OF A TUNNEL]

[Illustration: THE BUSIEST TUNNEL POINT IN THE WORLD--AT THE WEST PORTALS
OF THE BERGEN TUNNELS, SIX ERIE TRACKS BELOW, FOUR LACKAWANNA ABOVE]

[Illustration: THE HACKENSACK PORTALS OF THE PENNSYLVANIA'S GREAT TUNNELS
UNDER NEW YORK CITY]

But your interest in the man who was blown from the tunnel to the surface
of the river and escaped with his life is not entirely satiated, and you
ask more questions. What do they do when they strike soft mud like that?

"We get down and pray," he of the experience in this weird form of
construction engineering tells you. "We try to get the boys safely back
through the air-lock, and then we quit boring till we can fix things up
from outside. If it's a real bad case we've got to make land to bore
through. It's generally done by dumping rock and bags of sand from floats
just over where she blows out. It's a pretty rough way of doctoring her
up, but it has to go, and generally it does. All we want is to get it to
hold until we can set the rings of the tunnel.

"That ain't always the worst. I've been driving a bore under water this
way, when we struck stiff rock overhead and soft mud underneath the edge.
That's something that makes the engineers hump. You can't rest a cast-iron
tunnel like this on mud and you get a wondering if you've got to quit
after all this work under the durned old river, and let the boss lose his
money.

"The last time we struck a snag of that sort, the boss didn't give up. He
wasn't that kind. He had a chief engineer that was brass tacks from
beginning to end. What do you suppose that fellow did? He bored holes in
the bottom of the lining and drove steel legs right down to the next ledge
of solid rock below. There's that tunnel to-day, carrying 32,000 people
between five and six o'clock every night perched down there seventy feet
underground like a big caterpillar sprawled under the wickedest ledge o'
rock you ever see."

It takes a real genius of an engineer for this sort of work. He who drives
his bore into the unknown must be on guard for the unexpected. Emergencies
arise upon the minute, and the tunnel engineer must be ready with his
wits and ingenuity to meet them. Finally the day does come when the bores
from either shore are hard upon one another. If there has been blasting
under the bed of the river it is reduced to a minimum. The drills work at
half-speed, the fever of expectancy hangs over the men. Those who are
close at the heading catch faint sounds of the workmen on the other side
of the thin barrier--the last barrier of the river that was supposed to
acknowledge no conqueror.

The first tiny aperture between the two bores is greeted with wild cheers.
On the surface far above, the whistles of the shaft-houses carry forth the
news to the outer world; it is echoed and reechoed by the noisy river
craft. The aperture grows larger. It is large enough to permit the passage
of a man's body; and a man, enjoying fame for this one moment in his life,
crawls through it. The men knock off work and have a rough spread in the
tunnel. At night the engineers and contractors banquet in a hotel. "Not so
bad," the chief engineer says quietly. "We were 3/8 of an inch out, in
8,000 feet." It was not so bad. It spoke wonders for his profession. To
carry forth two giant bores from the opposite sides of a broad river, and
have them meet within 3/8 of an inch of perfect alignment, was an
achievement well worth attention.

After that, the last traces of the rough rock and silt are removed, the
iron rings of the tunnel made fast together, the air pressure released,
the cutting-shields, that formed so essential a feature of the
construction, removed. Then there remains only the work of installing
conduits and wiring and laying the tracks before the tunnel is ready for
the traffic of the railroad.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Michigan Central has recently finished a tunnel under the busy Detroit
River, at Detroit, which eliminates the use of a car-ferry at that point.
The tunnel was built in a manner entirely new to engineers. The river at
Detroit is about three-quarters of a mile wide, and its bed is of soft
blue clay, making it difficult to bore a tunnel safely and economically.
To meet this obstacle a new fashion of tunnel-building was created.

The tunnel itself consists of two tubes, each made from steel 3/8 of an
inch in thickness and reinforced every twelve feet by outer "fins." The
channel was dredged and a foundation bed of concrete laid. The sections of
the tunnel, each 250 feet long, were then put in position one at a time.
The section-ends were closed at a shore plant with water-tight wooden
bulkheads. They were then lashed to four floating cylinders of compressed
air and towed out to position. After that it was merely a matter of detail
to drop the sections into place, pour in more concrete and make the new
section fast. The wooden bulkheads next the completed tube were then
removed and the structure was ready for the track-layers. The sub-aqueous
portion of the new Detroit Tunnel is 2,600 feet long; it joins on the
Detroit side with a land tunnel 2,100 feet long, and on the Canadian side
with a land tunnel of 3,192 feet.

It takes more than a river, carrying through its narrow throat the vast
and growing traffic of the Great Lakes--a traffic that is comparable with
that of the Atlantic itself--to halt the progress of the railroad.




CHAPTER V

BRIDGES

    BRIDGES OF TIMBER, THEN STONE, THEN STEEL--THE STARUCCA VIADUCT--THE
    FIRST IRON BRIDGE IN THE U. S.--STEEL BRIDGES--ENGINEERING
    TRIUMPHS--DIFFERENT TYPES OF RAILROAD BRIDGE--THE DECK SPAN AND THE
    TRUSS SPAN--SUSPENSION BRIDGES--CANTILEVER BRIDGES--REACHING THE SOLID
    ROCK WITH CAISSONS--THE WORK OF "SAND-HOGS"--THE CANTILEVER OVER THE
    PEND OREILLE RIVER--VARIETY OF PROBLEMS IN BRIDGE-BUILDING--POINTS IN
    FAVOR OF THE STONE BRIDGE--BRIDGES OVER THE KEYS OF FLORIDA.


When the habitations of man first began to multiply upon the banks of the
water courses, the profession of the bridge-builder was born. The first
bridge was probably a felled tree spanning some modest brook. But from
that first bridge came a magnificent development. Bridge-building became
an art and a science. Men wrought gigantic structures in stone,
long-arched viaducts, with which they defied time. Then for two thousand
years the profession of the bridge-builder stood absolutely still.

With the coming of the iron and steel age it moved forward again. The
development of a fibre of great strength and without the dead weight of
granite gave engineers new possibilities. They began in simple fashion,
and then they developed once again, with marvellous strides. Steel, the
dead thing with a living muscle, could span waterways from which stone
shrank. Steel redrew the maps of nations. Proud rivers at which the paths
of man had halted, were conquered for the first time. Routes of traffic of
every sort were simplified; the railroad made new progress; and economic
saving of millions of dollars was made to this gray old world.

The earliest of the very distinguished list of American bridge-builders
erected great timber structures for the highroads and the post-roads. Some
of them went back many centuries and came to the stone bridge, in many
ways the most wonderful of all the artifices by which man conquers the
obstructive power of a running stream. But the building of stone bridges
took time and money, and time and money were little known factors in a new
land that had begun to expand rapidly.

So at first the railroad followed the course of the highroad and the
post-road, and took the timber bridge unto itself. In some cases it
actually fastened itself upon the highroad bridge, as at Trenton, N. J.,
where a faithful wooden structure built by Theodore Burr in 1803 was
strengthened and widened in 1848 to take the first through railroad route
from New York. It continued its heavy dual work until 1875 when it was
superseded by a steel bridge. A dozen years ago the railroad tracks were
moved from that structure to a magnificent and permanent stone-arch built
near-by. Thus the railroad crossing the Delaware at Trenton has, in this
way, typified step by step every stage of the development of American
bridge-building.

The timber bridges developed the steel truss bridge, the typically
American construction, of to-day. In an earlier day the timber bridges
were the glory of the engineer. Sometimes you see one of these old fellows
remaining, like the long structure that Mr. Walcott built across the
Connecticut River at Springfield, Mass., in 1805, and which still does
good service; but the most of them have passed away. Fire has been their
most persistent enemy. Within the past two years fire destroyed the
staunch toll-bridge at Waterford on the Hudson, just above Troy. The
bridge was a faithful carrier for one hundred and four years. In many ways
it was typical of those first constructions. It consisted of four clear
arch spans--one 154 feet, another 161 feet, the third 176 feet, and the
fourth 180 feet in length. It was built of yellow pine, wonderfully hewn
and fitted, hung upon solid pegs; and save for the renewal of some of the
arch footings, the roof, and the side coverings, it was unchanged through
all the years--even though the heavy trolley-cars of a through interurban
line were finally turned upon it.

About the same time, the once-famed Permanent Bridge across the Schuylkill
River at Philadelphia was built. It had two arches of 150 feet each and
one of 195 feet. In its day it was regarded as nothing less than a
triumph. A very old publication says:

    "The plan was furnished by Mr. Timothy Palmer, of Newburyport, Mass.,
    a self-taught architect. He brought with him five workmen from New
    England. They at once evinced superior intelligence and adroitness in
    a business which was found to be a peculiar art, acquired by habits
    not promptly gained by even good workmen in other branches of framing
    in wood.... The frame is a masterly piece of workmanship, combining in
    its principles that of king-post and braces or trusses with those of a
    stone arch."

In after years, the Permanent Bridge was also entrusted with the carrying
of a railroad. It has, however, disappeared these many years.

The early railroad builders did not neglect the possibilities of the stone
bridge. Two notable early examples of this form of construction still
remain--the Starrucca Viaduct upon the Erie Railroad, near Susquehanna,
Pa., and an even earlier structure, the stone-arch bridge across the
Patapsco River at Relay, Md., which B. H. Latrobe, the most distinguished
of all American railroad engineers, built for the Baltimore & Ohio
Railroad, in 1833-35. The Thomas Viaduct, as it has been known for
three-quarters of a century, was the first stone-arch bridge ever built to
carry railroad traffic. It was erected in a day when the railroad was just
graduating from the use of teams of horses as motive-power. In this day,
when locomotives have begun to reach practical limits of size and weight,
that viaduct is still in use as an integral part of the main line of the
Baltimore & Ohio. It is built on a curve, and consists of 8 spans of stone
arches, 67 feet 6 inches, centre to centre of piers, which, together with
the abutments at each end, make the total length of the structure 612
feet. It is in as good condition to-day as upon the day it was built.

When the Erie Railroad was being constructed across the Southern Tier
counties of New York in 1848, its course was halted near the point where
the rails first reached the beautiful valley of the Susquehanna. A
side-valley, a quarter of a mile in width, stretched itself squarely
across the railroad's path. There was no way it could be avoided, and it
could be crossed only at a high level. For a time the projectors of the
Erie considered making a solid fill, but the tremendous cost of such an
embankment was prohibitive. While they were at their wits' ends, James P.
Kirkwood, a shrewd Scotchman, who had been working as a civil engineer
upon the Boston & Albany, appeared. Kirkwood spanned the valley with the
Starucca Viaduct, one of the most beautiful bridges ever built in America.
He opened quarries close at hand and by indefatigable energy built his
stone bridge in a single summer. It has been in use ever since. The
increasing weight of its burdens has never been of consequence to it, and
to-day it remains an important link in a busy trunk-line railroad. It is
1,200 feet in length and consists of 18 arches of 50 feet clear span
apiece.

But stone bridges even then cost money, and so the timber structure still
remained the most available. Many men can still remember the tunnels, into
whose darkness the railroad cars plunged every time they crossed a stream
of any importance whatsoever. They have nearly all gone. The wooden bridge
was ill suited to the ravages of weather and of fire--ravages that were
quickened by the railroad, rather than hindered. A substitute material
was demanded. It was found--in iron.

The first iron bridge in the United States is believed to be the one
erected by Trumbull in 1840 over the Erie Canal at Frankfort, N. Y. Record
is also held of one of these bridges being built for the North Adams
branch of the Boston & Albany Railroad, in 1846. About a year later,
Nathaniel Rider began to build iron bridges for the New York & Harlem, the
Erie, and some others of the early railroads. His bridges--of the truss
type, of course, that type having been worked out in the timber bridges of
the land--were each composed of cast-iron top-chords and post, the
remaining part of the structure being fabricated of wrought-iron. The
members were bolted together. Still, the failure of a Rider bridge upon
the Erie in 1850, followed closely by the failure of a similar structure
over the River Dee, in England, influenced officials of that railroad to a
conclusion that iron bridges were unpractical, and to order them to be
removed and replaced by wooden structures. For a time it looked as if the
iron bridge were doomed. That was a dark day for the bridge engineers. A
contemporary account says:

    "The first impulse to the general adoption of iron for railroad
    bridges was given by Benjamin H. Latrobe, chief engineer of the
    Baltimore & Ohio Railroad. When the extension of this road from
    Cumberland to Wheeling was begun, he decided to use this material in
    all the new bridges. Mr. Latrobe had previously much experience in the
    construction of wooden bridges in which iron was extensively used; he
    had also designed and used the fish-bellied girder constructed of cast
    and wrought-iron."

Under the influence of the really great Latrobe, an iron span of 124 feet
was built in 1852 at Harpers Ferry. In that same year, the B. & O. built
its Monongahela River Bridge, a really pretentious structure of 3 spans of
205 feet each, and the first really great iron railroad bridge in all the
land. The path was set. The conquest of iron over wood as a bridge
material was merely a problem of good engineering. The iron bridge quickly
came into its own. The Pennsylvania Railroad began building cast-iron
bridges of from 65 to 110 feet span at its Altoona shops for the many
creeks and runs along the western end of its line. The other railroads
were following in rapid order. Squire Whipple, Bollman, Pratt--all the
others who could design and build iron bridges--were kept more than busy
by the work that poured in upon them.

And in the day when the iron bridge was coming into its own, Sir Henry
Bessemer, over in England, was bringing the steel age into existence,
first making toy cannon models for the lasting joy of Napoleon III, and
then making a whole world see that steel--that dead thing with the living
muscle--was no longer to be limited for use in tools and cutting surface.
Steel was to become the very right-hand of man. And so steel came to the
bridge-builders, at first only in the most important wearing points such
as pins and rivets, finally to be the whole fabric of the modern bridge.
The transition was gradual. The early engineers began using less and less
of cast-iron and more and more of wrought, until they had practically
eliminated cast-iron as a bridge material. Then there came a quick change;
there was another dark day for the railroad bridge engineers of America.
In 1876--that very year when the land was so joyously celebrating its
Centennial--a passenger train went crashing through a defective bridge at
Ashtabula, Ohio. There was a great property loss--thousands and thousands
of dollars, and a loss of lives that could never be expressed in dollars.
An outraged land asked the bridge-builders if they really knew their
business.

Out of that Ashtabula wreck came the scientific testing of bridges and
bridge materials, and the abolition of the rule-of-thumb in the cheaper
sorts of construction. Out of that miserable wreckage came also the use of
steel in the railroad bridge. Steel had found itself; and how the steel
bridges began to spring up across the land! They spanned the Ohio, and
they spanned the Mississippi, and they spanned the Missouri; a great
structure threw itself over the deep gorge of the Kentucky River. When the
day came that fire destroyed the famous wooden viaduct of the Erie over
the Genesee River at Portage, N. Y. (you must remember the pictures of
that tremendous structure in the early geographies), steel took its place.

All this while the bridge engineer attempted more and more. He built over
the deep gorge of the Niagara. He conquered the St. Lawrence in and about
Montreal. He laughed at the mighty Hudson and flung a dizzy steel trestle
over its bosom at Poughkeepsie. He built at Cairo, at Thebes, and at
Memphis, on the Mississippi, and again and again and still again at St.
Louis. The East River no longer halted him or compelled him to resort to
the alternative of the very expensive types of suspension bridge. He has
finally thrown a great cantilever over it, from Manhattan to Long Island.
The steel bridge has come into its own.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us study for a moment the construction of the different types of
railroad bridge. For the tiny creeks--the little things that are mad
torrents in spring, and run stark-dry in midsummer--where they cannot be
poured through a pipe or a concrete moulded culvert, the simplest of
bridge forms will suffice. And the simplest of bridge forms consists of
two wooden beams laid from abutment to abutment and holding the ties and
rails of the track-structure. As the first development of that simplest
idea comes the substitution of steel for wood, giving, as we have already
seen, protection against fire and a far greater strength. The steel beam
has greater strength than a wooden beam of the same outside dimension and
yet in its design it effects for itself a great saving of material, by
cutting out superfluous parts and becoming the structural standard of
to-day, the I beam. When the I beam becomes too large to be made in a
single pouring or a single rolling, it may be constructed of steel plates
and angles firmly riveted together, and thus still remains the possibility
of the simplest form of bridge. That single span may be further increased,
or the bridge developed into a succession of increased spans by the
substitution of the lattice-work girder, effecting further saving in
weight without material loss of strength for the solid-plate girder. The
track may be laid atop of such girders or--to save clearance in overhead
crossing--swung between them at their bases.

The limit in this form of bridge is generally in a 65-foot or a 100-foot
span. It is not practical to build the girders up outside of a shop; and
the 65-foot length represents the two flat-cars that must be used to
transport any one of them to the bridge location. Some railroads have used
three cars for the hauling of a single girder, and so increased these
spans to 100 feet; but as a rule, over 65 feet, and the truss, the most
common form of railroad bridge in this country, comes into use.

The truss is a distinct evolution from those old timber bridges of which
we have already spoken. Burr and Latrobe and Bollman and Howe and Squire
Whipple--those distinguished engineers of other days--have evolved it,
step by step. It is, in one sense, no more than an enlarged form of
lattice girder, the work of the different designers having been to
accomplish at all times, a maximum of strength with a minimum of weight.
It is built of members that stand pulling-strain, and those that stand
pressure-strain; and these are respectively known as tension and as
compression members. In them rests the real strength of the truss. But in
addition to the structure are the bracing-rods, generally placed as
diagonals and built to sustain the structure against both lateral and
wind-strains. The members that form the trusses are stoutly riveted
together; the rapid rat-a-tap-tap of the riveter is no longer a novelty in
any corner of the land. Sometimes certain of the important bearing-points
are connected by steel pins instead of rivets--another survival of the old
days of the timber bridge.

As a rule, the railroad is carried through the truss--and this is known as
the through span. Sometimes it is carried upon the top of the structure,
and then the truss becomes known as a deck span. A long bridge may
effectively combine both of these types of span. The splendid new
double-track truss bridge recently built by the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad
over the Susquehanna River between Havre-de-Grace and Aiken, Md., to
replace a single-track bridge in the same location, is a splendid example
of the best type of such structures. At the point of crossing, the river
is divided into channels by Watson Island; the width of the west channel
being approximately 2,600 feet and that of the east channel being
approximately 1,400 feet. The distance across the low-lying island is
2,000 feet--making the length of the entire bridge about 6,000 feet. The
bridge, as originally constructed when the line from Baltimore to
Philadelphia was built, in 1886, had a steel trestle over Watson Island.
In building the new structure, this viaduct was eliminated in favor of a
bridge structure of 90-foot girder spans, placed upon concrete piers.
Additional piers were placed in the west channel, shortening the deck
spans from 480 to 240 feet; the through span over the main channel was
kept at the original length--520 feet. In the east channel, the span
lengths remained unchanged, with a single slight exception. The changes in
the span lengths involved new masonry, and all piers were sunk to solid
rock, those in the west channel being carried by caissons to a depth of
more than seventy feet beneath low-water. The total amount of new masonry
and concrete approximated 62,000 cubic yards. The long span-lengths of the
deck span over the east channel and the through span over the navigable
portion of the west channel--each 520 feet in length--occasioned heavy
construction. The deck span, for instance, weighed 12,000 pounds to each
foot of bridge. The total weight of this very long bridge reaches the
enormous figure of 32,000,000 pounds. And yet, even the untechnical
observe the extreme simplicity of its lines of construction, and feel that
the engineer, A. W. Thompson, has done his work well. The construction of
the giant took two years and a half. During that time, the trains of the
B. & O. were diverted to the closely adjacent Pennsylvania, so that the
bridge-builders might continue with a minimum of delay.

The truss span reaches its limitations at a little over 500 feet in
length--we have just seen how the Susquehanna structure had its spans cut
in halves in the non-navigable portions of the river. The spans of two
great railroad bridges over the Ohio at Cincinnati reached 519 and 550
feet, but they were built in a day when the weights of locomotives and of
train-loads had not yet begun to rise. Nowadays the shorter span is the
safer and by far the best. The engineer builds plenty of midstream piers,
looking out only for a decent width for any navigable channels.

And when because of peculiarities of location he cannot place his pier
midstream, then it is time for him to get out his pencils and begin his
drawings all over again. He can perhaps build a suspension bridge--a clear
span of 1,500 feet will be as nothing to it,--but suspension bridges take
a long time to build and are fearfully expensive in the building. It is
more than likely, then, that he will turn to the cantilever. In the
cantilever, two giant trusses are cunningly balanced upon string
supporting towers. They are constructed by being built out from the
towers, evenly, so that the balance of weight may never be lost for a
single hour. The two projecting arms are finally caught together in
mid-air and over the very centre of the span--caught and made fast by the
riveters. The result is a bridge of surpassing strength and fairly low
cost, a real triumph for the bridge engineer.

The first of these cantilever bridges built in the United States was of
iron. It was designed and constructed by C. Shaler Smith across the deep
gorge of the Kentucky River in 1876-77. Mr. Smith also built the second
cantilever, the Minnehaha, across the Mississippi, at St. Paul, Minn., in
1879-80. The third and fourth were the Niagara and the Frazer River
bridges built in the early eighties. In their trail came many others--one
of the most notable among them being the great Poughkeepsie Bridge.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are going to see something of the construction of one of these great
railroad bridges. Let us begin at the beginning, and see the men, as they
work upon the foundations of abutments and of piers--many times hundreds
of feet under the waters of the very stream that they will eventually
conquer. For months this important work of getting a good foothold for the
monster will go forth almost unseen by the workaday world--by the aid of
the great timber footings, which the engineer calls his caissons. These
caissons (they are really nothing more or less than great wooden boxes),
are slowly sunk into the sand or soft rock under the tremendous weight of
the many courses of masonry. They sink to solid rock--or something that
closely approximates solid rock.

We are going down into one of the caissons that form the foothold of a
single great pier of a modern railroad bridge; we are going to stand for a
very few minutes under air-pressure with the "sand-hogs"--men whom we
first came to know when we studied the boring of a tunnel. Air pressure
spells danger. It takes a good nerve to work high up on the exposed steel
frame of some growing bridge, but the bridge-builders have air and
sunlight in which to pursue their hazardous work. The sand-hog has
neither. He toils in a box down in the depths of the unknown, working with
pick and shovel under artificial light and under a pressure that becomes
all but intolerable. The knowledge that the most precious and vital of all
man's needs--fresh air--is controlled by another, and through delicate and
intricate mechanism, cannot add to his peace of mind.

No wonder, then, that it is the highest paid of all merely manual work.
The sand-hog working 50 feet below datum is paid $3.50 for an eight-hour
day. But 50 feet is but the beginning to these human worms, who burrow
deep into the earth. Below it they first begin to divide their day into
two working periods. The air begins to count, and men with steel muscled
arms must rest. As they approach 80 feet below datum--the engineers'
phrase for sea level,--they are working two periods each day of one hour
and a half apiece, while their daily pay has risen to $4. There is your
rough arithmetical law of sand-hogs. As your caisson goes down so does the
length of your working-day decrease; inversely, their air pressures and
the pay of the men increase. The cost? The cost leaps forward in
geometrical progression. It is the owner's turn to groan this time.

One hundred feet is the limit. At 100 feet the air pressure is more than
50 pounds to the square inch--three additional atmospheres--and the limit
of human endurance is reached. The men work two shifts of forty minutes
each as a daily portion and the law steps in to say that they must rest
four hours between the shifts. They are paid $4.50 for that day's
work--which means something more than $4 an hour for the time that they
are actually at work in the caisson.

You have expressed your interest in the sand-hog, given vent to a desire
to go down into their underworld. You wonder what three pressures is going
to feel like. Permission is given and a physician begins examining you.
You cannot go into the caisson unless you are sound of heart and stout of
body. This is no joking matter. The sand-hogs' rules read like the
training instructions for a college football team. No drink, regular
hours, simple diet, the donning of heavy clothes after they leave the
pressure, constant reexamination--these rules are inflexible when the
caissons go to far depths. By their observance the difficult foundation
construction of this new bridge has been kept free from accident--there
have been few cases of the "bends" brought to the specially constructed
hospital in the bottom of the cavity.

The "bends" sounds complicated, and is, in reality, almost the simplest of
human ailments in its diagnosis. A "bubble" of high pressure air works its
way into the human structure while a man is in the caisson. When he comes
out into the normal atmosphere the bubble is caught and remains. If it is
caught near any vital organ that bubble is apt to spell death. Generally
the bubbles are caught in the joints--frequently the elbow or the
knee--where they cause excruciating pain. Then the specially constructed
hospital crowded on the narrow platform formed by the top of the pier,
comes into full play. Its sick room is incased in an air-tight cylinder.
The man suffering from the "bends," together with physicians and nurses,
is put under a pressure that gradually increases until it reaches that of
the caisson. After that it is a comparatively simple matter to relieve the
bubble and bring the air in the hospital back to a normal pressure.

The path is clear for us to go down into the caisson. A party of
sand-hogs, hot and exhausted after forty minutes of work within, come out
of the little manhole at the top of the air-lock. We step through the
little manhole and into a tiny steel bucket that rests within the air-lock
there at the top of the shaft. A word of command--farewell to the bright
blue sky overhead--the black manhole cover is replaced. It is suddenly
very dark. A single faint incandescent gives a dim glow in the tiny
place.

[Illustration: CONCRETE AFFORDS WONDERFUL OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE
BRIDGE-BUILDERS]

[Illustration: THE LACKAWANNA IS BUILDING THE LARGEST CONCRETE BRIDGE IN
THE WORLD ACROSS THE DELAWARE RIVER AT SLATEFORD, PA.]

[Illustration: THE BRIDGE-BUILDER LAYS OUT AN ASSEMBLYING-YARD FOR
GATHERING TOGETHER THE DIFFERENT PARTS OF HIS NEW CONSTRUCTION]

[Illustration: THE NEW BRANDYWINE VIADUCT OF THE BALTIMORE & OHIO, AT
WILMINGTON, DEL.]

You are not thinking of that. They are putting the pressure on. You can
feel it. Your eardrums feel as if they would break; they vibrate. You must
show your distress.

"Pinch your nose and swallow hard," says the man who stands beside you in
the bucket.

He stands so close to you that you can fairly feel the pulsation of his
heart, but his voice sounds miles away. You swallow hard, the hardest you
have ever swallowed, and you pinch your nose. You feel better. The
far-away voice speaks again in your ear. "Three atmospheres," is all it
says. The caisson shaft is no place for extended conversation. You descend
in an express elevator car; in that bucket you just drop. You have all the
eerie sensations that a Coney Island "novelty ride" might give you. There
is a row of dim incandescents all the way down the smooth side of the
shaft, and when you look you forget that this is vertical traction and
think of an uptown subway tube as you see it recede from the rear of an
express. A final manhole, the gate at the foot of the shaft and you stop
abruptly. It seems as if you had almost bumped against the under side of
China.

"This is it," says the far-away voice.

A timbered room, not larger than a parlor in a city flat and not near so
high. A close and murky place, filled with a little company of
men--shadowy humans of a real underworld there under the dull electric
glow.

"They're finding the footing for the shaft," says the voice. "We're on
rock at last at 94 feet."

       *       *       *       *       *

When the footings are finished and the caisson's edges have ceased to cut
its path straight downward, that timbered construction will rest here far
below the city for long ages. The sand-hogs will come out of their working
chamber for the last time--it will be poured full of concrete, more solid
than rock itself. The air pressure will be withdrawn--there is no longer
mud or shifting sand for it to withhold. Then, section by section, the
steel lining of the caisson shaft will be withdrawn, while concrete,
tramped into place, makes the shaft a hidden monolith 100 feet or so in
length. Upon the tops of all these monoliths a close grillage of steel
beams will be laid; upon that grillage will be riveted the steel plates
and columns of the bridge tower. The great structure is to have sure
footing; these giant feet bind and clasp themselves throughout the years
against the mighty river that has been conquered and humbled by the work
of man.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You should have been down in one of the boxes when they had to burn
torches, before they got the electric light," says one of the bridge
engineers. "I worked in one of those that we left under a stone tower of
the Brooklyn Bridge. Now we're almost in clover. They even cool and dry
the compressed air before we breathe it."

An order goes aloft over an electric wire, the engineer who sits smoking
his pipe on the sun-baked platform of the traveller derrick pulls a lever,
and we go slipping up the shaft toward fresh air and freedom only a little
less rapidly than we descended it. We do not reach it too quickly. There
is a long wait in the air-lock after the lower manhole has closed, while
the pressure is being reduced. You begin to worry and you ask your guide
as to the delay. Nothing wrong?

He smiles at your timorous question and explains. It would be dangerous to
come out from the caisson pressure quickly. He does not want to have to
send you to that air-tight hospital with a bad case of the "bends."

"How long in the air-lock?" you ask.

"Fifty minutes," he answers.

Then he explains in more detail. You have been under a pressure of 50
pounds to the square inch--that's your three atmospheres, and under the
rules you must spend fifty minutes in the tiny air-lock. Up to a pressure
of 36 pounds you must spend two minutes there for every three pounds of
pressure. When you get above that "law of 36" it is a minute to the pound.

When that manhole cover overhead finally slides open you feel blinded by
the light, even though the sun is hidden behind a passing cloud. The
air-lock tender reaches down with his arms and gives you a lift up onto
his narrow perch.

"Want to be a sand-hog?" he smiles.

"Not yet a while," you answer, in all truth. "Not until every other job is
gone."

       *       *       *       *       *

You are standing aloft, balancing yourself upon tiny planks at the
steadily advancing end of the bridge, as it forces itself over a stream of
formidable width. Overhead, a gigantic, ungainly traveller, equipped with
steel derricks at every corner, is advancing foot by foot as the bridge
advances foot by foot. Underneath, through the thin network of planks, of
girder and of supporting false work, you can see the surface of the river
a full hundred feet below. A steamboat is passing directly beneath you.
From your perch she looks like a great yellow bird. Those fine black
specks upon her back are the humans who are gathered upon her upper deck.

Whistles call and the derricks groan as they swing the thousands of
bridge-members, that are flying together at the beck of the engineer, into
their final resting-places. There is the deafening racket of the riveters,
here and there and everywhere. There are crude railroad tracks upon the
temporary flooring of the bridge deck, and the calls of the dummy
locomotives add to the racket. The railroad tracks lead to the shore, to
temporary yards where the bridge materials are assembled as fast as they
come from the shops in a city three hundred miles distant.

For, remember that while the sand-hogs were burrowing under the surface of
the river to find footholds for this monster, other men were burrowing
into the hillsides to find the precious ore for the welding of his
muscles. A hundred thousand picks must have fought in his behalf, furnaces
blazed for miles before the crude ore became the finished, perfect steel.
Of the forging and the rolling of the steel a whole book might be written.
It is enough now to say that of the 50,000,000 pounds of steel, every
pound was made on honor. The railroad had its inspectors everywhere, but
the rolling-mill men held to their formulas for perfect steel, and perfect
steel was the result. A slight flaw in the metal, and possibly at some
unexpected day, a great catastrophe. The safety of human life was upon the
men who forged the steel, and they forged honor into every great girder,
into every rod and bolt and plate. This conqueror of the river was a
warrior built in honor.

The safety of human life depends upon the men who build this bridge. Study
carefully the face of this man who stands beside you, the man who evolved
this bridge as a season's work of his restless mind. His face is the face
of a man who has high regard for human safety; that factor creeps to the
fore as he talks to you. He is telling of the method of constructing the
upper works of a bridge of this size.

"We're getting ahead all the time," he laughs, "and we're moving rather
forward in our construction methods. In an older day we did this work with
derricks of a rather simple sort, operated them by small portable steam
engines. You can't handle bridge-members--units that are only held down by
the clearances of tunnels and the transporting powers of the
railroads--that way to-day. We've nearly half a million dollars tied up
here in constructing-appliances. These steel-boom derricks, travellers,
and steel-wire hoists, the compressing engines for handling the riveters,
cost big money.

"Our method? That's a simple enough affair as a rule. We set up this
spindly tower on rails, that we call the 'traveller' and it moves
backwards and forwards over the trusses and the timber falsework that we
build before the steel really begins to be set up. When the steel--the
trusses--is up and riveted, then away with the falsework. Our bridge
stands by itself. You can put up a 500-foot span in no time at all by
using the falsework."

You make bold to ask what the engineer does when the river is too deep to
admit of falsework. He is quick to answer.

"We generally fall back on a cantilever," he says, without hesitation.
Then he begins to tell you about one of the latest of American
problems--the new bridge of the Idaho & Washington Northern Railroad, just
now being built over the Pend Oreille River, Washington. They could span
that narrow cleft only on the cantilever principle, and when they began to
balance their cantilever, there was not enough room for the back arm. But
the engineers only chewed off fresh cigars and began forcing their great
span out mid-air. They made the balance by placing 600 tons of steel rails
on the back-arm. For every foot the span reached out anew over a so-called
"bottomless" they added a few more rails. You can generally trust an
engineer in such a time as that.

Look closely now upon the workmen who are fabricating this giant bridge.
Look closely upon them. They are different from those whom we saw toiling
in the caissons below. Scandinavians may and do toil as sand-hogs at the
bottom of the stream; Lithuanians may mine the ore, and Hungarians roll it
into steel; Americans build upon their toil and erect this bridge. These
builders speak no unfamiliar tongue. They are the product of Ohio, the
Middle West, the South, the Pacific Coast, New England; they rise
immeasurably superior to every other class of labor employed upon the
work. Some of them have been sailors, and their talk has the savor of the
sea. All of them are men, clear-headed, cool-headed, true-headed men.

If you come upon them at the noon-hour, sprawled along the narrow ledge of
a single plank you may be impressed by two things--their Americanism and
their cosmopolitanism. The first of these is writ upon each man as you
look at him; the second is evident in talk with him. This big fellow must
have been a sheriff out in Montana, and he must have been a sheriff for
bad men to dodge; his neighbor is talking about his last job, a sky-high
cantilever down in Peru. The two side-partners over by the tool-box are
just back from India. American bridge-building talent encircles the world.
Here is a boss who got his first training down on the Nile; his assistant
has done some mighty big work on the Trans-Siberian.

These are the men who are building the bridge. In a little time there will
be no advancing ends, finding their path from pier-top to pier-top. There
will be, instead, a long and slender path for the railroad; the bridgemen
will have done their work well; a great river will have once again been
conquered.

       *       *       *       *       *

The bridge problem is always different, it constantly has the fascination
of variety. That variety will come into play at unexpected turns. Once,
down in a deep Colorado canon, whose walls rose precipitously for a
thousand-odd feet, and which was all but filled by a deep and rapid river,
the engineers of the Rio Grande & Western found absolutely no ledge
whatsoever upon which they might rest their rails. They puzzled upon the
problem for a little while, and then they swung a girder bridge parallel
with the river. The bridge was supported by braced girders, that fastened
their feet in the walls of the canon, hardly wider there than a narrow
city house. The railroad has been running over that construction for more
than thirty years; it is one of the scenic wonders of the land, and a
triumph for the engineer that built it. In constructing the expensive West
Shore Railroad up the Hudson River, similar difficulties were experienced
south of West Point, and truss bridges were built parallel with the steep
river banks to carry the tracks from ledge to ledge. It is not an unusual
matter for the construction engineer to spend a quarter of a million
dollars to span some deep, waterless gully in the mountains, which could
not be filled for more than twice that sum.

Many times, in these days of increasing weight of equipment, it becomes
necessary to replace a bridge, without interrupting the traffic. The
construction engineer never fails to meet the problem. Years ago, he took
Roebling's famous suspension bridge at Niagara Falls, removed the stone
towers and replaced them with towers of steel, without delaying a single
train; and a little later he took that bridge itself, and substituted a
heavy cantilever for it, while all the time a heavy traffic poured itself
over the structure. The rebuilder of bridges works like the original
builder--with plentiful falsework. He timbers in and around his structure,
and then step by step and with exceeding caution removes the old and
substitutes the new. An old girder is taken out between trains; before
another train of cars shall roll over the structure a new one is ready,
temporarily bolted until the riveters can make it fast. It sounds
complicated, but it is remarkably simple, under the careful plans of a
patient engineer, who has that infinite thing that we call genius.

Sometimes a bold engineer strikes out into a new method, quicker and less
expensive than these piecemeal efforts. Of such was the job at
Steubenville, O., where a 205-foot double-track span was erected on heavy
falsework alongside the old bridge. In a carefully chosen interval between
a service of frequent trains, both the old and the new spans--together
weighing 1,300 tons--were fastened together and drawn sideways a distance
of twenty-five feet in one minute and forty seconds. The new span was then
in place, and the old one--ready to be dismantled--stood on falsework at
the side. The entire job had been accomplished in an interval of seventeen
minutes between trains.

That is not unusual. The floating method is sometimes adopted with
remarkable success--especially in the case of draw-bridge spans. There the
problem complicates itself exceedingly, for both the water and the land
highways must be kept open for traffic; yet it is a matter of record that
the Pennsylvania Railroad, operating a fearfully heavy suburban service in
and out of Jersey City, recently substituted one draw for another on its
Hackensack River Bridge without delaying a single train.

       *       *       *       *       *

But even in this high noon of the day of steel, the stone bridge holds its
own. The big chiefs of railroad construction look upon it with favor.
Higher priced than a steel bridge of equal capacity it requires initial
outlay. But forever after, it represents a saving--a saving chiefly in
that very important figure, maintenance. A steel bridge requires constant
attention and constant expense. A stone bridge requires little of either;
and therein lies its strength in its old age. Engineers point to such
structures as the Thomas Viaduct down at Relay, or to the wonderful stone
bridges that have stood through the centuries in older lands; they bear in
mind the constant battle that a steel bridge must make against the ravages
of weather and against the sinister thefts of corrosion, and ofttimes they
rule in favor of the oldest type of sizable bridge.

Two things are all-important in the choice between the steel bridge and
the arch bridge of stone or concrete. The first is the accessibility of
the quarries. If they are not very near the solid bridge will cost four
times that of one of steel and the average American railroad is not able
to spend money in that fashion, even in the hopes of future economies in
maintenance. If the quarries are close at hand, as they were years ago
when Kirkwood built the Starucca Viaduct for the Erie, the cost of a
masonry bridge will hardly exceed that of steel trusses, and the concrete
structure may cost a little less. Then there comes into play the second
consideration. The stone or concrete bridge has tremendous weight, no
ordinary foundation work will serve it. If the river bed and banks be of
sand or poor earth, the engineer had best give up his hopes of the Roman
form of structure. He can build steel towers and trusses on piles of
caissons--hardly solid stone piers and abutments and aides.

All these things considered, the stone bridge is still more than holding
its own in modern railroad construction. The Boston & Albany Railroad
began building these splendidly permanent structures along its lines
through the Berkshires more than twenty years ago. More recently both the
Pennsylvania and the Baltimore & Ohio have been looking with favor upon
this type of bridge. The Baltimore & Ohio has just finished building its
massive Brandywine Viaduct, near Wilmington, a splendid double-track
structure, 764 feet in length, and composed of two 80-foot, two 90-foot,
and three 100-foot arches.

The three great stone bridges that the Pennsylvania has built upon its
main line are all four-tracked. Two splendid examples of these span the
Raritan River at New Brunswick, and the Delaware at Trenton, New Jersey.
The third, spanning the Susquehanna at Rockville, Pa., just north of
Harrisburg, is the largest stone bridge in the world. It is over a mile in
length, and is composed of 48 arches; 220,000 tons of masonry was employed
in its construction.

Concrete viaducts were first employed in interurban electric railroad
construction, and latterly they have been brought more to the service of
the steam railroad. A splendid example of this very new form of
construction exists in the extension of the Florida East Coast Railroad
over the keys and shallow waters of Southern Florida, for seventy-five
miles between Homestead and Key West. A considerable portion of the line
is over the sea.

The Florida keys are like a series of stepping-stones, leading into the
ocean from the tip of the peninsula to Key West. They lie in the form of a
curve, the channels separating the islands varying from a few hundred feet
to several miles in width. Nearly thirty of these islands were used in the
construction of the new railroad. More than fifty miles of rock and
earthen embankment have been built where the intervening waters are
shallow, but where the water is deeper and the openings are exposed to
storms by breaks in the outer reef, concrete arch viaducts have been used.
These viaducts consist of 50-foot reinforced concrete arch spans and
piers, with here and there a 60-foot span.

There are four of these arch viaducts aggregating 5.78 miles in length.
The longest is between Long Key and Grassy Key, 2.7 miles, and is called
the Long Key Viaduct; across Knight's Key Channel, 7,300 feet; across
Moser's Channel, 7,800 feet, and across Bahia Honda Channel, 4,950 feet.
The material of these islands is coralline limestone. In many places the
embankment for the roadway is 8 or 9 feet in height, and the roadbed is
ballasted with the same material. The result is one of the finest and
safest railway roadbeds in the world.

Across the Delaware River at Slateford, Pa., the Delaware, Lackawanna &
Western Railroad is building the largest concrete bridge in the world, a
few feet longer than the great structure by which the Illinois Central
crosses the Big Muddy River and just 100 feet longer than the Connecticut
Avenue Bridge, at Washington, D. C. The Lackawanna's bridge is 1,450 feet
long, with five arches of 150-foot span, and a number of shorter arches.
The track is carried at an elevation of 75 feet above highwater; and to
find living-rock as a solid foundation for a structure of so great a
weight, the abutments and piers were carried about 61 feet below the
surface of the ground.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the bridge-builder at his elbow, the railroad constructing engineer
hesitates at no river, no arm of the sea, no deep valley, no wild ravine,
no cleft in the mountain-side. He calls to his aid the magic of the men
who have made this branch of American practical science famous: a feathery
trestle appears, as if by magic. Across its narrow edge the steel rails
follow their resistless path.




CHAPTER VI

THE PASSENGER STATIONS

    EARLY TRAINS FOR SUBURBANITES--IMPORTANCE OF THE TOWERMAN--AUTOMATIC
    SWITCH SYSTEMS--THE INTERLOCKING MACHINE--CAPACITIES OF THE LARGEST
    PASSENGER TERMINALS--ROOM FOR LOCOMOTIVES, CAR-STORAGE, ETC.--STORING
    AND CLEANING CARS--THE CONCOURSE--WAITING-ROOMS--BAGGAGE
    ACCOMMODATIONS--HEATING--GREAT DEVELOPMENT OF PASSENGER STATIONS--SOME
    NOTABLE STATIONS IN AMERICA.


The railroad terminal is the city gate. Without, it rises in the superior
arrogance of white granite, as an architectural something. It has broad
portals, and through these portals a host of folk both come and go.
Within, this city gate is a thing of stupendous apartments and monumental
dimensions, a thing not to be grasped in a moment. In a single great
apartment--a vaulted room so great as to have its dimensions run into
distant vistas--are the steam caravans that come and go. It is a busy
place, a place of an infinite variety of business.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the early morning the train-shed gives the first sign of the new-born
day. Before the dawn is well upon the city, the great arcs that run into
those distant vistas in wonderful symmetry are hissing and alight, and the
first of 500 incoming trains is finding its way into the gloom of the
shed. Some few trains have started out with the early mails and the
morning papers. The great rush into town is yet to begin.

Even before dawn, a thousand little homes without the city have been awake
and fretful. The gray fogs of the night lie low, and lights begin to
twinkle, lines of shuffling figures to find their way to the nearest
suburban station. It is very early morning when these begin to pass
through the city gate. The earliest suburban trains slip in from the yards
and come to a slow, grinding stop beneath the shed. Before the wheels have
ceased turning, the first of the workers is off the cars and running down
the platform. In fifteen seconds, the platform is black with men.

There are many more of these trains, a great multiplication of men within
a little time. Before seven o'clock, the trains begin to increase; to
follow more and more closely upon one another's heels. After seven, they
come still oftener; two or three of them may stop simultaneously on
different tracks under the great vault of the shed; they are heavy with
people. There is a constant clatter of engines, stamping and puffing,
dragging their heavily laden trains and snapping them quickly out of the
way of others to follow. The electric lights under the shed go out with a
protesting sputter, and you realize that the day is at hand. This mighty
army of those who live without the city walls is flocking in, in an
unceasing current now. There is an endless procession from the track
platforms; a stream of humans finding its way to the day's work.

Do you want figures so that you may see the might of this army?
Binghamton, N. Y., is a city; a little less than fifty thousand persons
live there. If the whole population of Binghamton--every man, woman, and
child--were poured through the portals of this terminal on any one of six
mornings of the week, it would be about equal to this suburban traffic. In
a single hour--from seven to eight--45 trains have arrived under the roof
of this shed and discharged their human freight; in the following hour, 64
trains empty another great brigade of the army from without the city
walls.

       *       *       *       *       *

The city gate is indeed a busy place. Its concourse or head platform
echoes all day long with the unending tread of shuffling feet; beyond the
fence, with its bulletins and ticket-examiners, is the vault of the
train-shed, a thing of great shadows, even in midday. Its echoes are also
unending. There seems to be no end of pushing and shoving and hauling
among the engines; there must be an infinite stock of trains somewhere
without. The human stream flows all the while.

The marvel of all this is that the terminal, which seems so intricate, so
baffling, is under the control of one man--a man to whom it is as simple
as the ten fingers of his hands. This man is keeper of the city gate. His
watch-house is situated just without the big and squatty train-shed. It is
long and narrow, glass-lined and sun-filled. Through its windows he keeps
track of those who come and go.

"There's Second Seventeen, with them school teachers coming back from the
convention out at Kansas City. Put her in on Twenty-one so's to give the
baggage folks a chance. Them women travel with lots of duds."

These are orders to his assistants and orders in that watch tower are
rarely repeated. The assistants are in shirt-sleeves like their chief, for
the sun-filled tower is broiling hot. They nod to one another, click small
levers, and Second Seventeen--a long train of sleeping-cars coming into
the city in the hot moisture of the early June morning--is sent easily and
carefully in upon track Twenty-one in the train-shed of the terminal.
There you have the explanation of that order that was meaningless to you
but a moment ago. Track Twenty-one is nearest the in-baggage room of the
station. With two cars, piled roof-high with heavy trunks, the
thoughtfulness of the towerman in sending the special upon track
Twenty-one will be appreciated by the baggage handlers. A vast amount of
manual labor will be saved; and that counts, even upon a cool day.

[Illustration: THE NORTHWESTERN'S MONUMENTAL NEW TERMINAL ON THE WEST SIDE
OF CHICAGO]

[Illustration: THE UNION STATION AT WASHINGTON]

This keeper of the city gate represents the survival of the fittest, the
very cream of his profession. The chances are that he began his
railroading off in some lonely way station on a branch line, developed
qualities that brought him to the quick and favorable attention of his
chiefs, then advanced steadily along the rapid lines of promotion that
railroading holds for some men. He is one of three men, who, for certain
hours, hold the keeping of the complicated city gate within their own
well-drilled minds. The tower is the mind, the brain centre, the ganglion,
of that city gate; but the tower is only wondrously mechanical, after all;
the mind of the careful towerman is the mind that controls all the
mechanism.

To the average traveller, the city gate is a thing that impresses itself
upon his mind by its exterior and interior beauty, or its convenience of
arrangement. He notes the broad concourses, the ample entrances and exits,
the compelling magnificence of the public rooms, the great sweep of the
train-shed roof, but beyond that train-shed roof is a tangle of tracks and
signals about which he does not worry his busy head. Those tracks and
signals represent more truly the station than the mere architectural
magnificence of its outer shell. They are a tangle and a maze, apparently,
but a tangle and maze that must represent skill and ease in their
tremendous operation. They are neither tangle nor maze to the
shirt-sleeved men in the tower. They must know each track, each
switch-point, each signal as intimately and familiarly as they know the
fingers of their hands.

Every mechanical device is employed to simplify the tangle for the comfort
of the busy minds that must constantly employ themselves in solving it. In
the big watch-tower--the "control" of the terminal--there is a map that is
more than map. It depicts in miniature all the tracks and switches and
signals that lie without and roundabout the tower; but this map shows
switches and signals changing as the switches and signals of the
train-yard change. It brings the distant corners of the terminal in closer
touch with the towermen. In fog or blinding storm, this track model is
invaluable--a veritable compass set within the brain of the terminal.

This illuminated map sets upon the best piece of mechanism that has yet
been devised for the operation of the terminal yard. It is a long boxed
affair, not entirely unlike the box of the old-fashioned square piano, but
in this case (the terminal we are watching being of unusual capacity) more
than thirty feet in length. This box is the very brains of the terminal.
It represents the acme of mechanical condensation. Reduced to its earliest
and simplest equivalent--the separate hand operation of a gigantic cluster
of switches in a great terminal yard--it would cover a vast area and
result in the employment of an army of switchmen. Carelessness on the part
of any one member of this army might cause a serious accident. The margin
of safety would be very low in such a case.

The first schemes of automatic switch systems eliminated the necessity of
employing an army of switchmen. A cluster of levers, in a tower of
commanding location, was connected by steel rods with the switches and the
signals which protected them. A man in the tower operated this group of
levers. In this way, the control of the yard was simplified, and
responsibility was placed upon a better paid and better trained man than
the average hand switchman. The margin of safety was considerably
broadened.

Then came an amendment to that first system. Some genius of a mechanic
built an interlocking switch machine, a thing of cogs and clutches, by
which a collision in a railroad yard became almost a physical
impossibility. In these mechanical interlocking devices the tower levers
are so controlled, one by another, that signals cannot be given for trains
to proceed until all switches in the route governed are first properly set
and locked; and conversely, so that the switches of a route governed by
signal cannot be moved during the display of a signal giving the right of
way over them. By installation of the interlocking, some of the
responsibility is taken by mechanical device from human brain and the
margin of safety broadened still further.

This "piano box" represents still further condensation of the switch and
signal control and interlocking devices. The men who designed this
particular city gate designed it to accommodate more than a thousand
outgoing and incoming passenger trains each twenty-four hours; they had
found that the condensations given by earlier systems were not sufficient
for their purpose. After bringing several switches, designed to act in
concert, upon a single lever, they found that they would have a row of 360
levers. Set closely together these would require a tower about 160 feet
long. It is roughly figured that it is not desirable to assign more than
twenty of these heavy levers to a single towerman and that meant eighteen
men, working at a shift. Moreover, the throwing of a heavy switch half a
mile distant from the tower is not a slight manual exercise.

Then the "piano box"--electro-pneumatic--was installed; 150 feet of levers
was reduced to 30 feet of small handles hardly larger than faucet handles
and quite as easily turned. The control of a great terminal was brought
down to three towermen, acting under the direction of their chief, the
shirt-sleeved keeper of the city gate.

"We've got to keep them hustling," he tells you. "There's the morning
express in from New York. She's heavy this morning. That train over there,
coming across the swing-bridge, is the millionaire's special. She's all
club-cars, comes in every mornin' from the seaside. Her wheels'll stop on
the same nick as the express. Watch them both, carefully."

"Isn't it quite a trick handling those trains simultaneously?"

"Not much," a smile fixed itself upon the chief towerman's features, as he
fingered his greasy timetable. "Here's four trains pulling out here
simultaneously at 5:40. On top of that we get a Forest Hills local in at
5:39, a Hudson Upper local at 5:40, an Ogontz at 5:42, a Readville at
5:43, all incoming, and pull out two more at 5:43. Ten trains in just four
minutes isn't bad, and we haven't begun to feel the capacity of this
terminal yet.

"That isn't all of it. We get the whole thing criss-crossed on us
sometimes; and perhaps they'll put on an extra getting out of here at
5:40, and that'll bother us a little, for we have regular tracks assigned
for all our scheduled trains. If they don't run in the extras on us, or we
don't get a breakdown anywhere, it's pretty plain sailing. Ring off your
10:10, Jimmy."

Jimmy, the assistant at the far end of the tower, touched one of the
little handles, a blade on a signal bridge opposite the end of the
train-shed dropped, a big locomotive caught the rails instantly and
cautiously led a long train of heavy cars out through the intricacy of
tracks and switches until it was past the tower, over the "throat" of the
yard, and, striking on the main line, was gaining speed once more.

"It's as easy for him as unbroken rail off in the country," said the chief
towerman to me, as he waved salutation at the engineer passing below him.

Then he fell into a detailed and wondrous explanation of the intricacies
of the "piano-box" mechanism. On the lower floor of the tower were air
condensers, and through the medium of electricity and compressed air heavy
switches and signals a half-mile off are worked almost by finger touch.
Each switch is guarded by at least one signal, possibly two--home and
distant--and these blades show an open or a closed path to the engineer.
They are so arranged that normally they stand at danger and in case of
breakdown they return by gravity to danger. At night the blades, which in
various positions show safety and danger and caution, are replaced by
lights--red for danger, yellow for caution, green for safety--according to
the present standard rules.

       *       *       *       *       *

This physiology of the passenger terminal has dwelt so far upon its brain
and its nerve structure; the anatomy is hardly less interesting. Almost
every great passenger terminal in America is built upon the head-house
plan. In this scheme trains arrive and depart upon a series of parallel
tracks terminating within some sort of train-shed. It is the ideal scheme
from the standpoint of the passenger, for no stairs or bridges or subways
are necessary to reach any track. The tracks are generally laid in pairs,
and between each pair a broad platform is built, which is in reality a
long-armed extension of a common distributing platform or concourse
extending across the head of the tracks. Sometimes these extension
platforms are laid on both sides of a single track for greater facility in
handling baggage and for the quick unloading of heavy trains.

But in case any number of trains are to be operated through the terminal,
the head-house scheme becomes impracticable and an abomination to the
operating department. It makes necessary all manner of backing and turning
trains and a tremendous amount of energy and time is spent in so doing. So
we find the head-house stations--the real terminals of America--for the
most part along the seaboard or at the termination of really important
railroad routes. They are an expensive luxury at any other point.

At the outer end of the train-shed, its tracks begin to converge. They are
in rough similarity to the sticks of an open fan and at the handle they
are reduced to anywhere from two to eight main tracks, the connections
with the through tracks that serve the station. The point of convergence
is known to the towerman and all the other workers as the "throat" of the
yard. It is by far the most important point of the terminal, and is the
usual location of the control tower, with its authority over several
hundred switches and signals.

Upon the number of main tracks in this "throat" depends the capacity of
the terminal, quite as much as the number of tracks in the train-shed or
the size of any other of its facilities. If there are as many as eight
tracks in this "throat"--an unusual number--the signals and switches will
probably be arranged so that in the morning five tracks may be used for
the rush of incoming business, and three tracks for outgoing business,
while in the late afternoon conditions are exactly reversed, five tracks
being used for hurrying the suburbanites homeward, three for the lesser
business incoming to the terminal. With four tracks in the "throat"--a
usual number--three may be used in the direction of the volume of greatest
business. Each of these tracks is like a separate entrance to the
terminal, and when five are open from the train-shed simultaneously, as in
this first case, five outgoing trains may be started simultaneously from
as many tracks.

In this connection, a comparative table of the capacity of several of the
largest American passenger terminals may not be without interest:

                                          Approach   Station
                                           Tracks    Tracks
  Broad Street Station, Philadelphia         4         16
  Market Street Station, Philadelphia        4         13
  North Station, Boston                      8         24
  South Station, Boston                      8         28
  Union Station, St. Louis                   6         32
  Union Station, Washington                  6         33
  Northwestern Station, Chicago              6         16
  Lackawanna Terminal, Hoboken               4         14
  Pennsylvania Station, New York             2         21
  Grand Central Station, New York            4         32

But the approach and train-shed tracks are only a part of the yards that
are necessary at every large passenger terminal. Certain provisions are
necessary for mail and express service (freight of every sort is handled
as far as possible in separate yards and terminals), and extensive
provision for the storage and care of cars and motive power. In the last
case, it becomes advisable to have the roundhouse, or roundhouses, for
locomotive storage within short striking distance of the terminal station.
These are vast structures, their very form requiring large tracts of land.
The American plan of radiating engine-storage tracks from a common centre,
occupied by a turntable, has never prevailed in England. Some few
attempts have been made in this country to build parallel storage tracks,
with the transfer table for an operating arm, but almost every attempt of
this sort has been induced by a necessity for unusual economy in
land-space. We shall need the turntables as long as we continue to use
steam as a motive power, and the early method of grouping storage tracks
and radii from the table has never lost its favor with operating officers.

A full-size roundhouse, with a diameter approximating 300 feet, has as its
necessary accessories, facilities for coaling the locomotives--several at
a time--as well as supplying them with water, sand, and other necessities.
Possibly the terminal will be big enough to demand shop facilities for
trifling repairs and maintenance of both cars and motive power. A big
passenger terminal is a much bigger thing than that gaudy waiting-room in
which you sit, whilst your train is being made ready to take you out from
the city.

Great as the room assigned to locomotives, greater must be yard-room for
car-storage, in rough proportions, as the length of the locomotive to the
average train length. It takes something approaching a genius to lay out
the car-yards, particularly in the case of passenger terminals, which are
almost invariably in the heart of great cities where land values are
fabulously high. These yards, in order to earn the appreciation of the men
who must operate them, must be easy of access and be of sufficient size to
meet the heavy demands that are to be put upon them. To appreciate them,
let us consider them in daily use.

The heavy express which has discharged its baggage and passengers in the
train-shed is hauled out to the yards by one of the sturdy little
switch-engines that are eternally poking their way about the yards. The
engine that has pulled it in from the road backs itself down to the
roundhouse, without another thought of the train. Its responsibility ended
as soon as the run ended in the train-shed. The engineer simply has to
see that his locomotive is carefully put away in the roundhouse; and, on
some roads, that his fireman cleans its upper parts before the next run
out upon the line. The roundhouse crew is then supposed to take care of
the rest of the engine.

In the meantime, the stout little switching-engine has hauled the cars out
to the yards, separating the Pullman equipment and placing day-coaches,
baggage cars, and the like in a position by themselves. An effort is made
to keep the equipment for the heavy through trains reserved, allowance
being made for occasional changes for repair and maintenance. In the case
of the local and suburban trains, their varying traffic requires varying
lengths; and it is possible that two or three of the train-shed tracks
contain a supply of extra coaches in order that emergencies of sudden and
unexpected traffic may be met.

The yards must afford full facilities for storing and cleaning cars. This
last is a thorough operation, compressed air being used in many cases and
to great advantage. Within, seats are thoroughly dusted, floors swept,
woodwork wiped, while the railroad's pride in the outer appearance of its
equipment is shown by the scrupulous care with which a small army of
cleaners, ladders in hand, wash down the varnished sides of the coaches.
In addition, both coaches and Pullmans must be stocked with linen and
ice-water, lighting tanks filled and trucks inspected while in storage
yards. Most elaborate provisions are made for the stocking of dining and
buffet cars.

Through equipment will rest in the yards from six to twenty-four hours, as
an average. The local and suburban trains have a programme of their own,
slightly different. The engine that is to make the run will get its train
in the first place from the storage yard. It is only a big express run,
where the locomotive is privileged to back into the station, to find its
train made ready there for it by some fag of a switch-engine. The engine
that hauls the local backs its own train into the station, makes its run
out upon the line, 15, 25, 50 miles, whatever the case may be, and brings
the train back into the station. It kicks the cars out, just beyond the
cover of the train-shed and while it is hurrying to the turntable the cars
are being hastily swept and dusted. An hour will be allowed the engineer
to turn his engine and get his coal and water supply, and then he will
start out again on his local run. This performance will be repeated one or
more times, before the coaches are sent to the yard for thorough cleaning
and stocking, and the locomotive housed for a little rest in the
programme.

This is not the universal programme, but it is typical. It seems simple;
but with the multiplicity of local trains in service, the demands of the
regular through traffic, and the special demands that come unexpectedly
day after day, that car storage yard has got to be arranged for an economy
of operation, as well as with the economy of space in view. Each storage
track must be of convenient access and the chances are that a separate
tower and interlocking may be set aside for the quick, convenient, and
safe operation of the storage yard. In any event, it must be so built as
to be worked without interference of any sort on the main line tracks of
the terminal.

So much for the terminal, in reference to its operation; now let us
consider it for a moment from the standpoint of the passenger. The first
point to be considered by the engineers who design it is the point that we
have just considered--safety and convenience in operation. A terminal
might be, and sometimes is, an architectural triumph and a thing of
monumental beauty, but a curse and an extravagance as an operating
proposition. The architects, the mural painters, the furniture designers
and the like are called in last. It is their province to make the setting
for the thing the engineers have already created.

So in considering the terminal station as a building, we must still give
ear to the engineer. He must plan for the future, anticipate the number of
persons who are to pass through this city's gate fifty years hence, and
plan his concourse, so many square inches for each one of those future
users of the terminal. Exits and entrances to the trains must be built in
order that incoming and outgoing streams of persons shall not conflict.
All these points require careful study. It is possible to design a
baggage-room so bad as to make the station all but a failure; a stuffy
ticket-office that is almost an impossibility to use under pressure
conditions. The good engineer thinks two or three thousand times before he
begins the design of a passenger terminal.

The concourse, or head platform, that joins all the different track
platforms is the main feature of the terminal building. Upon it some
persons congregate preparatory to going through the gates to their trains,
and other persons congregate awaiting the arrival of trains--a matter
which is carefully bulletined for their convenience. Arriving and
departing passengers, with a percentage of idlers, must be accommodated
upon it. It must be capacious. Exits to the street should be provided,
without the necessity of passing through the station building, and the
carriage stand should be close at hand.

The waiting-room will be the monumental and artistic expression of the
terminal. It may or may not be a portion of the entrance to the concourse
and train-shed, but it is essential that it be conveniently located, that
smoking-rooms, women's waiting-rooms, parcel-check, telephone, telegraph,
news-stand, and restaurant facilities be close at hand. It is hardly less
desirable that the ticket-offices adjoin the waiting-room yet the
architect who so places his ticket-offices that the belated traveller has
unnecessary delay in purchasing his tickets, will bring down unnumbered
curses upon his defenceless head.

The modern station will make provision for numerous railroad offices--be a
complete modern office-building in fact, although not emblazoning that in
its architectural design--and will have lunch-stand and restaurant
facilities, with their necessary addenda of store-rooms, refrigerators
and kitchens, as complete as those of the largest hotels.

The baggage accommodations deserve a paragraph by themselves. Americans,
due to the liberal baggage provisions of our railroads, travel each year
with increased impedimenta. Each year the task of the baggage-handlers
multiplies. Making room for trunks has come to be an important terminal
provision. In the large terminals, this traffic is divided, an in-baggage
room receiving from incoming trains and distributing to various forms of
city baggage delivery and an out-baggage room receiving and checking
baggage for outgoing trains. The in-baggage room is always much the
largest, because of the delays that almost invariably hold trunks for a
time--short or long--upon their arrival at a terminal.

It is desirable that baggage be handled with as little inconvenience as
possible to passengers; and for this reason almost all terminals have
subways extending from the "in" and "out" rooms beneath all train-shed
platforms and connected with each of these by elevators, large enough to
receive a full-sized baggage-truck. In this way annoyance and delay to
passengers is minimized. In the case of heavy through trains, where
baggage runs unusually heavy, the baggage-cars are frequently detached and
switched in upon special tracks that run alongside the baggage rooms.

The passenger terminal must also provide mail and express facilities among
these structures, but these, as has already been intimated, are generally
apart and quite separate from the passenger facilities. A power plant is
another necessity. The buildings must be heated, cars warmed in freezing
weather long before the locomotives are attached, ice-machines operated
for the station restaurant, power supplied to elevators, dynamos, and
lesser mechanisms about the terminal. This is a feature that is not
radically different from that of other large commercial structures.

The capacity of a modern railroad is measured by the capacity of its
terminals rather than by that of its main line tracks. The railroads were
not quick to realize nor to appreciate this fact at the first. It was
finally forced upon their attention, and in that way became one of the
fundamental principles of American railroad construction and operation.

The terminal became recognized as one of the most efficient possible
solutions of the congestion problem, a little more than a quarter of a
century ago. It was then that the double-tracking and four-tracking
devices were found to measure all out of cost with the relief that was to
be derived from them. It was then that the engineers were told to meet the
situation with a relief that should be measurably low in cost.

The result of their work has been to put America foremost with her
railroad terminals. The engineers have worked against great odds in many
cases. The railroads in the beginning took little or no forethought for
their terminals. They neglected rare opportunities to buy land for these
facilities in the beginning, when the cities were small and the land
cheap. They have paid in millions of dollars for this neglect. In some
cases, the early railroads had little money to expend upon this city real
estate; but in few cases did any of their managers have the gift of
prophecy that made them foresee the great cities of to-day or the great
tides of traffic they would be called upon to move.

Nor has this phase of the situation improved within recent years. A great
railroad rebuilt its passenger terminal in an important city ten years ago
and blindly imagined that the increase in facilities would carry it a
quarter of a century at the least. To-day it is carrying off the remnants
of that station improvement to the scrap-heap and trying to see far enough
into the future to build a station that shall last it fifty years at
least.

There is not an engineer employed by that railroad who will assert
himself as possessed of the absolute belief that the new station will be
adequate for the traffic of a half century hence, if indeed the great
spreading palace of steel and marble be in existence at all at that time.
All that they will tell you is to point to the fact that another one of
America's greatest passenger carriers has doubled its traffic within the
past ten years.

"How can we gamble with an unknown future of such dimensions?" they ask
you in return.

When the Park Square Station of the Boston & Providence Railroad in Boston
and the Grand Central Station in New York were built, in the early
seventies, they were the first railroad passenger terminals of size that
the country had seen. It was thought that _they_ would stand a hundred
years as monuments to the genius of the men who designed them. To-day they
are both gone, each supplanted by a station that both together might be
packed within.

Do you wonder then that railroad operator and engineer alike stand
appalled at the tremendous terminal problem that our great cities, growing
awesome overnight, are constantly presenting to them?

       *       *       *       *       *

In the beginning, there were no passenger or freight terminals, nor,
indeed, a traffic that demanded them. The passenger cars were apt to be
hauled by horses from some downtown depot through the centre of the street
to an "outer depot" at the edge of the town where the locomotive replaced
the horses. When the cars became heavier, the trains longer and more
frequent, the railroads were gradually forced in most cities to remove
their rails from the streets and the use of horses was generally
abandoned. Still, passengers crossing Baltimore, for some years after the
war on their way from the North to Washington, noticed that the trains
were broken into cars and drawn one by one by horses across the city,
through crowded streets, from one outer railroad station to the other. A
venerable white horse was the switching-engine in the Rochester depot
until the beginning of the eighties.

When the passenger traffic on the railroads had become a business of
extent--about the middle of the past century--the construction of sizable
railroad stations began. The Fitchburg Railroad built its stone fortress
at Boston, which still stands and was for many years regarded as a marvel
of its sort. Down in Baltimore, the Susquehanna Railroad--afterwards the
Northern Central--built Calvert Station, and stanch old Calvert is still a
busy passenger gateway of the Monumental City. A few years later the
Baltimore & Ohio built Camden Station there and Camden Station was
regarded as something rather unusually fine for a number of years.

In the sixties, the railroad terminals grew in size, and the old custom of
having separate stations at the far sides of important towns was
disappearing, as the American began to see and to demand the advantages of
through traffic. So Cleveland built at the close of the war a stone Union
Station, of such size that Cleveland folks bragged of it for many years.
The stone Union Station at Cleveland is still in use, but the folk of that
town do not brag of it nowadays. Cleveland has grown a good deal since
they built the Union Station there.

The first real passenger terminals of importance in the country were the
Park Square in Boston, and the Grand Central in New York, to which
reference has already been made. These presented architectural pretensions
such as the railroads of the country had not before offered to the cities
they served. They also served as models for bigger things that were to
follow. In Boston, the Lowell Road planned and built a large new station,
and the era of the passenger terminal was begun.

When the Pennsylvania Railroad built Broad Street Station, at
Philadelphia, it built a terminal a little finer than anything
accomplished up to that time. Even to-day, with the dignity of years
creeping upon it, Broad Street is still one of the foremost American
stations. The policy of its owners has been to keep it abreast of the
demands of the day, and only recently it has been greatly enlarged again,
its protecting, interlocking, and signal system being made second to none
in the world. To the traveller, the ivory-white waiting-room, where
Philadelphians delight to congregate, is an unending source of admiration;
engineers find interest in the intricate system of tunnels and bridges by
which a number of trunk-line divisions are brought into the station
without crossing at level. Broad Street Station shows a yearly increase in
its passenger traffic of about five per cent. It has a daily movement of
more than 600 loaded trains in and out, in addition to a heavy switching
movement. But because of the steady increase of its traffic the
Pennsylvania has already planned to relieve it by building a new main for
express trains out at West Philadelphia. When that is done Broad Street
will be used exclusively for suburban traffic. A short distance away
stands the Market Street Station, of the Philadelphia & Reading Railroad,
a terminal rivalling Broad Street in beauty, and only slightly inferior in
capacity. Philadelphia possesses two distinguished city gateways.

But the first big station terminals--in our American sense that a thing
big must be bigger than anything else of the same kind in the world--were
those erected at Boston and at St. Louis. The first of these handles a
traffic far exceeding that of any other terminal ever built; the second
has a train-shed that is gigantic and overwhelming; and so each of the
cities can, in a measure of truth, claim for itself the largest railroad
station ever built. Each has enough of novelty and interest to make it
worthy of attention.

The Boston terminal--South Station--was preceded by a giant structure
erected along the bank of the Charles River to receive a multitude of
through and suburban railroad lines entering from the north. This
terminal--North Station--embraced the structure of the Boston & Lowell
Railroad and superseded those of the Boston & Maine and Fitchburg
railroads. The merging of these and other interests into the present
Boston & Maine made the North Station a possibility. It is not a structure
of particular distinction, from either an architectural or an engineering
standpoint, but it has proved itself a mighty convenience to a travelling
public, using a multiplicity of busy lines.

The convenience of it made the South Station a possibility. Boston, like
Philadelphia, spreads out well beyond its actual boundaries and measures
itself as a vast community, including many near-by cities and villages.
With the consolidation of a number of railroads in Southern New England
into the New York, New Haven & Hartford system, and the popularity of the
North Station so close at hand, the South Station came as a matter of
course. It replaced the stations of the New York & New England--whose site
forms part of its site--the Old Colony, the Boston & Albany, and the Park
Square Station. To accommodate the vast traffic of all these railroads, a
great terminal was designed and built, a thing whose bigness is hardly
realized by the passenger coming and going through it and who knows it
only as a thing of some thousands of shuffling feet, giant shadows, and
long distances.

In addition to the 28 sub-tracks in the train-shed, South Station is, in
effect, a through station for electric suburban traffic. This service has
not yet been installed, but the tracks are ready for use upon short
notice, when the facilities of the main train-shed shall become overtaxed.
This through station has been ingeniously devised underneath the
train-shed and waiting-rooms of the terminal. It is served by two tracks
leading from the main entrance tracks to the station--guarded by separate
interlocking and tower controls, and consists of two extensive loops. For
suburban service, with no baggage to be handled, these loops will some day
afford a great accommodation. Three or four electric trains may be stood
upon each. The time and necessity of reversing the trains is entirely
obviated, and upon the two tracks of this sub-station a short-haul traffic
can be handled almost equal in numbers to that of the train-shed overhead.

What such a statement means can be better realized by a recourse to bold
statistics. South Station handled 31,831,390 passengers in 1909, who
travelled two and fro in some 800 trains daily. It has handled more than
900 trains in a single day. Its baggage men take care of more than
2,500,000 trunks in a twelvemonth. The statistics of a city gate like
South Station are, in themselves, sizable.

St. Louis has one passenger station to serve as city gate for the traffic
that comes and goes at that important railroad centre. That gate is the
chief through passenger traffic point of the world. From its train-shed
one may take through trains to every corner of the United States and a few
distant corners of Mexico and Canada. St. Louis, like most Western cities
has no volume of suburban traffic as New York, Boston, or Philadelphia,
but it is a consequential point for through passengers. The better to
serve the needs of the 22 different railroad systems entering that city,
the Union Station was built a dozen years ago. It was thought to be big
enough to last St. Louis many years. Before the World's Fair of 1904
opened in that city the Union Station was already judged inadequate, and
an elaborate plan was consummated for its enlargement.

When the Union Station was originally planned, St. Louis demanded a gate
that would be worthy of her size and dignity. No type of through station
would do, the head-house terminal was demanded and built, even though in
actual practice it necessitated backing each arriving train into the
shed. A station of giant size with the largest train-shed in the world was
built and hailed with a glad acclaim by the Western town.

When the station was found inadequate, the engineers found their plans for
enlarging it would have to be adapted to a very confined area, proscribed
by immovable railroad properties to the south, highway viaducts to the
east and west, and a granite head-house, costing several million dollars,
to the north. Within that confined area, they were to correct the evils of
insufficient capacity--a train-shed with a single 4-track throat and some
standing tracks of but 3 cars' length, inadequate baggage arrangements,
and lesser evils. Within two years, they had substituted, without
increasing the area of the Union Station property, a 10-car capacity for
each of the 32 tracks of the train-shed, a double throat with 6 tracks,
increased concourses and distributing platforms for passengers, and a
complete subway system for the handling of baggage. The prosecution of
that work, while the station was in constant and busy use, ranks as one of
the marvels of latter-day practical engineering.

From the standpoint of the architect, no other station has yet been built
in the United States that can compare with the new Union Station at
Washington. For years, the overcrowded railroad stations at that city have
been but wretched gateways to the national capitol. Now the city that is
fast becoming the Mecca of all Americans has an entrance worthy of her
dignity, and in keeping with the increasing magnificence of her
architectural works.

The Washington Station is in full accord with the wonderful architectural
development of that city, and has a setting in the creation of a great
facing plaza, in which 100,000 troops may be gathered in review. Some day
the plaza is to be surrounded by a group of public buildings but even in
that day the white marble station, exceeding in size all other Washington
buildings save the Capitol itself, will remain the dominating feature of
that facing plaza. It has been created in simple classic outline, a
vaulted train-shed being purposely omitted, in order that the station
should not overshadow the proportions of the near-by Capitol.

Similarly, the vaulted train-shed has been omitted in the splendid new
white granite terminal which the Chicago and Northwestern Railway has just
completed on the West Side of Chicago. That new terminal is a real
addition to a town which has long boasted two model stations--one in La
Salle Street and the other upon the Lake Front. The Northwestern terminal
is one of the fine architectural features of Chicago--a structure of
classic design, the dominating feature of which is a colonnaded portico,
monumental in type and towering to a height of 120 feet above the main
street entrance.

This new terminal has a possible capacity of a quarter of a million
passengers each day. It has some novel features for the comfort of
passengers. A great many travellers cross Chicago in the course of
twenty-four hours; in many cases this is the single break in a weary and
dirty journey. For these, the new terminal not only provides the customary
lounging rooms and barber shops, but also private baths. There is a series
of rooms where invalids, women with children, or other persons seeking
privacy, may go directly by private elevator where they may rest while
waiting for connecting trains. For women there are tea-rooms and hospital
rooms, with trained nurses in attendance. That is almost the last note in
comfort for the traveller. There are, in addition to all these, private
rooms where the suburbanite may change into his evening clothes and
proceed in his various social duties, changing back again before he
catches his late train out into the country.

       *       *       *       *       *

New York City is still in the process of rebuilding and readjusting her
gateways. Two magnificent terminals in her metropolitan district have
already been finished; the third is still under construction. The first of
these terminals is a real water-gate, built for the Lackawanna Railroad
and situated in Hoboken, just across the Hudson River from the corporate
New York. It is a handsome architectural creation in steel and concrete.
Its tall clock-tower dominates the river front by night and day and those
who come and go through its portals find themselves in a succession of
white and vaulted hallways and concourses that suggest a library or museum
more than the mere commercial structure of a railroad corporation.

An interesting feature of the Hoboken Station is the abandonment of the
high train-shed such as has come to be a distinguishing feature of some of
the world's great terminals. Engine smoke and gases work havoc with the
structural steel work of such sheds, and the engineers of the Hoboken
Station fashioned a low-lying roof, slotted to receive the locomotive
stacks. The result is a clean train-house, yet admirably protected from
the stress of weather. It is a novel note in terminal engineering.

The Pennsylvania Station, opened in November, 1910, has already become one
of the notable landmarks of New York. Beneath it disappeared the biggest
hole ever excavated at one time in the metropolitan city; for the great
station is not so famed either for its architectural beauty or for the
completeness of its details (although it is in the foreguard of the
world's great terminals in both of these regards), as for the stupendous
engineering project that was found necessary to connect it with the
trunk-line railroads that it serves. To the west, this takes form in two
parallel tunnels underneath the city, the Hudson River, and the Jersey
Heights; to the east a still heavier traffic, composed of empty trains in
Pennsylvania service and a great army of Long Island commuters, is carried
under the very heart of Manhattan Island and under the East River in four
parallel tunnels. Trains run for six miles under the greatest city of the
continent, with its flanking rivers and environs, without ever seeing
more than a momentary flash of daylight. The terminal has no train-shed or
other of the familiar external appearances of the usual railroad station
in a large city.

[Illustration: A MODEL AMERICAN RAILROAD STATION--THE UNION STATION OF THE
NEW YORK CENTRAL, BOSTON & ALBANY, DELAWARE & HUDSON, AND WEST SHORE
RAILROADS AT ALBANY]

[Illustration: THE CLASSIC PORTAL OF THE PENNSYLVANIA'S NEW STATION IN NEW
YORK]

[Illustration: THE BEAUTIFUL CONCOURSE OF THE NEW PENNSYLVANIA STATION, IN
NEW YORK]

[Illustration: "THE WAITING-ROOM IS THE MONUMENTAL AND ARTISTIC EXPRESSION
OF THE STATION,"--THE WAITING-ROOM OF THE UNION DEPOT AT TROY, NEW YORK]

The Pennsylvania terminal also departs radically from the other great
terminals in its track arrangements. The twenty-one parallel station
tracks, with their platforms, are placed in a basement forty feet below
street level. In fact, the great building is divided into three levels. At
the street level are the broad entrances, the chief of these forming
itself into a broad arcade, lined with shops that cater particularly to
the demands of the traveller. On this floor are also the railroad's
commodious restaurant and lunch-room.

On the intermediate plane, or level, the real business of the passenger
prefatory to his journey is transacted. The concourse, the great general
waiting-room, with its subsidiary rooms for men and women, the ticket
offices, and the telegraph offices are there gathered. From the roomy
concourse, covered in steel and glass after the fashion of the famous
train-sheds in Frankfort and Dresden, Germany, individual stairs and
elevators lead to each of the track platforms. A sub-concourse, hung
directly underneath the main structure, is reserved for exit purposes
only, and serves to separate the streams of incoming and outgoing
passengers. The north side of the station is separated and reserved for
the use of the Long Island passengers, chiefly commuters.

The theory of operation of the station is simplicity itself. A
Pennsylvania through train from the West, after discharging its passengers
and baggage, will not be backed out of the train-house, but will continue
on through the station, under more tunnels and another river, to the
storage yards just outside of Long Island City. Similarly, trains made
ready for a long trip at the yards will proceed empty under the East River
tunnels to the big station, where they will receive their outbound load.
This is the theory of the station, an operating theory which makes it in
part like a giant way-station and saves much terminal congestion. The Long
Island trains and a few short-line Pennsylvania express trains will be
turned in the station. These are the exception.

Of interest fully equal to that of the new Pennsylvania Station, is the
construction of a new Grand Central Station upon the site of and during
the use of the old. The Grand Central Station, used by both the New York
Central and the New York, New Haven, & Hartford Railroads, has been for
many years New York's great gateway to the east as well as the north and
west. It has developed a great suburban and a great through traffic since
the construction of the first station--away back in 1871. Temporary relief
was gained in the early eighties by the construction of an annex to the
east of the original station. Still further improvement was gained ten
years ago by tearing out a series of ill-arranged public rooms and
substituting for them the single beautiful waiting-room that has proved so
great a delight to travellers. Now that waiting-room is about to be
demolished in the face of plans for the newer and greater Grand Central.

The building of the new station has offered tremendous problems to the
engineers, for it has demanded a complete reconstruction within extremely
limited area, while not placing hindrances in the way of the constant
operation of one of the world's greatest terminals. Coincident with the
rebuilding of the new station has come the substitution of electricity for
steam on the terminal lines of its two tenants, the New York, New Haven, &
Hartford, and the New York Central & Hudson River Railroads. In order to
work the three-mile tunnel through Park Avenue and the sole entrance for
trains to the station at greatest capacity, it was found necessary to
extend the yards of the new station far north of those of the old. This
work, alone, has necessitated the acquisition of whole city blocks of
tremendously valuable real estate and the excavation of several million
cubic yards of rock and earth.

To accomplish the work of reconstruction and still enable the station to
handle its great traffic without serious interruption, serious forethought
and definite plans of action were found necessary. The plan was developed
by constructing a temporary building of brick and plaster covering a
vacant city block in Madison Avenue, at the west of the station. Into this
temporary structure a branch post office, an important adjunct of the
Grand Central, was moved from the extreme eastern side of the terminal.
Excavation for the new terminal began at its eastern edge and at that edge
the first portions of the new structure have been completed. A
waiting-room was then established in temporary quarters, the last vestiges
of the old Grand Central removed, and the main front and centre of the new
station fabricated. Similarly, as the excavation has progressed from the
east to the west side of the terminal, the great bulk of the traffic has
been gradually shifted from the old high-level to the new low-level.

The new Grand Central complete will have its main train-shed devoted to
through traffic. A second train-shed of similar arrangement and of
slightly smaller dimensions will be constructed underneath the main shed
for suburban traffic, and a single head-house will serve both floors. The
head-house will have as its chief architectural feature, a concourse of
mammoth proportions. The lesser features of the new Grand Central will
contribute to make the new terminal, built upon the site of the historic
old, one of the world's greatest gateways. The fact that steam locomotives
are absolutely prohibited from entering either of the two new stations on
Manhattan Island makes these the cleanest railroad terminals yet built.

So not only have our railroads begun to build great stations; they are
to-day building really beautiful stations. An age in which the American
demands the exquisite and the monumental in his architecture, palatial
homes, palatial shops, palatial hotels, demands that the railroad station
be something more than the mere expression of a commercial utility. Stone,
the sturdy and durable building material of all the ages, has become the
expression of these buildings from without. Within, they are gay with rare
marbles and mural paintings. There is nothing too fine for the railroad
passenger terminal of to-day in the United States.

When the master fancy of the architect, Richardson, designed the splendid
stations at Worcester and Springfield, as well as a host of smaller
attractive stations along the line of the Boston & Albany Railroad, the
beginnings were made. More recently this rising American desire for beauty
and good taste has shown itself in such elaborate and artistic structures
as the stations at Albany and Scranton. The last step has come in the
designing of the palatial terminals in Chicago, in Washington, and in New
York City. It would take a bold prophet to anticipate what the next step
might be.




CHAPTER VII

THE FREIGHT TERMINALS AND THE YARDS

    CONVENIENCE OF HAVING FREIGHT STATIONS AT SEVERAL POINTS IN A
    CITY--THE PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD'S SCHEME AT NEW YORK AS AN
    EXAMPLE--COAL HANDLED APART FROM OTHER FREIGHT--ASSORTING THE
    CARS--THE TRANSFER HOUSE--CHARGES FOR THE USE OF CARS NOT PROMPTLY
    RETURNED TO THEIR HOME ROADS--THE HARD WORK OF THE YARDMASTER.


All the folk who come and go upon the railroad know the passenger
stations. Few of them know the freight terminals. Yet it is from this last
source that the railroad will derive the greater part of its revenue. The
freight terminals of a large city will be a group of plants, designed for
varying purposes. The railroad handles its passenger business from a
single structure, if possible. It is comparatively simple to gather all
its passengers, even from a broad territory, within a great city, and so
to concentrate this part of its traffic in a single well-located terminal.

With the freight it is entirely a different question. The problem of
trucking is one of the great problems of each of our large cities, and, in
order to eliminate this as far as possible, the railroad, under the
stimulus of competition, will establish freight stations at each point
where any considerable volume of traffic is likely to originate. These
stations will consist of a freight-house, for handling package-freight
(your traffic expert calls this "LCL," meaning "less than carload"), and
wagon yards for carload lots. Perhaps there will be two freight-houses,
one for inbound, the other for outbound traffic. The wagon yards will have
to be ample for the accommodation of a host of trucks and drays as well
as for the long rows of freight-cars.

In addition to these stations, each large manufacturing plant is apt to be
a freight station of itself, with a private switch running to its
shipping-rooms and storage sheds; and in even a moderate-sized American
city there may be from 300 to 500 of these sidings in active daily use. So
much for the general commodity freight. Then there are the special
commodities.

Coal, for instance, is a freight business of itself. It is not handled in
the regular stations of the railroad, but in specially designed pockets
and storage sheds, which may be located at from one or two to half a
hundred different accessible points about the city. One begins to see,
after a little while, why the railroads now seize with avidity each
opportunity to gain lines through the hearts of our cities. Each line
gained means some appreciable relief toward the taking up of a traffic
burden that increases yearly.

It is most probable that the freight terminals of the city will have to
accommodate much more traffic than that which originates or terminates
there. Important lines of other railroads may intersect at that point, and
the handling of interchange freight is a busy function of the terminal
scheme. It may be an important point for lake, river, or ocean traffic;
and in such a case, the industries at docks and docking facilities of
every sort form other busy functions. There will be coal or ore wharves,
elevators, and car-floats to enter into the scheme.

So you see the railroad's freight terminal in any large city is like the
fingers of its extended hand. The long tendons reach into every productive
centre, gathering and distributing at from a dozen to fifty points, aside
from the private sidings. It is obvious that these must be caught together
somewhere; and generally upon the outskirts of an important traffic city
the railroad creates an interchange yard where this freight, incoming and
outgoing--100 trains a day, perhaps--is gathered together and sorted with
system and regularity, very much as the post office sorts the letters and
the mail packages.

To examine more closely this working of a modern freight terminal scheme,
let us take a single plant of a single system. The great operation by
which the Pennsylvania Railroad catches up and delivers its freight in the
metropolitan district around New York is typical, and will illustrate.

The Pennsylvania works with at least 24 freight stations, in addition to a
great number of private sidings from its lines as they pass through
Eastern New Jersey. These stations handle the freight of Manhattan Island,
Brooklyn, Jersey City, Hoboken, Newark, and smaller centres; but in
addition to them there are vast docks at which foreign steamers berth,
lighterage facilities for both foreign and coasting steamers, and a
tremendous freight interchange with the railroads running to the north and
east. The coal business is there again, a separate institution with many
piers and pockets; there is a group of bulky elevators that rise above the
smoky, busy Jersey shore, the whole going to make a sizable freight
terminal. There are coal pockets, piers, elevators, and a local freight
station at Jersey City (the railroad men know it as Harsemus Cove), and
another much larger plant at Greenville on the west bank of the upper
harbor, almost behind the Statue of Liberty. This last plant is just now
awaiting its greatest development. The Pennsylvania Railroad, through its
ownership control of the Long Island Railroad, is building an encircling
line, 4 and 6 tracks wide, around Brooklyn, and crossing its passenger
terminal yards at Long Island City. This encircling line--the New York
Connecting Railroad it is called--will be continued by a splendid bridge
over the East River to an actual connection with the New Haven system
reaching up into New England. When this is done, one of the bugaboos of
the freightmen--the slow and ofttimes dangerous movement of barges and
car-floats through the East River, past the entire length of Manhattan
Island--will be ended. Greenville will become the distributing point for
the bulk of New England freight that comes and goes from the south and the
west through New York.

Even at the present time Greenville is a freight point of considerable
magnitude. Go out to Waverley, the great sprawling interchange yard that
reaches from Newark almost to Elizabeth along the edge of the Jersey
meadows, and watch the through trains come from Greenville. They rank well
to-day with the traffic that comes from Harsemus Cove already; and
Harsemus Cove is soon to be as nothing.

Waverley is more than a mere junction. It was in the first instance the
neck of the bottle where the double-track line from Greenville, the main
line from Jersey City and Harsemus Cove, and the cut-off freight line that
carries through traffic around the heart of great and growing Newark,
united to form the main line of the busy Pennsylvania Railroad. Being a
gateway by natural location the railroad sought to make it a gateway in
reality. A big assorting or classification yard was built there for
outgoing freight, and another for the incoming. Storage tracks were added
and one of the great transfer houses of the country--but of that, more in
a moment.

The business day ends at the many freight-houses along the waterfront of
Manhattan and Brooklyn at four o'clock in the afternoon. At that hour, the
railroad refuses to accept any more freight for the day, car-doors are
closed and sealed with rapidity; in a short time the long and clumsy
floats are being hauled by pert little tugs toward Harsemus or Greenville.
There is not much loafing at either of those points along about
supper-time. Switching crews show feverish activity in snatching the cars
from the floats, and yardmasters bend themselves nervously toward forming
the long trains that are to go rumbling toward the west throughout the
night.

Stand in the switch-tower at Waverley, and you will begin to cultivate a
wholesome respect for the freight traffic that comes out from a great city
at nightfall. A through train from Greenville is billed to Pittsburgh, and
only hesitates long enough at Waverley to take the switch-points at that
busy junction with care. Three minutes behind it is a through Chicago
train from Harsemus Cove, and it goes stolidly through the gateway yard
without pausing. You wonder why they keep an expert yardmaster and half a
dozen switching crews at Waverley. Within five minutes you wonder no
longer. They are beginning to get the unassorted cars from the terminals,
cars that are bound for more than a score of States. The work of sorting
begins. The night yardmaster is a general, and he has an army of lesser
officers in the field. You can trace them through the night, as, lanterns
in hand, they are running along the trains (these are pulling in from the
waterfront every five minutes now), cutting out cars, adding cars, vamping
and revamping the freight traffic of the night.

This track receives through freight for Philadelphia, the next for
Pittsburgh, the third for Cincinnati, the fourth for Washington and the
points diverging therefrom. So it goes. When the assorting process has
been in progress for more than an hour at one end of the classification
tracks, there are long trains of cars upon them ready to run solid to some
large city or important distributing point. After that it is a simple
enough matter to bring engines and cabooses and start the trains through.
Then the sorting of the cars is begun again and continues until the
freight receiving points and the freight interchange points in the
metropolitan district have been swept clean for the night.

The transfer-house repeats the assorting process, only upon a smaller
scale, for it handles package freight--"less than carload." It is a long
structure, stretching its way down the yard and served by 8 to 10 long
sidings and unloading sheds. It takes the "LCL" stuff coming by night
from the connecting railroads and from the metropolitan freight-houses,
and a little after midnight its workers begin the sorting of this great
mass of matter, from 200 to 500 carloads a day.

Here is a really great phase of railroad energy. We find our way to a
gaunt freight-house, to whose door no truck has ever backed, and which is
hemmed in by many rows of sidings and of sheds. In this building one of
the busiest functions of the whole transportation business goes forth by
day and by night.

You ship a box--sixty pounds to one hundred pounds--from Wilkes-Barre,
Pa., to Berlin, Wis. Here comes another box from Watertown, N. Y., to
Norfolk, Va. A third is bound from Easthampton, Mass., to Chillicothe, O.;
a fourth from Terre Haute, Ind., to Plainfield, N. J., and so on, _ad
infinitum_. You can readily see how in such cases the railroads have a
problem in freight that closely approximates that of the Government mail
service. Ten thousand currents and cross-currents of merchandise rising
here and there and everywhere, and crossing and recrossing on their way to
destination, make a puzzle that does not cease when the rate-sheet experts
have finished their difficult work.

If all the freight might be expressed in even multiples of cars the
problem would not be quite so appalling. But your box is a hundred pounds
weight, or less, perhaps--"LCL" anyway. From its destination it goes with
other boxes in a car to the nearest transfer point. At the transfer house
the car in which it is placed is drilled quickly into an infreight track,
seals are broken, doors opened, and re-assorting begins. The
transfer-house is roomy and systematic. If it were anything less it would
resemble chaos.

But the chief freight points of that particular system and its connecting
points have regular stands, upon which nightly are placed cars bound for
these points. Each city (in the case of a large city each freight-house),
each transfer point, has a number, and its through car stands opposite
that number. When the infreight arrives and is unloaded piece by piece, a
checker, who is nothing less than an animated guide-book, gives each its
proper number, and it is promptly trucked off to the waiting car. It is
mail-sorting on a Titanic scale.

Nor is this an absolute order. Certain towns demand an occasional through
car from time to time, and a car must be assigned number and place at the
transfer-house against such emergencies. Sometimes there is more than
enough freight to fill the car allotted to any given point, and then one
of the switching crews must drill that out and find another empty to
replace it. Beyond that, the yardmaster's superiors are all the time
demanding that he show judgment in picking the cars to be filled.

When a freight car gets off the system to which it belongs it collects
forfeits from the other lines over which it passes, if they do not
expedite its passage; this the railroaders know as "_per diem_." The great
trick in operating is to keep _per diem_ down; and so the "foreign" cars,
so called, must be promptly returned to their home roads.

"We load out of the transfer-house a through car over the Northwestern
from Chicago every day," the man who has this yard in charge explains.
"It's up to me to have a Northwestern empty for that when I can. When I
can't, I do the best I can." He scratches his head. "Perhaps I'll use a
Canadian Pacific, and so get her started along toward home. If not,
something from the Sault; just as I am going to start that New Haven car
over toward Connecticut to-night. If I were to send that New Haven car out
beyond Washington there'd be trouble, and I've got to dig out something
empty from the Boston & Maine to take that stuff over to Lowell. Mos'
generally, though, when we've got a turn of Western stuff, I've got my
'empty' tracks stuffed full o' them New England cars."

We mention something about the transfer-house being a mighty good thing.

"It's a necessary evil," says our guide, correcting us.

He starts to explain. "See here. The X----, over in its Jersey City
transfer-house, got near a carload of that fancy porcelain brick through
from Haverstraw las' week, and that young whelp of a college boy that's
hangin' round there learnin' the railroad business gets it into his noodle
that it's somethin' awful, awful for that stuff to be goin' through to
Middle Ohio in a Maine Central box, an 'LCL' at that. So out he dumps it
into a system car right here an' now, and saves his road about one dollar
and fifty cents _per diem_. Of course they pay about one hundred and
thirty-five dollars for damages to that brick in the transferrin'. But the
boy's all right in the transfer-house. If he was out on the engine he
might blow up the biler."

       *       *       *       *       *

Here is another great railroad yard--this almost filling a mighty crevice
between God's eternal hills. This is within the mountain country, and the
gossip that you get around the roundhouse is all of grades. You hear how
Smith and the 2,999 pulled seven Pullmans around the Saddleback without a
pusher; how some of the big preference freights take four engines to mount
the summit; the tales of daring are tales of pushers and of trains
breaking apart on the fearful mountain stretches.

Randall is yardmaster here, and Randall is the opposite of the layman's
picture of a yardmaster--a slovenly, worn, profane sort of fellow. Randall
does not swear; he rarely even gets excited; his system of administration
is so perfectly devised that even in a stress he rarely has to turn to
work with his own hands. With him railroading is a fine, practical
science. He will tell you of the methods at Collinwood, at Altoona, at
Buffalo, at Chicago--wherein they differ. He is cool, calculating, clever,
a capital railroader in addition to all these.

[Illustration: SOMETHING OVER A MILLION DOLLARS' WORTH OF PASSENGER CARS
ARE CONSTANTLY STORED IN THIS YARD]

[Illustration: A SCENE IN THE GREAT FREIGHT-YARDS THAT SURROUND CHICAGO]

[Illustration: THE INTRICACY OF TRACKS AND THE "THROAT" OF A MODERN
TERMINAL YARD: SOUTH STATION, BOSTON, AND ITS APPROACHES]

You speak of his yard as being overwhelmingly big. He answers in his
deliberate way:

"We've more than 200 miles of track in this yard; something more than
2,000 switches operate it."

Then he takes you down from his office, elevated in an abandoned
switch-tower, and looking down upon his domain. He explains with great
care that, his yard being a main-line division point and not a point with
many intersecting branches or "foreign roads," its transfer-house is
inconsequential. The same process that goes forward with the
package-freight in the transfer-houses, Randall carries on in this yard
with cars. These operations are separated for east-bound and west-bound
freight and each is given an entirely separate yard, easily reached from
the group of roundhouses that hold the freight motive power of that part
of the system. Randall's, being an unusually large yard, further divides
these activities into separate yards for loaded and empty cars on the
west-bound side. No east-bound "empties" are handled over his road.

We follow him to the nearest operating point, the west-bound
classification yard for loaded cars. In the old days this was a broad flat
reach of about 20 parallel tracks, terminating at each end in approaches
of lead of "ladder" track. Upon each set of 3 or 4 tracks a switch-engine
is busy in the eternal classification process. In these more modern days
you may see the "hump" or gravity-yard, although you will still find
skilled railroaders who are prejudiced against its use. In the hump-yard
half of the work of the switch-engines is done by gravity. This new type
of railroad facility has an artificial hill, just above the termination of
the parallel tracks where they cluster together, and upon this hump one
switch-engine with a trained crew does the work of six engines and crews
in the old type of yard.

A preference freight rolls into the receiving yard for the west-bound
classification. Its engine uncouples and steams off for a well-earned rest
in the smoky roundhouse. A switch-engine uncouples the caboose that has
been tacked on behind over the division, and it is shunted off to the
near-by caboose track, where its crew will have close oversight of
it--perhaps sleep in it--until it is ready to accompany some east-bound
freight a few hours hence.

Blue flags (blue lights at night) are fastened at each end of the
dismantled cars, and the inspectors have a quarter of an hour to make sure
if the equipment is in good order. If the car is found with broken
running-gear it is marked, and soon after drilled out from its fellows,
sent to the transfer-house to have its contents removed, to the shops for
repairs, or the "cripple" track for junk, if its case is well-nigh
hopeless.

With the "O. K." of the car inspectors finally pronounced, the train that
was comes up to the hump, and the expert crew that operates there makes
short work of sorting out the cars--this track for "stuff" southwest of
Pittsburgh, this next for Cleveland and Chicago, the third for
transcontinental; and so it goes. Two lines of cars are drilled at the
same time, for just ahead of the switch-engine is an open-platform car,
known as the "pole-car," and by means of heavy timbers the "pole-man"
guides two rows of heavy cars down the slight grades to their
resting-places.

The cars do not rest long upon the classification-yard tracks. From the
far end of each of these they are being gathered in solid trains, one for
Pittsburgh, another for Cleveland and Chicago, the third transcontinental,
and so on. Engines of the next division are being hitched to them, pet
"hacks" brought from the caboose tracks, and the long strings of loaded
box-cars are off toward the West in incredibly short time.

Of course there are some trains that never go upon the "classification" at
Randall's yard. There are solid coal trains bound in and out of New York,
of Philadelphia, and of Boston, that pass him empty and filled, and only
change engines and cabooses at his command. There are through freights,
bound from one seaboard to the other, from the Far East to the Far West,
that do likewise. But the majority of the freight movement has the sorting
out within his domain, his four humps are busy day and night with an
ordinary run of traffic, and you shudder to think what must be the
condition when business begins to run at high tide.

"We get it a-humming every once in a while," he finally confesses. "We had
one day, a little time ago, when we received 121 east-bound trains in
twenty-four hours, more than 3,200 cars all told. That meant, on an
average, a train every 11-1/2 minutes. That same day we got 78 west-bound
freights, with more than 3,600 cars. That meant nearly 7,000 cars handled
on the in-freight in twenty-four hours, or a train coming in to me every
7-1/2 minutes during day and night. They don't do much better than that on
some of the subway and elevated railroads in the big cities; and I haven't
said a word about the trains and cars we despatched--just about as much
again, of course."

Through yards such as these there are incoming streams of merchandise,
equal at least to the outgoing, passing through classification yards in
carload lots and the great transfer-houses in "LCL." These streams must be
kept separate and from clogging one another or themselves. Cars must carry
loads whenever they are moved--"empties" are the bogy-men of the
superintendents of transportation--and cars from "foreign" systems must be
quickly returned to their home roads. The yardmaster at a busy freight
point has his own worries. His puzzle is unending. To it he must bend the
bigness of a big mind, he must be prepared to handle the unequal volumes
of traffic that pass through his domain with an equal skill: in dull times
he must seek to keep his plant working under conditions of rare economy;
when the freight rises to flood tide, he must fight in harness to prevent
the freight from congesting. The word "failure" has been stricken out of
his vocabulary by his superiors.

It takes a high grade of railroader to serve as yardmaster.




CHAPTER VIII

THE LOCOMOTIVES AND THE CARS

    HONOR REQUIRED IN THE BUILDING OF A LOCOMOTIVE--SOME OF THE EARLY
    LOCOMOTIVES--SOME NOTABLE LOCOMOTIVE-BUILDERS--INCREASE OF THE SIZE OF
    ENGINES--STEPHENSON'S AIR-BRAKE--THE WORKSHOPS--THE VARIOUS PARTS OF
    THE ENGINE--CARS OF THE OLD-TIME--IMPROVEMENTS BY WINANS AND
    OTHERS--STEEL CARS FOR FREIGHT.


From out of the fiery womb of steel comes the locomotive. We have already
told of the honor that is forged in the building of the bridge; honor of
no less degree has gone into the forging of the most vital and most human
thing upon the railroad, outside of man himself. That man has ever been
able to create and build the locomotive, a giant creature of some 200
tons, perhaps, built together with infinite care of some 5,000 to 7,000
parts, and these parts acting with the delicacy of the hair-spring of a
watch, almost passes ordinary belief. The wonder becomes even greater when
it is realized that this monster creature, set upon two slender rails, is
capable of pulling a 4,000 ton train, through every stress of weather and
over considerable grades.

To tell in detail of the locomotive in one chapter is short allowance to a
subject that fairly demands for itself a whole book, a technical mind for
the telling, and at least a fairly technical mind for the understanding; a
subject that in its history goes hand in hand with that of the railroad
itself. Yet the limitations of this book forbid a more lengthy
description.

We have already told of a very few of the earliest and most famous
American locomotives; the _Stourbridge Lion_, which Horatio Allen brought
to the Delaware & Hudson Company; the _Best Friend_, which was built in
New York City, and which went to Charleston, South Carolina, to be the
first American locomotive to run in the United States, the _De Witt
Clinton_, which awoke the echoes of the Hudson and Mohawk valleys in a
single day; and the _Tom Thumb_, built by Peter Cooper, which induced the
directors of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad to change their motive power
from horses to steam, and so opened a great new development for their
property.

A little while after Cooper's _Tom Thumb_ had achieved the astounding feat
of beating a team of horses in hauling a railroad coach, the directors of
the B. & O. offered a prize of $4,000 "for the most approved engine that
shall be delivered for trial upon the road on or before June 1, 1831; and
$3,500 for the engine which shall be adjudged the next best." It was
determined in this prospectus that "the engine, when in operation must not
exceed three and one-half tons weight and must, on a level road, be
capable of drawing day by day fifteen tons, inclusive of the weight of
wagons, fifteen miles an hour."

Three locomotives answered this generous offer. Of them but one, the
_York_, oftener called the _Arabian_, built at York, Pa., by Davis &
Gartner, and hauled to Baltimore by horses over the turnpikes, was of
practical service. Phineas Davis was a watch and clock maker, but he
succeeded in devising a locomotive that was the forerunner of the famous
_Grasshopper_ upon the Baltimore & Ohio. Better name was never given to a
locomotive, the rude and ungainly angles formed by rods and levers giving
a distinct resemblance to the long-legged bugs. Yet the Grasshoppers
served their purpose. In the late eighties, the _Arabian_ was still in
service in the Mount Clare yards at Baltimore. With a single exception, it
never had an accident or even left the rails. That exception was just
before the completion of the Washington branch, and Davis was a passenger
upon the engine. It was going at a fair rate of speed when suddenly it
rolled over upon its side in the ditch. No one was hurt, save Davis, who
was instantly killed. It seemed a strange caprice of Fate, for although
careful examination was immediately made, both of the engine and of the
track, no reason could ever be assigned for the accident.

In that same year, 1831, the _John Bull_, which was built by George &
Robert Stephenson & Company, of Newcastle-on-Tyne, in England, was
received in Philadelphia for the Camden & Amboy Railroad. As long as the
locomotive continues to serve the railroad the name of George Stephenson,
its inventor, must be indissolubly linked with it. The _John Bull_ was
easily the most famous Stephenson engine ever sent to the United States.
It has been shown at all our great expositions, and now occupies a
position of honor in the great Smithsonian institution at Washington. Of
these early engines, which it was found necessary to bring from England, a
volume once issued by the Rogers Locomotive Works, of Paterson, N. J., has
said:

    "These locomotives ... furnished the types and patterns from which
    those which were afterwards built here were fashioned. But American
    designs soon began to depart from their British prototypes, and a
    process of adaption to the existing conditions of the railroads in
    this country followed, which afterwards differentiated the American
    locomotives more and more from those built in Great Britain. A marked
    feature of difference between American and English locomotives has
    been the use of a forward truck under the former."

As a matter of fact, the English engines, built for use on long straight
stretches of line would never have served on the early roads in this
country with their steep and curving routes through the mountains. So, in
the latter part of the year 1831, John B. Jervis invented what he called
"a new plan of frame, with a bearing-carriage for a locomotive engine" for
the use of the Mohawk & Hudson Railroad, in which he introduced the
forward truck which is to-day a distinctive feature of American engines.
Its effectiveness was at once recognized, and its almost general adoption
immediately followed. Five years later, Henry R. Campbell, of
Philadelphia, had patented his system of two driving-wheels and a truck,
and the distinctive type of American locomotive was born.

In the development of that peculiarly successful type, great names have
been written into the history of American locomotive-building--the names
of such men as Rogers and Winans and Hinckley and Mason and Brooks and
Matthias Baldwin and William Norris; the last two both of Philadelphia.
Norris, after some interesting smaller engines, built the _George
Washington_ in 1835. This engine was not one whit less than a triumph. It
ascended the steep plane of the Columbia Railroad in Philadelphia, a grade
of 7-1/2 per cent, carrying two passenger cars in which were seated 53
persons. It came to a stop on that grade and started up again by its own
efforts. After reaching the summit, the engine was turned around and came
down, stopping once in its descent.

That was the only time that a locomotive ever essayed the Columbia plane,
and the performance of the _George Washington_ has not been attempted in
all these years save in the case of Latrobe's temporary line at Kingwood
Tunnel. The English newspapers of that day ridiculed the experiment,
pronounced it a Baron Munchausen story, yet in 1839 Norris sent an engine
overseas that successfully climbed the then famous Lickey plane, in
England. After that he was besieged by foreign orders, sending 16 American
locomotives to Great Britain in 1840, and, during the next few years, 170
others to France, Germany, Prussia, Austria, Belgium, Italy, and Saxony.
William Norris did his full part in giving Europe a measure of respect for
the growing nation across the Atlantic.

Matthias Baldwin, like Phineas Davis, of York, was a watch maker in the
beginning of his life. He lived long enough to lay the foundation of one
of the greatest of American single industries, to give his name to a firm
that has carried the fame of American locomotives around the world and
kept it alive in every nation of the earth. Baldwin's first locomotive was
built in 1832 for the Philadelphia, Germantown, and Norristown Railroad;
and that it was a good locomotive is proved by the fact that it performed
twenty years of faithful service upon that line. His second engine, built
two years later, went south to that famous old Charleston & Hamburg
Company. After that his works were regularly established, their head to
give his patience and untiring genius to the perfecting of the locomotive.
The history of Baldwin locomotives is, in an important sense, the history
of the industry in the United States.

It was not long before the pioneer engines were considered too small for
much practical value, and Mr. Baldwin was building a much bigger
locomotive for the Vermont Central Railroad. This engine, named the
_Governor Paine_ for a famous executive of that State, was delivered in
1848, and for it was paid the unprecedented price of $10,000. It had a
pair of driving-wheels, six and one-half feet in diameter placed just back
of the fire-box, a slightly smaller pair being placed forward. Baldwin
must have given full value, for it is related that the engine could be
started from a state of rest and run a mile in forty-three seconds. The
Pennsylvania Railroad ordered three of the same sort, and one of these
once hauled a special train carrying President Zachary Taylor at sixty
miles an hour. In weight, the locomotive was steadily increasing. In the
beginning, these engines weighed from four to seven tons each; by the late
forties engines of twenty-five tons each were being built for the Reading
Road, and these were regarded as monsters.

Year by year the locomotive was being perfected in all its details. The
cab made its appearance and was first opposed by the engineers, who
imagined that they would be badly penned in, in case of accident. The
Erie contributed the bell-rope signal from the train; we have already
heard of that first whistle on the locomotive of the Sandusky and Mad
River Railroad. The Boston & Worcester devised the headlight, so that time
might be saved by handling freight at night. More important than these
were the experiments by Ross Winans and by S. M. Felton that led to the
substitution of coal for wood as a fuel, and the development by Rogers at
his Paterson works of the link device, so necessary in stopping, starting,
and reversing the locomotive.

Gradually the size of the locomotive increased to 28 and 30 tons in the
late fifties. Finally James Milholland, engineer of machinery for the
Philadelphia & Reading Railroad, built in 1863 a pusher engine for coal
trains that weighed something over 50 tons. When folk saw that engine they
almost gasped, and wondered what the railroads were coming to. But the
wiser men kept silent. They knew that as long as bridges and roadbeds and
fine steel rails were increased in strength, the limit of size of the
locomotive had not been reached. The greater grip the locomotive has upon
the rail, the greater its pulling power, the greater its efficiency. Sheer
weight, and weight alone, gives that grip. It certainly takes a weight of
seven tons to give a grip of one ton upon a dry rail; in the case of wet
rails this ratio becomes ten to one.

Then wonder not that the locomotive steadily increased in size, that the
Moguls with six driving-wheels, and the Consolidations with eight, came
into vogue a few years after the close of the war, and that these kept
increasing in weight all the while. Height and width were and still are
rigidly limited by the clearance of the line. The locomotive must stand no
more than fourteen or sixteen feet high and from nine to eleven feet wide;
in length the problem only meets the genius of the designer.

But it is altogether possible that the limit of the size of the
locomotive would have been reached long ago if it had not been for the
coming of the air-brake. This most important assurance of the safety of
the railroad passenger came into its being in 1869, when George
Westinghouse, its inventor, was permitted to try it on a Panhandle train.
From the beginning of railroads the necessity for brakes was apparent, and
in 1833 Robert Stephenson patented a steam brake for the driving-wheels.
That same brake, with compressed air substituted for steam, is essentially
the Westinghouse device of to-day. But Westinghouse made the air do the
work of steam. After he had developed the idea he offered it to leading
Eastern railroads, but they one and all declined it.

Finally, he was permitted to place it on a Panhandle train, full assurance
having been given to the railroad officials that he would be personally
responsible for any injury done to their equipment. Four cars and an
engine were fitted with the new device and the train started forth from
Pittsburgh to Steubenville. On the way its progress was halted by a farm
wagon which was caught in the rail at a highway crossing. The engineer
whistled for the handbrakes in the good old-fashioned way but he knew that
he was too late. Then he thought of the air-brake. He had little faith in
the contraption, but he gave its handle a wrench and the train stopped ten
feet from the wagon. Several lives were saved and the air-brake was
proven. From that day forth it was simply a question of developing the
device to its fullest possibility, and Mr. Westinghouse has proved himself
able to do that very thing.

The air-brake was a fact. Steel had come into use for axles, driving-wheel
tires, frames, and every other vital or bearing part of the locomotive;
and the designers were again increasing its size. They passed the
_Consolidation_ and built the _Mastodon_. These were freighters--each with
ten drivers--drivers with tremendous gripping force. They went through
what M. N. Forney has called a "period of adolescence in railroad
progress," and in that period they experimented with huge driving-wheels
only to discard them once again. Then they built bigger engines than even
the _Mastodon_; the _Decapod_, with twelve driving-wheels; the _El
Gobernador_ which was built by the Southern Pacific at its Sacramento
shops in 1884, weighing, with engine and tender fully equipped, 113 tons.

Still the locomotive grows and its progenitors talk of the 500-ton
machine. They have recently built the Mallet articulated compound, which
because of its very great weight has splendid gripping force and is
especially adapted for pushing-service on heavy grades. The Baltimore &
Ohio, the Erie, the New York Central, the Great Northern, and the Santa Fe
have already become committed to this type of engine. The American
locomotive Company has just completed for the Delaware & Hudson several
Mallet articulated compounds that are among the most powerful locomotives
yet constructed. They were designed for pusher service, on heavy grades,
north from Carbondale on the main line of the D. & H., which average from
.81 to 1.36 per cent. Up to recently the heavy northbound coal traffic up
these grades has been handled by the use of two heavy pusher engines. A
single one of the new Mallets will do the work of the two pushers, and
therein lies the economy in their use.

These new giants are, in operation, two 8-wheel engines, with individual
cylinders, steam chests and supplies from a single boiler and fire-box.
The gripping power of 16 driving-wheels under the enormous weight of 223
tons can be imagined; the designers estimate it at the high figure of
forty-three tons. The exceptional length of these monster engines--a
fraction over ninety feet--is carried around the curves of mountainous
lines by an ingenious joint in their solid steel frames. This then is only
the latest of American engines; but not quite the biggest, for the Topeka
shops of the Santa Fe Railroad claim that honor with their new Mallets,
each 121 feet long and weighing complete 810,000 pounds. The 500-ton
locomotive does not seem so very far away when one comes to consider the
Santa Fe giants. These engines, which are operated in pushing freights
over the heavy grades in the Southwest, were built from two of the Santa
Fe's heaviest freight engines. They operate with equal facility in either
direction as there is not a turntable in the land which would come
anywhere near accommodating them.

[Illustration: ONE OF THE "DIAMOND-STACK" LOCOMOTIVES USED ON THE
PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD IN THE EARLY SEVENTIES

PRAIRIE TYPE PASSENGER LOCOMOTIVE OF THE LAKE SHORE

PACIFIC TYPE PASSENGER LOCOMOTIVE OF THE NEW YORK CENTRAL

ATLANTIC TYPE PASSENGER LOCOMOTIVE, BUILT BY THE PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD AT
ITS ALTOONA SHOPS]

[Illustration: ONE OF THE GREAT MALLET PUSHING ENGINES OF THE DELAWARE &
HUDSON COMPANY

A TEN-WHEELED SWITCHING LOCOMOTIVE OF THE LAKE SHORE

SUBURBAN PASSENGER LOCOMOTIVE OF THE NEW YORK CENTRAL

CONSOLIDATION FREIGHT LOCOMOTIVE OF THE PENNSYLVANIA]

In recent years, the rather graceful custom of giving names to the
classification of locomotives has been extended to the passenger
motive-power. In 1895, the Baldwins created the Atlantic type of
four-driver locomotive for high-speed service both on the Atlantic Coast
Line and on the Atlantic City Railroad, from Camden to the ocean--and the
name has stuck. The Brooks plant of the American Locomotive Company at
Dunkirk similarly developed the Pacific type for passenger locomotives
with six drivers instead of four. The Prairie type was appropriately
enough sponsored by the Burlington system. It is like the Pacific type
save that the forward or lead truck (the Englishman would blandly call it
the "bogey") has but two instead of the conventional four wheels.

Your locomotive-builder is apt to be more systematic about these types of
engine, and he falls back on what is generally known as Whyte's
classification. The basis of this simple system is in the number of wheels
of the engine itself. Each type is described by a series of three numbers,
the first of these being the number of wheels in front of the drivers, the
second the number of drivers, and the third the number of wheels to the
rear of these. The eight-wheel American type, the simplest for
illustration here, would thus be described as "4-4-0."

The trailer, which is described by the third number in this series, is a
recent addition to the locomotive family in this country. It came from
the constant lengthening of the fire-box, due to the necessity of
providing greater steam-power for engines of increasing weight and
cylinder capacity. When the fire-box began to overhang too far, the
trailer-wheels were introduced, and a device was affixed to the locomotive
by which they might receive its weight for hill-climbing purposes. This
last device has not proved particularly successful. But the trailer itself
has become a fixed device in locomotive construction. When the third
figure in Whyte's classification is a cypher it simply means that there
are no trailers. Similarly the first figure a cypher, indicates the
absence of a forward truck or even wheels, which is common in some forms
of switch-engines, where the weight is entirely concentrated on the
drivers for better gripping power upon the rail.

Such, in brief, is the development of the locomotive. It has been
development rather than change, for while some designers have fretted
about whether the engine's cab should be in the middle of the boiler or at
its end and others have recently developed the Walsheart gears upon the
outside of the engine frame, where it is of easier access than the
old-style links, the general design of the iron-horse remains practically
the same as that given it by our grand-daddies. They planned carefully and
they planned for the long years. The essential features of their designs
have not been questioned. It has simply been a problem of growth.

       *       *       *       *       *

From out of the fiery womb of steel comes the locomotive. If you would
better understand the iron horse, find your way to any of the great plants
in which he is being built. Begin at the beginning in a factory, which
seems, with dozens of shops and great yards, to be almost a miniature
city. Begin at the draughting-rooms where each locomotive is given a whole
ledger page--sometimes two or three--for specifications. From those
specifications, the young draughtsmen take their instructions. They work
out their charts and elevations, their detailed plans; and the ink is
hardly dry upon their drawings before they are being whisked away to the
blueprint rooms. The blueprints are still damp, when in turn they are
hurried to the different construction shops of the plant.

You see these shops, one by one, in care of an expert guide. You see the
wooden patterns going to the blast furnaces at the foundries and to the
sullen tappings of the trip-hammers. You leave the blacksmiths and stand
for a moment--not long--under the terrific din of the boiler-makers. The
boiler, the great trunk of the locomotive, is built of steel plate--plate
that is the very pride of the rolling-mills. In some foreign lands, copper
fire-boxes are demanded; but the real American locomotive has these also
of steel.

The steel plates are rolled to form the boiler itself, flanged by
angle-workers into the square fire-box. Finally the boiler and the
fire-box are riveted together, section by section--made as fast by steel
thread as man's ingenuity can make them. Together they form a unit.
Another unit is being formed in an adjacent shop, the solidly welded steel
frame in which the boiler shall yet set, and to which truck and drivers
will be firmly fastened. Forward on this frame will sit the cylinders; in
another corner of this shop they are being made ready. Cast-iron still
remains the best material for the cylinders and the steam-chests. These
are cast in one piece and the rule holds good where there are two
cylinders, as in the case of the compounds. The cylinders, and steam-chest
for one side and half the "saddle" of the locomotive, upon which the
forward end of the boiler rests, are nowadays generally made in a single
casting. After that it is a simple enough matter to smooth down the outer
surface, bore the cylinders to perfect surfacing, and line the
steam-chests with a bushing that can be readily removed once it is worn
out.

The driving-wheels are an important detail of the construction of the
locomotive. They are made in rough castings--of steel for fast passenger
engines, and of iron for other forms of motive power--and are then made
true in giant lathes. The steel tires are shrunk on the wheels, a work of
astounding nicety; and in turn the wheels themselves are heated and shrunk
upon the axles--of the best steel that man can forge. To place these
wheels upon the axles is hair-line work. A 9-inch hub receives an axle
just 8.973 inches--no more, no less--in diameter. It is keyed and then
under the slight expansion of a gentle heat it is rammed upon the
axle-end. It goes on to stay, and stay it must.

From all these shops, a busy industrial railroad brings the different
parts to the great and busy hall of the erecting-shop, a vast place of
vast distances and filled always with the noisy clatter of great industry.
Here the different parts, which have been carefully built by skilled
artisans, are assembled into the finished whole. The cylinders and
saddle-halves are placed and firmly riveted together. Into the collar of
that saddle a giant overhead crane carefully sets the boiler and the
fire-box. They are quickly riveted to the upper flange of the saddle: the
locomotive is coming into a semblance of itself.

The cab is fastened into position; then the boiler-makers descend upon the
unfinished engine and place the 200 or more flue-tubes that run from
fire-box to smoke-box, just underneath the stack. They make every tube and
joint fast--put into the growing locomotive all the energy and all the
skill of good workmanship. When they are gone the giant crane again comes
noiselessly down along the ceiling. It reaches down, grasps the
engine-trunk, and swings it high aloft.

Down there, resting on real railroad tracks, are the driving-wheels and
the lead truck, carefully spaced in anticipation. The crane, lifting the
fifty tons of boiler and frame with no apparent effort whatsoever, places
its load squarely upon the wheels that are to carry it. Again the
mechanics are busy; the engine is growing into a solid unit. Upon their
heels follow testers, men who must look for steam or water leaks. They
work under a test of air, carrying lighted candles into every nook and
cranny of the giant. If the candle flutters, air is escaping, and the leak
must be found.

Finally comes the report "O. K." from the testing crew. The stacks, the
steam and sand domes, and the air-brakes are being made fast. The engine
is hurried off to the paint-shop. There it may find its companion in life,
the humble useful tender already awaiting it. It came direct from the
tender shop; for the appendage of the locomotive is no longer a specially
rigged flat-car but a solid steel plate construction built to carry some
9,000 gallons of water and about 16 tons of coal. Only a little time ago,
a New Yorker, scion of a wealthy and famous family of railroaders, proved
himself worth his oats by designing a tender of great practicability and
of great economy of construction.

When the engine emerges from the paint-shop it is gorgeous and
refulgent--brilliantly new. Unless it is going to foreign lands, when it
must be partly dismantled and crated, it will ride its own wheels to the
road which has purchased it. A string of new locomotives may be sprinkled
through a freight train--never coupled together--in charge of an inspector
from the locomotive company, who will bunk in one of the cabs and never
leave his charges until they have been receipted for. After that the
locomotive begins to bend to the work for which he was created. Unless he
is of a very unusual sort or was built for some very especial purpose, he
soon loses his identity. The days are gone when locomotives were
christened after the fashion of ships. There are too many of them. Each is
given the cold informality of a number, marshalled for service in a mighty
company.

Cars came as corollary to the locomotive. In the beginning the passenger
coaches were nothing more or less than old-time stage-coaches which had
been set upon wheels so flanged as to enable them to stay upon the rail.
So it was that the first cars built for the railroad followed stage-coach
models. It was a practical necessity from the first to draw more than one
small coach at a time, so the couplings and the bumper devices came as a
matter of development. Then came the day when an aspiring inventor grouped
several stage-coaches together on a single rigid frame and he had really
developed a form of railroad coach--a form which our English and
continental cousins still cling fondly to, in despite of its most apparent
disadvantages.

Four wheels quickly gave way to eight. In the early thirties, Ross Winans
developed a double-truck car for use on the Baltimore & Ohio. Compared
with anything that had gone before it was certainly a pretentious vehicle.
It was thirty feet in length, four-wheel trucks being attached at the
ends, very much after the present fashion. There were seats on the flat
roof, which were reached by a ladder in the corner, and the car itself was
divided into three compartments. A little later Winans tore out the cross
partitions in the car and introduced the end doors and the centre aisle,
thus establishing the American passenger coach of to-day. The Baltimore &
Ohio manufactured a number of these coaches at its famous Mount Clare
shops. They were known for years as the "Washington cars," probably
because they were the first run on the Washington branch.

If Winans had been able to establish his patent rights to the double-truck
car he might have reaped a fortune from its royalties alone. But when he
went to assert his right as an inventor, it was discovered that the idea
was not absolutely new. Gridley Bryant, in his old Quincy Granite
Railroad, just south of Boston, had used the device in crude form. The
four-wheeled flat cars which he had employed in bringing stone from the
quarries down to the dock were not long enough for granite slabs. He had
met that emergency by fastening two of them together with coupling-rings,
and thus in a way had created the eight-wheel car. So Winans lost his
patent although credit is given him for having really developed the
passenger car of to-day.

The form, once set, came quickly into vogue. In a few of the Southern
States, old-fashioned gentlemen followed the early English fashion of
having their private carriages attached to flat freight-cars whenever they
went on railroad trips, but even this was a passing fad. At that time
carriages were no novelty, and railroad cars were. They were stuffy little
affairs compared with the coaches of to-day, miserably lighted and heated
and ventilated, but Americans were very proud of them. The fashion that
made early locomotives gay with color, with brass and burnished metals of
other sorts, found full scope upon the passenger cars, both inside and
out. They were pannelled and striped, ornamented and lettered to the limit
of the skill of gifted painters. A coach, named the Morris Run, on the old
Tioga Railroad, which began running south from Elmira about 1840, was
decorated in red and green and yellow and blue and gilt and several other
colors. It would have made a modern circus band wagon inconspicuous. But
the day came when the brass stars and the red stack-bands began to
disappear with the names from the locomotives and in that day the railroad
cars became subdued in colorings. Some of the gay frescoes of the
interiors, typical of the taste of an earlier day, were in use within the
present generation.

While the "Washington cars" set a type, there was much yet to be
accomplished in the development both of the passenger coach and of the
freight car, and this much was chiefly in the line of the development of
safety devices. The old-time passenger rode in a very decent fear of his
life. Sometimes a loosened end of one of the "strap rails" would come
plunging up through the flimsy floor of the coach and impale some
unfortunate passenger upon its end against the ceiling; other times the
cars would go rolling off the banks and crashing into kindling-wood
against one another. They were lightly built contrivances, incapable of
standing any sort of shock or collision.

But improvements came one by one--better devices for coupling them
together, culminating in the modern automatic "jaw coupler," better
framing, better platforms, better trucks, improved hand-brakes; and after
them the now universal air-brakes made life safer both for the traveller
and the railroad employee. Finally came the steel-end vestibule; and where
cars have been equipped with this very comfortable device, telescoping in
collision, a very common and disastrous accident in which one car-shell
enveloped another, has been rendered impossible.

The car-platforms for many years remained a menace and a problem. An early
railroad in New Jersey sought to emphasize their danger by painting on an
inner panel of each car-door a picture of a newly made grave, surmounted
by a tombstone, on which was inscribed: "Sacred to the memory of a man who
stood upon a platform." The railroad used every method to keep its
passengers off the platforms at first. Afterwards they began to encourage
it and to devise means to promote a general intercourse between the cars.

The dining-car, of which much more in another chapter, was a prime factor
in this change of attitude on the part of railroad officers. Its use
necessitated passengers going the length of the train, a movement which,
in itself, was facilitated by the main design of American cars, as
differentiated from those of English railroads. When the English roads
began the universal use of dining-cars they had to revamp the entire plan
of their car construction and produce what are still known across the
Atlantic as "corridor trains."

To make such communication safe, George M. Pullman, the sleeping-car man,
set forth to devise a platform protection. Back in the fifties there had
been something of the sort on the old Naugatuck Railroad in Connecticut,
rough canvas curtains enclosing the platforms; but these had been built to
facilitate car ventilation, and failing in this, they were abandoned after
three or four years of trial. Pullman did better. He devised a platform
enclosure of folding doors and placed a steel frame at the end of his
vestibule that did more than merely protect passengers from the stress of
weather; these, of course, then served as effective anti-telescoping
devices. The Pennsylvania Railroad began the use of these vestibules in
1886 and they were soon universally adopted by American railroads on their
fast through trains.

After that a better vestibule was devised by Col. W. D. Mann, one that
extended the full width of the car. In fact the platform of the car had
practically ceased to exist, the structure being full-framed to include
its entrances at both ends.

After the vestibule came the steel car, introduced within the past ten
years for freight service, and within the past five or six for passenger
equipment. It has everything to commend it, save a slightly increased
original cost, which is more than compensated by economy of maintenance,
to say nothing of the intangible but certain raised factor of safety. It
is to become universal; the wooden car will become extinct upon American
railroads almost as soon as the present equipment is worn out and sent to
the scrap-heap.

Of the forms and varieties of railroad passenger coaches there are many,
and these will be described when we come to consider in a later chapter
the luxury of modern railroad travel. But the variety of passenger
equipment quite pales before that of the freight service. Flat-cars,
coal-cars, box-cars, grain-cars, live-stock cars--the list runs on into
catalogue form. There are refrigerator cars that are kept filled with salt
and ice or ice alone, precooled cars that are merely kept air-tight, and
ventilator cars employing a distinct reverse of that method; and up in
northern climates there are heater-cars which are kept warm by lamps or by
stoves and which are used for the transportation of fresh fruit and
vegetables in winter just as the refrigerator-cars and the precooled cars
are used for that same purpose in summer.

Almost all the safety devices that have been added to the running-gear of
the passenger equipment have been added to the freight equipment also, to
the great safety and peace of mind of the railroad employee. The car
itself remains the simple essential of the very beginnings of the
railroad. Its change has been a change in size, in weight, and in
strength.

The first freight cars of the very old railroad at Mauch Chunk weighed
1,600 pounds each, and were permitted to carry a weight or "burden" of
only 3,200 pounds. When the Boston & Albany first began using freight cars
30 feet long, it was so confused that it gave each end of the car a
separate number for convenience in billing and designating consignments.
Nowadays 40 tons is the right load for an efficient car, although they go
as high as 55 and 60 tons' capacity; the car itself may weigh
approximately half that figure.

Freight cars by hundreds of thousands go bumping all over the different
railroads of the land, and all the while they are getting bumped and
broken in accidents--large and small. In such cases they are hauled to the
nearest shop of the railroad upon which they are travelling and there
repaired at the cost of the road that owns them. In earlier days, the job
of master mechanic was no sinecure, for each road built its cars upon its
own plans and no two of these plans were alike. A simple broken part
necessitated the manufacture of a new part. It was a matter of great
confusion and expensive to every line.

The organization of the Master Car Builders, in 1867, solved that problem.
This organization, through committee, made first the freight car standard
and then the passenger standard. Axles, bolts, king-pins--every one of the
intricate car-parts--were brought to standard and numbered sizes. After
that all that a master mechanic had to do was to keep an assortment of
standard car parts in his store-room, and he could make reasonable repairs
to any car that travelled rails. The standardization has gone steadily
forward year by year; it has included a variety of things, even such
details as systematic numbering and lettering of cars. It is one of the
evidences of the constant bettering of the American railroad, the steady
effort to bring it to an economical and scientific basis.

Recently some of the railroads have made intelligent experiments, seeking
to devise a vehicle that should be both locomotive and car, and that
should be especially adapted for small side-lines, where traffic runs
exceedingly light. Some success has been found in the use of a passenger
coach, into which a gasolene engine has been introduced, and several of
these cars are in regular use in the West. Two or three of them have been
employed for three or four years on Union Pacific branches in and around
Denver. They render a possible solution for one railroad problem--the
problem of providing sufficient service for some branch where local
traffic is slight. The gasolene car requires but two men, as against a
minimum crew of five men for even the smallest steam passenger train. It
can be quickly handled, will make many successive stops readily, and
generally provides an efficient addition to the regular passenger
equipment. A few years ago it would have given the standard steam
railroads an excellent weapon against the constant encroachments of
paralleling electric roads through their good passenger traffic districts;
even to-day it offers a possible solution of the difficult problem of the
very small branch side-lines.




CHAPTER IX

REBUILDING A RAILROAD

    RECONSTRUCTION NECESSARY IN MANY CASES--OLD GRADES TOO HEAVY--CURVES
    STRAIGHTENED--TUNNELS AVOIDED--THESE IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED ESPECIALLY
    BY FREIGHT LINES.


To the operating heads of the great railroad systems, rebuilding a line is
to-day a far more important problem than the building of new routes. The
country has grown--grown in wealth, among other things. The causes that
demanded the very greatest economy in the building of early railroad lines
no longer exist. The hill that the early engineer carefully rounded with
his line is now pierced without a second thought. Grades that were once
deemed slight are now classed as impossible. The almost infinite
development in the operation of the railroad has seen the grade or the
curve, not as a slight matter, but as a matter which, however slight in a
single instance, becomes in the course of constant operation a heavy
operating expense. To-day the operating folk of the big railroads are
counting the pennies where they countlessly multiply in these fashions; it
is one of the greatest factors in the grinding operation competition
between the great railroad systems of the country.

It is all quite as it should be. The early builders did the best that they
might do with the opportunities that were theirs. They got the railroad
through. It developed wealth for itself, as well as for the territory it
served; and with that wealth it is enabled in these piping days of peace
and plenty to correct the alignment errors of the early builders.
Moreover, there are frequent cases where the steady increase of traffic
has rendered it necessary for a railroad to parallel its trunks with new
lines, quite aside from the consideration of grade and curve.

As far back as the early fifties this great work of rebuilding the
trunk-line railroads was begun. Certain serious errors in the original
alignment of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad between Baltimore and the
Potomac River were corrected, even though at a considerable expense. As
time went on, other railroads continued this correction work. It is still
being prosecuted east and west of the Mississippi. Ten million dollars,
fifty million dollars, looks like a lot of money to the stockholders of
any company, when their president tells them that this is to be the cost
of this new relief line, this reconstruction, that cut-off; but what is
$1,000,000 when it is going to save more than $100,000 a year in the
operation of your railroad? It is the big sight of the big situation that
the railroads make nowadays at this reconstruction work.

Mr. Harriman, with his transcontinentals from the Mississippi watersheds
west, was almost the pioneer in this work of wholesale reconstruction. The
wholesale operating benefits that have resulted from it in the case of his
group of Pacifics have been largely responsible for his preeminence in the
railroad world. And yet, once his method was tried, it all seemed simpler
than A, B, C.

Take the case of the Lucin cut-off on his Southern Pacific. When the Union
Pacific was being pushed across the plains and threaded over the Rockies
and the Sierras, the Great Salt Lake of Utah lay directly in its path. The
railroad did the obvious thing and carefully made a detour around the
lake. When Mr. Harriman took over the Union Pacific, then in a state of
physical decadence, and linked it with his Southern Pacific, and surveyed
the situation carefully, he decreed that the Great Salt Lake should no
longer cause a trunk-line railroad to double in its path. He caused a line
to be surveyed direct across the marshy lake from Ogden to Lucin and when
that was done he had a line--on paper--103 miles long as against 147
miles by the old line. The engineer hesitated, but Harriman urged and they
courageously began the construction of miles and miles of embankment and
of trestle. Then new difficulties arose. Sink-holes developed. In a few
minutes structures that had been the work of long months silently
disappeared. The engineers in charge came to Harriman.

"It is not possible," they told him.

"You must carry it through whether it is possible or not," Harriman
replied.

Eventually they carried it through.

       *       *       *       *       *

When it was done, the Union Pacific had not only shortened its
transcontinental line 44 miles, but it had eliminated more than 1,500 feet
of heavy grade and 3,919 degrees of curvature. An operating economy of
between $900,000 and $1,000,000 a year had been effected and the
stockholders of the company had a good investment for the $10,000,000 that
the Lucin cut-off had cost them.

Nor was that all on the Union Pacific. On other sections of its main line
similar reconstruction work has added to the economy of operation by
millions of dollars each year. For twenty miles west from Omaha, where the
old historic transcontinental formerly dipped south to avoid a series of
undulating hills, the new Lane cut-off cuts squarely across them--20 miles
of deep cuts and heavy fills--"heavy railroad," as the engineers like to
put it. And again, where the old line twisted and wound itself over the
Black Hills, and wobbled unsteadily through Wyoming, the reconstruction
engineers pressed their work.

[Illustration: WHERE HARRIMAN STRETCHED THE SOUTHERN PACIFIC IN A STRAIGHT
LINE ACROSS THE GREAT SALT LAKE]

[Illustration: LINE REVISION ON THE NEW YORK CENTRAL--TUNNELLING THROUGH
THE BASES OF THESE JUTTING PEAKS ALONG THE HUDSON RIVER DOES AWAY WITH
SHARP AND DANGEROUS CURVES]

[Illustration: IMPRESSIVE GRADE REVISION ON THE UNION PACIFIC IN THE BLACK
HILLS OF WYOMING. THE DISCARDED LINE MAY BE SEEN AT THE RIGHT]

It is not generally understood that the summit of the Union Pacific is in
the Black Hills, which are the first foothill range of the Rockies, rather
than in the mountain crest beyond. The Black Hills have always been a
baffling proposition, with their short, steep slopes. The engineers
wrinkled their brows at the thought of correcting the old line through
there, but Harriman simply said that they must, that the board--which
meant E. H. Harriman himself--had directed that 247 feet be cut from the
road's crest there; and 247 feet, almost to the inch, was cut. It took
giant fills and embankments and an army of men but the grades were brought
to a minimum for a Rocky Mountain stretch. Wooden trestles, old and
affording a constant fire-risk, were swallowed up in embankments; a single
slice through a hill-top, a quarter of a mile long and eighty feet deep,
did its part in reducing the grades; antiquated cars disappeared before
equipment of the modern class; dilapidated shanties were supplanted by
fine, permanent railroad stations. The new Union Pacific is a monument to
the reconstruction engineer--and to E. H. Harriman.

The Canadian Pacific Railway, while traversing but one small northeastern
corner of the United States, is essentially an American railroad, both in
equipment and in operation. It forms an important half of that all-British
Red Line encircling the globe, of which any Englishman is so very proud.
When the Canadian Pacific Railway was completing its last link in this
unbroken line of rails from St. John, N. B., and Montreal, to Vancouver,
the question of grades was indeed a secondary one. The vital thing was to
cut the line through, and to that end great sacrifices of grade efficiency
were made. So that when the line was through, and the first Imperial
Limited was making its way from the Atlantic to the Pacific over a single
railroad system, it was indeed a line with structural defects. At one
point--the famous Big Hill, near Field, Alta.--in order to overcome the
steep Rocky Mountain climbs, it was necessary to use from four to six
engines for comparatively light freight and passenger trains. And at that,
it was difficult to attain a speed of more than four or five miles an
hour.

Within the last three years, this fearful grade has been corrected by the
very first spiral tunnels ever built upon the American continent. Spiral
tunnel construction of this kind is not new. It has been used with
remarkable success by the railroads of Continental Europe, in piercing the
High-Alpine boundaries between France, Germany, Austria, and Italy.

Coming from the east on the Canadian Pacific Railway, the train first
enters the spiral tunnel--they call it the "corkscrew" out in
Alberta--under Cathedral Mountain. This first bore is some 3,200 feet in
length. Emerging from it, the train runs back east across the Kicking
Horse River, then enters the eastern spiral tunnel, and after describing
an elliptic curve, emerges, and again crosses the Kicking Horse westward.
This whole thing is a perfect maze--the railroad doubling back upon itself
twice, tunnelling under two mountains, and crossing the river twice in
order to cut down the grade. The work cost $1,500,000. The mere cost of
the explosives came to over $250,000. It was one of the really great
tunnel jobs of the world. Yet despite the complicated work caused by the
spiral shape of the tunnels, they met exactly. The worth of the thing to
the Canadian Pacific is shown in the fact that those same trains that
formerly required four to six engines, are now handled easily over this
Big-Hill grade with but two engines, and at a speed of about twenty-five
miles an hour.

Other railroads by the dozen, whose lines traverse mountainous or even
hilly country, are engaged in this proposition of lowering their grades.
F. D. Underwood, president of the Erie, and known as one of the ablest
operating heads in this country, has been engaged in cutting off some of
the heavy hill-climbs on that old-time route from the seaboard to the
lakes. Underwood has already seen Erie's hopes of success in developing
the property as essentially a freighter and for the immediate improvement
of that portion of its facilities he has built three new relief lines, a
small stretch near Chautauqua Lake in western New York, and then through
the upper Genesee Valley, the third and most important eastward from a
point near Port Jervis and piercing the summit of the Shawangunk
Mountains.

The line through the Genesee Valley extends from Hunts, on the Buffalo
division, about 20 miles west of Hornell, to Hinsdale on the main line,
and is 33 miles long. It cuts off a heavy grade between Hornell and
Hinsdale on the main line--a little over one per cent--for both east-bound
and west-bound freight. At that particular point, Erie's west-bound
freight approximates 75 per cent of the east-bound, and so the new line
recognizes that fact by establishing the west-bound maximum grade at 3-10
of one per cent, as against a maximum of 2-10 of one per cent in the other
direction. Brought to a plain understanding, a single locomotive has no
difficulty in handling 80 cars, each bearing 40 tons of coal, over this
new low-grade line. To take one-half that load over the old main line
required a pusher.

On the east end of the line, where Erie's engineers built their greatest
low-grade cut-off, the coal rolls down to the seaboard in such quantities
as to make the west-bound tonnage only a quarter of the east-bound; so the
reconstruction engineers were satisfied with a maximum west-bound grade at
6-10 of one per cent as against the maximum of 2-10 east-bound, in the
direction of the heavy traffic. The cut-off, which is double-tracked and
is 42-1/2 miles long, increases the distance from New York to Chicago 8
miles; but this is not an essential fact, for, like the Genesee Valley
Road it is built exclusively for freight service, and not only almost
triples the hauling capacity of a locomotive but actually permits of
faster running time for the freight trains between Jersey City and Port
Jervis. To build the cut-off required a really great expenditure, for like
all these new lines it was "heavy work," embracing a tunnel nearly a mile
long under the crest of the Shawangunk Ridge, and a steel trestle over the
Moodna Valley, 3,200 feet in length and 190 feet high. Still President
Underwood can contemplate his locomotives hauling three times their old
loads over it. The economy of such a proposition becomes apparent upon the
face of it.

The Baltimore & Ohio, the Southern, and the Norfolk & Western have
recently lowered their grades and straightened their curves in similar
fashion; the Lehigh Valley, by the erection of a great new bridge at
Towanda, Pa., has taken a bad link out of its main line; the Chicago &
Alton, when the engineers told it that it must abandon miles upon miles of
its main line (for long years its pride) and build anew, told those
engineers to go ahead. Stretch by stretch the old road was revamped to
meet in every way modern conditions. A steel bridge across the Missouri,
which was the first steel bridge built in America, and which cost
$500,000, was sent to the scrap-heap while the old-timers groaned. "That
which yesterday was a railroad marvel becomes a curiosity to-morrow,"
observes Frank H. Spearman, in speaking of this very thing.

The rebuilding of the Chicago & Alton was a clean-cut affair. The 70-pound
rails were torn from the main line and sent to sidings and branch lines in
favor of the 80-pound rails; for while men were tearing at the tracks, the
shops were working overtime; 55-ton freight engines that could haul 30
cars were to give way to 165-ton motive power, capable of picking up and
carrying a hundred cars with ease. That was why the old bridge had to go
in favor of one which cost an even million dollars. And when the Alton
built heavy new bridges at dozens of other points besides the Missouri, it
built them after the new fashion, with solid rock ballast floor, affording
additional comfort and safety to its patrons.

In a flat State like Illinois there were no very serious grade defects to
be corrected, but through the gentle undulations of rolling country the
line twisted and turned like a lazy brook. The rebuilders stopped that.
When they were done there was a single section of 40 miles, straight as
the arrow flies, and many tangents of from 15 to 29 miles. In some cases
when the trains were transferred to the completed line, the old, spindly,
wobbly affair could be seen for miles in roadbed, to the one side or the
other of the new. In some cases, this abandoned right-of-way was sold to
interurban electric railroads; in one particular case one of the abandoned
bridges was included in the sale.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Delaware, Lackawanna, & Western is one of the old time Eastern Roads
that have waxed immensely prosperous with the years. Originally built as
an anthracite coal carrier from the Eastern Pennsylvania Mountains to the
seaboard, it has developed into a through freight and passenger carrier of
importance. The old-time engineer knew how to plan good railroads; the
Pennsylvania to-day is building its new low-grade freight line on the very
surveys made by its pioneer surveyors three-quarters of a century ago;
but, as we have already intimated, those railroads were financially weak.
Early annual reports of the Pennsylvania tell how its stock was peddled in
Philadelphia from house to house--up one street and down another--and how
sometimes two houses joined together to buy a single share. Money was not
plentiful in the middle of the last century.

So the Lackawanna engineers were compelled to build their road in
semi-mountainous districts, along the lines of least resistance, rather
than by the most direct routes. As it came east from Scranton over the
Pocono Mountains it found its way in a roundabout course to the middle of
Northern New Jersey. The road wound south and then wound north again, its
grades were steep, some of its curves were short, and it dipped through
two tunnels--one at Oxford Furnace, the other at Manunka Chunk.

To iron out those time-taking dips, the sharp curves, the grades, and the
tunnel, the Lackawanna cut-off--the "heaviest" bit of railroad in the
world--was begun three years ago. A new route 28-1/2 miles long was
surveyed diagonally across from Port Morris on the main line in New Jersey
to the main line again at the Delaware Water Gap. Despite the fact that it
must cross the watersheds diagonally--the watersheds formed by deep
valleys and high rocky ridges--the line as surveyed and built is only
three miles longer than an absolute air-line. It shortens the Lackawanna's
main stem from New York to Buffalo--already the shortest route between
these two cities--by 15 miles, and brings that busy lake port a trifle
within 400 miles from the seaboard.

To cross those watersheds at a sharp diagonal meant "heavy work"; and the
engineers, to run their straight-cut, low-grade line, found that they
would have to make tremendous cuts and fills--these last alone totalling
14,600,00 cubic yards. The Lackawanna's engineers will give you a faint
idea of the stupendous size of these embankments. To build them up of
stone and earth at the rate of a cartload a minute for each working-day of
the year would require 81 years for the job. To do it in less than three
years has meant the employment of whole trains of dump-cars, the purchase
of 600-acre farms for single borrow-pits, the energy and administration of
real engineers.

There have been cuts through solid rock, 65 bridges and culverts to be
wrought of concrete, a single embankment (at the Pequest River) three
miles in length, 110 feet high, and 300 feet wide at its base. The
traveller who rides over the completed double-track road will have but a
faint idea of the human labor and the human energy that have gone to
construct it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great railroad that traverses the State of Pennsylvania is another
monument to the engineer. The Pennsylvania Railroad was no wobbly affair
at any time. Its grades and curves, considering the character of the
country through which its trunk rests, are not excessive. It has been a
good standard railroad for a good many years past. But in 1902, the
Pennsylvania found that its troubles rested in the volume of traffic that
was being offered it. Over its middle division from Harrisburg to
Pittsburgh it was handling as much tonnage as J. J. Hill's entire Great
Northern system. The heavy tonnage business began to clog the road's fast
passenger traffic (its especial pride) and the fast freight traffic (the
mainstay of its shippers), and appeal was made to the reconstruction
engineers.

It was no slight appeal at that. Pittsburgh, handling 400,000 freight cars
a month, was clogged, congested with such streams as had never before
tried to crowd through that narrow neck of the Pennsylvania's bottle and
the orders that went forth for relief were emphatic. Vice-presidents,
general managers, superintendents and general superintendents, and
engineers of every sort crowded into the president's office in Broad
Street Station, and out of that conference the plans for an exclusively
low-grade freight line from New York to Pittsburgh and for the traffic
relief of Pittsburgh itself were born.

Every large city has become, in a sense, a bottle-neck for the important
railroads that pierce it. In some cases like Chicago or St. Louis or
Kansas City or Indianapolis, the situation has been solved by the creation
of belt-line freight railroads partly or entirely encircling the town. At
Buffalo, the New York Central lines have built a connecting line to enable
through traffic to escape the congestion of city yards and terminals,
while at New Haven, the road of the same name has recently spent several
million dollars in enlarging its narrow throat in the middle of the town.

But nowhere else did the situation approach that at Pittsburgh. Through
the Pennsylvania's passenger station there poured not only an abnormally
heavy passenger traffic, owing to a heavy suburban service, but every
pound of freight bound between the parent company and its two great
subsidiaries, the Panhandle and the Fort Wayne. There were further
complications right at the station, owing to the proximity of two of the
very worst grade-crossings in America, where Penn and Liberty Avenues
swept their busy tides of city traffic all day long over the Fort Wayne's
main line tracks. It was a problem that called for the best in engineering
skill--and received it.

The Pennsylvania dug deep into its pocket-book and solved the problem
magnificently. It began by going back to the vicinity of its great
Pitcairn freight-yards at the east of the city, and from them building two
connecting laterals (the one to the south and across the Monongahela River
to connect with the Panhandle tracks, the other to the north--known as the
Brilliant cut-off) across the Alleghany and connecting with the tracks of
the West Penn Railroad, which in turn connected with those of the Fort
Wayne in the one-time city of Allegheny. That sounds simple, but it was in
reality a fearfully expensive undertaking. The mile of Brilliant cut-off,
"heavy work" every inch of it, cost $5,500,000, and is to-day the most
expensive mile of railroad track in the world.

But the gripping hand was off the traffic throat of Pittsburgh and
commercial Pittsburgh breathed more easily once again. The Union Station
and its approach tracks were restored to passenger uses; and in the course
of things the Pennsylvania tore down the old station, built a new one, and
wiped out the two wicked city crossings, as with the stroke of an
Aladdin's hand.

So much for Pittsburgh. Now consider the great new freight line leading to
the east from there. Not all of that railroad has yet been built, but the
greater part of it is already completed, and every part of the old road
that was under tension because of freight congestion has already been
relieved.

To build this new double-track railroad across 350 miles of a mountainous
State, the engineers studied two points--grade and curvature. Distance
was no object, for speed is the very last attainment of heavy tonnage
movement. The new route consisted in part of the enlargement of the old
routes, and in part of the construction of brand new line. It started east
from Pittsburgh, where the great Brilliant cut-off had been built to
relieve the tremendous terminal freight congestion, and followed up the
valley of the Alleghany River on the route of the West Penn Road, a
Pennsylvania property. The main line of the Pennsylvania comes east from
Pittsburgh up the valley of the Monongahela for a distance, and then
across country to Blairsville Intersection, 50 miles east of Pittsburgh,
where it is intercepted by the low-grade freight route.

From Blairsville to Gallitzin, the road winds through the narrow and
forbidding Conemaugh Valley most of the way. It twists itself through the
slender defile of Packsaddle. A dozen years ago or more, when the
Pennsylvania's engineers were ordered to four-track the original
double-track through that narrow defile in God's great world, they shook
their heads dubiously; then--after the fashion of engineers--they went
ahead and did it. When the order came for two more tracks in the same
narrow pass, they placed them there, although they had literally to blast
out a shelf on the side of the fearfully steep mountainsides for the
low-grade line.

Just beyond Gallitzin, where the Pennsylvania pierces with two great
tunnels the very summit of the Alleghanies, the low-grade line takes its
own course once more, breaking farther and farther away from the main
line, and for long sections following the trail of the long-since
abandoned Portage Railroad. The day is coming when Gallitzin Tunnels are
to be left high in the air. The Pennsylvania's officers tell you that
frankly.

"We have plans for a six-mile tunnel, to be handled by electric
motive-power already made," said one of them, just the other day, "and
every year we wait, that tunnel grows longer, the approaching grades less
and less. It will cost money--money into millions of dollars--and it will
earn 10 per cent on the investment."

From Gallitzin, the low-grade line delves far south to Hollidaysburgh and
then follows the tracks of a former branch line up to Petersburg on the
main line, which it parallels to the Susquehanna. Where the main line
crosses the Susquehanna at Rockville, the low-grade freight route diverges
once again and follows the west bank of the river for a number of miles,
completely avoiding in that way Harrisburg and the steel-making towns to
the south of it with all of their conditions of congestion. The freight
route crosses the broad Susquehanna at Shock's Mills, eight miles north of
Columbia, and follows the east bank of the river for twenty miles to
Shenks Ferry, where it turns abruptly eastward through the rugged hills of
Lancaster County to a connection with the main line at Parkesburg. From
thence it follows the main line nearly all the way to Glen Loch, crossing
and re-crossing it but at all times retaining its nominal grades. At Glen
Loch it makes a wide detour around Philadelphia and its suburbs and
reaches with a long straight "short cut" over to the main line at
Morrisville near Trenton.

So much for the location of this great line of reconstruction. In grades
and in curvatures it has achieved real triumphs. The great tonnage here is
also always east-bound--coal and iron coming to the seaboard. Its grades
also are chiefly consequential then to the east-bound movement. To that
movement the heavy grades are again at the almost incredible figure of
3-10 of one per cent--some seventeen feet to the mile. That will mean more
when it is understood that that figure is equal to the pull that is
required of an engine to start a heavy freight train upon an absolutely
level track. With such a pull, grades become as nothing, and the
Pennsylvania's operating department is enabled to run 75 trains an hour
over this low-grade line; hour after hour upon a 15 minutes' interval.

Ask a Pennsylvania officer what he would do with such traffic on his old
main line to-day, and he will tell you that he would rather resign than
tackle the proposition. The same thing is true on the New York Central
lines. Like the Pennsylvania, that railroad thought a little time ago that
with its four tracks it might move all civilization. Its acquisition of
the bankrupt West Shore Railroad in the eighties gave it two extra tracks
across New York State that for a long time were carried on the company's
books as deadwood. Now they are filled with freight operation and bringing
in a healthy return to their owners. The growing land is always catching
up to its new railroad facilities, no matter how rapidly they may be
constructed.

To-morrow?

The railroad operator does not like to think of that. He meets to-day and
he plans as best he may against that to-morrow. To meet the great unknown
he bids the engineers--those who construct and those who reconstruct--to
him, and begs that they exercise their best wits to help him to see a
little way into the dim and shadowy future.




CHAPTER X

THE RAILROAD AND ITS PRESIDENT

    SUPERVISION OF THE CLASSIFIED ACTIVITIES--ENGINEERING, OPERATING,
    MAINTENANCE OF WAY, ETC.--THE DIVISIONAL SYSTEM AS FOLLOWED IN THE
    PENNSYLVANIA ROAD--THE DEPARTMENTAL PLAN AS FOLLOWED IN THE NEW YORK
    CENTRAL--NEED FOR VICE-PRESIDENTS--THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS--HARRIMAN A
    MODEL PRESIDENT--HOW THE PENNSYLVANIA FORCED ITSELF INTO NEW YORK
    CITY--ACTION OF A PRESIDENT TO SAVE THE LIFE OF A LABORER'S
    CHILD--"KEEP RIGHT ON OBEYING ORDERS"--SOME RAILROAD PRESIDENTS
    COMPARED--HIGH SALARIES OF PRESIDENTS.


All the widely divergent lines of human activity in the organization of
the railroad converge in the office of its president. He is the focal
point of the entire system. More than that, he is its head and front. If
he is anything less, the sooner he is out of his job the better for both
the railroad and himself; for, although there is a great variety of
departments in the organization of steam railroad transportation and each
department will have still greater varieties of activities, there is but a
single activity delegated to the office that bears only the modest word
"president" in gilt letters upon its door. The function of that office is
to supervise. To understand that supervision better, consider for a moment
the rough structure of the railroad.

Its activities are grouped into classes. The activity of soliciting
business, both freight and passenger, forms the traffic department, in
many ways the most important of all; for from it comes nearly all the vast
revenue needed for the maintenance of the organism. The legal department
looks after the railroad's rights--its franchises, its charters, the law
fabric of its almost innumerable relations with the various railroad
commissions, legislatures, city councils, and town and country boards. If
the road be really sizable--with 8,000 or 10,000 or 12,000 miles of
track--it will probably organize into separate departments the buying of
its great quantities of supplies, the keeping of its intricate books, and
the handling of its money. The business of building its lines and
structures will need special talent for an engineering department. The
department that will employ the great rank and file of the railroad's army
of employees is the operating department, called by some big roads the
transportation department.

There are two other great factors of conducting a railroad; maintaining
its lines--the tracks, bridges, tunnels and other features of the
permanent way; and keeping both cars and engines fit for service. This
last work, organized as the mechanical department, will probably rank next
to operating in the number of its employees, and the value of its
equipment is one of the greatest assets of the railroad. It is generally
expressed in great shops located here and there and everywhere, at
convenient points upon the system.

Generally the maintenance-of-way department comes under operating--it is
only fair that a general manager should supervise the condition of the
line over which he is expected to operate his trains at high speed and in
absolute safety. The same argument should hold true as to the equipment.
But right here is the great rock upon which the principle of American
railroad organization splits in twain.

From the president's office downward, the system of organization may be
divisional or departmental. In the former case, the division
superintendent is the real unit of railroad operation: under his guidance
and responsibility come not only the operation of the trains but the
maintenance both of the line and of the rolling-stock. In the case of
departmental organization that superintendent--and also, above him, the
general superintendent--exercises no authority over the engineers of
maintenance-of-way or the master mechanics of the shops along the system.
Those lines of railroad activity do not converge with that of train
operation below the office of the general manager. The greatest outside
power that is given to a division superintendent on a purely departmental
road is a sort of cooperation with the master mechanic in the matter of
the men who handle the road's motive power. This cooperation is many times
intricate and involved. If the master mechanic and the division
superintendent are not harmoniously inclined toward one another, and
things very naturally go wrong with the motive-power, it is a difficult
matter to locate responsibility.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Pennsylvania system, which is one of the most perfectly organized in
the world, is strongly organized upon the divisional system. The division
superintendent upon the Pennsylvania is indeed a prince above his
principality, and he is well trained for his rulership. Pennsylvania men
go through the mill. It takes a pretty capable man to combine the ability
for handling trains and handling men with the intricate knowledge for
command over an engineering corps devoted to maintenance-of-way, as well
as command over a machine-shop which may employ a thousand skilled
workmen. In order to give its division heads that tremendous training, the
Pennsylvania sends its men through its own West Point, the great shops at
Altoona. The men who have sat in the big, roomy office in Broad Street
Station, Philadelphia, and who have been addressed as president, have been
proud of the days when they were up in the hills of the Keystone State,
standing their trick in overalls at the lathe, or carrying chain and rod
over long stretches of track. To-day every Pennsylvania superintendent,
possibly with a single exception or two, is a civil or mechanical
engineer.

[Illustration: THE OLD AND THE NEW ON THE GREAT NORTHERN--THE "WILLIAM
CROOKS," THE FIRST ENGINE OF THE HILL SYSTEM, AND ONE OF THE NEWEST
MALLETS]

[Illustration: THE SOUTHERN PACIFIC FINDS DIRECT ENTRANCE INTO SAN
FRANCISCO FOR ONE OF ITS BRANCH LINES BY TUNNELS PIERCING THE HEART OF THE
SUBURBS]

[Illustration: PORTAL OF THE ABANDONED TUNNEL OF THE ALLEGHANY PORTAGE
RAILROAD NEAR JOHNSTOWN, PA., THE FIRST RAILROAD TUNNEL IN THE UNITED
STATES]

On the other hand, the New York Central has also been brought into a
high state of organization, and stands firmly on the departmental plan.

"We believe that our superintendents should specialize in train
operation," says one of the high officers of that road. "In other words,
we do not believe that a man, to get his traffic through over a stretch of
line, should necessarily know to a fraction of an inch the best wheel-base
for an engine of a given type or the precise construction of a truss
bridge. Such requirements take away from the special training that is
to-day needed for every high-class railroader. A railroader is made better
by sticking to one thing and sticking to it faithfully; and our
departmental method, by which the maintenance of line and rolling-stock
comes under the sole supervision of men expert in those specialties, we
think the best. Sometimes we develop a very wizard in traffic handling,
who has never had a chance at a technical education."

And there you have the very essence of the other side of the proposition.
Between these two sides there are various shadings and gradings, but the
question has never been definitely solved. It has reduced the vast
complexity in the organization of the modern railroad of the larger size.
That has become so very complex it fairly cried for expert relief. One man
has recently spent a busy term of years in simplifying the organization of
the Harriman lines. To cut the intricate lines of red-tape in a big
railroad office, to reduce to a minimum the vast needless correspondence
between departments and between branches of a single department, is a
problem that calls for genius--and offers for its solution no small
reward.

       *       *       *       *       *

In other days--and we refer to no ancient history, for the electric light
was proved and the hundred-ton locomotive already increasing the average
tonnage of the American freight train--the presidents of the biggest roads
were content to worry along with one or two assistants. But two decades
ago, the railroads were still simple matters; there did not exist the
intimate relations between one and the others of them, as shown by
stockholdings in competing and feeding lines to-day--the constant waiting
of their executives upon the sessions of the different railroad
commissions. These complications of American railroading have also further
complicated the organizations of the different systems, and have brought a
demand for executives of the keenest type. It is no slight strain that a
man works under when he becomes the head of a ten-thousand-mile railroad.

So to-day the president of the railroad has fortified himself in the only
possible way--by creating vice-presidencies. Each ranking department
to-day is apt to be recognized in council by a vice-president; and these
heads form a cabinet as informal as that of the Federal Government and, in
its way, quite as important. Legal traffic, and engineering traffic each
demands a vice-president at that cabinet-board, and gets him. The general
manager usually is the vice-president representing operation. One big road
has eight vice-presidents. It is indeed a poor property that cannot show
three or four men that are the fittest to hold this title.

There is another cabinet where the president must sit, which is formal and
recognized; it is the board of directors. Between it and the lesser
cabinet the president must take good care that he is not ground as between
millstones. The cabinet of his department heads will tell him how he can
spend his money; but he must get it from the upper cabinet. It is not
always harmonious pulling in the upper cabinet. Imagine for a moment the
troubles that sometimes arise in the lower.

You are sitting in the office of a big railroad president, talking
straight to that big-shouldered soul himself. Outside is the shadowy roof
of the train-shed of a terminal, which is filled with long lines of cars
that come and go, of platforms that are black with humans one instant and
quite deserted the next. The room has the quiet elegance of a comfortable
home library. There are long rows of books upon the shelves; a great table
is set squarely in the centre. But it is business--for a ticker is slowly
spelling the fate of that railroad and every other railroad, upon the
endless tape; a huge map of the system--many thousands of miles of
high-class railroad--lies under the glass that covers the table top.

"They don't always pull together," the president of the railroad admits,
when you ask him about the lower cabinet. "Sometimes they pull apart when
they have honestly different ideas as to policy, and other times--there's
to be a big college football game up at G---- next Saturday. We have only
two private cars for our four vice-presidents, every single blessed one of
whom wants to go. I don't want to go myself, and I've contributed my car,
but we're one short then, and the man that's left is going around like a
boy who's had a chip knocked off his shoulder. He's just been in here, and
I've settled the matter by hiring a car for his party from the Pullman
folks and footing the bill myself. I sent him out ashamed of himself.

"That's Pete every time. Flares up quick, and every time he flares up I
can remember when we were working the day-and-night tricks in a
God-forsaken junction out on a prairie stretch of the Great West. He's
like a boy in some ways--awfully fussy about the rights and prerogatives
of his department; and he'll go all to pieces over some little thing if he
thinks another man has stepped over on to his side of the line. But let a
big situation arise--a flood that sets a whole division of our lines
awash; a wicked congestion of traffic in midwinter blizzards; a nasty
accident that takes away our nerve--and you ought to see Pete! He'll be
handling the thing as if he were putting a ball up on the links, and he'll
never lose his confident smile. That man in one such emergency is worth
the hire of a dozen Pullmans."

You ask about the upper cabinet, and the president lowers his voice. The
board is no matter for light conversation. He steps to the window and
points down into the concourse of the train-shed.

"I happen to know that young fellow over there by the mailbox," he
answers. "He's one of our travelling freight-agents. He's lucky. He works
for one boss, and is responsible to him; I work for a whole regiment of
bosses, and am held responsible by a group of pretty keen old citizens who
gather around this table and put me on the rack.

"There are many interests in this property, and some of them are too big
to sleep in the same bed. I have three directors who never speak to one
another outside of this room, and rarely ever in it. There is another who
represents the holdings of a road that fights this at every turn, and he
hurts the property worse than any good husky plague. A big estate, with a
bitter aversion to spending money for any purpose whatsoever, has another
director here; and a banking interest presents a director who seconds him
in every move, fool or good. That is the crowd I have got to work with
when I want ten or fifteen millions to hold our own against some other
fellow who is crowding us hard for business in our competitive territory
or threatening to run a line into one of our own private melon-patches.
That boy down there is lucky. He has only got to get out and land a couple
of hundred carloads from a shipper who hates corporations worse than
politics, and who has just had a claim for spoiled goods turned down by
this particular corporation. That boy has the cinch job."

       *       *       *       *       *

This imaginary railroad president has told you of one of the vital points
in the business of the railroad, the necessity for constant teamwork. A
railroad head may have the genius of a Napoleon, the stubborn persistence
of a Grant, or the marvellous executive ability of a Pierpont Morgan, and
be worthless if his board is not working enthusiastically with and for
him. It is not all pie and preserves by any means. The board may set its
sweet will straight against his, and he may be forced to execute a policy
of which in his own mind he has no trust. It is only once in a generation
that a man like Harriman, who can bend a whole mighty directorate to his
absolute will, arises. Harriman was a railroad president in the fullest
sense of the word.

He rode in his car north from Ogden one day, toward the great National
Park of the Yellowstone. At that time the only direct rail entrance to
that splendid reserve was by the rival Hill lines. Harriman had called for
a report upon the opportunities for the Southern Pacific to strike its own
line into the west edge of the Park. That report was being explained to
him in great detail as he rode north from Ogden. His chiefs had a hundred
practical reasons against building the line. Harriman listened faithfully
to the explanation, as was his way. Then he turned to one of the signers
of the report, a high officer of his property.

"You have never been in the Yellowstone?" he asked.

The officer admitted that he had not.

"I have," said Harriman triumphantly, "and I am going to build that road."

That road was built and became successful from its beginning; but Harriman
was a railroader with the intuitive sense that gives genius to a great
statesman or to a great general. The average railroad president does not
hold a controlling interest himself and he must be guided pretty carefully
by the judgment of his department heads; he must win the cooperation of
his board by tact and subtlety rather than by the display of an iron will;
and where he leads he must take the responsibility.

The Pennsylvania Railroad, as has already been told in an earlier chapter,
recently forced its entrance into New York City and marked its terminal
there with a monumental station. That move was a strategy of the highest
order, and was made that the road might place itself upon an even fighting
basis for traffic with its chief competitor. But it cost. Two mighty
rivers had to be crossed, whole blocks of high-priced real estate secured,
a busy city threaded, the opposition of local authorities (who stood with
palms outstretched) honestly downed. That all cost. That would have been a
mighty expenditure for the Federal Government; for a private corporation
it was all but staggering.

When the station was finished, a rarely beautiful thing with its classic
public rooms, its long vistas, and its vast dimensions, that private
corporation built, within a niche of the great waiting-room, a bronze
figure of its former president, the late A. J. Cassatt, where all hurrying
humanity might see it. But, though a thousand nervous travellers see that
statue in the passing of a single hour, not a hundred of them will know
the splendid tragedy it represents; for many of the high officers of that
railroad--some of the men who caused the bronze to be erected--to this day
believe that the production of that great station was the cause of the
death of their chief. He had dreamed of that terminal for years; his
engineer had deemed it all but impossible, and he had sent overseas for
other engineers. One of these, who had conquered the busy Thames, said
that he could tunnel the two great rivers. He was asked the cost, and he
gave it. His first figures were staggering, but the railroad president did
not abandon his hope. He summoned his board and put the problem to them.

There was pulling power between that president and his board, and the
pulling was all in a single direction. Their system--a railroad that
acknowledged no superior--could not keep in the very front rank without
its terminal in the heart of the seaboard city, eliminating forever the
delays and the inconveniences of a ferry service; the road could not
afford to drop into second rank, and so it assumed the great undertaking.

That meant many things more than laymen understand; the selling of
securities in delicate markets, home and foreign, which fluctuate wildly
on the promulgation of anticorporation talk; the evading of untiring
competitors; the appeasing of hungry politicians, only too anxious to feed
at the hands of a wealthy corporation. In this case, it meant more than
all these things, for the two rivers were quite as treacherous as the
American engineers had pronounced them. They would sound in their tunnel
bearings and find rock which seemed soft, and their dynamite charges would
be sufficient. Then it would prove hard, and their blast as inefficient as
that of a child's toy cannon. Again, the rock would drill as hard as the
hardest gneiss--the very backbone of Mother Earth herself, and the
hard-rock men would prepare a heavy charge of dynamite. Then the stuff was
as soft as gravel, and their heavy charge would have torn off the roofs of
half a dozen houses. When they were under one of the rivers they found its
bed--the roof of their tunnel--as soft as mud. There came a day when the
little foaming swirls of water above their headings became a geyser: the
river-bed had blown entirely out.

After that, some of the younger engineers felt like throwing themselves
into the wicked river, but the biggest engineer of all never lost his
faith. He sent upstream and brought down a whole Spanish Armada of clumsy
scows, each heaped high with sticky clay. That clay--in thousands of cubic
yards--made a new river-bottom and the tunnel shields went forward.

There were other obstacles and discouragements, almost an infinite array
of them, to be surmounted, but this railroad president had steeled his
mind to the accomplishment of that terminal. In the making of it he gave
his life. When the day came for the drafts upon the railroad's treasury,
mounting higher and higher, he was cheer; when bad news came from the
burrowing engineers, he was courage; when timid stockholders and directors
began to worry, he was comfort. He gave of his vitality to the
organization, to the making of the terminal, until the day came when he
gave too much--and his life went out while he was still like a mighty king
in battle. He did not live to see the classic lines of the great station
building. As he stands in the waiting-room, he stands in bronze. Those
bronze eyes are powerless to see the splendid fruition of his endeavors.

That sort of thing--heroic courage and death-bringing devotion to an
enterprise--repeats itself now and then among the executives of the
railroads. When the panic of 1907 reached high tide, there was a certain
railroad president who, like his fellows, viewed it with no little alarm.
He had lunched with a big steel man, the kind the newspapers like to call
a magnate, and the steel man had scared him. The company for which the
former labored was going to close half a dozen of its plants--was going to
throw some thousands of poorly provided men out of work.

The railroad president took that bad news back to his comfortable office;
at night it travelled with him in his automobile to his big and showy
house. It would hit his company hard in its heavy tonnage district, but
that was only a single phase of the situation. He thought of things
becoming more disjointed when the news became public--before that week had
run its course. That night the president made up his mind to take a big
step. It was risky business, but he thought it worth the risk.

He sent for the steel man in the morning and asked him what was the best
price he could make for his product. The steel man cut his regular profit
in half, but the president was not satisfied.

"You'll have to show me a better margin than that," he said.

"We'll eliminate profits," said the steel man, "and give you the stuff at
cost, to save shutting down our plant."

"Is that the best you can do?" persisted the president.

Before he was done, the steel man had also eliminated depreciation on
plants and half a dozen minor expenses. He agreed to deliver at the mere
cost of raw material and labor. Then he received an order that would have
broken some records in prosperous times. The road was committed to some
big building projects and it needed whole trainloads of girders and
columns; bridges by the dozen. The railroad president went further, and
helped out the steel man's car-building plant. He ordered 3,000 steel
freight cars, and every day he was getting reports from his general
manager of a further falling of traffic tides. They had motive-power
rusting on sidings, and they were dumping freight cars in the ditches
along the right-of-way because they did not have storage-room for them.
That took courage of a certain high-grade sort. When those freshly-painted
new steel cars began to be delivered in daily batches of sixty, some of
his directors asked him where he was going to find room to store them. He
did not answer, for he did not know; but in the long run he won out. His
company had a new equipment for the returning flood-tide of traffic which
had cost it 25 per cent less than that of its competitors. When the time
came to build its big improvement it had the steel all stored and ready.
The president was able to tell his directors then that he had saved them
$1,700,000 on that close bargain that he had driven in panicky times.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes a little thing makes a railroad president big.

The head of a busy road in the Middle West was hurrying to Chicago one day
to attend a mighty important conference of railroad chiefs. His special
was halted at a division point for an engine-change, and the president was
enjoying a three-minute breathing spell walking up and down beside his
car. An Italian track laborer tried to make his way to him. The
president's secretary, who was on the job, after the manner of presidents'
secretaries, stopped the man. The signal was given that the train was
ready, but the president saw that the track-hand was crying. He ordered
his train held and went over to him. The story was quickly told. The
track-hand's little boy had been playing in the yards and had hidden in an
open box-car; so his small companions had reported. Afterwards the car had
been closed and sealed by a yardmaster's employee. Somewhere it was
bumping its weary way in a lazy freight train, while a small boy, hungry
and scared, was vainly calling to be let out.

Perhaps that president had a boy of the same size--they always do in
stories; and perhaps--this being reality--he did not. But he stopped there
for three precious hours, at that busy division point, while he sent
orders broadcast to find the boy, orders that went with big authority
because they came from the high boss himself. He was late at the
conference, because that search was taking his mind and his attention. He
hung for hours at a long-distance telephone, personally directing the
boy-hunt with his marvellously fertile and resourceful mind. When action
came entirely too slowly he ordered the men out of the shops and all
interchange freight halted, until every one of 12,000 or 14,000 box cars
had been opened and searched. Finally, from one of these they drew forth
the limp and almost lifeless body of a small boy.

The railroad chief died a little while ago and was buried in a city 500
miles away from the line that he had controlled. The track-hands of his
line, with that delicate sensibility that is part and parcel of the
Italian, dug deep into their scanty savings and hired a special train,
that they might march in a body at his funeral.

It sometimes takes a big man to do a little thing in a big way.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here is Underwood, the railroad president who took hold of the Erie when
the property was a byword and a joke, who began pouring money into it to
give it real improvements and possibilities for economical handling, and
made it a practical and a profitable freighter, a freighter of no mean
importance at that. He once issued an order that any car on the road (no
matter of what class of equipment) with a flat wheel should be immediately
cut out of the train. The order was posted in every yardmaster's office up
and down that system.

Some time after it went into effect, Underwood was hurrying east in his
private car. It was essential that he should reach Jersey City in the
early morning, for he had a big day's grist awaiting him at his office. A
real railroad president, working 18 hours a day, can brook few delays. But
when the president awoke, his car was not in motion; the foot of his bunk
was higher than the head. He looked out and found himself in a railroad
yard three or four hundred miles from his office. When he got up and out
he saw why his bed had been aslant. The observation end of his car was
jacked up and the car-repairers were slipping a new pair of wheels
underneath it. A car-tinker bossed the job and Underwood addressed him.

"Who gave you authority to cut out my car?" he asked.

"If you will walk over to my coop," said the car-tinker, politely, "you
will find my authority in orders from headquarters to cut out any car (no
matter of what class of equipment) with a flat wheel."

When the new wheels were in place the president of the road put his hand
upon the shoulder of the car-tinker and marched him uptown. The man
obeyed, not knowing what was coming to him. Underwood walked him straight
into a jeweller's shop, picked out the best gold watch in the case and
handed it to the car-tinker.

"You keep right on obeying orders," he said.

The relations between a railroad president at the head of the
organization, and some man who struggles ahead in the army of which the
president is general, would make a whole book. They still tell a story in
Broad Street Station, Philadelphia, of Mr. Cassatt, the Pennsylvania's
great president, and the brakeman.

It seems that one of the suburban locals that took Cassatt to his country
home up the main line was halted one night by an unfriendly signal. The
president, mildly wondering at the delay, found his way to the rear
platform. On the lower step of that platform, in plain violation of the
company's rule, sat the rear brakeman. Cassatt was never a man who was
quick with words, but he said in a low voice:

"Young man, isn't there a rule on this road that a brakeman shall go a
certain distance to the rear of a stalled train to protect it by danger
signal?"

The brakeman spat upon the right-of-way and, without lifting his eyes from
it, said:

"If there is, it's none of your damn business."

Cassatt--the man who could strike an arm of Pennsylvania into the heart of
metropolitan New York at a cost of many millions of dollars--was much
embarrassed.

"Oh, certainly it isn't," he said with an attempt at a smile. "I was
merely asking for information."

The next morning the president of the Pennsylvania summoned the
trainmaster of that suburban division to his desk and reported the matter.
The trainmaster turned three colors. It was _lese-majeste_ of the most
heinous sort. He proposed the immediate dismissal of the offending
brakeman. Cassatt ruled against that. He was too big a man to be seeking
to rob any brakeman of his job.

"Just tell him," he said to the trainmaster, with a suggestion of a smile
about his lips, "that he cussed the president, and that, as a personal
favor, I should like him to be more polite to passengers in the future."

No two railroad presidents come up to their problem in quite the same way.
Take the two members of the Western railroad world--one gone now--Hill and
Harriman. In J. J. Hill's domain the personality of the man counts for
everything. He picks his men, advances them, rejects or dismisses them,
by a rare intuitive sense, with which he judges character. A high chief in
his ranks once asked for a vacation in which to take his family to Europe.
Hill granted it. When the man came back from Europe another was at his
desk. Hill did not approve of long vacations, and that was his method of
showing it. The department head should have known better.

On the other hand, Harriman measured his men impersonally--as if in a
master scale. He measured them by results. A man might personally be
somewhat repugnant to him, but if he accomplished results for the road, he
held his place, at least until some one came along who could do even
better.

W. C. Brown, of the New York Central, and James McCrea, of the
Pennsylvania, are the heads of two railroads great in mileage and in
volume of traffic; yet their methods are in many essentials radically
different. McCrea is the essence of Pennsylvania policy--coldly
impersonal. It is easier to gain an audience with the president of the
United States than with the president of the Pennsylvania. No Pennsylvania
man from president down to the lowest ranking officer, grants an interview
to a newspaper reporter. It would be risky business for any officer of the
Pennsylvania to have his photograph published or himself glorified by
reason of his connection with the company. The company is the corporation.

When it speaks, it speaks impersonally through its press agent, a clever
young man with clever assistants, who both answers newspaper questions and
advances newspaper information. His function is a new one of the American
railroad, and allies itself directly with the office of the president.

W. C. Brown, of the New York Central, probably stands preeminent to-day
among American railroad executives. He has shouldered himself up from the
ranks of the railroad army, and only good wishes have gone to him as he
has stepped from one high post to a still higher one. He has come, as
nine out of ten successful executives have come, from the operating end of
the railroad.

Brown is particularly accessible to newspaper reporters. He talks with
them, carefully and painstakingly, and sees to it that they are correctly
informed as to each of the great railroad problems of the day. He believes
sincerely that the head of a railroad should be personality and that the
personality should stand forth directly in the guidance of the property.
In his own case, at least, he has demonstrated the value of his theory.

For all this work and all this strain, the railroad president demands that
he be adequately paid. He has a good many perquisites--chief among them a
comfortable private car at his beck and call; but perquisites are not
salary. The head and front of the American railroad to-day receives
anywhere from $15,000 to $75,000; an astonishingly large percentage of
railroad presidents are receiving at least $50,000 annually. But they work
for their pay--sometimes with their life-devotion, as in the case of the
big man who built the big terminal; other times with the hard sense of the
president who bought his steel girders and cars in the time of panic. Here
is a case in point.

A road in the Middle West, which was so compact as to make it quite local
in character, had a big traffic proposition to handle and was handling it
in a miserable fashion. One local celebrity after another tackled it,
until the directors were laying side bets with one another as to the
precise day when the receiver should walk into the office. Finally,
Eastern capital, which was heavily interested in the property, revolted at
the local offerings, and sent out an operating man with a big reputation
to take hold of it.

The directors received him with a certain veiled distrust as coming from
another land, but in the end they hired him. The matter of salary came up
last of all.

"Fifty thousand," said the New Yorker in a low voice.

One of the local directors spoke up.

"Fifteen thousand!" said he. "It's out of the question. We've never paid
more than twelve."

"So I should imagine," was the dry response. "But I said fifty, not
fifteen."

The consternation that followed may be imagined! In the end the New Yorker
carried his point. At the end of just twelve months he had, through his
acquaintance in Wall Street, and his keen insight into the big channels of
finance, cut that little road's interest charges just $800,000 a year. The
receiver has not come yet. The road has accomplished a miracle and has
begun to pay dividends. There is another miracle to relate. Last spring,
the directors of the road voted an increase in salary to their
president--and he courteously refused it!

"I think the presidency of this road is worth $50,000 a year," he said,
frankly, "and not one cent more."

That is the way a president should stand above and with his board.

Only a little time ago, another president, who had no easier proposition
to set upon its feet, was criticised by a querulous old director for his
lavish use of private cars and special trains. That president was having
his own troubles--his job had no soft places; but he said nothing when the
testy old fellow lectured him as he might have lectured a sin-filled
schoolboy. When the director was done, the president spoke in a low voice.

"Gentlemen, my resignation is on the table," was his reply to the censure.

The next moment there was consternation in that board. The president
slipped out of the room and left them to consider the matter. When he
returned, the chairman of the board, who had nodded in half approval at
the censure, was at the door to greet him.

"We refuse to accept your resignation," he said; "but the board does feel
that you ought to have a new car--the present one's getting shabby, Phil."

And in that moment the president felt that his work had gained one little
ounce of appreciation.




CHAPTER XI

THE LEGAL AND FINANCIAL DEPARTMENTS

    FUNCTIONS OF GENERAL COUNSEL, AND THOSE OF GENERAL ATTORNEY--A SHREWD
    LEGAL MIND'S WORTH TO A RAILROAD--THE FUNCTION OF THE CLAIM-AGENT--MEN
    AND WOMEN WHO FEIGN INJURY--THE SECRET SERVICE AS AN AID TO THE
    CLAIM-AGENT--WAGES OF EMPLOYEES THE GREATEST OF A RAILROAD'S
    EXPENDITURES--THE PAY-CAR--THE COMPTROLLER OR AUDITOR--DIVISION OF THE
    INCOME FROM THROUGH TICKETS--CLAIMS FOR LOST OR DAMAGED
    FREIGHT--PURCHASING-AGENT AND STORE-KEEPER.


At the very elbow of the railroad president stands the general counsel. He
is shrewd, resourceful, diplomatic. He has quick perception and action,
the faith and the loyalty of a friend. In many cases he is a personal
officer of the president--in the highest sense. If there is a change of
administration of the railroad, there is apt to be a change in the office
of the general counsel. If B----, who has been guiding the destinies of
the T. & S., goes to Transcontinental, he is apt to take Y----, his
general counsel along with him. For except in the case of some exquisitely
organized roads like the Pennsylvania, for instance, the general counsel
is in every sense personal to the president. He advises him privately,
urges him to this step, cautions him from that.

On the other hand, the general attorney is more apt to be the legal
officer of the railroad. Like the general counsel he has an old-fashioned
pride in his profession that makes him hesitate at accepting a
vice-presidency; he likes the ring of "general attorney" or "general
counsel" in his own ears. Railroad history and tradition both go to prove
that. He will hardly drop those titles for anything less than that of
president.

The general attorney, unlike the general counsel, in most cases will
make his offices in the railroad's headquarters. He will handle its
litigation, and if in half a dozen years he can bring down its verdict
costs from $1,250,000 to $750,000 for an average twelve month, as one man
did, he will be well worth the large salary that he demands and gets. And
his salary will be only one of many of the heavy expenses of the legal
department. When that functionary asks for money he gets it and without
many questionings. The operating department, the traffic department, the
engineers, may have to give sharp account for their appropriations; the
legal end of the railroad is trusted to accomplish accurate results,
without detailed accounting. In some cases it might prove embarrassing.

       *       *       *       *       *

You want to know the value of the shrewd and perceptive legal mind to a
big railroad? Here is a case that proves his worth:

A certain transportation company in the East had a legal vice-president
who many people supposed was a political heritage to the road, a man for
whom it was supposed a berth had been made by the owner of the property,
who was something of a politician himself. A quick turning of the wheel of
fortune had thrown one political party out of business at the capital, and
another in. The man was given a place in the railroad offices, and a
little later was made a vice-president. It so happened that the
vice-president knew more than supposers might even imagine; but he was a
quiet man, and sometimes some of his own clerks wondered why he drew his
big salary. After he had been at his desk a dozen years they found the
reason.

In gathering up a number of railroad properties to make the parent
company--after the fashion of modern railroad practice--one of the most
important of these old-time units was found to be in woefully shabby
physical form. It was a valuable road in the consolidation. The new parent
was willing to guarantee an annual rental of 10 per cent on its stock;
but as a railroad it fairly shook at the knees. It stood in dire need of
reconstruction, and the men who were offering it a high rental made that a
provision of the deal. The old road finally agreed to spend $12,000,000 in
revising its line and in buying new locomotives, cars, and bridges. With
much ado it accomplished its revision, and brought itself up closer to
modern standards of railroading.

A decade later when the governmental supervision of the railroads had come
into the full flush of its authority, the quiet vice-president had an
armful of State commission reports and vouchers brought to his desk. He
locked himself in his room, and in a week he had made from them a
20,000-word abstract in long hand. Then he took his report in to the
president of the road.

The acute mind of that general counsel--you see that he was vice-president
in this particular case--searching here and there and everywhere, had
discovered a mouse-hole. The old-time road had not fulfilled its part of
the contract. It had found that it could revise its lines at a cost of a
little less than $9,000,000 and had quietly pocketed the change. The big
rent-paying consolidation went into the courts, after its cool, impassive
way. The case went to a referee and the referee took four years to hear
the case and decide it. There were 5,000 exhibits offered in evidence and
8,000 closely written pages of evidence, making a case nearly equal to
that of the receivership of the Metropolitan Street Railway Company of New
York City, which fills twenty pudgy volumes of some 800 pages each.

The referee decided in favor of the parent company, and rendered a verdict
close to $6,000,000, principal and interest. The case was appealed, and
sustained. That vice-president had proved his worth. The president of the
defendant road came to him.

"We simply can't pay," he pleaded. "We've no reserve fund."

"Then we will take it out of your rental," was the emotionless reply of
the quiet vice-president.

That type of man stands forth as a possibility to every one of the dozens
and dozens of young men who make the main staff of the railroad's legal
department. Those fellows come to the railroad fresh from the law schools.
Their salaries are small but their experience and their opportunities are
enormous. It is a far better career at the beginning than a briefless
existence in one's own office, even though one's own name is emblazoned in
brilliant gilt letters upon the door. A young man coming into the legal
department of a large railroad has a diversity of work offered him. He
draws up the simplest of papers at first, acts as assistant to a trial
lawyer, then finally comes to the time when he will alone fight the
railroad's case in some minor cause in a small court. After that the
causes get bigger, the courts more important, he begins to delve into law
libraries and to write briefs. Gradually he emerges into a full-fledged
lawyer. He may eventually become general attorney or general counsel, and
he may find himself welcome to the partnership of some really important
law firm. He has knowledge that may be of value in fighting the railroad;
whether he will use that knowledge in afterwards fighting his employer is
a matter for his own conscience to determine.

There are special departments under the main heading of the law
department. Counsel, the ablest of counsel, is retained at each important
point reached by the railroad, and these counsel must act in conjunction
and cooperation with headquarters. Special tax counsel have an important
office by themselves, for the railroad sometimes finds itself in a
difficult position. In its pride it may announce to the world, through the
newspapers, that the new Bingtown depot has cost $400,000, but when the
Bingtown appraisers come around, possessing in their bosoms no inherent
love for the railroad, those newspaper clippings in their hands, the tax
counsel begins to earn his salary.

In these days of Federal and State supervision and regulation of railroad
management, with now and then an aldermanic chamber or a county board of
supervisors trying its hand at the game, there is sure to be special
counsel, generally known as the commerce or commission counsel, assigned
to the complaints and hearings. For intricate, involved, or unusual cases
the road may go outside of its own ranks and hire special counsel--lawyers
who are specialists in the very thing involved.

Just as the big and tactful attorney stands back of the railroad's
president, so there crouches at his feet the claim-agent of the company,
who is its watch-dog and its scenting hound. Back of this claim-agent, who
must have achieved a reputation for keen-sightedness and marked ability
before receiving his position, is a busy company of claim agents, at
headquarters and every division headquarters upon the system. Together,
these form a militant organization that stands with the legal department
to defend the railroad's treasury against indiscriminate raiding.

Sometimes, because the work dovetails in many ways closely with that of
the operating department, these claim-agents work under the order of the
general manager and the division superintendents. A sly old fellow who
once headed a big road in the Middle West once explained the reason
why--in the case of his property--without even a trace of a smile.

"John says," he was speaking of his own general counsel, "that a
claim-agent can't be yanked up before any of these touchy bar associations
and charged with unprofessional practices if we can show cases--that
they're just railroad men and not lawyers, at all."

That was an exaggerated case. As a rule, the young claim-agent has
abundant need to be upon his mettle. The public, with an inborn itching
against the corporation, keeps him upon that mettle. The man who has had a
slight bump upon a railroad train--to make an instance--hunts out the
claim office at headquarters. He gets quick treatment and mighty courteous
treatment. If he can prove himself in any way entitled to a reimbursement,
he gets it--in cash upon the spot. Likewise he signs a release--a most
ponderous and impressive document. When his "John Smith" goes upon that
document he has, in its own magnificent phrasing "in consideration of
money received" released the railroad company from all obligation to him
from the beginning of the world, the fall of man and the decline of the
Roman Empire up to the very moment of the signing.

He goes home, pretty well satisfied with himself. It was only a little
bump at that. A twenty-five cent bottle of arnica had made him physically
himself once again; and as for his suit, well, that was pretty well worn,
anyway, and three dollars to a tailor would make it a good "second best"
for next winter. He feels that the ten dollars that the railroad gave him
was pretty abundant compensation.

But wait until he sees his neighbor. The neighbor almost froths at the
mouth when he hears of the transaction--of the impressively worded release
that was signed.

"You're a chump," he says. "You could have gone to bed, stayed there a
week and they would have been glad to give you a hundred."

After which the man looks upon his ten dollars with contempt and a feeling
of injury, and becomes a corporation hater. Or perhaps he was really hurt
and had some sort of a bill from his doctor and his druggist, lost time to
be compensated at his job. The railroad has figured these together and
paid him the sum, with the signing of the release as a necessary feature
of the transaction. The thing was not very serious, we will say, in this
instance also, and the hundred dollars that he received was really a fair
compensation. Now watch the neighbor, who it happens is a pretty shrewd
attorney:

"Let me take the case, even now," he urges slyly. "I'll get a verdict of
five thousand for you, if you are wise, and we will divide the proceeds."

"But I've signed their release," groans the other.

The shyster laughs in his face.

"You were drugged," he whispers, "drugged, and we will prove it."

That is not an exaggerated case. It is the sort of thing that the
railroad's claim-agents are combating every day of the year; and then
wonder not, that some of them finally lose the fine sense of honor,
themselves.

And beyond this class of folk, is another--nothing less than criminal.
There are men and women in this broad land who make a business of feigning
injury, and make it a pretty astute business, too, so that they may dig
deep into the strong-boxes of the railroad. The most dramatic of this
particular brand of "nature fakirs" has been Edward Pape, the man with the
broken neck. Pape has a most remarkable deformity and has not been slow to
avail himself of it as a money-making device far beyond the figures that
might be quoted for him by circus side-shows or dime museums. Pape makes a
specialty of the trolley companies. He can so alight from a car, coming
slowly to a stop, that he will fall and go rolling into the gutter.
Instantly there is excitement and a group of men to pick up the prostrate
form. He is found to be badly injured and is hurried to a hospital. There
the internes discover that he has a broken neck. A marvellous set of X-ray
photographs are made, and the railroad is usually willing to settle a
large cash sum rather than stand suit. Within a week he will probably be
away and practising his trick on some unsuspecting railroad.

"There was a time over in Philadelphia that was hell," Pape once told the
writer. "I'd just finished my fancy fall, and they got me into the
sickhouse and rigged out most to kill. They put hip-boots on me there in
bed, with their soles fastened to the foot-board and a rubber bandage
under my chin and over my head. They put seventy-five pounds in weights
on a cord and a pulley-jigger to that bandage and it nearly killed me all
day long. At night I used to wait until it was dark and then I'd haul up
the weights and put them under the blanket with me. Otherwise, I don't
know how I'd 'a' got my sleep."

[Illustration: THE FREIGHT DEPARTMENT OF THE MODERN RAILROAD REQUIRES A
VERITABLE ARMY OF CLERKS]

[Illustration: THE FARMER WHO SUED THE RAILROAD FOR PERMANENT INJURIES--AS
THE DETECTIVES WITH THEIR CAMERAS FOUND HIM]

Little things like the discomfort of hospital treatment and searching
examinations by railroad surgeons do not seem to discourage these
criminals. They take these as necessary hardships that go with their
profession. Inga Hanson, the woman who impersonated deafness, dumbness,
blindness and paralysis to win a heavy verdict from the Chicago City
Railway Company, and who was afterwards convicted of perjury, was wheeled
daily into the court-room in a chair apparently nothing more than a
living, inert, shapeless mass of humanity, exquisitely trained to enact
her role of deception.

Sometimes the claim-agents, working in conjunction with the railroad's
secret service, have used the camera to great advantage. A farmer who
lives in New Jersey drove into a seaboard city with a load of produce. At
a grade crossing, a switch-engine overturned his craft, about as gently as
such an accident could be accomplished. The farmer was lucky in that he
was bruised, rather than seriously hurt. Then he saw a lawyer and learned
that he was incapacitated for life by severe internal injuries. He entered
suit for $25,000 against the railroad.

There was a case for the secret-service bureau of the railroad, and it
took little time to find the right detectives, husky enough to get out
into the fields and work for four long weeks as farmhands. When the Jersey
farmer began haying that August, he found less trouble than he had ever
before experienced in hiring low-priced help. He was able to get two big
lads, who were hard workers.

It was a big hay year and the farmer was not averse to turning in to do
his part of the work. He liked to be with the boys he had hired and one of
them had a camera that he could take "great" pictures with. He showed him
some of the pictures that he took those August days on the Jersey farm.
The farmer liked them immensely.

He liked them rather less when his attorney came down from the city one
day, with prints of the same pictures that had been sent him by the law
department of the railroad. The farmer was given a chance to withdraw from
the limelight or else stand a criminal trial for perjury, with the
penitentiary's gray walls looming up behind. He took the chance. Few of
the dishonest claimants will proceed after such evidence has been put
before them. As for the railroad, it usually works better through getting
signed confessions of guilt than by going through the somewhat intense
workings of a criminal trial.

The secret service stands just back of the claim-agents. It has greater or
less recognition in the case of different railroads but its work is
generally much the same. It is police. Sometimes it is organized like the
police department of a small city, with captains and inspectors at various
division headquarters, and at other times its very existence is denied by
the railroad heads. But its work is much the same. Its men, generally
chosen for fitness from city police or detective staffs, sometimes root
out tramps or small thieves along the line and in the freight-yards,
sometimes in gay uniform patrol the platforms of crowded passenger
terminals, sometimes work with greatest secrecy in "plain clothes"--which
in this case may be jeans or overalls--to detect theft or treason among
employees, and sometimes they receive their greatest laurels in connection
with the "fake" suits that are brought against the railroad.

The secret-service works night and day. Its members, with the
claim-agents, are at the scene of a serious accident as quickly as the
wrecking-train itself. Together with the railroad's own corps of surgeons,
retained in every important town, and chosen for absolute honesty and
integrity, they form an important adjunct of the personal injury claim
service.

       *       *       *       *       *

The financial officer of the railroad is, of course, the treasurer. It is
he who receives its earnings--running possibly into a hundred millions
dollars in the course of a twelvemonth--and disburses them for supplies
and for wages, for taxes and for bond coupons, and, it is to be hoped, for
dividends. He works through appointed banks; and the bank president who
can go out and capture one or two good railroad accounts for his
institution has earned his salary for several years to come. The selection
of the banks is one of the dramatic phases of the inside politics of
railroading; it is a cause of constant wire-pullings and heartburnings.

"Do you see that whited sepulchre down there?" a big railroad head laughs
to you as he points to a white marble skyscraper closing the vista of a
city canyon. "This road built that temple of business. Our account is its
backbone. Sometimes we deposit a million dollars a day and it is no
uncommon thing for our balance there, approaching coupon or dividend times
to reach sixteen or seventeen million dollars."

He laughs again, then grows confidential.

"We're in a bit of a hole," he admits. "Some of the big manufacturers
downtown are organizing a bank, and it looks as if it was going to be a
pretty solid sort of institution. They want a big account from us, and our
traffic people are urging their cause. In the long run they'll get the
account."

Then he explains to you that the railroad endeavors to hold down its bank
accounts, although it must have them in a large number of different
cities, to avoid the long shipments of large quantities of money. The
agents and the conductors will, following a carefully arranged system,
send their receipts to the nearest designated banks, mailing memorandum
slips of the deposit both to the treasurer and to the comptroller. The
bank in its turn, sends receipt slips to both of these officers, so the
deposit transaction is hedged about with a sufficient degree of formality
and detail.

When it comes to pay out its money, the railroad has no lessened degree of
formality and detail. For the wages of its employees--generally the
greatest of all expenditures--the railroad has proper system and order.
The paymaster makes out the voluminous pay-rolls, they are each properly
attested by the heads of departments; and for his pay-roll totals, the
necessary vouchers are issued to him by the treasurer. He may pay the
railroad army by check or he may send his deputies out over the system in
the pay-cars.

The pay-car is one of the pleasantest of the surviving old-time railroad
customs. The shriek of the whistle of the engine that hauls it is the
pleasantest melody that can come to the ears of the man out upon the line.
To shuffle in a long line up to its platform window where the railroad's
money is being paid out in tiny envelopes, as each man signs the
impressive roll, is one of the greatest joys that anticipation can hold
out. As the car makes its routine trip over the line each month or each
fortnight, it draws its money from the various repository banks, or else
the cash is forwarded to it at division points from headquarters.

But, like many old customs, the pay-car is disappearing. The railroads are
more and more paying their men by check. It is a better system in many
ways. It avoids the handling of large sums of money, and many of the men
prefer not to have a roll of bills thrust into their hands. The old
prejudice among them against checks is practically over. The checks are
constant incentives toward saving, the small banks in the little town are
shrewdly reaching for the accounts of the thrifty railroaders. There may
not be much for the bank in just one of these accounts, but they can
quickly multiply into considerable sums.

We have already spoken of the comptroller; he is called the auditor upon
some of our railroads. The comptroller is the most passionless and
unemotional of all railroad officials. He measures the worth of his
fellows by cold mathematical rules, by addition, by subtraction, by
multiplication, by division. Even as big a man as the president may
shudder at the result of such coldly accurate measurings.

No moneys are received, none spent, without the knowledge and approval of
the comptroller. He is really a fine balance-wheel of the system, a
governor working in exact accord with the laws of the ancient and
wonderfully accurate science of numbers. By his computations men rise, men
fall. He is the keeper of the rule and keeper of the weight.

His office organization reflects his own measure of accuracy. As a rule,
an auditor of disbursements and auditors of tickets and of freight
receipts report are his chief assistants at headquarters. A corps of
sharp-eyed young men, each also having an almighty respect for
mathematical accuracy, will be up and down the line for him, catching up
careless agents on the one hand, and on the other gently showing them how
to keep their accounts better, and conform more carefully to the company's
established standards. Sometimes the car accountant, a man who watches the
mileage of the company's cars travelling over other roads, and the
equipment of other roads scurrying over the home system, reports to the
comptroller, oftener, however, directly to the operating department. All
these make a considerable office--an office which usually treads its
monotonous path and rarely becomes nervously excited; an office to be well
considered in the organization of the railroad.

The work of that office falls quite naturally into three channels--as we
have already indicated--passenger receipts, freight receipts and
disbursements, and general accounts. In the passenger receipts the
accounting has, of course, to do with the sale of tickets, and the cash
fare collections made by conductors upon the trains. This would be simple
enough bookkeeping if a good many years ago the interline or coupon
ticket, entitling the bearer to ride upon several different roads, had not
come into popularity. To apportion the revenue of a ticket between the
half-dozen different lines upon which it has been used requires almost no
end of system and accounting. Once a month each road has an accounting
with its fellows, with whom it is engaged in selling through tickets. The
coupons themselves are the vouchers, and cash balances of a single
road--because of the freight as well as the passenger business--may be
kept standing in the treasuries of several hundred other roads. It is a
system quite as intricate, in itself, as the relations between city and
country banking and yet it is only a single small phase of the conduct of
the railroad.

The auditor of ticket receipts must also, through this staff organization,
make sharp examination of the tickets that are turned in by the conductors
at the end of each day's run. He must see to it that the conductor is
neither careless nor anything worse. In either of these cases he will
bring the matter quickly to the attention of the operating department.

In addition to the railroad selling its tickets there are also railroad
passenger traffic organizations, half a dozen or more important ones
across the country, which are engaged in selling various forms of railroad
transportation. In some cases this takes the shape of a mileage-book which
may be honored by fifteen or twenty different lines. The book will perhaps
be sold for $25.00 and will permit of 1,000 miles' riding at a saving over
local fares, if the purchaser comply with its provisions. If he has
complied with its provisions within the year's life of the book, he will
be paid $5 rebate upon return of its cover which has given him his riding
at two cents a mile. Sometimes these books take the form of "scrip" which
is silent upon mileage but which has its strip divided into five-cent
portions, sold at wholesale, as it were, at a fraction less than five
cents each.

In any case, there is more work for the auditor who handles passenger
receipts, and if the railroad is in New York State, for instance, where
there is quite a model law in effect regulating these things he will have
to be very careful how he handles the accounts for these peculiar mileage
books. The law tells him that he must not credit the whole $25 to
passenger receipts, for the law seems to point to even finer lines than
the comptroller. He cannot even subtract the $5 which will probably return
to the purchaser, and charge the $20 to receipts. The mileage-book sales
must be credited to a separate account, and only transferred to the main
receipts of the railroad as the strip is turned in for passage, a few
miles at a time.

Do you wonder then that the comptroller sometimes grows gray-haired, that
the vast routine of his office swells tremendously from year to year? The
passenger receipts are almost always less than half of the income accounts
of his offices. They are the A, B, C compared with the delicious tangle
that comes when the freight waybills come in by the hundred thousand, and
each little road must receive the last penny due to it. That feature alone
will sometimes keep 400 clerks scratching their pens in a single office,
will involve many, many more balances and cross-balances between the
railroads.

And beyond that complication is still another, the constant investigation
and settlement of freight claims that come pouring in against the
railroad. There is another job for a staff of competent men. If it is an
overcharge claim, the routine is comparatively simple. The audit office
should have information at hand sufficient to decline the claim or settle
it immediately. But if the claim is for lost or damaged freight, the thing
complicates. Before the freight claim department will draw a voucher
against the treasurer, it will have to assure its own conscience that the
claim is fairly substantiated by the facts.

From these receipts, combined with those from rentals of express or
telegraph privileges or the like, the railroad pays its bills--pays its
men, as we have already seen. It pays its taxes and its bond coupons and
its fire insurance, and apportions these as far as possible over the
twelve months of the year that it may keep a fairly even balance between
receipts and expenditures. The other bills are paid by properly signed and
attested vouchers, which are bankable like checks, and which are indeed
the very best form of check, because they are upon their face a receipt
stating the precise reason for which a certain sum of money was paid.

In recent years the comptroller, or the auditor, as you may prefer to call
him, has become more and more of a statistician. He prepares tables as to
locomotive performances, obtaining his figures from the mechanical
department; he can tell you to an ounce the average carload of the system
for any given month. He fairly seems to revel in his own development of
the science of numbers. Train and car statistics will probably show the
number of trains of different classes, the mileage of the same, the
mileage of empty and of loaded cars, and the direction of their movement.
Locomotive statistics run to mileage, consumption of fuel and of stores,
and the cost of labor and material for repairs. In addition to all these
the comptroller will probably prepare statistics of locomotive
performances--so many miles to one ton of coal and one pint of oil. Then
he will show the average cost of coal by the ton and of oil by the gallon,
for the railroad never forgets the cost.

It is cost that really makes the excuse for these great statistics; cost
and revenue, analyzed and reanalyzed in half a hundred different ways. The
statistics are the thermometers, the very pulse by which the health of the
railroad is acutely judged. Sometimes the statistics become graphic, and
the comptroller, through some of the keen-witted men in his office,
prepares charts, in which statistics become "curves of averages" or jotted
and wriggling lines, with each jot and each wriggle full of meaning.

"Government by draughting-board," sniffs the old-time railroader as he
sees these great "cross-hatched" sheets with their crazy lines of
intelligence spun across them, but it is "government by draughting-board"
that has made the old-time railroader--well, the old-time railroader. The
new-time railroader gives heed to those charts--the pulse readings of the
creature that he is directing--guides his course in no small way by them.
They are veritable charts by which he may pick his way quickly and safely.

Branching, as a rule, direct from the president's office and occasionally
from the general manager's, are the purchasing agent and the store-keeper,
many times one and the same, or the former acting as superior to the
latter. The purchasing agent has no easy role. If he is not above sharp
practices--the gift of a bit of furniture or a theatre box, in the least
instances--he will fulfil only part of the reputation of his office; and
if he is--as many, many of them are--absolutely honest down to the keenest
degree of an acute conscience, he will probably still be under the
suspicion of some querulous minds. His opportunities for deceit and guile
are many, so much the more must he be an honest man in every full sense of
that word.

He brings the modern railroad's passion for standardization down to the
purchase of its every sort of supplies; for his office goes out into the
market for anything, from a box of matches to a locomotive. The very fact
that his department is a non-revenue department, save for an occasional
sale of scrap-iron or discarded materials, only serves to put him the more
upon his guard. He must not yield to the wiles of crafty salesmen. He must
measure their wares by a single standard--economy, as expressed in
selling-price, in durability, and in cost of maintenance; and upon that
standard he must decide between them, as impartially as a justice upon the
bench.

He must be guided by standard. If it be typewriters, he must struggle
against the preference of this department or that for some particular
machine, and bring all to the test of his three-headed economy. The
successful machine will then be adopted for the system and brought as
such. No small responsibility rests upon his accuracy of judgment.

His store-keeper must see to it that there is no waste of supplies. He
must see to it, for instance, that the engineers are as careful in their
use of oils as the clerk in that of stationery.

"We use $4,000 worth of lead pencils alone in the course of a single
year," says one of them; "and if we didn't keep hammering at the boys,
that figure would jump to $5,000 or $6,000 without realizing it."

He keeps check on the supplies that he issues. His stock of blank forms,
alone, would do credit to a wholesale stationery house in a sizable city;
for the railroad is a liberal user of printer's ink in its own devices. He
must be thrifty and he must be economical; he must look to it that the
railroad's money is not wasted in the purchase and use of its supplies.

Together with the general counsel, the general attorney, the claim-agent,
the treasurer, and the comptroller, the purchasing agent and the
store-keeper stand as guardians of the railroad's strong-box.




CHAPTER XII

THE GENERAL MANAGER

    HIS DUTY TO KEEP EMPLOYEES IN HARMONIOUS ACTION--"THE SUPERINTENDENT
    DEALS WITH MEN; THE GENERAL MANAGER WITH SUPERINTENDENTS"--"THE
    GENERAL MANAGER IS REALLY KING"--CASES IN WHICH HIS POWER IS ALMOST
    DESPOTIC--HE MUST KNOW MEN.


The general manager operating the railroad is held strictly responsible
for the economical movement of the trains and the maintenance of the
property. To the greatest portion of the railroad army (nine-tenths of it
employed in the operating department) he is an uncrowned king. The
superintendent, as we shall presently see, is the unit of the operation of
the road, just as the division over which he is head is one of the
physical units that go to make up some thousands of miles of first-class
railroad track. The division superintendent deals in men; the general
manager deals in division superintendents; and right there is the radical
difference between the two.

The superintendent must see to it that his men get a square deal. If he
does not see to it in the first instance they will see to it in the last,
and woe to him if such be the case. For the men who work on the steam
railroad are well-paid, well-read, keenly sensitive as to their privileges
and their rights. And from these men have come the division
superintendents, as different each from the other as men can be grown. It
is the general manager's chief duty to bring these very different men into
harmonious action. That is absolutely essential to the successful
operation of the railroad. The general manager must have absolute firmness
with his superintendents. He can appoint or discharge them as they can
appoint or discharge their trainmen--more quickly in fact, for up to the
present time there is no brotherhood of railroad superintendents.

A certain division superintendent in the East had 150 miles of busy
double-track trunk line under his direction. At his headquarters were a
big classification yard and a coaling-station for the engine of the two
divisions that intersected there. In the course of gradually increasing
business, the coaling-station, which stood in a narrow ledge beside the
main-line tracks and under the breast of a steep mountain-side, had to be
enlarged. In so small a place, that was a difficult engineering problem.
It was necessary to build much bigger coal-pockets and while the engineers
were removing the old and building the new station, temporary coaling
facilities had to be provided for the busy engine point. That part of the
problem--more operating than engineering--was finally solved by going
across the main-line tracks and locating a temporary coaling-station
there. That made a bad situation--with the heavy main-line traffic
constantly intersecting with engines drilling back and forth to their coal
supply, and the general manager was quick to realize it. He went up there
and warned his superintendent.

"This is a danger place," he said, "and a mighty bad one at that. That
tower's too far away to guard this cross-over. I want you to put two
flagmen here at all hours and let them personally signal and safeguard
every engine that crosses these main-line tracks."

Then he went back to his own big office, feeling that the responsibility
for that danger place was off his own shoulders, in part at least. The
division superintendent put in the requisition for the four men he needed.
The requisition enmeshed itself in the red-tape at the general offices of
the system. Some smart young assistant auditor there, who couldn't tell a
coal-pocket from a gravity-yard, and who was 400 miles away, remembered
that he had been ordered to cut the pay-roll--and the requisition went
into the waste-basket. The division superintendent did not try to get
another requisition for those flagmen through. He did the next best thing
and told the towerman in the cabin--almost half a mile away--to keep as
good a watch as possible of the cross-over.

The inevitable came early one evening, in an October fog. The Chicago Fast
Mail ran into an engine returning from the coal-pockets and there were
half a dozen dead when the wreck was cleared away. The division
superintendent was hurriedly summoned down to the general manager's
office.

"I cautioned you against trying to operate that cross-over without special
signalmen," that officer said, as he discharged the superintendent and so
cleared himself of the responsibility.

And that is where the modern system of excessive consolidation in our big
land carriers turned one good, faithful railroad executive into a howling
anarchist. An illogical system has developed from this rapid expansion of
the great individual railroad properties. As its most interesting phase,
it offers the man who is farthest away from the detail of operation as the
man who decides. One man takes the judgment of another and both of them
are far removed, perhaps, from the seat of the very trouble that they seek
to remedy. The man on the ground is powerless in the matter.

Here is the yardmaster at a great interior railroad centre--we call it
Somerset for the sake of convenience. His is one of the biggest yards in
all this land, and he is a man whose judgment should be solidly respected.
There are four improvements in his yards that he deems absolutely
necessary in the face of a rapidly increasing traffic, and for a portion
of the property that depreciates rapidly under hard usage. His is a most
important position; and yet as he cannot spend a cent himself for the use
of the railroad, not even to buy matches, he embodies his four requests
for necessities into a requisition and forwards it to headquarters--at a
seaboard city. His superior officer thinks that Somerset is asking a good
deal, and he cuts the request down to three items. The next link in the
chain is a man--an auditor, perhaps--who happens to be imbued with a
strong streak of economy at that time. Middle division has had its
appropriation cut thirty-three per cent, so off comes another item from
Somerset yard. After a time, the yardmaster is lucky to get one single
item through--and that is sure not to be the essential item that he needed
most of all. Good, plucky, valiant railroader that he is, he is sure to
think the whole outfit in the general offices a set of arrant fools.
Perhaps the big accident comes, and then perhaps he has full opportunity
to set himself straight. It is more likely that he does not, and that he
is made the target for Grand Jury indictment and a lot of other fireworks.

That is an instance of the complications of the modern railroad--the vast
intricacy of organization. Wonder not, then, that many a general manager
of to-day must think twice before he remembers that some particular inland
town is one of the obscure branches of his property.

       *       *       *       *       *

The superintendent deals with men; the general manager, with
superintendents. That statement is open to a slight modification. The
superintendent deals with the operating army in individual cases; the
general manager deals with them collectively. Somewhere in rank between
the division superintendent and the general manager stands the general
superintendent, but in the rapidly changing structure of American railroad
operation, his office is fast losing its individuality, is to-day in real
danger of utter extinction. On some railroads he is hardly more than a
chief clerk to the general manager, a rubber-stamp whose signature goes
mechanically upon papers bound upwards from division superintendent to
general manager. At the most he is to-day an outside man, getting up and
down the line and making constant reports to his boss, the general
manager.

[Illustration: OIL-BURNING LOCOMOTIVE ON THE SOUTHERN PACIFIC SYSTEM

THE STEEL PASSENGER COACH, SUCH AS HAS BECOME STANDARD UPON THE AMERICAN
RAILROAD

ELECTRIC CAR, GENERATING ITS OWN POWER BY A GASOLINE ENGINE

BOTH LOCOMOTIVE AND TRAIN--GASOLINE MOTOR CAR DESIGNED FOR BRANCH LINE
SERVICE]

[Illustration: THE BIGGEST LOCOMOTIVE IN THE WORLD: BUILT BY THE SANTA FE
RAILROAD AT ITS TOPEKA SHOPS]

For the general manager is really king of the entire situation. Just now
his reign is threatened from a new quarter, and you find him receiving the
opposition with both distrust and anger. This is the fine figure of a fine
man. He has come up the ladder, rung by rung--station assistant, telegraph
operator, despatcher, train-master, assistant superintendent,
superintendent, general superintendent, general manager; he knows
railroading, stick and wheel. His own railroad he knows as he might know
the fingers of his hand.

When we come into his office, the last of a committee of well-dressed
citizens is slipping out of his door; they are citizens from a prosperous
town in an adjoining State, and he may tell us of their errand.

"K---- is a good town," he will say, "and gives us a good and growing
traffic. We've a lot of nasty grade-crossings there, for the two of our
big lines that right-angle into there seem to get over about every street
in the place at level. They want us to elevate or depress our tracks
through there, and it should be done. This road wants it as much as
K----wants it; for it's one of the worst bottle-necks on our main line,
and Lord only knows how many thousands of dollars it's cost us in delayed
traffic."

This king of the railroad points to a sheaf of blueprints upon his desk.

"That tells the story," he says simply, "and the end of the chapter is a
bill for nine millions of dollars to get rid of those crossings. According
to law, K---- will have to stand about half of the cost of the work, and
K----, like most progressive American towns, has been running pretty close
to her debt limit. She is staggered at the thought of having to dig out
three or four millions of perfectly good dollars, and so her mayor has
made the naive suggestion that we advance the money and let them pay back
their share in the shape of refunded taxes and annual payments.

"We advance that money--and the big boss has to slip over to France and
try to sell our securities for mere necessities. The truth of the matter
is that we haven't the money to advance. We're grubbing to get enough cash
to buy locomotives and cars to keep pace with our business, not running a
loan business for upstart towns that have run through their capital."

In comes a second delegation, this one another group of commuters. They
have been asking for an additional train in on the Valley branch. The
general manager has said that the road cannot afford it, for the train
would have to be operated at a loss. He proves his statement.

"But," urges the spokesman of the party, "you will make traffic by it, and
eventually the train will pay."

"Eventually isn't to-day," said the G. M. stanchly, "and it is on to-day
that we are being judged. You gentlemen come here and ask me to place a
train in service that is a sure loser; and then you will go down to your
office, and when the difference between my net and gross comes to you upon
your ticket sheets, you will damn me as being a rank incompetent."

"But this one train?" protests the spokesman.

"Violates that very principle," replies the general manager. "Not another
car that does not pay its way."

And as that little group files its way out of the big office, uttering
sundry threats about going to the commission, the general manager
stretches his leg over his big desk. Under the glass top of that desk is a
big map, in colors, of his system--miles and miles and miles of
first-class railroad.

"They come to me--towns like K---- and tell me of their troubles," he
says, "as if I already did not know of them. I've a reconstruction plan
for every ten miles of our main-line." His finger traces upon the map to a
great division point. "Take Somerset here, and Somerset yard. That is some
yard, as the boys say. We have 110 miles of track in it, enough for a
good-sized side-line division, and that yardmaster has to be the equal of
a superintendent.

"You would take a good look at that yard, with its roundhouses and its
shops, its gravity-humps and its classification sections, and you would
think it big enough to handle every freight car that goes between here and
Chicago. It isn't. It isn't really big enough to handle our decent share
of that traffic to-day. We're trying to pour the business through it
to-day, and are succeeding only by the narrowest measure. It's a weak
valve in our biggest artery, and some day it's going to clog.

"It won't be five years before Somerset has me throttled again. Five years
ago it was as bad. It took us three to four weeks to put a carload of
freight through it in winter, and the shippers were howling bloody murder.
They got mad enough then to scare our directors and I got separate
east-bound and west-bound classifications yards, relief that I'd been
fairly down on my knees for, three years at least. I was the goat in that
thing. I always am; that's part of the job of general manager.

"I know just what the steady increase in traffic is going to bring me to,
at this point and at that. Here's where a couple of our biggest feeders
from the north come into our main-line; here are a couple of friendly
haulers dumping down into us from Canada; here, in the mountains, is where
we pick up our stuff from the south and the southwest. Every yard on our
system is beginning to stagger under the traffic that shows no let up, and
we've got to spend millions to keep ourselves from getting throttled.
Don't think I don't know every bit of that. I can see necessary
improvements all the way up our main line; but every one of them takes
money, and just now the big boss has to hustle to sell his securities and
raise the money. But when we know and can't improve--that's railroading."

A secretary tiptoes in. This railroad king looks up and smiles quite
frankly at us.

"Committee from the Chamber of Commerce at Zanesburgh," he announces.
"They want a new depot in Zanesburgh, and they're entitled to a new one,
costing at a fair ratio about $40,000. A $40,000-depot would give them
every comfort and convenience but they demand that we spend $100,000
because Great Midland has spent $80,000 in an architectural wonder in
Stenton; and the old time town rivalry makes Zanesburgh want to go Stenton
one better."

"You've got a lot of these delegations?" we venture.

"I lose track of them," says the general manager. "It's all a part of the
day's work; it's railroading."

We know. Last night, this general manager was at a big freight terminal
there in the headquarters city, seeing with his own eyes until midnight
the fast freight and the express traffic under handling. The night before
he was there, and the night before that he was also there, and three days
before that he was out pounding over the line in his car, working eighteen
hours a day. That's railroading, too.

The freight house in this terminal city is one of his biggest problems.
His biggest local freight yard is in a narrow valley between high hills;
and these, together with fearful realty values, absolutely circumscribe
its area. The traffic is growing all the while, and all the local freight
for his road--running in strongly competitive territory--comes to this
terminal. Three hundred and fifty cars must be despatched every night for
different points, and yet a dray coming into the yard must be able to find
any one of those cars without an instant's delay. And still the narrow
physical limitations of that yard prevail. There is a big problem for a
big man.

And sometimes the big man must stoop to examine carefully into the little
things. When McCrea, the present president of the Pennsylvania, was a
general manager off on the western end of that system, his car was halted
in the middle of the night by a bad wreck on a single-track side-line. He
might have remained in his comfortable bed, but that would not have been
McCrea. He got up and dressed, went outside and offered his services to
the wrecking-boss. The wrecking-boss was competent and he knew it.

"There's nothing you can do, boss," he said.

"Do you mean to tell me that there is nothing that I can do--with a road
blocked on both sides with wreckage and stalled trains and track to be
laid?" said McCrea. "Well, let me tell you that there are ties down there
in the ditch that will have to be placed before another train goes over
here, and we might as well be beginning."

And with that General Manager McCrea suited action to word. He went down
into the ditch, picked up a heavy tie, put it over his shoulder, and
brought it up into position. In an instant he was in the ranks, working to
bring order out of chaos. That was the way a big man could do a little
thing in a big way.

It takes a really big man for that very sort of thing. And the big man,
general manager of several thousand miles of railroad, must understand the
smaller men beneath him--any one of whom is apt in some future day to
supersede him. Here is a man who has been known as one of the best general
managers in the whole land. Soon after he was made operating head of a
really big road, a certain train on which he was travelling was much
delayed. The new G. M. inquired the exact reason for the trouble. He was
not so much concerned for his own convenience as he was curious to know
why one of the road's best through trains should have halted until
assistance should come from the nearest roundhouse.

"The fireman lost his rake," was the somewhat perfunctory report that the
G. M.'s secretary returned to him. But if that young man thought that his
boss was going to be satisfied with that report, he was mistaken,
decidedly.

"Bring the fireman to me," commanded the chief.

That fireman was not of the sort that is easily feazed. He stood stockily
and in a low voice gave a very circumstantial explanation of the whole
occurrence. It seemed that he had missed the rake that morning when they
had started out from the yard roundhouse to take the Limited down over the
division. He was just going back for another, when they were called to
lend a hand at a small yard wreck. When they were done shoving and bunting
there, they had no time to run back to the roundhouse and get a rake. They
had barely enough time to get to the passenger station for the engine
change. That was a good story, with a deal of explanation, and the fireman
thought that the G. M. must be impressed with it.

The G. M. was not in the least impressed. He looked the coal shover up and
down, from head to feet, then said:

"How about those seven freights that you passed laid out on sidings? You
could have forced any one of those engineers to lend you his rake rather
than lay out this train."

The effect of that slight observation from the G. M.'s car was not lost on
a man on the system. The new man made good. From that time forward word
went out to the far corners of his road that the "new boss" knew
railroading; that he had four eyes in his head and that you had to be
pretty careful what sort of a story you put up to him. Calculate, if you
can, in dollars and cents the moral effect of such a stand upon the rank
and file of the king's army. The general manager, as we have already said,
must know men.

       *       *       *       *       *

You are back with your first general manager again. He is tired of all
these problems, and yet he is now turning to another. This is formally
entitled the Situation. It is placed upon his big desk every morning. It
is a morning paper, if you please, prepared for a single reader. The
general manager is "Old Subscriber," in good measure; and if the paper
lacks both editorials and advertising, it is none the less interesting to
its star reader. Its news is as exclusive as its reader, and exclusively
the news of his system.

By it he knows first of the traffic that has been handled in twenty-four
hours, by cars and by trains. He knows by it the reserve forces of the
railroad, in cars and in locomotives, and just where they are located. By
the _Situation_, he can discover the over-massing of equipment upon one
division, the shortage upon another. After that he can begin to give
orders to his general superintendents and his superintendents of
transportation--these last the men who are directly responsible for car
movement--toward bringing a better balance between traffic and equipment.
The _Situation_ is on his desk at ten o'clock in the morning. By eleven,
whole brigades of locomotives may be under way, moving from their stalls
in some giant roundhouse out toward another division whose superintendent
is fairly shrieking for power.

But the _Situation_ tells more than merely this. It goes into history, and
in its own cold-blooded fashion tells what the road is doing by
comparison. It gives weather conditions and traffic for the corresponding
day, one year, two years, three years, five years before; and the general
manager will do well if he avoids giving mere cursory examination of such
tables. The _Situation_ not only notes weather conditions, it brings to
the eyes of the man whom we have called king in railroad operation the
more important train delays and the reasons that have caused them. Every
fact or incident that may affect the traffic or the operation of the road
is noted in its fine-filled pages. It is in every way a guide and a
barometer of the condition of a great property up to the very hour that
the general manager comes to his desk.

But the _Situation_ does not tell the entire story. Out in the nearest
passenger yard is a big private-car, almost as handsome and as well
equipped as that of the president of the road, and that car is in service
as many days as it stands idle there upon the siding. This man has 4,000
miles of railroad empire in his domain; there are nearly 70,000 faithful
privates for his army. To cover that territory means constant travel.
There are side-lines of less importance that sometimes do not see him for
six months at a time.

Of less importance, did we say? We had better not let him hear us breathe
that, for there are men in his employ who remember the first council of
the operating department staff after this G. M. came to the road. They
were gathered there for the time-table meeting--a general superintendent,
a whole round dozen of division superintendents, serious traffic-minded
folk from the passenger department, an auxiliary corps of chief clerks and
stenographers. Division by division, the passenger time-table problem was
adjusted. This superintendent asked a little more running time, for they
were putting in a cluster of new bridges, which made slow orders
necessary; another was thereupon forced to shorten his schedule, for the
total running time between main-line terminals of a road in hot
competitive territory could not be increased a single sixty seconds.
Finally, after a vast amount of argument, the main-line divisions were
settled, and attention was given to the side-lines. The first of these ran
through a section purely rural, but there was not a busier 500 miles of
single track in the East.

The general superintendent called attention to it, with a laugh.

"We'll now tackle the hoejack," said he.

It was an old joke, and the division heads began to laugh. They stopped
laughing the next instant. The new general manager was on his feet and
pounding thunderously upon his table top. His face was crimson, as he
demanded attention.

"Gentlemen," said he, scathingly, "the great railroad from which I have
had the honor to come has prided itself upon being a standard railroad.
Its standard is universal wherever its cars and engines run, and its
jurisdiction extends. Some of its lines are the busiest traffic-haulers in
the land. The four and even six tracks to each of them are hardly enough
for the great volume of high-class freight and passenger traffic that
press upon their rails. There are some side-lines, with but two or three
trains a day--side-lines that reach the main-line only through other
branches. But there are no hoejacks, nor peanut branches, nor jerkwaters
upon that system. Hereafter there are to be none upon this. The man who is
hauling a train on the most remote corner of this railroad is doing its
work quite as much as the biggest trainmaster here at the terminal. I
trust you follow me?"

They followed implicitly; and to that general manager has been finally
accorded the credit for bringing an operating department, torn by
inefficiencies and by jealousies, into one of the first rank among the
railroads of the land.

But he admits that he is going out upon side-line; and that particular
side-line brings a story to the mind of his chief clerk. When he has us
quite aside he tells it to us:

"The next to the last time the boss went up the Upper River Division, they
got his goat. We halted at the depot up at West Lyndonbrook, to fill the
tanks. The boss thinks that he will get out and stir his feet for a minute
on the right-of-way. Up comes a villager. 'Are you the general manager of
this 'ere road?' he says to the boss. Boss thinks he was some gentle
bucolic soul, and he says 'yes,' and offers him a real cigar. But the
gentle bucolic doesn't smoke anything cleaner than a pipe, and he just up
and says, 'Well, General, here's somethin' fer ye,' and shoves a paper
with a big red seal into the boss's hand.

"It seems that up in that neck o' woods they get grade crossings removed
as a last resort by going to the county court and the paper that the
constable served was one for the boss to come down there in a fortnight
for a hearing on an order to put a flagman and gates at our crossing in
West Lyndonbrook. The boss was mighty mad, and almost discharged the agent
for letting that constable hang around the depot. There isn't enough
traffic over that line to do more than keep the rust off the rails, and we
never had an accident in the sixty odd years that crossing has been in
use. And at that the boss might have fallen for a flagman. But the way
they rubbed it into him riled him. They might have gone at the thing in a
decent way--first sent a committee down to the division superintendent to
request that flagman.

"He went down on the appointed night to the old Town Hall. Before he got
there he started a guessing contest in that smart-aleck burg. The crossing
was right 'in the heart of the community,' as they put it themselves, and
the big citizens' houses were all within an eighth of a mile of our
right-of-way. Three days before the big flight of oratory down at the Town
Hall, the boss starts something. They hardly get away from their houses in
the morning before there is a bunch of those bright tech-school boys with
their rods and sextants and steel tapes measuring lines over the front
lawns. And the next thing they were planting bright new stakes in all the
flower-beds. There hadn't been so much excitement in West Lyndonbrook
since the last time Theodore Roosevelt talked there, and the townfolk
hustled down to the depot. The agent didn't ease their minds. The boss
wasn't working hand in glove with him.

"When the night came for the big time at the Town Hall, it was a regular
'standing-room only' business. The boss kept in the background while the
great minds of the township did their best. When it came his turn he
clamped across the platform like an avenging angel. He is a big fellow,
and that night he looked seven-foot-six, as he stuck his long fingers out
over that intelligent body politic and asked what it meant by trying to
cow the only first-class railroad that had ever had enough energy to put
its rails down in that township. Then he calls up an engineer from our
construction department.

"'Mr. Blinkins,' he says, in a voice that you could have heard across the
public square, 'this railroad has decided to temporize no longer in this
highway crossing situation on its lines. How much will it cost to put a
subway under our track at this crossing?'

"The engineer dove into his drawings and said: 'It'll be quite a big job,
and we'll have to cut quite a way into some of the front yards to get the
foundations for our abutments. My estimate of the cost of the proposed
improvement is $160,000.'

"Then it was the boss's turn again. 'Under the state law, work on
abolishing a grade crossing begins by the railroad expressing its
willingness,' he told them. 'The cost is divided--half being borne by the
railroad, the other half being divided between the township and the State.
West Lyndonbrook's share will reach $40,000.' Forty thousand dollars--why
$40,000 would have built either the new union school or the waterworks
that that burg had been hankering for and thought it couldn't afford. When
the boss breathed about that $40,000 it started the old feuds between the
waterworks crowd and the school crowd. They forgot all about the crossing
and our sin-filled railroad, and got to hammering anew on the old issue.
We slinked out while they were still at it--had the car hooked on to the
rear of thirty-eight and got started while the oratory was taking a fresh
turn.

"The boss? The boss is a diplomat. That's how he keeps his job."




CHAPTER XIII

THE SUPERINTENDENT

    HIS HEADSHIP OF THE TRANSPORTATION ORGANISM--HIS MANNER OF DEALING
    WITH AN OFFENDED SHIPPER--HIS MANNER WITH COMMUTERS--HIS MANNER WITH A
    SPITEFUL "KICKER"--A DISHONEST CONDUCTOR WHO HAD A "PULL"--A SYSTEM OF
    DEMERITS FOR EMPLOYEES--DEALING WITH DRUNKARDS--WITH SELFISH AND
    COVETOUS MEN.


If the general manager is king in modern railroad operation, the division
superintendent is not less than prince. His principality is no mean state.
It may consist of some 500 miles of what he modestly admits is the "best
sort of railroad in all this land"; or it may be a little stretch of 100
miles, or even less, losing its way back among the hills; but it _is_ a
principality, and his rule is undisputed. If ever it be questioned, it
will then be high time for him to abdicate.

Just as the division is the physical unit of railroad operation, so is its
superintendent the human unit. By him the transportation organism stands
or falls. If it stands, he is able to go forward; the path from his door
leads to the general manager's office. If it falls--Well, there is to-day
in Central Illinois a gray-haired station-agent who once held his own
principality--4,000 men to take his orders.

"We only discharge for disobedience or dishonesty," said the president of
that railroad at the time he signed the order reducing the prince to the
ranks. "When we fail to get the real measure of a man, it is our fault,
not his. We never turn out a man who has done his level best for us."

This man is superintendent of one of the most prosperous of the
trunk-line railroads that reach the metropolis by stretching their rails
across New Jersey. His is a "terminal division," so called, and he has
assumed command of one of the busiest city gates in all America. His
railroad day begins almost as soon as he is awake. There is a telegraph
outfit in the corner of his bedroom, and as he dresses and shaves he
listens mechanically to its scoldings--to the gossip of the division. It
comes as casually to his ear as the prattle of his children; the key began
to be music to him long before he left the little yellow depot where he
first began to be a railroader.

"They're in pretty good shape this morning, John," laughs his wife. She,
too, has been listening half unconsciously to the gossip of the wire.
Years ago she "stood her trick" with her husband back in that little
yellow depot.

"Got a coal train in the ditch up the other side of Greyport," is his
reply. "We'll rip out that nasty cross-over up there some day, when the
big boss wakes up to the cash we've put out in wrecks at GP."

"Going up there?"

"Not this morning, Maggie," he laughs. "I've a committee from the firemen
coming in to see me. They're nagging for a raise." He lowers his voice, as
if he almost thought that the walls had ears. "It's beginning to grind the
boys, too--butter 48 cents, eggs 45, and all their hungry kiddies. But the
big boss--whew!"

He whistles, goes to his key, cuts in, and begins to give orders to the
wrecking-boss up at Greyport.

"Steady, Jim," he says, in a low voice. "You've got all day on that job if
you need it, only watch out for the number two track with your crane. We
can't risk a side-swipe on one of our pretty trains. We're detouring the
east-bound passengers over the Central. How's Hinckley?"

He closes the circuit softly.

"Poor Hinckley," he says gently. "Do you remember, Maggie? He was married
the same summer we were."

Through with his breakfast, he hurries down to the station, and before he
slips aboard the suburban train that is to carry him in to his Jersey City
office, he has had the wire again into Greyport. They are getting things
cleaned up there a bit; a baggage-car has been sent up with a special
engine for Hinckley. The superintendent turns from these. One of the
little trains that come out from town in the dusk of early dawn has
brought a leather bag filled with mail. He runs through it as his train
slips across the meadows. By the time he is in his roomy office it is
ready to be answered, a pencilled memorandum on each is sufficient guide
for his chief clerk.

Throughout the morning his calendar is a crowded thing. There is a
constant line of restless men sitting on the long bench just without the
guarded rail of the outside office. One by one these are called; they
disappear behind swinging baize doors to stand in front of the
superintendent.

For the first of these there is a smile--the caller is a big shipper, big
enough to go to the head of the line and have instant access to the boss.
This shipper is the sort who gives the railroad tonnage in trainload lots.
He is hot. He cannot get cars. He will begin to route over the Triple
B----, even though his siding facilities are wrong for it. _They'll_ dig
him out the cars he needs, they have folks over there who make it their
business to find cars. And while he is on the subject it seems pretty bad
to have stuff coming twelve and fourteen days through from Chicago.
Perhaps he'd better be getting after the Commission. The shipper is very
hot. He expatiates upon his wrongs, hammers upon the superintendent's
desk, grows scarlet in his heavy face.

The superintendent's smile never wavers. He gives close attention, does
not grow excited. A few orders over the telephone, a word of explanation,
the shipper smiles now. Down in his heart he begins to be sorry that he
made these threats about the Triple B----.

That is getting traffic, you say, and the superintendent is an operating
man. You are a bit wrong there. The superintendent is a _railroad_ man and
that means that any part of the railroad business is his business. There
is a man, by name A. H. Smith, who is to-day operating vice-president of
the New York Central system, who held to that idea from the beginning. In
the beginning, Smith was the superintendent of a little side-tracked
division of the Lake Shore & Michigan Southern which centred in at
Hillsdale, Michigan. It was a strong competitive territory, and Smith
found that the traffic that came to his road was so slight that it did not
take a great deal of his time to move it. The superintendents before him
had had a lot of time to speed their fast horses and fuss around their
gardens. Not so with Smith. He went into the business of making traffic.
It was a decade that took keen delight in singing societies, and Smith's
robust voice allied itself to every choir of importance in three counties.
He sang himself into personal popularity, he sang traffic into coming over
the Michigan Southern. After a while, the folks over in the general
offices at Cleveland began to take notice. The traffic folks were the
first to notice, after that--well, a long story's short when you know that
Smith found himself on a short cut to his present job.

The superintendent's smile remains while a solemn-faced delegation of
commuters files into his room. These grave folk have been coming into town
on the 8:52 almost since the road first laid its rails. It is part of
their lives, and they fondly imagine that it is a big part of the
road's--that the twenty-hour train over the mountains to Chicago is a
matter of considerably less importance than the 8:52. The superintendent
broadens his bland smile and rings for his train sheets. There are other
trains than the 8:52 coming into that terminal--almost a train a minute
from a little before eight o'clock until half-past nine. The
superintendent's finger runs for corroboration over the train sheets.
Twenty-five days this month when 94 per cent of his suburban trains come
under the protection of the big shed of the terminal right on the
scheduled moment--how was that for consistency of operation?

The commuters' committee seem a little dazed. Individually, the men are
expert on a good many things--printing, indictments, breakfast foods,
patents, wholesale feathers; but consistency of train operation and train
sheets are a bit confusing.

"The 8:52 has been late a whole lot recently," doggedly affirms the
chairman. "Last Thursday we were pretty near fifteen minutes late."

A gleam of triumph comes into the superintendent's eye. He fumbles anew
among the flimsy train sheets. His forefinger alights upon a line of the
typewritten copy.

"Last Thursday," he comments, "you can see that we were all laid out by
the Hackensack River draw. A schooner filled with brick got caught by the
ebb tide and laid down on us in the open draw. What you want to see,
gentlemen, is the Treasury departments down at Washington. It is
outrageous that the antiquated navigation laws should be allowed to hold
up business in that way."

The committee confer among themselves and decide to make the life of the
Secretary of the Treasury uncomfortable for a while.

"You cannot hope for anything better with that Hackensack Bridge," urges
the superintendent almost malevolently.

He does not tell them, but the boys out on the line know his own
experience with the Hackensack River bridge. Last December and just in the
evening rush-hours they found that the cabin that stands perched at the
top of the trussed draw was afire. The trains bringing home the tired
suburbanites were beginning to line up back of the fire for solid miles.
The tired suburbanites were saying things about this particular railroad.
It chanced that this superintendent was a passenger on one of the trains.
He went forward to the blaze. The towerman had beat a retreat. The
superintendent started to climb up the ice-covered ladder tower toward the
burning cabin. The towerman halted him. The wiry superintendent turned
upon him with a look of infinite scorn:

"We've got to hand signal those trains across here--there's thousands of
folks out here in the meadows that we can't let miss their supper--"

"I've got a family--" began the towerman.

"That's all right. I'll signal these across."

"That ain't it, boss. Back o' th' cabin's the gasolene tanks, the stuff
for openin' th' draw."

The superintendent gave a low whistle.

"That settles it," he said. "We've _got_ to put this fire out. I can't
risk cutting this draw out of service."

It is a matter of record on that railroad that he climbed alone to the top
of the draw and began to put out the fire with his own stout endeavors. He
was not alone for long. Inspired by him, the men that gathered
there--engineers, firemen, trainmen, and conductors, crawled up upon that
freezing cold draw and lent him their efforts. In a half-hour the fire was
out, and the stalled trains were moving again.

This, then, is the measure of the man who sits across the wide office
table from you. The mollified commuters are marching out.

"You don't encourage kicking?" you ask.

"We don't discourage it," he replied. He is reminded of a story and tells
it to you.

"When they made Blank superintendent over there at Broad Street, in
Philadelphia, he went in to make a clean record. He called his chief
clerk to him. 'Mind you, if you hear kicks, don't let them get in one ear
and out the other. You bring them in here and we'll investigate.' In three
days the chief clerk was busy. 'Lots of trouble with the suburban traffic
to-day,' he would say. 'Wilmington train laid out at Grey's Ferry; third
day that's happened.' 'Ugly trainman on the main line wouldn't close the
rear doors. That fellow's unpopular.' 'Not enough equipment on the Central
division.' 'No fire in the stove at Lenden Road,'--a long string of
commuter troubles. After Blank had heard this for a week he began to get
nervous. He called his chief clerk to him. 'See here,' he demanded,
'what's the matter with our service? Where are all these kicks coming in
from?' The chief clerk looked at him--never a snicker. 'You said you
wanted the kicks,' he replied. 'Well, I've been letting the head barber
downstairs shave me after he was done with the commuters. He gets every
one of the howls.'"

Sometimes the kicks represent a serious side of the superintendent's
problem. A while ago a man came to a railroad superintendent in Boston and
demanded that a certain ticket-examiner in the passenger terminal be
dismissed. There had been some sort of dispute and the man insisted that
the ticket-examiner be discharged, nothing less. The ticket-examiner, on
his part, told a pretty fair sort of story. Moreover, he said that if in
the heat of the dispute he had transgressed on good manners he was frankly
sorry and that it would not happen again. Back of all that he had a good
record: no complaints had ever before been registered against him. The
superintendent then wrote a letter to the man who had complained and
stated that the offending ticket-examiner had been reprimanded and that
the offence would probably not be repeated.

[Illustration: THE CONDUCTOR IS A HIGH TYPE OF RAILROAD EMPLOYEE]

[Illustration: THE ENGINEER--OIL-CAN IN HAND--IS FOREVER FUSSING AT HIS
MACHINE]

[Illustration: RAILROAD RESPONSIBILITY DOES NOT END EVEN WITH THE TRACK
WALKER]

[Illustration: THE FIREMAN HAS A HARD JOB AND A STEADY ONE]

That did not satisfy the man who complained. He was of the sort that are
supposed to have a "pull," and he threatened to use his pull if the
ticket-examiner were not discharged. He refused to accept apologies or
explanations. He said he was hot. So was the superintendent. He keenly
resented anything that approached interference with his discipline, and he
refused to discharge his employee. Pressure was exerted, the pull was
doing its fine work. The superintendent was--like every other railroad
superintendent in this land--a fine diplomat. He took the man from the
train gate in the terminal and gave him an equally good job in a city a
hundred miles distant from Boston. He flattered himself that he had seen
the last of the man with the pull.

Not a bit of it. That brisk soul chanced to pass through the distant town,
and gasped at sight of the former ticket-examiner still drawing pay from
the railroad. He hastened into the superintendent's office in Boston and
demanded that the subterfuge end--that the man be actually discharged from
the road's employ. The superintendent looked at him coolly, not speaking.
The man again threatened his pull. The railroad boss looked at him through
slitted eyes. It was a real crisis for him. His diplomatic smile was
ready. He pointed with his lean forefinger toward the door.

"The case is closed. Good-morning," was all he said.

After that he began wondering what road would have him after that pull was
exerted. He wondered for a day, for a week, then a month. Then he forgot
the occurrence. The pull, like many other sorts of threats, was thin air.

Of a different sort was the problem that confronted a superintendent in
Chicago. On a certain suburban train for many years the conductor had
remained with an unchanged run. Gossip had come into the super's office
that this conductor was systematically stealing from the company. The boss
started a quiet investigation. The conductor with apparently no other
income than his $3 a day, had purchased a neat home in the suburbs, had
sent his boy to Yale, his girl to Vassar. That was Thrift, with a capital
T. The superintendent took the case sharply in hand and summoned the
conductor before him. He was one of the older sort, gray-haired,
kind-faced.

"Johnson," said the boss, "you've been with the road a long time and never
had a vacation. I want you to lay off a month and run over to either
coast. I'll get the transportation for you."

Johnson protested. He belonged to a generation of railroaders that was not
educated to vacations. The superintendent insisted and had his way, as
superintendents generally do. Johnson started on his vacation, and a
substitute, knowing nothing of the real situation, replaced him. The
returns from that daily run doubled, and the superintendent knew that he
was right.

Nowadays when a railroad finds that a conductor is stealing, it invokes
the majesty of the Interstate Commerce Law and prepares to hurry him off
toward a Federal prison. In that day they were content to fire Johnson;
that was sufficient disgrace to the old man. The railroad could not begin
to get back the money that had been trickling out throughout the long
years.

But Johnson showed fight. His was an important train in the Chicago
suburban service, and his passengers were important merchants and
manufacturers--big shippers. They got together, under Johnson's
supervision, and made the hair on the heads of the traffic men turn gray.
Those fellows were Johnson's friends, and they were not going to see the
N---- turn out a faithful employee. Johnson said that he had not stolen,
and Johnson was not the sort to lie. It might do the N---- good to send
some tonnage over to the M----. The traffic department and the operating
locked horns, as ofttimes they do on roads, both big and little. Traffic
won. The superintendent lost, Johnson went back to his job, and the road
put on a checking system that made its conductors wonder if they had held
convict records.

That case was an exception. There are not many superintendents who are
compelled to back water, mighty few Johnsons among the thousands of
conductors across the land.

We are still in that superintendent's office in Jersey City. The boss's
smile is gone. A big railroader just in from the line, his jeans covered
with engine grease, shuffles into the place and stands before the super,
hat in hand, like a naughty boy ready to be whipped. The superintendent
speaks in a few low sentences to him, makes a notation on an envelope. The
big man trembles in front of the little. A bit of a smile comes to the
lips of the boss.

"You think of the wife and the kiddies first next time," he says.
"Good-bye and good luck to you. I'm not much for lecturings," he adds,
after the man has gone. A little later he begins to explain. "That big
fellow had to be disciplined. There was no two ways about it for either of
us. He's an engine-man, got a good train, too; but he's been running
signals. We've caught him twice on test. We can't stand for that. Suppose
we have a nasty smash and the coroner's jury begins to ask nosey
questions? I had to put black on his envelope."

He goes into further detail. In other days he would have been forced, in
order to uphold his discipline, to suspend the engineer for from five days
to two weeks--the punishment preceding discharge. There was a
possibility--disagreeable to the superintendent--that the engineer's
family might have been crowded for sufficient food for a fortnight. Some
of those fellows live pretty close to the proposition all the while.
Nowadays the offender is demerited--once again like the schoolboy. That is
what the superintendent meant by that reference to the envelope, the
road's record of the man's service with it.

Sixty demerits--dismissed. That's the rule of one big road. But the record
does not always continue to be negative. Its positive side rests in the
fact that for every month a man keeps his envelope clear five demerits are
taken from the black side of his envelope. A trainman might have
forty-five demerits against him, be on the narrow edge of discharge, and
in eleven months, after turning the new leaf, have as clean a sheet as the
best man on the division. This is as it should be. The demerit plan--often
called the "Brown system"--represents the triumph of modern railroad
operation over the old.

The superintendent may have all the advantages of a time-tried disciple
and a modern record system; have the prestige and the reputation that come
from the operation of 500 miles of railroad, and still have a hard row to
hoe. Out in the Middle West there was, until recently, a stretch of what
was known as "booze railroad." It was a division where reputations and
records alike counted for naught, where discipline was a mockery.
Train-crews went from their runs direct to saloons and, what was a deal
worse, began their day's work within them. The wreck record of that
division that went forward to the State Commission was appalling--and half
the wrecks were not reported. Yardmasters were busy day after day stowing
away damaged equipment far from the curious eyes of passengers--the
wrecking crews were hammering for big over-time pay. It was a thoroughly
demoralized stretch of railroad.

The distressed president of the system sent East for a superintendent who
had a reputation. He thought he had his man. The new broom was a
book-of-rules man. He had a quarter of his operating force laid off all
the time, to go before him. He was a man fond of words, and he lectured
those old fellows as if they had been school children. He might have done
quite as well with his division if he had been operating it from
Kamchatka. The men began to call their rule-books the "Joe Millers."

The superintendent got mad and was lost--hopelessly. He began discharging
right and left, and the wrath of the gods and of the brotherhoods (the
great labor unions of the railroads), was upon him. The road was
threatened with a big strike at the very time that it could least afford
it. He avoided that strike only by acceding to the demand of the
brotherhood chiefs that the superintendent's head be given to them on a
silver platter. After that the "Man Without a Country" was in a more
enviable position. There was not a railroad in the country that dared
employ him, despite his excellent technical training. He drifted up into
Canada, got a job running a state-operated line. He held that job less
than a year. He was murdered of a winter's night in a shadowy railroad
yard, shot down by a discharged train hand.

The grim situation on the "booze division" grew much worse. The president
of that system gave the matter his keen personal attention; he began
scouring the entire width of the land for material, without much success.
When he was thoroughly discouraged, a raw-boned trainmaster from a far
corner of the demoralized division applied for the job of superintendent;
he reckoned he could handle the situation. He had caught the president
unawares standing outside of his private car. The president told him that
he was superintendent.

"There was something in Matt's eye that took me," he confessed afterwards.
"You do see something in a man's eye now and then that beats a whole
barrel of references."

So Matt Jones (that is nothing like his real name), took up the nastiest
operating proposition in the country. He did not lecture nor discharge,
not he; but the men knew that there was a boss behind the super's desk.
The fellows who began trifling with the new broom were down in his office
the next morning. Jones selected the leading spirit; he had the advantage
of knowing him.

"Pete," he said in a quiet way, "you've been drinking. It doesn't go. I'm
not going to discharge you,"--he gave grim thought to the fate of his
predecessor--"but in thirty days you are going to send in your resignation
voluntarily and leave our service."

The man protested. He had not been drinking; and Matt Jones had better not
try that game anyway. The superintendent wished him a pleasant
good-morning and bowed him out of the office.

In five days the engineer was back, uncalled. The superintendent saw him,
even though he had no more to say than he had not been drinking; that is,
he had quit drinking long ago. In ten days he was back again. This time he
admitted that he had been drinking up to the day that Matt Jones took
office. The superintendent said nothing. He bowed the engineer out again.
A month is a short thing at the best. At the end of the twenty-second day,
the engineer again found his way to the superintendent's office. He seemed
like a man who had been through a sickness. Big human that he was, he
began crying at the sight of the man who was a real boss.

"For God's sake, Matt, don't forget the old days up on the branch. I can't
get out from the old road," he said.

"I gave you thirty days' chance to get on another road," was all the
satisfaction that he got.

But on the thirtieth day the engineer went to work with a clean envelope
and the new superintendent had an ally of no mean strength. The patient
grinding won; complete victory was only a question of time; the president
five hundred miles away began to notice. You may say what you want,
railroad executives are born, not made. This reads like romance, but it is
truth. Matt Jones is to-day general manager of that system, and a little
while ago a New York paper said he was going to take charge of one of the
big transcontinental that needs a firm hand at its reins.

This superintendent has his division 400 miles away from New York, a clean
stretch of busy railroad, making a link in one of the stoutest of the
transcontinental chains, 300 miles of line, making traffic and handling
it. The superintendent is a personage in the little inland city where
headquarters are located; his opinion is eagerly sought by the local
reporters each time a new civic problem is tackled. If he were in the
metropolitan district he would be unknown except to a little coterie of
railroaders; up here he is the voice of the railroad. He is far more real
to the folk of half a dozen populous counties than is the president of the
road, a stuffy gentleman who comes up in a private car once in a dozen
years to the dinner of the local Chamber of Commerce and tells the
townspeople to thank God that they have the main line of the K. & M.
running through their "lovely little city."

You may listen for the clatter of the telegraph key in his house and be
entirely disappointed.

"I would have poor system if I had to listen to all the gossip of the
wire," he tells you quietly. "We've organization on this stretch of line."
He says this with a bit of pride. "We have men and we have system. My
train-masters are in effect assistant superintendents: they are expected
to organize beneath them."

Watch this sort of man. He is the kind that American railroading is hungry
for to-day. Of him the big executives are being made each year. He enters
his office in the morning and gets a few brief reports of the situation on
the line: first weather, then congestion conditions in the big yards.
After that he talks over the long-distance 'phone with the G. M., four
hundred miles away. He gives a summary of the situation to headquarters,
just as the summaries came in to him from his train-masters at junctions
and at terminals. He holds the telephone receiver for a minute: the 'phone
is rapidly coming into general railroad use since the telegraphers made
Congress pass a bill limiting their working hours to eight each day. That
bill promises to make trouble yet for the men who were supposed to benefit
by it.

The telephone speaks to him a moment. He hangs up the receiver and speaks
to his chief clerk.

"W. H. T. is coming up the line this afternoon. Tell the boys not to get
rattled," he says.

That is all. The passage of the President of the United States over his
three hundred miles of well-ordered track makes no flutter in this
superintendent's heart. If it were Europe--the troops would be drawn out,
all other trains brought to a standstill, pilot engines run in advance of
the royal train, in infinite pow-wow over the railroading of nobility. But
it is not Europe, it is this blessed United States, partly blessed because
it so excessively differs from Europe.

Only the military aides of the President lament upon the informality of
his travel. Some time since a great executive was making the familiar loop
throughout the West. The superintendent of a division of line the far side
of the Missouri was a worrier, and was personally watching the progress.
In order to facilitate rear platform oratory the President's cars were
placed at the rear of a train that hardly ranked as express. Between towns
the delays grew frequent and a stuffy little aide in uniform protested to
the superintendent.

"Look a' here, sir," he said stiffly, "why don't you let these other
trains up the line wait?" The division was single-track. "You know this is
the President's train."

A twinkle came into the super's eye.

"You're wrong," he said, in the positive tones of a real executive. "This
is _not_ the President's special. This is train number 67 of the B----main
line, and she hasn't many more rights on the time-card than a gravel
limited. Now if you were snitching along on our cracker-jack Nippon
Limited--there's some train, sir. They wouldn't lay her out. She's
double-extra first-class all the way through to the coast."

The point of that was not lost.

An instance of a different sort occurred some years ago, when Mr.
Roosevelt went up into Northern New York to make a speech. The
superintendent of the old Black River road was pretty proud of his stretch
of line, and invited the then Governor to ride in his neat inspection
engine.

"Dee-lighted," said he of the gleaming teeth, and he climbed up into the
big cab. The superintendent wondered what he'd think of that nifty stretch
of track just north of Lewville. Col. Roosevelt never thought. As soon as
he was settled in the cab he picked a well-thumbed copy of Carlyle's
"French Revolution" out of his pocket and read it every inch of the way
from Utica to Watertown. The Republican party had to worry along
thereafter without that superintendent's vote.

       *       *       *       *       *

All the superintendents cannot become general managers or railroad
presidents; there is not room at the top for even a decent proportion of
the best of them. The real tragedy on the division comes when a Prince
grows old and for the first time realizes that he is never to be King.
When such tragedy shows its head it is time for the stove committee--the
men who gossip in roundhouse corners and the yardmaster's office--to talk
in whispers.

Buffalo is no mean principality in the railroad world--it is near kingdom
in itself--miles and miles and still more miles of congested freight
yards, tonnage in breath-taking volume rolling in from the wonderful lakes
eight months out of the twelve, a nervous traffic that never ceases. For
years there reigned in Buffalo, in calm command of the situation for a
great railroad system, a man who was entitled by every virtue of the word
to be called superintendent. They called him "the lion" and did not misuse
that word either. He was a lion, guardian of a great railroad gate, a
stern old lion whose word and whose law were unquestioned.

But time aged the man, and the day came when the clerks in his outer
office began to talk in whispers; they were having the audacity to wonder
who the new Prince would be. Two men thought that they were capable--one
an assistant superintendent in the great yard at East Buffalo, the other
holding similar rank over at Rochester. Each of these men was prepared to
assume greater honor, to sit in command at the lion's great desk.

That old fellow sat aloof. His ears were not too deaf to hear the
whisperings of his clerks in the outer office, and sometimes when one of
them would creep in upon him unawares they would find him sitting alone
there, head in hands, holding the fort. The two assistant superintendents
gained courage; they went to the picayune business of pulling wires. At
other times they locked horns.

They locked horns over one great question. It was not operation that set
them at odds, not a vexing practical question of how some congested yard
might be lanced so that traffic should flow the more freely, or a main
line section be aided to give a greater daily tonnage. Nothing of that
sort for the two ambitious assistants.

A new pony inspection engine, with an observation room built forward over
the boiler--just the sort that Col. Roosevelt had once used as a
reading-room--was to be built for the division, and each assistant thought
that he needed that engine for the dignity of his job. Each in turn went
before the lion and stated his claims for the possession of the pretty
toy. The old man listened with grave dignity. A week later he sent down to
the master mechanic at the big Depew shops and had him deliver a brand new
hand-car, with his compliments, to each.

The pony-engine went into the roundhouse until the real Prince should
come. Then he sat long hours alone at his desk once more.

Finally they brought a man to him, a fine, upstanding man. The lion rose
from his comfy old chair and gave greeting to the newcomer.

"I'm glad to see you," was all he said; but to the general manager, who
had come up from New York, his eyes seemed to ask: "You've brought the
right man here at last?" He turned to the stranger.

"Would you like a pony engine to get over the division?" was his question.

"I'm willing to go to hell, and go in a caboose," laughed the stranger.

The old superintendent grasped him by the hand.

"Thank God, they've sent a real man to be superintendent at Buffalo," was
all he said. That was the only recognition that he gave to one who since
has become one of the master railroaders of America, but in that moment
the act of succession had been consummated.




CHAPTER XIV

OPERATING THE RAILROAD

    AUTHORITY OF THE CHIEF CLERK AND THAT OF THE ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT--
    RESPONSIBILITIES OF ENGINEERS, FIREMEN, MASTER MECHANIC, TRAIN-MASTER,
    TRAIN-DESPATCHER--ARRANGING THE TIME-TABLE--FUNDAMENTAL RULES OF
    OPERATION--SIGNALS--SELECTING ENGINE AND CARS FOR A TRAIN--CLERICAL
    WORK OF CONDUCTORS--A TRIP WITH THE CONDUCTOR--THE DESPATCHER'S
    AUTHORITY--SIGNALS ALONG THE LINE--MAINTENANCE OF WAY--SUPERINTENDENT
    OF BRIDGES AND BUILDINGS--ROAD-MASTER--SECTION BOSS.


The administration of the division runs quite naturally into several
channels. The routine of the work, the making and filing of records and
reports, the handling of the mass of correspondence that must constantly
arise, is usually in the hands of a chief clerk, who has control over the
office force at division headquarters. If there is an assistant
superintendent, the chief clerk will divide responsibility with him, the
theory at all times being to cut off the detail wherever possible. This
office work is not radically different from the office management of any
other large business. Its clerks are about the only unorganized force in
railroad employ.

If the management of the road is of the divisional type, the
superintendent of course is a more important executive than if it is of
the departmental type. In either of these cases, as we have seen, he will
probably have at least partial authority over the engineer of maintenance
of way, whose force keeps the line and track structures in full repair,
and also looks after ordinary construction work along the division. In the
road of divisional type, he will also have partial authority over the
master mechanic, in charge of the shops and roundhouses and the
locomotives of the division. These last are regarded by the railroad as
part of its machinery, like the planers and drills in the shops
themselves; and for the care and operation of the locomotives the
engineers and firemen are held responsible to the mechanical department.
This is the case even upon those railroads where, under the departmental
system, the superintendent has no direct authority over the master
mechanic upon his division. For the conduct of the trains which their
locomotives pull, both engineers and firemen are directly responsible to
the operating department. The master mechanic simply sees to it that the
railroad's property is maintained to a certain degree of efficiency and
that the man who operates the locomotives is capable from every point of
view. A reasonable amount of deterioration is expected, and each
locomotive is expected to turn in to the shops for inspection, overhauling
and repairs, at certain stated intervals.

The superintendent has absolute authority over the two officials who are
chiefly interested in the conduct of the trains over the division--the
train-master and the train-despatcher. The first of these two officers,
who must dove-tail their work both night and day, has the assignment of
the train crews. His opinion will be called for whenever the vexed
questions of seniority and promotion arise, and he will be asked to help
to plan all extra or special freight and passenger trains. To show how
this is done brings us close to the question of schedules, and we may
pause for a moment to consider how this important phase of the railroad's
operating is builded together.

That time-table that you have just pulled from the folder rack seems at
first glance an interminable mass of meaningless figures; yet when you
come to find your journey upon it, it quickly simplifies itself, and you
begin to marvel at the relation the figures bear to one another, how
easily you may pick your course through the long columns of numerals. The
more extensive time-tables that the railroad employees carry are quite as
simple, and yet they are great feats of typographical composition. In
reality, both these forms of printed time-tables are but transcripts of
the real time-table of the division, which is kept set out upon a great
board.

This board is ruled in two directions. The regularly spaced intervals in
one direction are marked as time, and represent time--one entire day of
twenty-four hours. In the other direction of the board the stations are
spaced in proportion to their actual spacing upon the line.

The reproduction of a portion of such a board for an imaginary division of
a railroad will illustrate. This line runs from Somerset to Rockville, 120
miles; and portions of it are double-tracked, the rest single-track, as
shown at the top of the diagram. On the double-track, trains going in the
same direction may pass one another only at the vertical lines, which
represent station passing sidings, and on the single-track sections this
rule holds, with the additional one, of course, that trains running in
opposite directions may also pass one another at the vertical station
lines. For economy of room only the seven hours from six o'clock in the
morning until one o'clock in the afternoon are shown here. Following an
old-time practice, odd numbers will represent up-bound trains, from
Somerset to Rockville; even numbers, the down trains.

So we have an early morning accommodation passenger train, No. 1, leaving
Rockville at 6:10 o'clock and proceeding at a leisurely rate of about
twenty miles an hour (which makes allowances for local stops) all the way
to Somerset at the far end of the division, which it is due to reach at
11:45 A. M. It is halted for any length of time only at Honeytown, where
upbound No. 8--local accommodation--and upbound No. 6--fast express--will
pass it. At 6:20 o'clock an upbound local accommodation of the same nature
as No. 1, and hence known as No. 2, leaves Somerset and, halting only at
Robbins's Corners to permit the fast upbound No. 6 to overhaul and pass
it, reaches Rockville at 1 P. M. Train No. 31, which follows No. 1 out of
Rockville forty minutes later, is a milk train, and so must have a
liberal allowance for stops. It proceeds only as far as Stoneville, where
the dairy country ends, stops there long enough to turn and to water the
engine, and then returns to Rockville as No. 32. Train No. 117 is a
way-freight, and still slower. So it follows the milk-train. It is known
as a "low-class" train by the railroaders. It must wait everywhere for
better class trains to pass it. Train No. 118 is the same class of train,
proceeding in the opposing direction. Train No. 5 is a down express.

[Illustration: HOW THE REAL TIME TABLE OF THE DIVISION LOOKS--THE ONE USED
IN HEADQUARTERS]

Sometimes unforeseen demands of traffic necessitate the running of extra
trains, and these may be strung across the board. This board, in reality,
has all its trains placed upon it by strings and pins, to admit of the
constant changes that the schedules are always undergoing, and the
addition of a new train is a quick proceeding. As a matter of fact, a
skilled train-master or despatcher will rarely take the time actually to
string an extra train. He carries the schedule too completely in his head
to admit of such a necessity.

But the extra train is best placed following, as a second section, some
good passenger train, as indicated on the diagram. The regular train will
then carry signals showing that it is followed on this particular day.
While the train orders protect its movement in any event, as will be shown
in a moment, the billing of the extra train as a second section is less of
an upset to the regular operation of the division. Practised operating men
found years ago that the fewer deviations made from the regular programme
of the day, the higher the proportion of safety arose.

Now you begin to see the use of the train-despatcher. If the unforeseen
never came to pass upon the railroad, instead of coming to pass nearly
every hour, there might be no need of that officer. Each engineer, each
conductor, each station agent would have his complete time-tables, and the
road would run every day in full accordance with them. That was the very
earliest and the most primitive way of operating railroads. Almost as
early the need arose of having a special direction over the operation of
the trains. Emergencies arose daily. Trains were often late; storms beat
down upon the line; the snow covered its rails; what might have been,
according to the time-card, an orderly operation of line, became chaos. If
a train was ordered by schedule to meet a train bound in the opposite
direction at P----, it might wait there for long hours, not knowing that
the other engine was broken down at A----.

The invention of the telegraph and its almost instant application to the
railroad service made such special direction possible. So now we find the
explicit directions of the schedule supplemented by even more explicit
directions from the train-despatcher at the head of the train movements
upon each division. Briefly stated, it may be said that the engineer and
the conductor in charge of a train are first guided by the schedule,
which, after many revisions, has been compiled with great care, and in
reference to connecting lines, branches, and adjoining divisions. This
schedule acts in conjunction with certain simple fundamental rules of
operation, the A, B, C of every railroader. By one of these, trains of the
same class bound north or east are given precedence, all other things
being equal, over trains bound south or west. This rule is sometimes
superseded by one giving right-of-way to trains bound up the line--or the
reverse.

High-class trains, like the fastest limited expresses, have precedence
over trains of graduated lower classes--down to the slow-moving heavy
freights. When any sort of train loses a certain length of time--usually
half an hour or more--it loses all rights that it might ever have had, and
everything else on the line has precedence over it. A train may lose time
if it has to, but there are never any circumstances that will justify it
in running ahead of time.

All this is the part of railroad operation which governs the relation of
one train to another. There are even simpler but not less vital rules
that control its own operation. In order that the engineer who is guiding
the train, and the conductor who shares the responsibility, may keep in
touch with one another, the device was adopted many years ago of having a
cord run through the cars of passenger trains to a bell signal in the cab
of the engine. This bell signal during recent years has given way to an
improved form of locomotive signal, sounded by means of compressed air in
tubes throughout the train, and operated in connection with the air-brake
equipment.

The air-whistle, or bell cord-code of signals, is standard upon all
American railroads, and is as follows:

When the train is standing:

  Two signals--start.
  Three signals--back.
  Four signals--apply or release air-brakes.
  Five signals--call in flagman.

When the train is in motion:

  Two signals--stop at once.
  Three signals--stop at the next station.
  Four signals--reduce speed.
  Five signals--increase speed.

There also arises a necessity for communication between men who stand
outside the train and who seek to guide the movement of the locomotive.
This necessity has given rise to still another code, transmitted by the
hands--holding a flag, if possible--by day, and a lighted lantern at
night. This signal code follows:

  Method of Transmitting Signal.                  Indication.

  Swung across track.                             Stop.
  Raised and lowered vertically.                  Proceed.
  Swung vertically in a circle across the track:
    When the train is standing--                  Back.
    When train is in motion--                     Train has parted.
  Swung horizontally in a circle:
    When the train is standing--                  Apply air-brakes.
  Held at arm's length above head:
    When the train is standing--                  Release air-brakes.
  Any object waved violently by any person on
      or near the track is a stop signal.

By use of his locomotive whistle, the engineer is enabled to acknowledge
these signals, as well as to signal upon his own initiative. His code is
also a standard in railroading. It follows:

      ---- A short blast.     -------- A long blast.
                                  ---- Stop, apply brakes.
                     -------- -------- Release brakes.
  ---- ---- -------- -------- -------- Flagman go back
       ---- -------- -------- --------   and protect rear
                                         end of train.
    ------- -------- -------- -------- Flagman return to
                                         train.
            -------- -------- -------- Train in motion,
                                         has parted.
                             ---- ---- Acknowledgment of
                                         signals, not otherwise
                                         provided for.
                        ---- ---- ---- Standing train--back.
                   ---- ---- ---- ---- Call for signals.
                    -------- ---- ---- Calls attention to
                                         following section.
           -------- -------- ---- ---- Highway crossing
                                         signal.
                      ---------------- Approaching stations,
                                         junctions or
                                         railroad crossings
                                         at grade.

A succession of short blasts is an alarm for persons on the track and
calls the attention of trainmen to danger ahead.

These signal codes operate fundamentally in connection with the essential
rules of schedule that we have already shown.

Suppose now that we consider the workings of all this system as it comes
down to actual practice in a single concrete instance. We are finding our
way to a big terminal yard in all the murkiness and cloudiness of very
early morning, and once again we hunt out that urbane soul, the
yardmaster. He holds in his hand the yellow tissue of an order from the
despatcher of the division. In the conciseness of telegraphy it tells him
to start a third section of train 118--through freight--at 6:15 o'clock.
Just back of his little grimy box of an office is the big sprawling
roundhouse--a dozen freighters with banked fires standing in the stalls,
awaiting summons to work. The twelve engines are divided into several
classifications according to pulling strength and speed, but the
despatcher has designated the particular engine he wishes for third-118,
and he gets it--a big lanky puller--1847. She is chosen chiefly because
she has had the longest roundhouse rest, having brought in a through
freight from up the line, and having been received with engineer's report
showing her to be in good running order, at five o'clock yesterday
afternoon. Before the 1847 slipped from the turntable into the waiting
stall, the hostlers and the wipers were at her. The hostlers had taken her
over the cinder-pit and cleaned out the fire-box. Then they went over her,
cleaning her, inch by inch, a mechanical inspector in their wake, testing
and sounding and checking every item in the engineer's report which showed
1847 to be in good order at the end of his run with her. There was not
much chance left for any shirking of responsibility, no matter what might
arise upon the 1847 on any coming day.

We turn and watch the yardmaster once again. He has the roundhouse foreman
send one of the bright young boys who hang around his office night and
day, and who dream of that coming hour when they will handle an 1847 for
themselves, to call the engineer and fireman, whose names are posted
"first out." Or perhaps the telephone has come into play--in these days in
the smaller towns there is hardly a house too humble to have receiver and
transmitter hanging somewhere upon its walls. In any event the engine-crew
are supposed to stay home when off duty, unless especially excused, and to
live within reasonable distance--say a mile--of the roundhouse.

The caller tells the engineer and fireman to report at the roundhouse at
5:45 A. M. At that hour the hostlers have made the 1847 fit for service.
Her tender has been filled with coal, her tanks with water, even her sand
is packed aboard the box that stands upon the boiler and is ready to help
on slippery rail and upgrade. The engineer makes keen inspection of the
1847 before he moves her a single inch, makes sure with his keen and
practised eye that she is quite fit for service, pokes here and there and
everywhere with his long-spouted oil-can. At a minute or two after shop
whistles have shrieked "six o'clock" he pulls the 1847 out from the
shadows of the roundhouse. He gets an open signal and switch to the main
yard and finds waiting on a siding in that great place, the trail of
freight cars and the caboose that are going with him to make Third-118.

Now come back for a moment in your thought. While we were still scurrying
down to the grimy yard, the despatcher was creating Third-118. On his desk
were car reports, showing what had been received and sent out, and there
was enough accumulation of stuff in the yards last night to justify a
Third-118. Because good railroading means yard-sidings cleared, and
standing cars and freight, like passengers, kept constantly moving, he did
not hesitate at ordering her out. He found that there would be 32 cars
between tender and caboose, weighing approximately some 1200 tons, and so
he ordered from the roundhouse an engine of a class which the mechanical
department guaranteed capable of pulling from 1,000 to 1,500 tons,
gross weight.

[Illustration: _Courtesy of the "Railroad Age Gazette"_

THE ELECTRO-PNEUMATIC SIGNAL-BOX IN THE CONTROL TOWER OF A MODERN
TERMINAL]

[Illustration: THE RESPONSIBLE MEN WHO STAND AT THE SWITCH-TOWER OF A
MODERN TERMINAL: A LARGE TOWER OF THE "MANUAL" TYPE]

[Illustration: "WHEN WINTER COMES UPON THE LINES THE SUPERINTENDENT WILL
HAVE FULL USE FOR EVERY ONE OF HIS WITS"]

[Illustration: WATCHFUL SIGNALS GUARDING THE MAIN LINE OF A BUSY RAILROAD]

The yardmaster had given the numbers of the cars that were to make
Third-118, just as he received them from one of the despatcher's
assistants, to a switching foreman, who arranged them, with the quick
facility that comes from long practice, into an order that would permit
them to be set off at various points up the line, with the least possible
amount of switching. That practical sequence worked out in pencil and
paper, a stubby switch-engine effected in reality. The cars and the
caboose, in proper order, were ready, with the crew, and inspected when
the 1847 backed to them and Third-118 came into her being.

A yard caller had summoned the train-crew while the roundhouse caller was
rounding up the two men of the engine-crew. Collins, the conductor, and
his brakemen had reported at the yard-office, and were assigned to
Third-118. Collins found the cars and caboose waiting just a few minutes
before the 1847 had been coupled to them, with little ado and no formality
whatsoever, beyond the testing of the air-brakes. Into his train-book he
had entered the number of each car and the initials of the road owning it,
its destination, its empty or tare weight; the weight of its load, and the
sum of these or its gross weight. He sees to it that each box-car is
firmly seal-locked. If not, he refuses to accept it from the yardmaster
until it has been resealed, and makes a note of the occurrence. Like the
engineer and the hostlers in the roundhouse, he takes no chances, no
responsibilities that do not fairly belong to him.

With both conductor and engineer ready, Third-118 starts upon her day's
run. The yard operator has telegraphed the despatcher's office that 3-118
is awaiting instructions. In that despatch he has given the locomotive
number, the number and total weight of the cars it hauls, the name of both
engineer and conductor. The train-despatcher enters these details of
train and crew at the head of a column of his train register. On that
register there are spaces for the entries of arriving and leaving times of
the train as telegraphed him by the operators at each telegraph station on
the division.

The train once so entered by a despatcher's clerk, the despatcher sends a
clearance card to the telegraph operator at the little yard office who
repeats it back for accuracy. Then the yard operator presents that
clearance order to the engineer and conductor, who read it aloud to
him--also for accuracy, of course--and then sign that they have read and
understood the order. The signatures are then reported to the despatcher's
office, which wires "Complete." "Complete" goes in writing upon the copies
of the order made in manifold, which go to engineer, to conductor, and to
the operator's own files. The engineer reads his order to the fireman, who
repeats it back to him; the conductor follows the same routine with his
brakemen. That all sounds complicated, but quickly becomes mechanical and
rapid; the danger is that it may become so mechanical and rapid as to
permit of serious errors passing unchecked through the routine. But the
railroad has done its part. It has, for itself, taken every possible
precaution against error and resulting accident.

We are privileged, and we climb into the caboose of Third-118. We hold
credentials to Collins, her conductor, and they are unimpeachable. We can
see that from his face as he holds his lantern over them: he would not
even let us into his caboose until his own mind was set. After that there
was barely time to jump aboard. The 1847 is beginning to clear the yard
before we have had time for a good look at the inside of the little
caboose.

"You won't find our hack any fancy place," says Collins. "But we've had it
nine years now, and it seems kind of homelike to us after all this time."

The "we" consists of Collins and his rear brakeman. The forward brakeman,
who is held responsible for the front half of the train, has his
headquarters in the cab of the 1847. The caboose is a home-like place,
snugly warmed by a red-hot stove placed in its corner and lined with bunks
made into beds, Pullman fashion; only never was there a Pullman sleeper
that gave you less sense of the impressive and a greater sense of a snug
cabin. Squarely placed in its centre is a sort of wooden pyramid and the
steps up this lead to the lookout from where the long snaky train can be
watched.

"Kind o' ol'-fashioned, that," apologizes Collins. "Th' las' time I had
th' cabin into the shops for over-haulin', they offered to take it out an'
put in th' ladders; but I says 'no'; an' this is why."

One by one he lifts its hinged steps. This is a pyramid built of lockers,
a regular treasure house of railroad necessities. There are all sorts of
ropes and jacks and wrenches, extra parts against every emergency. There
is a food closet, and another locker filled with neat stacks of
stationery.

"They give us more forms to fill out now than th' super's office got
twenty years ago," he laughs. "I spend more than half my time at that
desk."

The clerical work on Third-118 is considerable. Collins has to keep all
the way-bills of his train--32 cars, almost $100,000 worth of merchandise,
and if he makes a serious error it is apt to cost him his job. He writes a
neat hand, and his records, like his caboose, are kept in ship-shape
fashion. He is a careful student of the ethics and the practices of
railroad management and operation. He has his own ideas on each of these,
and when you get to them they are good ideas. Of such as he railroad
executives are every year made in America.

       *       *       *       *       *

We slip up the line, slowly threading our passage through the mass of
passenger trains, fast and slow, that all times have the right-of-way over
the third sections of rather ordinary freights. Collins sometimes thrusts
his orders into our hands in order that we may see something of the
great detail of this branch of operating. Each is wonderfully specific,
and we know by that "complete" on the corner that it has been given in
detail.

"No. 1 Engine 2236 will wait at Morris Level until 10:00 A. M. for 3-118,
Engine 1847."

The signature is that of the initials of the division superintendent, the
numerals have been spelled out. It would seem as if the railroad had taken
every possible precaution for safety. And yet again, remember that great
accidents have happened upon American railroads just because men's minds
have perversely refused to read what eyes and ears have read. And yet
there seems to be nothing to be done, more thorough than is already being
done.

"Are all these freights upon schedule?" you may ask Collins, after you
meet a few dozen of them within the limits of a single-track division. He
is decent enough not to laugh at your ignorance.

"Schedule?" he repeats. "It's a joke. They give our first section a time
to get out on, in the time-card and then one o' them bright office-boys
gets a figger out o' his head an' puts it down for an arrivin' time. He
never hits it an' he never expects to. So more an' more they're gettin' to
move this freight on special orders. They can better regulate it then,
'cordin' to volume of business. Mos' of the men carry the schedules of the
fas' an' th' way-freights in their domes. Th' coarse tonnage stuff doesn't
even get special orders. When they get enough of it, down on th' main
line, they get an engine out o' th' roundhouse, give the train th' engine
number, and start off. Railroad traffic along the freight end follows
business conditions mighty close."

It is still daylight when we halt at a junction, across a frozen river
from a city. The city is set upon a steep hillside, and its houses rise
from the river in even terraces. At the top a great domed structure--the
State House--crowns it. It is a still winter's morning, and the smoke
from all the chimney-pots extends straight heavenward. We wait patiently
upon a long siding until everything else has been moved--through fast
expresses heavily laden with opulent-looking Pullmans, jerky little
suburban trains, long draughts of empty coaches, being drawn by
consequential switch-engines in and out of the train-shed of the passenger
station. Finally a certain semaphore blade drops, we cross over to the
important main line and begin pulling on a sharp curve, across the river,
clear of the station with its confusion, through and past the city to a
busy division yard.

In a very little time, for this is their home town, Collins and his crew
are registering at the yardmaster's office. The engineer of the 1847, and
his fireman, turn in their time-slips and proceed with the locomotive to
the roundhouse where they make a report upon its condition. Their names
are posted on the "in" list or register, and they are off duty until they
are summoned by the callers at this end of the division. The despatcher
has, of course, been apprised of the safe ending of the run of Third-118.

In the despatcher we have a high type of railroad official who works
almost unknown to the great travelling public, and yet accepts a very
great measure of the responsibility for the safe operation of the lines.
His orders, sent by telegraph and bearing that cabalistic initial
signature of his superintendent, are the products of his own mind. There
can be no mistake in these, and he knows it. Each message that he sends
may produce disaster, and he knows that.

He is an executive of a type that is not to be passed by lightly. He has
risen from the ranks of the telegraphers, most likely from some lonely
country station or forlorn signal-tower, and his knowledge of railroad
operation, both theoretical and practical, must approach perfection. On
sunny, serene days he proceeds with the theoretical railroading; when
storms or unexpected influxes of traffic come to harass the division, he
will need every bit of his practical knowledge. Handling a number of
special trains--freight or passenger--is a strain, and that strain is most
felt at the despatcher's desk.

Now and then your morning paper tells of a railroad wreck, and laconically
adds, "The despatcher was at fault." The stories of the wrecks that were
forestalled by the sheer genius of the men who sit night and day at the
telegraph instruments at headquarters are the stories that are for the
most part untold, and that far surpass in thrill and interest the stories
of the failures.

The despatcher must also be the full measure of a man. He is, like the
silent figure upon the bridge of a great ship, of unquestioned authority
as he sits at his desk. He may or may not have a map of the line before
him as he sits there, but you may be certain that he knows where every
moving train on the division is at the moment you see him, just as clearly
as if it were all visible there to the naked eye in some sort of picture
map. No trains proceed without his express orders. He has "reliefs" and
there is no hour of day or night when one of these is not at the
despatcher's desk, having the work of the line under his exact
supervision.

The order that any train receives from the despatcher by means of the
telegraph will, as we saw in Collins's case, direct it to proceed to a
certain point on the line, and will specify every train, regular or extra,
that it will meet, and the meeting point. When the train has proceeded to
the end of its orders there will be more orders from the train-despatcher
to be receipted for, and so it will proceed to the end of the route. It is
quite possible that at any stage of the journey orders will come from
headquarters nullifying those already issued, in part or entirely; and
these must be accounted for in the same thorough and accurate fashion.
Some of this seems "red tape" to the men on the line, and there come times
when they are a bit disposed to rebel at what seems to them useless
formality. There also come times when trains crash into one another; and
at those times the railroad, with its infinite system of recording its
orders, is generally apt to be able to place the blame pretty accurately.
Those are the times when the system of train orders justifies its worth.

Recently the telephone has come into something more than an experimental
use in despatching trains upon American railroads. Various causes have
contributed to this. For one thing, the use of the telephone enables the
average road to make good use of its veterans, men who would indignantly
refuse to become pensioners, and yet who have come to a time in their
lives when they must set their pace in gentler key. A trusted old
employee, a man crippled perhaps in loyalty to the company's service, a
keen-witted responsible woman, any one of these can competently handle
train orders over a telephone, without having to have the education and
the wonderful expertness that comes only from long experience in
telegraphy; and they all become available in the despatching service.
Still another cause has contributed to the change, which is being reported
each week from some fresh corner of the country--the telegraphers,
themselves. Within the past few years they were able to induce Congress to
reduce their day's work to eight hours. Translated, this meant that the
average way-station which had been manned by one or two operators would
correspondingly need two or three operators. The telegraphers, by reason
of the expert training needed in their business, kept their wage-scale up,
and the railroads felt that eight-hour bill keenly in their treasuries. So
there may have been the least bit of retribution in their seeking the
telephone as a relief. The change has certainly been made in the keen hope
of effecting economy. No railroad operator would feel ashamed to admit
that fine impeachment.

Modern railroading simply makes the same demand of the telephone that it
makes of the telegraph--that it keep the probability of safety high. It
makes the same demand of the men who maintain the signals, the track, the
bridges, and other portions of the right-of-way. Let us consider them in
the passing of an instant.

You know the signals along the line of the railroad--those gaunt, uncanny
things that spell danger or safety to the men in the engine-cabs. A little
while ago, we stood beside a man in the sun-filled tower of a great
railroad terminal and watched him operate the most complicated switch and
signal system in the land, watched him with the crooking of a finger upon
the lever of an electric machine raise this blade, lower that, as he made
new paths for the many trains, coming and going.

A plant of that sort is known as the interlocking. In its simplest form,
it will guard a junction between two single tracks. The mast of the signal
will rise, according to standard custom, at the right of the track in the
direction of travel, and there will probably be two semaphore blades, the
upper of which guards and signals the straight main-line or "superior"
track, the lower, the diverging branch, known as the "inferior" track. The
blade raised--automatically showing a red light--indicates that the main
line is closed to the engineer. "Stop!" "Danger!" are the words it tells
him. The blade lowered, a green light is automatically displayed, and the
engineer knows that he can go ahead at full speed on the main line. The
road is clear for him. The lower blade gives similar indications for the
branch diverging line. Normally, both blades stand at "stop" and "danger,"
and the one guarding the line for which the train is destined, is dropped
only on the approach of the train, itself. In fact, to facilitate the
movement of trains, these guarding signals--known to the signal experts as
"home signals"--are generally interlocked with "distant signals" several
hundred feet down the line, on which blades indicating the diverging
tracks forecast the story that the "home signal" is to tell the engineer.
The blade raised--by night displaying a white or safety signal--on the
"distant signal" indicates that the line it guards is blocked at the
"home signal," and that the engineer must be prepared to bring his train
to a full stop. Dropped--showing the green safety light--that particular
line is open and ready, and the engineer can be prepared to pass the
junction without a very great diminution of speed.

That is the fundamental rule of the signal. Some roads have experimented
with other forms of indicators--disks of one sort or another, semaphore
blades that turn upwards rather than drop. The devices are numerous, but
the principle is the same. When the tracks begin to multiply, and the
signals begin to multiply in even greater proportion, they are generally
carried over the tracks on a light bridge construction--our English
cousins call it a "gantry"--and a series of small semaphore masts built up
from the bridge. One of these masts, or "dolls," will be assigned to each
track; and if there chances to be an unsignalled siding-track of little
importance passing under the bridge, it will have its own "doll" rising
from the bridge although quite devoid of semaphore blades. So it is all
quite as clear as print to the engineer, even when forty or fifty lights
blink at him from a single bridge. The signals tell their story to him
quite as simply as to the man in the tower, who is setting their blades in
accordance with his carefully arranged plans.

Where signals are not of this interlocking type, guarding some junction,
railroad grade crossing, draw-bridge or other point of possible danger,
they are likely to resolve themselves into the block system. This system,
in a rather crude form, with the use of operators at each block-tower or
way-station, has been in development for something less than thirty years
upon the American railroad. In brief, it divides a line--usually
double-tracked, but sometimes used by the so-called "staff" method upon a
single-track road--into sections, or blocks, of from three to five miles
each. On double-track under this system, no two trains, even though
travelling in the same direction are permitted in the same block. At the
entrance to each block stands a tall mast with two of the conventional
signal blades. The upper of these raised denotes that a train is still in
the block, and an engineer must stop his train and wait till it drops,
before he can proceed. The lower blade, when raised, indicates that a
train is in the second block ahead, and the engineer must proceed only
with caution and expecting to find that block closed against him. It is
all quite simple; and if the engineers followed the signals absolutely,
there never could be any rear-end collisions on lines protected by block
signals. As a matter of fact, there rarely ever are, although the
engineers do take chances time and time again.

"Why should I stop for that thing," said a veteran engineer on a fast
express train as we went whirring by one of those upper blades raised and
commanding us in a blood-red point of light to stop, "when I can look down
this straight stretch and see they're clear? Like as not something's got
into the mechanism of it and let her flop that way."

Do not insult the intelligence of that engineer. A little while before, he
had told us, with a deal of pride, that the rolling stock of "his road"
placed end to end would reach from New York to Omaha, a distance of some
1300 miles. Keenest of the keen, he had a sort of contempt for a rule-book
in such a case as that.

"Isn't it sort of positive?" we began. "Good excuse anyway--"

"It is," he shouted back, "but somehow it don't go if you fall behind on
your running time. We're here to use ordinary good sense--and bring our
trains in on time."

And yet the railroad has a sharp way of insisting upon compliance with
that book of rules by making, once in a great while, surprise tests. A
signal is set at danger, without any more apparent reason than in the case
just cited; a secret watch is kept, and judgment and discipline are
visited upon the heads of the engineers who permit themselves to run past
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

To operate the signals calls for one body of men, and to maintain them for
faithful service against all manner and stress of wear and weather,
another; just as there must be a working corps to keep the right-of-way in
working order. This last is a mighty brigade of the railroad's army; for
one man in every four who works for it is employed in keeping the track in
order. One dollar in every six that the railroad spends goes for that
purpose.

Maintenance of way on each division divides itself into a superintendent
of bridges and buildings, who sees to the upkeep of those facilities; and
a roadmaster, who specializes upon the track itself. This last officer,
almost invariably one who has begun to shoulder himself up in the ranks of
the railroad army from the very beginning, has his territory divided into
sections from two to five miles in length on double-track, from four to
ten on single. In command of each section a faithful hand-car and a group
of more or less faithful section-hands, figured on an allowance of one to
each mile of track, is a section-boss. The section-boss is a wry and a
wise soul, or should be. He may not know as much about the formulas for
compensating curves as that bright boy who has just come out of a "tech"
school to stand his turn at a transit, but he has a marvellous sort of
intuitive sense in keeping his little stretch of track in order. He can
sight his rail and discover flaws in alignment as a blind man can find
surface flaws with the developed tips of his fingers, and all the while he
may be growling at the railroad management for adding to the weight of its
rolling-stock and "pounding the elevations out of his track."

In summer he is expert with the "track jacks" and constantly putting in
bits of ballast here and there; and in the winter, when the frost and snow
have made it impossible to touch the ballast, he keeps his elevations by
means of "shims." A "shim" is a piece of wood, from shingle thickness to
the width of two ties piled one upon the other, and is wedged between the
tie and the rail till summer comes and the line can be corrected by
ballasting.

The section-boss must keep pace with a job that is no sinecure. If his
gang, in eagerness to be on dress parade, almost throws dirt on the rear
steps of the boss's private car as it goes whizzing down the line, he must
also see to it that they keep plugging at it where there is not even a
locomotive whistle within sound. He must be thrifty, economical. He must
remember that the humble cross-tie which once cost a quarter now costs
almost a dollar, and that for one of these to be found neglected in the
ditch is almost a capital crime. He must have an eye for loose spikes and
angle-plates, for the big boss has hinted at the annual loss to the road
in these simple factors.

At his call and that of the superintendent of bridges and buildings is a
work-train, made up of a few flat-cars and discarded coaches, doing
boarding-house Pullman service in their declining years, which looks after
work too sizable for the section-boss and his little gang, and yet not
large enough for the attention of the dignified gentlemen who are known as
the reconstruction engineers. Yet some of the feats of these work-train
gangs have the crackle of engineering genius. It takes brains to rip out a
little timber span and replace it in the interval between two trains
spaced a couple of hours apart, and in the railroad, brain work often
comes from the shabby workman, from the man who graduates from the command
of his own battered hand-car.

       *       *       *       *       *

All this elaborate system of railroad operation has been built up through
many years of practice. Experience has been more than a teacher in the
business, which becomes yearly more and more nearly a developed science;
she has been a whole faculty and a curriculum, too. Methods that promised
well at the outset have been found faulty after trial, and rejected.
Committees of trained experts have pondered and reported voluminously; the
standard railroad codes of every sort have been born because of them. The
operation of the railroad has been brought close to science. It would seem
as if the entire field had been completely covered.

And yet new situations constantly arise, the like of which have never
before presented themselves, even to the railroad veterans. Traffic moves
in unequal volume, particularly freight traffic. There are single-track
stretches through the Middle West that starve through eleven months of the
year, and for the other thirty days handle in grain more tonnage than a
double-track trunk-line in the East. Obviously such lines cannot be
double-tracked for thirty days of business; quite as obviously the
overtaxed division, its equipment, and its men must rise to every
necessity of the floodtide of business. There are fat years and there are
lean years. There come years of bumper crops, years when the factory
lights burn from sunset to dawn, and wheels turn unceasingly, and then the
superintendent wonders how his equipment and men are going to stand the
strain. Engines are kept from the shops and in service; nothing that is
even a semblance of a car is kept out of service; the demand for men is
keen; prosperity strains the resources of the railroad.

In the lean years, engines are sometimes kept from the shops because the
railroad feels that it must hold down its running expenses to keep pace
with reduced revenues, and such a course it can stoutly defend as nothing
else than good business. Equipment begins to stand idle. Engines are
tucked away on empty sidings, boarded and forlorn; and if the year be very
lean indeed, the superintendent may find it necessary to send out a
wrecking crane and begin lifting empty cars off the rails and leaving them
in the ditch at the side of the right-of-way, until the golden times come
again. At such seasons his ingenuity is tested quite as much as in the
times of floodtide. Orders come to cut expenses, and his big expense is
the pay-roll. When he begins to blue-pencil that pay-roll, some one is
going to be hungry. The superintendent knows that. He must move with great
care in such emergencies.




CHAPTER XV

THE FELLOWS OUT UPON THE LINE

    MEN WHO RUN THE TRAINS MUST HAVE BRAIN AS WELL AS MUSCLE--THEIR
    TRAINING--FROM FARMER'S BOY TO ENGINEER--THE BRAKEMAN'S DANGEROUS
    WORK--BAGGAGEMAN AND MAIL CLERKS--HAND-SWITCHMEN--THE MULTIFARIOUS
    DUTIES OF COUNTRY STATION-AGENTS.


One man in every twelve in the United States is on the pay-roll of a
railroad. No wonder that that great organism comes so close to human life
throughout the nation, that we seem to touch it at every turn.

This one out of twelve is the great army of industrial America. Composed
of nearly 1,500,000 men, it is an army that inspires loyalty and
cooperation within its own ranks, and confidence and admiration from
without. To a nation whose creed is work, it stands as the uniformed host
stands to a fighting nation like England or France or Germany. The army of
industrial America inspires not one whit less affection than those great
crops of paid fighters in Europe.

Ninety-six per cent of this army of railroaders are engaged in the
business of maintaining and operating the great avenues of transportation,
an overwhelming proportion in the last phase of the business. The
operating department is, to the average mind, the railroad. Its members
are the men with whom the public come oftenest in contact; they are the
men who are oftenest called upon to hazard life and limb in the pursuit of
their callings. The romance of the railroad--a romance that is told in
unending prose and verse--hovers over the men who operate it. The men who
labor in the shops and keep engines and cars safe and fit for the most
efficient service have no small responsibilities. Moreover, their work,
forging and finishing great masses of metal, is not without its own
hazards. The men who give their time and talents to the maintenance of the
track and the structure of the railroad have equal responsibilities. It is
not doubted for an instant that both of these are important functions in
the conduct of railroad transportation, and each in turn will have full
attention given to it.

In a previous chapter we have considered the men who control the actual
operation of the railroad, the safe conduct of its trains up and down the
line. How about the privates in the ranks of this industrial army, the
men, who by their loyalty and ability form the very foundations of
successful operation, who also form the material from which executives are
chosen every day?

There are no common laborers in this phase of railroad work. A man with
stout muscles and less than the average amount of brains can ofttimes
shovel ballast out with the track-gangs; there are many, many
opportunities for crude labor in the heavy metal work of the railroad's
shops; there are none within the scientific activity that gives itself to
the running of the trains. The humblest of these folk must have a
particular talent, a talent so peculiar that it might almost be described
as "latent Americanism." The lowest-priced man in the train-service must
understand the entire complicated theories of railroad operation to a T.
He may be the man on whom responsibility--the responsibility for the
safety of not one but many human lives--may suddenly be thrust. A
gate-tender at a highway crossing has not ordinarily a place of gravest
responsibility; yet in some least expected hour this humblest employee of
the operating department may hold the fate of human life in the balancing
of his steady hands.

Americans run the American railroads. For this great service men must
possess not only the mental capacity for understanding the technique of
operation, but the physical strength to meet the stress of hard labor, and
of every sort of weather, and of long hours spent upon moving trains.
Moreover, there is a requirement of morals--that a man must fully know and
quite as fully accept the responsibility for human life that is placed in
his hands. These things combined make that "latent Americanism" of which
we have just spoken; and the railroad that digs deep into this mine of
"latent Americanism" finds its material, not in the great cities with
their vast colonies of foreigners, but on the farms of a broad, broad
land. The boy standing in the pasture sees the express train go skimming
past him from an unknown great world into another unknown great world, and
straightway he has the railroad fever. He drives to the depot with the
milk cans, and there he comes in contact with the personnel of that link
of steel that stretches across the farm where he was born. It is only a
little time after that before he is applying for work as a railroad man.

So it is that the railroad finds fine timber for its service. It picks and
chooses. For its choice it has the pick of American timber, the ironwood
of our national forests of humanity. It gathers its army of men, inspects
them carefully for physical, mental and moral requirements and then it
impresses upon them the necessity of good living, the absolute necessity
of deference to an established and rigid system of discipline as a
requirement in the successful handling of the different transportation
business.

Thus we have the railroad men as the best workers of the nation. If you
want proof of that, ask any of the great mail-order concerns which class
of business they prefer and they will tell you without hesitation that it
is the railroad man. Come closer home and ask the merchants of any
community the same question. Their answer will be the same. Rigid
conditions, out-of-door life, sober habits make desirable citizens out of
this class of workers. There are none better anywhere.

In the train service, the ordinary route of promotion is through the
freight service to the passenger. Thus, for the farmer's boy who hankers
to sit in the cab of the locomotive that hauls the Limited there is a long
hard path. Chances are that at the beginning the road foreman of engines
will start him at odd chores, calling crews, wiping engines, and the like,
around some one of the big roundhouses. He will work hard, but here he
will begin to absorb the romance of the line, the romance that, like fog
and engine smoke, lies around the engine house, thick enough to cut.
Perhaps after a while they will give him a little authority and make him a
hostler. The "hostler" and the "stalls" in the roundhouses are quaint
survivals of the most primitive railroad days, when horses were really
motive power.

At odd times, night times perhaps, the boy will ride in engine cabs and
gradually acquire a knowledge of one of these great machines such as no
text-book would ever give him. Then comes his first big opportunity. There
is a vacancy among the engine crews; the road foreman of engines gives him
a good report, and he begins to have dealing with the train-master. He is
made a fireman, and he travels the division end to end, day in and day
out.

Now he knows why the railroad requires physical tests as well as tests of
eyesight and of hearing. Even after he has taken another step in advance
and been promoted to the passenger service (we will assume that ours is a
bright, ambitious boy), he will only find that his labors in the
engine-cab have been increased. It is no slight task, firing a heavy
locomotive over 100 or more miles of grade-climbing, curve-rounding
railroad. It is a task that fairly calls for human arms of steel; for some
firemen handle some 17 tons of coal in a single run. The appetite of that
firebox is seemingly insatiable. There is hardly a moment during the run
that it is not clamoring to be fed, and that the fireman is not hard at it
there on the rocking floor of the swaying tender, reaching from tender
coal to firebox door.

But the day does come, if he sticks hard at it, when he becomes an
engineer. He has learned the line well, during his countless trips over it
as fireman. He has come to know every signal, every bridge, every station,
every curve, every grade, every place for slow, careful running, every
place for speeding, as thoroughly as ever river pilot learned his course.
There have been many times when he has had to assume temporary charge of
the engine. He is a qualified man at least to sit in the right hand of the
cab, to have command over reverse lever and over throttle.

His work is of a different sort already. The hard physical labor is a
thing of the past, most of the time he sits at his work. But
responsibility replaces physical stress, and the farmer boy now realizes
which of the two is more wearing. Upon his judgment--instant judgment time
and time and time again--the fate of that heavy train depends. After he
has been promoted from freight engineer to passenger engineer he has a
train filled with humanity, and he knows the difference. By day the
inclination of a single blade, by night the friendly welcome or the harsh
command of changeable lights must never escape him. One slip, and after
that--

The engineer prefers not to think of that. He prefers to think of a safe
trip, terminal to terminal, to think of the long line covered, once again
in safety, to think of the station at the far end of the division, where a
relief engine and engineer will be in waiting to take the train another
stage in its long journey across the land, to think of the home and family
awaiting him. He is a big passenger man now. When he gets to the end of
the run, there will be a crew to take his locomotive away to the
roundhouse. He will have a bit of a wash and in a few minutes he will be
bound through the station waiting-room, well dressed, smoking a good
fifteen-cent cigar, quite as fine a type of American citizen as you might
wish to see anywhere. You would hardly recognize in this well-dressed man
of affairs, the keen-eyed, sound-bodied man in blue jeans who stood
beside his engine, oil-can in hand, at the far end of the division.

       *       *       *       *       *

The same type holds true through the man in care of the other parts of the
trains. Take the brakeman--they call him trainman nowadays in the
passenger service. In the old days this was a slouchy, somewhat slovenly
dressed individual of a self-acknowledged independence. Time has changed
him in thirty years. An increased respect for the service has taken away
from him his slouchiness; a feeling that good work and hard work will take
him through the ranks, through a service as conductor, perhaps to
train-master, to superintendent, goodness knows how much further, has
replaced that bumptious independence.

He began as brakeman on a freight. There were two, possibly three, of
these men to the train, under command of the conductor, back there in the
caboose, and they were supposed to distribute themselves pretty equally
over the top of the train. The forward brakeman would work from the cab
backward, the rear brakeman from the caboose (he also probably calls it a
"hack"), forward, the remaining man when a third was assigned to the
train, having the middle. It was thought and confidently predicted that
with the universal use of the air-brake to freight equipment the days of
clambering over the tops of the cars to man the brakes were over. Brakemen
twenty years ago were dreaming of the day when they might sit in a cab or
caboose and have the difficult work of slacking or the stopping of a
1,500-ton train accomplished, through the genius of mechanism, by a
hand-turn of the engineer upon an air-brake throttle. But what looked so
well in theory has not worked quite so well in practice. The railroads
have found the wear and tear on the air-brake equipment, particularly with
the steep grade lines and heavy equipment, a tremendous expense. For the
sake of that and for the sake of still greater safety--following the
railroad rule to use each possible safety measure, one upon the
other--the brakemen are still compelled to keep to the top of the cars.

[Illustration: "WHEN THE TRAIN COMES TO A WATER STATION THE FIREMAN GETS
OUT AND FILLS THE TANK"]

[Illustration: A FREIGHT-CREW AND ITS "HACK"]

[Illustration: A VIEW THROUGH THE SPAN OF A MODERN TRUSS BRIDGE GIVES AN
IDEA OF ITS STRENGTH AND SOLIDITY]

[Illustration: THE NEW YORK CENTRAL IS ADOPTING THE NEW FORM OF "UPPER
QUADRANT" SIGNAL]

On a pleasant day this is a task that can give the average brakeman a sort
of supreme contempt for the man whose work houses him within four walls.
If the road lies through a lovely country, if it pierces mountain ranges,
or follows the twisting course of a broad river, he may feel a contempt,
too, for the passenger who observes the lovely scenes only through the
narrow confines of a car window. To him there is a broad horizon, and he
would be a poor sort of man indeed if he did not rise to the inspiration
of this environment.

There is quite another side of this in the winter. Let wind and rain and
then freezing weather come, and that icy footpath over the top of the
snaky train becomes the most dangerous way in all Christendom. It consists
of only three narrow planks laid lengthwise of the train, and between the
cars there is a two-foot interval to be jumped. Hand-rails of any sort are
an impossibility, and the brakeman now and then will receive a sharp slap
in the face that is not the slap of wind or of sleet, and he will fall
flat upon the car-roof or dodge to the ladders that run up between the
cars. That slap was the slap of the "tickler," that gallows-like affair
that stands guard before tunnels and low bridges and gives crude warning
to the man working upon the train roofs of a worse slap yet to come.

There are other dangers, not the least of these the possibility of open
battle at any time of day or night with one or more "hobos," tramps, or
"yeggmen," who seem to regard freight trains as complimentary
transportation extended to them as a right, and train-crews as their
natural enemies. The list of railroad men who have lost their lives
because of these thugs is not a short one. It is one of the many records
of railroad heroism.

Still the brakeman has a far easier time of it than his prototype of a
generation or more back. The air-brake is a big help. When a train breaks
in two or three parts on a grade, the pulling out of the air-couplings
automatically sets the brakes on every part, and if you do not know what
that means ask one of the old-timers. In the old days of the hand-brakes
the very worst of all freight accidents came when a section of a freight
train without any one aboard to set its brakes, broke loose and came
crashing down a hill into some helpless train. Ask the old-timer about the
hand-couplings and the terrific record of maimed arms and bodies that they
left. The modern automatic couplings have been worth far more than their
cost to the railroads.

In the course of time and advancement the brakeman leaves the freight and
enters the passenger service. Now he is called a trainman and is attired
in a natty uniform. He has to shave, to keep his hands clean, wear gloves
perhaps, and be a little more of a Chesterfield. He must announce the
stations in fairly intelligible tones, and be prepared to answer
pleasantly and accurately the thousand and one foolish questions put to
him by passengers.

As a conductor he will probably begin as Collins began, in the freight
service. When he comes to the passenger-service there will be still more
book-keeping to confront him, and he will have to be a man of good mental
attainments to handle all the many, many varieties of local and through
tickets, mileage-books, passes, and other forms of transportation
contracts that come to him, to detect the good from the bad, to throw out
the counterfeits that are constantly being offered to him. He will have to
carry quite a money account for cash affairs, and he knows that mistakes
will have to be paid out of his own pocket.

All this is only a phase of his business. He is responsible for the care
and safe conduct of his train, equally responsible in this last respect
with the engineer. He also receives and signs for the train orders, and he
is required to keep in mind every detail of the train's progress over the
line. He will have his own assortment of questions to answer at every
stage of the journey, and he will be expected to maintain the discipline
of the railroad upon its trains. That may mean in one instance the
ejectment of a passenger who refuses to pay his fare, and still he must
not involve the road in any big damage suit; or in another, the
subjugation of some gang of drunken loafers. The real wonder of it is that
so many conductors come as near as they do to the Chesterfieldian
standards.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the forward part of the train are still other members of its crew, some
of them possibly who are not paid by the railroad, but who are indirectly
of its service. Among these last may be classed the mail clerks, who are
distinctly employees of the Federal Government, and the messengers of the
various express companies. If the road is small and the train unimportant,
these workers may be grouped with the baggagemen in the baggage-car. If
the train is still less important the baggageman may assume part of the
functions of mail clerk and express messenger. If so, he is apt to have
his own hands full. The mere manual exercise of stacking a 60-foot
baggage-car from floor to ceiling with heavy trunks (and the commercial
travellers and theatrical folk _do_ carry heavy trunks) is no slight
matter. But that is not all. The trunk put off at the wrong place or the
trunk that is not put off at all is apt to make the railroad an enemy for
life and the baggageman is another one of the many in the service who are
permitted to make no mistakes.

When he has United States mail-sacks and a stack of express packages to
handle, his troubles only multiply. His book-keeping increases
prodigiously, and his temper undergoes a sharper strain. Give him all
these, then a couple of fighting Boston terriers, which must, because of
one of the many minor regulations of railroad passenger traffic, ride in
the baggage-car--a cold and draughty car--and you will no longer wonder
why the baggageman has a streak of ill-temper at times. His office is
certainly no sinecure, neither is he in the direct path of advancement
like his co-workers, the fireman and the brakeman.

These train-workers who are so little seen by the travelling
public--baggagemen, mail clerks and express messengers alike, ride in the
most hazardous part of the equipment, the extreme forward cars of the
train. Read the list of train accidents, involving loss of life, and in
nine cases out of ten you will find that these have headed the list of
killed or injured. There work is hard, their hours long, their pay modest.
They form a silent brigade of the industrial army that is always close to
the firing line.

       *       *       *       *       *

There remains in the operating service a great branch of the army that
does not scurry up and down the line. Some of these men are at lonely
outposts, forlorn towers hidden at the edge of the forest or set out upon
the plain, where a desolate man guards a cluster of switch levers and
hardly knows of the outer world, save through the clicking of his
telegraph key or the rush of the trains passing below his perch. He knows
each of these. If his is a junction tower or a point where two busy lines
of track intersect or cross one another, it is his duty to set the proper
switches and their governing signals.

It seems a simple enough thing, and it is. But even the simple things in
railroading must be executed with extreme care. If the towerman set those
switches and signals 319 times in the course of a day, they must be set
absolutely correct 319 times. There can be no slurring in this work.

Those men in the towers have their own records of bravery. They are the
sentinels of the railroad, and faithful sentinels they are. The lonely
tower, like so many other scenes of railroad activity, gives long
opportunity for thought and meditation; and so it is not so strange, after
all, that one of them has recently given the country a most distinguished
essayist upon national railroad conditions.

There are even humbler positions in the operating service, each of them
demanding a fine loyalty and a fair measure of ability. Even the young boy
who draws a baggage-truck knows that the path of advancement starts at his
very feet; and the humble track-walker feels that a good part of the
railroad safety and the railroad responsibility rests upon his broad
shoulders. His is also a forlorn task, as he trudges back and forth over a
section of line, hammer and wrench in hand, looking for the broken rail or
other defect, slight in itself, but capable of infinite harm.

By day his task is dreary and arduous enough. By night it is far more so.
With his lantern in hand he must patrol the line faithfully, even if the
wind howl about him and the snow come to block his progress. The
passengers in the fast express trains that whirl past him and who see, if
they see anything at all without, only a blotch of a tiny spark of light,
do not know that it is a part of their protection. There is a deal of
"behind the scenes" in railroad operation.

And so it goes. There are hundreds of hand-switchmen who make the safe
path for the train and upon each of them hangs responsibility. It is a
trite saying that each of them knows that, and that each lives up to the
full measure of his responsibility.

       *       *       *       *       *

The station-agent, even in the smallest towns, has a less lonely time. He
comes in contact with the outside world, and ofttimes his life goes quite
to the other extreme. A local train may be due within three minutes, and
here comes Aunt Mary Clark, delayed until the train is already whistling
the station stop. Aunt Mary is deaf and it takes her some time to buy her
ticket and to ask endless questions which must bring an endless string of
answers. At that very moment the agent's telegraph sounder begins to call
him. A message, upon which the safety of the operation of that train
depends, is being poured into his ear, and he cannot afford to miss a
single click of that instrument; the responsibility will be his if
anything goes wrong in its delivery. On top of all this some commercial
traveller may be clamoring for the checking of his trunk. The
representative of the railroad in the small town has to keep his wits
about him in such times.

Of course, if the town is of considerable size he may have a staff about
him. In such a case, he may have a baggage-room with baggageman and
baggage-handlers installed; he may have assistants to mind the telegraph
instrument and to sell tickets, other assistants to look after the
freight. He may even attain to the dignity of a station master in uniform
or else have such a dignitary reporting to him.

But in the majority of railroad stations throughout the United States the
station-agent is the staff; he is lucky if he has a man to "spell" him in
his "off" hours. He probably is the agent of the express company in
addition, and probably the agent of the telegraph company, too, which, by
arrangement with the railroad, transacts a general commercial business
over its wires. There are frequent instances when the local post-office is
situated within the depot and the agent proves the versatility of his
profession by acting as postmaster, too. He serves many masters, as you
can see, and not all of these are outside of the railroad. He is not only
answerable to the superintendent, in almost every case he is
freight-agent, too, making out the bills of lading and figuring the
complicated rate sheet. For this part of his work he is under the control
of the general freight-agent. The general passenger-agent is also his
superior officer. To him he must account accurately for his ticket sales,
and that is not always a very easy matter. The question of passenger rates
is a fairly complicated one.

Still, the agent must not only be able to figure the rate to South Paris,
Me., or to Oshkosh, Wis., within two minutes, but he must make out a long
and correct ticket within that time, while the railroad's patron demands
information about some branch line connection on another system a thousand
miles away. The country station-agent earns every cent of his humble
salary. He works long hours; and then occasionally one of the railroad's
travelling representatives will drop in upon him and casually suggest that
in his leisure time he might get out and solicit a little business for the
company!

There is not much loafing at the little yellow depot in the country.
Sometimes a group of trainmen from some freight awaiting orders will
gather there to swap stories and the keen wit of the railroad. These are
the exceptions. The most times are the times of long, hard grind, work,
work, work like the men out upon the trains. This railroad army is truly
the army of hard work. It was gathered for labor.

Yet the station-agent leaning over his telegraph instrument in the bay of
his office, and watching the Limited scurry by the little depot, and
seeing the president's big and gay private car hitched on behind, knows
that that very executive in charge of many miles of railroad and thousands
of men, came from another little country depot like this. The time may yet
come when he himself will have a private car and a deal of authority.
There is a great goal for every man in the railroad service.




CHAPTER XVI

KEEPING THE LINE OPEN

    THE WRECKING TRAIN AND ITS SUPPLIES--FLOODS DAMMED BY AN EMBANKMENT--
    RIGHT OF WAY ALWAYS GIVEN TO THE WRECKING-TRAIN--EXPEDITIOUS WORK IN
    REPAIRING THE TRACK--COLLAPSE OF THE ROOF OF A TUNNEL--TELEGRAPH
    CRIPPLED BY STORMS--WINTER STORMS THE SEVEREST TEST--TRAINS IN QUICK
    SUCCESSION HELP TO KEEP THE LINE OPEN IN SNOWSTORMS--THE ROTARY PLOUGH.


A cub reporter shouldered his way into a railroad superintendent's office.
Outside, a late winter's storm howled around the terminal; the morning was
nipping cold, the air curtained with myriad snow-flakes, a great railroad
was making a desperate fight against the mighty forces of nature.

"My city editor wants to know what you folks are doing to get the line
open," demanded the reporter.

The big superintendent swung in his swivel chair and faced him. It was a
place where angels might well have feared to tread--a place surcharged
with the electricity of fight. The superintendent's mind was filled with
the almost infinite detail of the fight, but he liked the cub reporter and
greeted him with a smile.

"You can tell your city editor," he replied slowly, "that it is as much as
a man's job here is worth for him to think that the line is going to be
opened. I'd fire him if he as much as thought that it was ever closed. We
don't die. We fight. It's a hard storm, sonny, but we make muscle in
storms like this. We don't _get_ the line open, we are _keeping_ the line
open. D'ye see?"

In that the big superintendent had sounded one of the biggest principles
of railroad operation.

The line must be kept open. That slender trail of two rails, stretching
straight across the open land and writhing and twisting through the high
hills, is a living organism. The railroad is no mere inanimate
organization, like a store, for instance. It is a right-hand of the
nation's life; it is life. The railroad is like a great living thing, its
many arms reaching long distances back into the land. You cannot cut off
the living arm and then bring it back to pulsing life.

Just so the railroad arm cannot be severed--the line must be kept open.
Strange things may come to pass: the right-of-way may be littered with the
wreckage of trains, brought together through a defect in the physical
machine of the human; unexpected floods of traffic may seek to overwhelm
the outlet; in spring the power and might of flood may descend upon it;
winter's storms may seek to paralyze it; still, always the railroad must
be kept open.

"We can't lie down," the superintendent explained to the cub reporter.
"We've got to get the traffic through. Do you know what it would mean if
we were to follow the path of least resistance to-day--to let this storm
get the best of us? Let me give you an idea of just one thing. There's
food coming in here in trainload lots every night--fresh meat, fresh
vegetables, fresh milk. Folks would go hungry if we were to say 'We can't,
this storm is a gee-whilicker. We give up.'"

To keep the line open, the railroad affords every sort of protective
device; it trains men for especial duties.

Take the matter of wrecks, for instance. The railroader does not like to
think of wrecks, but his methods for removing them must be prompt and
thorough: the line must be kept open. Each year sees equipment increasing
in size and weight, and each increase brings additional problems in
handling wrecked cars and engines.

Twenty years ago, the wrecking-equipment of most of the big roads was
comparatively simple. It was generally built in the railroad's own shops.
To-day 60-ton cars and 100-ton locomotives require something of a
wrecking crane or derrick to lift them from the right-of-way; and the
wrecking-train is a device thought out and built by specialists.

These wrecking-trains are the emergency arms of railroad operation. They
stand, like the apparatus of a city fire department, at every important
terminal or division operating plant, awaiting summons to action. You may
see the wrecking-train at every big yard, waiting on a siding which has
quick access to the main-line tracks. It consists of from four to six
cars--a tool-car with all sorts of wrecking-devices--replacers, blocks and
tackle, extra small parts of car-trucks for emergency repairs, and the
like. There are more of these extra parts--axles and wheels and four-wheel
trucks on a "flat" that is fastened to the tool-car; and if this
wrecking-train has a couple of miles of heavy traffic line to serve, there
may be three or four of the "flats" with tools and spare equipment. You
cannot have too many of those in a big wreck. The wrecking-train is sure
to have a crane--a big arm of steel, compressed to come within the slim
clearances of bridges and of tunnels, but capable of reaching down and
tugging at a 100-ton locomotive with almost no effort whatsoever. And
quite as important as the crane is the cook-car--generally some old-time
coach or sleeper descended to humble service on the road. The cook-car has
a rough berth and a kitchen; and you may be mighty sure that there is a
good griddle artist upon it. You cannot expect a wrecking-gang to get into
a twenty-four hour job without being pretty constantly provisioned while
it is at work.

Only a little while ago, one of the officers of an Eastern trunk-line
railroad and a member of one of the State railroad commissions were coming
toward New York. The trip was in the nature of an inspection on the part
of the State official, but as a matter of comfort and convenience to the
two men, it was made upon the former's private car. The comfort and
convenience suddenly ceased while the two were still nearly 300 miles away
from the seaboard. The road rested there for many miles in heavy country;
its rails found their curving way in the crevices between high hills. It
had rained steadily for a fortnight; the little mountain brooks were
raging mill-races. In the low flatlands of one deep valley lakes were
being formed. There were long stretches where the four rails of the
double-tracked trunk-line railroad lost themselves under the glassy
surface of the waters. Up and down the valley trains were standing
helpless between those lakes, their passengers fuming at the delay. Fast
freights stood axle-deep in water; their title, for that moment, was an
occasion for joyous humor. The comfortable, convenient trip of the
railroad operating man and the railroad commissioner was at an end.

An embankment that the railroad had built for a branch down the valley was
blocking the waters, and orders had come from New York to dynamite out
that embankment. It would cost the railroad nearly $50,000 to destroy that
half-mile of track but it might save the valley millions. There had been
no hesitation on the part of the "old man"--the road's tried executive.
That is a phase of American railroading not often brought to light.

Orders came that the engine hauling the "special" of the operating man and
the railroad commissioner was to be taken for a work-train down at that
damming embankment. That's the way with railroading. When the clattering
telegraph keys sound the note of trouble, even that mighty soul, the
chairman of the board, may find himself "laid out" at some jerkwater
junction, while his pet engine goes into service with a wrecking-train.
But the chairman of the board, whose time is real money, offers no
protest. He knows that to block the main line costs his road $250 a minute
for the first 60 minutes; that that figure doubles and trebles in the
second hour; in the third, his auditors may check off $1,000 a minute, at
the least, as the cost of a blocked railroad. No wonder that they insist
that it is "keeping the line open."

Before the engine of that special was cut off to go scurrying down to the
embankment where the skilled workmen were making preparations to dynamite
away a half-mile of track, the operating man lifted his hand. He had, like
any trained railroader, been listening to the clattering telegraph key.

"They've come away without their cook--those wreckers," he told the
gentleman who regulated public utilities. "I think I'll go down with the
'eats.' There's an old hotel across from the railroad track down at the
next station, and the landlord, Uncle Dan Hortley, will fix me up."

"I'll go with you," said the State official. "I want to get my finger in
the pie."

So it came to pass that they both went, the private car stopping at the
little hotel long enough to get in an overwhelming supply of bread and
ham. As they whizzed through the scene of trouble all hands joined at
making sandwiches.

"Butter them on both sides," said the railroad commissioner.

"They're better with the butter on one side," insisted the operating man.

The commissioner was not used to back-talk from railroaders, no matter how
high their office, and he stuck to his point.

"Both sides," he insisted.

"One side only," reported the big operating man.

"The commission has closed its hearing and issues an order for both
sides."

"The railroad appeals."

But the commission won--it almost always does--and the men down at the
embankment ate their sandwiches with a double thickness of butter.

Sometimes a refrigerator train comes under the skilled hands of the
wreckers, and the cook-car may have more than an abundance of good
material right at hand. Beef, chickens, milk--all manner of edibles have
been spilled like waste along the right-of-way, and there have been no
regrets among the men of the wrecking-boss's crew. Once, a speeding
cook-car hurrying to the relief of the laborers upon a wrecked meat-train
that had tried to go tangent to a mountain curve, brought reinforcements
in the form of ham sandwiches. The wreckers were pretty hungry, but it
needed all their hunger to tackle those sandwiches. The meat-train had
been filled with ham; it had caught fire. Somehow, three or four hours of
work hauling out smoked hams gave no appetite for sandwiches of the same
sort.

       *       *       *       *       *

On main-line divisions, where traffic runs exceeding heavy, a locomotive
stands, steam-up, with the four cars of the wrecking-train. Even on
side-line divisions the call for the wreckers will bring the fastest and
best engine out of the roundhouse, no matter what her train assignment may
be. Things on the railroad stand aside for the wrecker. Limiteds may paw
their nervous heels upon sidings while she goes skimming up the line--all
time-table rights are hers from the moment that she goes into service.

A wire from the seat of trouble brings her into service.

"Second Four-twelve in ditch at Grey's Bridge. Broken rail. Engine and two
cars derailed. Both tracks blocked. About four killed and injured."

That wire has itself had the right-of-way. When "W-K, W-K, W-K" comes
persistently calling over a railroad wire, every key closes. "W-K" is the
"C-Q-D" of railroading. It is as much as any operator's job is worth, to
ignore it.

When a despatch of the sort just cited comes into headquarters, things
start to move. The despatcher, if he is after the manner of most
despatchers, turns to his telephone and calls the yardmaster to order out
the wrecking-crew. There is no more excitement in his voice than if he
were ordering out any ordinary sort of special. He rings off quickly,
calls up in turn the superintendent, trainmaster, perhaps the division
engineer, the claim department. If there is a fatality list--the wreck one
of those fearful things that sometimes show themselves upon the front
pages of the newspapers--he will get the hospitals and the doctors. The
list of surgeons who are allied to the railroad in every town on the
division hangs above the despatcher's desk.

He may run a special hospital train with doctors and nurses and emergency
equipment. On one memorable occasion the hospital train was on its way out
upon the main line before the wreck had been reported over the wire. The
despatcher saw that the hospital special had a clear track; he gave a
multitude of directions as to its running, with the quick clear word of a
self-possessed man--then turned and shot himself dead. He had
miscalculated: the human machine sometimes does. He knew that he had sent
the two crack-a-jack trains on that single-track division, curling its way
among the mountains, into each other at full speed. No need for him to
know exactly where they met.

But even if the wreck is no holocaust; if it is one of those minor smashes
that are bound to come now and then on the best of lines, he must keep his
head. As he caught up his telephone to get orders to that wrecking-boss
out at the roundhouse, his assistant took instant notice of the wreck,
first notifying the stations on either side of the accident to set
danger-signals against all trains. After that, while the despatcher
himself was busied with details, the assistant arranged to handle all
traffic. If both tracks were blocked, there were plans to be instantly
made to forward the fast through trains by detouring them over other lines
of railroad. The assistant despatcher, wishing to know how long he
could afford to hold his heavy traffic (remember that the line must always
be kept open), wired the nearest station for additional details. Most of
all he wanted to know how long the tracks would be blocked. Perhaps before
he got his wire through there came a second message from the wreck, giving
more facts about it. By means of code, great detail can be given in a
short wire; headquarters gets a clear understanding of the trouble. After
that the wire chatters constantly; there are a thousand orders to be
given, a thousand details to be arranged.

[Illustration: THE WRECKING TRAIN READY TO START OUT FROM THE YARD]

[Illustration: "TWO OF THESE GREAT CRANES CAN GRAB A WOUNDED MOGUL
LOCOMOTIVE AND PUT HER OUT OF THE WAY"]

[Illustration: "THE SHOP-MEN FORM NO MEAN BRIGADE IN THIS INDUSTRIAL ARMY
OF AMERICA"]

While the first of these wires are beginning to swing back and forth the
despatcher will hear the wrecking-train, pulled by the neatest and
swiftest bit of motive power from their big roundhouse, go scurrying by
down the line. The road is cleared. Everything stands aside, and for weeks
after, the stove committee in every roundhouse on the division will be
telling how she made the run.

They don't talk about the run when they get to the accident. They pile off
the train and get to work quickly. Every man is a trained wreck-worker, as
a fireman is trained to his peculiar business. In such hours as they are
not out on the road, the wreckers are repairers of cars. It keeps them
busy during the long seasons when the line is lucky and has no wrecks, and
it gives them the skill with which to tackle the difficult problems that
confront them after a smash. By day these men--eight or ten or twelve of
them to a crew--work in the yard close to the waiting wrecking-train; by
night the telephone at the head of the bed of each man will bring him
quickly to the near-by yard.

"How do you handle a wreck?" we once asked an old-time wrecking-boss, a
man grown gray in keeping his line open.

"I don't know," was his frank response. "I've probably handled a thousand
wrecks--perhaps more--but I have yet to see two that were the same.
Different cases demand different treatments. Any surgeon will tell you
that; and you know," this with a bit of a laugh, "we are the surgeons of
the steel highway.

"We've only one rule that is absolute, and that rule is to take care of
the folks who are hurt in the first place, and in the second place to get
the line open. If it is multiple-track line--two or three or four tracks
in operation--and the muss is sprawled over the entire right-of-way we get
a through track working in shortest interval. When we can wire "number two
open" or whatever it is, the despatcher down at headquarters will catch
the stations where there are crossovers and he'll be handling his
first-class traffic of all sorts past us while we'll still be stocking the
arm of the old bill crane down into the smash."

The arm of that crane can lift a freight-car--if there is enough
freight-car left to lift--off the rails and into the ditch in almost a
twinkling. Two of these great cranes can grab a wounded mogul locomotive
and put her out of the way. The wrecking-trains on a first-class road are
kept along the line in profusion. Each is supposed to cover a territory of
100 miles or so in every direction from headquarters, and a sizable smash
will bring two or more to work in unison. Two wrecking-cranes working into
the remnants of a head-on collision from each direction can accomplish
marvels. They will come together finally at the chief test of their
strength--the point where two locomotives have firmly locked horns in
dying embrace. That is a point that finds the nerve and ability of every
wrecking-boss.

But all these wrecking-bosses have nerve and ability. They could not hold
their jobs without both. They know when equipment--cars that might be made
as good as new in the shops--must be burned like driftwood, and when the
burning of a wreck would be criminal waste. That requires
judgment--judgment to determine whether it is cheaper to burn than to
lose valuable time; to delay traffic on a main-line division or to let the
traffic on a less important side-line division wait for a little longer
time. Judgment is part of a wrecking-boss's equipment. His superintendent
knows that; and when the super grows nervous and gets down to the wreck
himself, although he knows that he is ranking officer in charge of the
work he shows good judgment, on his own part, in letting the wrecking-boss
give all orders. That makes for skill, it makes for speed. If the
wrecking-boss is not doing good work the superintendent can fire him
to-morrow, or (what is far more usual) find him an easier berth somewhere
on the division.

There are times when the work-train must be summoned, when laborers by the
dozen must get to work to build new track. A wash-out may require a
half-mile of track to be laid in a night, and the railroad can do it. A
young man wrote a very able story for _The Saturday Evening Post_ a few
months ago, in which he told how an emergency track was laid across a
highway bridge and a test fast-freight put through on schedule. That feat
was but one of the many ordinary tasks that come in the lifetime of every
operating man.

Clearing a wreck may be a tedious business.

There is a deep sink on the parade-ground of the Military Academy at West
Point that is a monument to the nastiest railroad wreck from the point of
view of time, that the Eastern railroaders have ever known. Just under
that parade-ground the West Shore Railroad passes through a long tunnel.
On an October night more than twenty years ago, the Chicago & St. Louis
Express of that railroad was slowly poking through that bore, when a
portion of the roof of the tunnel collapsed. It buried itself between the
rear part of the baggage-car and the forward part of the express-car and
the train came to an abrupt stop.

Engineer William Morse saw in an instant the damage that had been done.
He cut loose from that penned baggage-car and made record speed up the
line to Cornwall, the nearest station. From there he a sent a wire
post-haste to the despatcher up at Kingston, then the headquarters of the
line.

"Train caught by collapse of West Point tunnel," that despatch read in
part. "Only engineer and fireman escaped."

They began to get their hospital train ready at Kingston, notified Newburg
to get all the doctors in sight and hurry them on a special to West Point.
The chief despatcher went through the worst quarter of an hour of his
life. He began to call Weehawken, the southern terminal of the line.
Weehawken wires were all busy, and he could not cut in there.

Weehawken wires were getting reports from Conductor Sam Brown of the
Chicago & St. Louis Express, who had come running out of the tunnel to the
West Point depot.

"Wire headquarters," he shouted to the agent, "that we've run into an
avalanche. Morse and his fireman are crushed under the tunnel roof."

And they began to get the wreckers busy down at Weehawken.

When the chief despatcher up at Kingston finally got Weehawken, they told
him about Sam Morse's fate. The truth of the thing came to him in an
instant. He laughed hysterically, and his assistant jumped up. The
despatcher's bad quarter of an hour was over. He jumped to his telephone,
caught the yardmaster with it.

"We won't need that hospital train," he said. "There isn't a soul hurt."

And there was not. But there remained the worst railroad block on record.
It was three months before they pulled the baggage-car out of that tunnel,
and then they had to use dynamite. After that it was found necessary to
line the entire bore with solid masonry. That was an accident that might
not have been so lucky on repetition.

       *       *       *       *       *

Enough of wrecks. They are not the only test when it comes to keeping the
line open. Sometimes a crippled telegraph service may be quite as
effective. Out on the Pennsylvania lines west of Pittsburgh a couple of
years ago a severe wind and sleet storm levelled more than 40 miles of
telegraph poles, in most cases dropping them across main-line tracks in
the dark. A few months later--the never-to-be-forgotten inauguration day
of President Taft--a similar storm did similar work on the lines leading
to Washington. Thousands of militiamen and excursionists never reached the
inauguration at all. In both storms the resources of a great railroad were
well tested.

An old-time Erie man remembers wire troubles of a different sort. It was
in his salad days, when he was serving as assistant superintendent over
the Meadville, in the western part of Pennsylvania. They had but one
telegraph wire for railroad purposes on the division then, and one night
it "grounded." Keys were silent, the road might as well have had no wire
at all.

The assistant superintendent started that evening with two linemen on a
hand-car to find that "ground." They went miles from Meadville, and every
test showed the wire working. Finally they came to a deserted little depot
at a cross-roads and the railroader lifting his lantern high against the
window verified his suspicions: the careless agent had gone home and left
his key open. The superintendent broke open the window, climbed in,
removed the telegraph set, placed it in his overcoat pocket and closed the
circuit. He knew that he would hear from the agent on the morrow. He did.
Word came by tedious train mail, a formal report on the road's yellow
stationery.

"Station at A---- burglarized last evening," that formal report read, "and
agent's telegraph set, best pants, and ten dollars taken."

       *       *       *       *       *

The real test of keeping the line open comes when winter descends upon the
land, when the heaviest freight traffic of the year comes, together with
those forces of nature that sweep off the summer joys of railroading. The
mighty battles of the western transcontinentals with the snows of the
Rockies have long been known, their miles of snow-sheds making safe
crawling bores for through trains under the snow-banks, and the avalanches
of the mountain-sides are as familiar to the tourist as the Great Salt
Lake or the wonders of the Yellowstone. Only a few months ago the
newspapers told the story of how a passenger train, stalled at the
entrance of a Washington tunnel, had been carried by an avalanche down a
great cliff. Every railroader, east and west, knows full well the hazard
of mountain line in the depths of a treacherous winter.

There is a snow-belt extending around the south edge of the Great Lakes
that annually gives the Eastern railroad men a good opportunity to
sympathize with the Westerners. Long years ago a little railroad reaching
north in this belt from the main line of the New York Central became
discouraged in the all but hopeless task of keeping its line open. It had
been a hard enough battle to find the rails of its main line from Rome to
Watertown through one blizzard crowding upon the heels of another. There
had been ten days when Watertown was entirely cut off from the world to
the south of it. But that little railroad owed some obligations to its
chief town, and it kept at its brave efforts although every night the
fresh wind blowing down from the Canadas across Lake Ontario filled the
long miles of railroad cuts, and nightly erased all trace of rails. But
there was a branch from Watertown to Cape Vincent run at a dead loss
throughout the entire winter, and in that hard winter the railroad gave up
the branch, and hired a liveryman to take the mails in his cutter over the
country drifts. It was one of the few instances on record of a railroad
giving up the fight.

After the railroad had been abandoned a fortnight a delegation of citizens
from Cape Vincent drove to Watertown and there confronted H. M. Britton,
the general manager of the line. They made their little speeches, and
those were pretty hot little speeches--hot enough to have melted away one
good-sized drift.

"When are you going to cart that snow off our line?" finally demanded the
spokesman of the Cape Vincent folk.

Britton looked at the delegation coolly, and lighted a fresh cigar.

"I'm going to let the man that put it there," he said slowly, "take it
away."

And he did. It was thirty-two days before a railroad engine entered Cape
Vincent from the time that the last one left it.

In recent years, that nasty stretch of railroad line has kept the
railroaders still busy. Within the decade it was blocked for six long
days, while a force of snow-fighters and a battery of ploughs forced their
way into the drifts. And while the superintendent up at Watertown grew
nervous, then desperate, there came the worst blow of all: the telegraph
wire no longer brought news from the front.

Afterwards that super knew the reason why. His train-master was at the
front with ploughs and the hungry, tired, straggling men. The train-master
was nervous, too, wearied explaining to his boss. He remembered Dewey at
Manila, and he cut the cable! He lost sight of the outer world for long
hours, for days, for nights, until that January evening when he brought
his battered snow-fighting force triumphant into Richland Junction.

When a big road whose rails rest through a snow belt finds the winter
clouds blackening, it puts on its fighting armor. Every man at
headquarters sticks by his desk. The superintendent will get bulletins
from each terminal and important yard every hour, perhaps oftener. Those
bulletins will give him exact information--the amount of motive-power
ready at each roundhouse, freight congestion, if any, amount and direction
of wind, cloud and snow conditions.

In other days the signal for an oncoming storm was followed by quick
orders from headquarters to pull off the snow-freights. Traffic was
quickly cut down to passenger and perishable-freight trains, and, if the
blizzard grew bad enough, the perishable-freights were run in upon the
sidings. The railroad concentrated its motive-power upon the passenger
trains and the ploughs. Nowadays they do it better. Not that the old
fellows of the last generation were anything less than prize railroaders,
for remember they did not have the locomotives in those days that even
side-line divisions possess in these.

So to-day the superintendent can growl at the first of his men who even
hints that a scheduled train of any class be sent upon a siding.

"We keep the traffic moving," said one of the biggest the other day. "We
keep the line open. A train every thirty minutes over our rails will do
more toward keeping them usable than a rotary going over them after a
night's inaction.

"So when she begins to blizz, we just fall back on our roundhouses, that's
all. We cut our local freights down to 1500 tons, then to 1200, 900, 600,
rather than send them into shelter. We tackle our through freights in a
like proportion and while we are cutting off cars, we are adding power.
Everything that goes out of this yard will be double-headed as long as
there is danger in the air. There will be two engines to a passenger-train
and ahead of each a rotary, with two or three locomotives to push her.
You see the value of reserve motive-power, don't you? Why we have
half-a-dozen extra engines trying to gather rust over there in the
roundhouse. They're worth their weight in gold in a pinch of this sort,
though when they're done with a week of snow fighting, they're fit
candidates for the shops."

A rotary plough has no powers of self-propulsion, but the mighty engine
within her heart, driving the shaft of her great cutting-wheel has the
power of three locomotives. That cutting-wheel approximates the width of a
single-track in diameter. It will bore into a solidly packed drift, twelve
or sixteen feet in height, suck in a great volume of snow, and then throw
it--as a fire engine throws water--through a nozzle 60 to 100 feet to the
right or left of the line. The nozzle is close to three feet in diameter,
and the stream that it throws will bury a small barn. The man who sits in
the lookout of the rotary controls the nozzle, changes it from side to
side so as to avoid buildings.

These rotaries are giants. Where the great flange or wing ploughs--the
ordinary snow-fighting artillery of a railroad--fail, they come into
service. Theirs is ever a mighty task to perform. We have seen a rotary
spend sixty minutes in going sixty feet through a heavy drift, a drift
three miles long and twenty deep. Snow can drift, and wet snow can pack,
pack until you almost begin to think of dynamite as a resource.

Three days of such snow-fighting would completely weary the ordinary man.
Up in the snow-belts, they are likely to get a hard storm every week from
December to March, and that atop of the heaviest traffic of the year. It
is the sort of fighting that marks the fine-grained timber of a man; that
sends him down to headquarters in some metropolitan city along the
seaboard, to fight the weightier battles of traffic and of operation,
which are unending within and between the mighty railroads of America.

Sometimes the battle to keep the line open is fought close to a busy
terminal. Here, before you, once again, is the division superintendent of
one of the great lines entering Jersey City. Let him tell you of the nasty
storm on Christmas night last, a storm that laid low all street
transportation in every city along the North Atlantic seaboard. He will
tell you how it was the first Christmas that he had spent with his family
in seven years; the first holiday in three. He lives in a little suburban
city within the 20-mile radius of New York City Hall, and in his bedroom a
telegraph sounder, connected with the division's main wire, clicks in the
early morning and late at night.

Over that wire on Christmas night last, the superintendent gave orders.
There was snow in the air at dusk when they finished their late afternoon
dinner; by eight o'clock he had ordered the flanges (ploughs) on all his
regular road engines. Along the entire line orders had gone to keep a
sharp lookout for trouble. The superintendent turned into bed at ten
o'clock, hoping for a clear winter's sky in the morning.

He turned into bed but not into sleep. He had cut out his telegraph wire
for the night but a telephone message from the agent down at the depot in
the suburban city made him sit up wide awake. The storm was gaining. They
were beginning to get trouble reports down at headquarters. The
superintendent turned out of bed and began dressing. He cut in on the
telegraph wire and began giving orders.

He caught his train-master at the neighboring town and told him to meet
him at 495, the last train into Jersey City that evening. He turned from
the telegraph to the telephone and ordered the local livery man to get up
to his house and take him down to the 11:42. He called the depot agent to
hold that 11:42 until he arrived.

[Illustration: "WINTER DAYS WHEN THE WIND-BLOWN SNOW FORMS MOUNTAINS UPON
THE TRACKS"]

[Illustration: "THE DESPATCHER MAY HAVE COME FROM SOME LONELY COUNTRY
STATION"]

[Illustration: "THE SUPERINTENDENT IS NOT ABOVE GETTING OUT AND BOSSING
THE WRECKING-GANG ONCE IN A GREAT WHILE"]

When that superintendent came puffing into his office in the Jersey City
terminal it was one o'clock of a blizzardy Sabbath morn. He dropped into a
chair beside his chief despatcher and took the entire situation in
hand. Things looked pretty bad from every point of view. From up in the
foothills came reports of discouraging nature, trains were losing time,
they were having added trouble every hour in handling switches and
cross-overs. At the terminal the switches were a most prolific source of
annoyance. The intricacy of the interlocking system was being bothered by
ice freezing about its exposed working parts.

The superintendent was perplexed, but he did not show it. He kept lighting
cigars and throwing them away half-smoked. And all the while he was
sending orders over his wire. If a narrow strand of steel, stretching for
miles through darkness and through storm could carry infectious courage,
that wire carried the superintendent's courage out to every far corner of
his division through those early hours.

"Keep at it," was the tenor of his message. "Keep everlastingly at it."

And between times he was planning how to help them to keep everlastingly
at it. Men were summoned to report Sunday morning at the shops--they might
need to make some quick repairs, and it is a matter of record on that
division that a locomotive has been torn apart, entirely overhauled and
placed in service again in twenty-four hours--others were ordered to stand
by important switches against breakdowns in the interlocking.

There were special problems in plenty to be considered, a new one arising
every hour. One of them will suffice to show the measure of that
superintendent's problem that night.

Up in a narrow pass between overhanging hills a much-delayed local, with a
light road-engine, was still struggling to get the Christmas celebrators
home. It was a hard proposition; and just a block back of the suburban
train was chafing the midnight express through to Chicago--one of the
road's best trains. The superintendent saw in an instant that his main
line stood in imminent danger of being blocked. He caught Middleport, the
station ahead of the struggling local, and ordered it side-tracked there
for a moment.

"I want to get that midnight with her big engine ahead from there," he
explained to his despatcher.

But the towerman at Middleport said that he could not move the
siding-switch there; it was packed in with ice and snow.

"Tell him to get a pick-axe and shovel and get in at it," said the
superintendent.

"He says that it's 20 deg. below up there; they've swiped his shovel, and he
hasn't anything but a broom," the despatcher returned.

"A broom! Tell him a broom's a God-send. He can sweep with the one end and
pick with the other."

Eight times that towerman tried there in the midst of the storm to open
that switch and eight times he reported failure. Eight times the
superintendent kept at him with his kind persistence, and the ninth time
they reported that the midnight express with the best type of motor power
on the division was ahead of the weak engine on the local.

And while the superintendent struggled at the far end of a telegraph wire
with that towerman, there were a dozen other Middleports, each with its
own different and equally difficult problem. Each required quick,
intelligent solution. He solved each. The line stayed open. The
superintendent stayed at his desk.

All that Sunday it snowed, and all that Sunday the superintendent was at
his desk. He did not know the passage of the hours; the clicking sounder
held his attention riveted. He worked all Sunday night and into Monday
morning. There were 200 suburban trains to be brought into the terminal on
Monday morning, and the commuter is a fussy soul about his train being on
time. The superintendent knew that, and he was ready. He had extra men at
the switches in the terminal yards, took particular pains to have snow
swept from the platforms of even the lowliest suburban station.

The trains came in on time that Monday morning, all save one. On that one
train the regular fireman had been snowbound at his home upon the
mountainside. They had to put on a green man to fire the engine--a
raw-boned lad just off a freight. He made slow work of it, and the train
was fourteen minutes late. That was the only exception to a clean record,
a record made possible by long hours of work.

"They ought to have been proud of that fight," you say to the big boss. He
grins at your ignorance.

"Proud?" he laughs. "They raised hell with me because we had 387 laid out
fourteen minutes."




CHAPTER XVII

THE G. P. A. AND HIS OFFICE

    HE HAS TO KEEP THE ROAD ADVERTISED--MUST BE AN AFTER-DINNER ORATOR,
    AND MANY-SIDED--HIS GENIALITY, URBANITY, COURTESY--EXCESSIVE RIVALRY
    FOR PASSENGER TRAFFIC--INCREASING LUXURY IN PULLMAN CARS--MANY PRINTED
    FORMS OF TICKETS, ETC.


We have already called the division superintendent the Prince in the realm
of railroad operation. But there is another, whom we see when we leave
operation and consider traffic--another who might also be called
Prince--Prince Charming. This prince of charm of the railroad is the
general passenger agent. To a large proportion of folk he is almost the
personification of the railroad itself. His signature, appearing upon each
of the railroad's tickets and time-tables, is multiplied a million times a
year. In his own self he appears many, many times as the road's
mouthpiece. His evening clothes must always be kept in press and
moth-balls, for his oratory is at all times close to the tap. His wit is
ready, his tongue a good arguer for his line. At dinners of Chambers of
Commerce and Boards of Trade, his urbanity is profound, his remarks to the
point; and the road gets the advertising.

For the general passenger agent is _per se_, an advertiser. There are two
affiliated and yet quite distinctive functions to his office. The older
function, the one for which it was really created when railroads were
young, is that of issuing tickets and selling them. The newer function,
and to-day the all-important function, is that of keeping the road before
the eyes of the travel-mad public--an advertising function. A few years
ago, a big Eastern road had to change general passenger agents because of
this very thing. The man who had held the job was in almost every way
absolutely efficient. He had been reared in the routine of his office; he
knew its vast details as well as any man might ever hope to know them. But
he was a detail man, and there he stopped. The road needed more of a
figurehead, a better advertiser. The late George H. Daniels was in many
respects the best passenger agent that American railroading has ever
known. He was the forerunner of the general passenger agent of to-day--a
well-known figure in the great State that his railroad served, being
interviewed by reporters--and lady reporters, too--on every conceivable
subject in the public eye; addressing dinners in metropolitan New York, or
in suburban Yonkers, or anywhere else in the State, with rare facility,
yet now and then adroitly bringing in reference to the "four-track trail"
by which he was employed.

Other roads took heed of Daniels. The general passenger agent became less
and less a man of office routine and of ticket detail, more and more of a
public figure. He called Mayors of important cities by their first names;
he kept close to the pulsing heart of the public press by friendly
intimacy with the reporters; spoke at two, three, four dinners a week. The
Prince Charming of the railroad is, indeed, a development.

But behind the smiles of this prince, behind the phraseology of words
spoken or written that glorify "the road," there is a serious aspect of
his life. He must capitalize that splendid urbanity, that jocose wit, into
ticket-sales. In the beginning he was created to sell tickets, and sell
tickets he must. On his ability to sell tickets, and not as a popular
public figure, will he be measured by the board of directors--that
delegation of grim-faced gentlemen, who place small market value on either
urbanity or jocosity.

So, while the general passenger agent presents his smiling face to the
outside world, he is a man of system, no mean executive there within the
inner. He must organize to sell his tickets. There is an inner
organization of no small moment in the passenger office of any sizable
railroad. In the first place, the area from which traffic is to be drawn
is divided into districts. General agents or assistant general passenger
agents (the title varies widely on the different railroads) are assigned
to each. This traffic area is far larger than the area covered by one
railroad system. It is generally nation-wide, while some of the biggest of
our railroads maintain ticket-offices in the large cities all the way
around the world. They are to-day fighting almost as sharply for American
traffic in Paris or in London as they fight in Clark Street, Chicago, or
in Broadway, New York.

For it is a fight and an endless fight, which the Prince Charming--he of
the urbane smiles--must wage. Despite the constant consolidating processes
of our railroads, there are few large territories that are the exclusive
field of any one road. The most of them must fight for their
business--particularly for their profitable long-distance business. The
fight divides itself between the freight and passenger traffic
departments. No wonder, then, that the general passenger agent must be a
many-sided man.

From his district offices, there scurries forth a corps of smooth-tongued,
quick-witted young men--the travelling passenger agents. These young men
are skirmishers. They are up and down the steel highways of the nation,
thirty days out of the month, skirmishing for business. Each carries in an
inner pocket a wad of annual passes--such as might make any statesman
green with envy. Those passes cover every steam line in the territory that
is assigned to him and are return courtesy for the neat little cards which
his road in turn issues to the traffic solicitors of other roads.

In other days these skirmishers carried forth business which sometimes
approached cut-throat tendencies. The weaker lines in hotly competitive
territory--lines which, running fewer high-grade trains and running them
at slower speed--which were naturally at a disadvantage, sought to obtain
at least their normal share of passenger traffic, by sharp work. After
that their stronger brethren often showed their religious belief in
fighting them by fire. Tickets were sold at less than advertised rates to
certain favored individuals; sometimes a few passes, adroitly placed, did
the business. In these days those sharp things are forbidden, and the
young man, soliciting railroad traffic, who breaks the rules of the game
runs the risk of worse than facing an angry boss, getting discharged;
perhaps he can see the doors of a Federal prison opening for him.

So the fellow who skirmishes for the weak road has a hard time of it in
these piping days. Passenger traffic, like kissing, seems to go by favor
nowadays; and how hard the travelling passenger agent works to curry that
favor! He drops off a local at some way-station, there is a smile and
perhaps a cigar for the country-boy who sells tickets there, for the
Interstate folk have not sent any one to prison yet for offering either a
smile or a cigar. The T. P. A. knows that the local agent cannot, under
the rules that govern him, recommend routes that connect with and extend
beyond the line which gives him employment. Still, sometime the country
agent may be approached by a man who demands that a connecting road be
suggested for him, and the T. P. A. can see that man, without even
shutting his eyes. If the country agent will only remember the nice T. P.
A. that the Transcontinental sent in there a month before, and the good
kind of cigars he dispenses, the Transcontinental may get a part of the
haul on a long green ticket. Perhaps the man will be taking his wife, and
there will be two of the long green tickets. Perhaps there will be a whole
party to be routed over the Transcontinental--the T. P. A. can imagine
almost anything as he swings overland in the dreary locals from
way-station to way-station.

Sometimes a wire from his chief quickly changes his schedule. The
Magnificent Knights of the Realm--or some other impressive order of that
sort--are to hold their annual convention at Oshkosh, and the T. P. A.
must hustle down to Bingtown to see that Transcontinental gets the haul of
the delegation that will go to Oshkosh from the bustling little community.
He scurries into Bingtown to locate the officers of the local lodge of the
M. K. O. R. there. On the train there may be a T. P. A. from some rival
system--they are all partners in misery. The Transcontinental man will
probably drop off the opposite side of the train at Bingtown from the
crowded depot platform--it's an old trick of the T. P. A.--and be tearing
over the pages of the Bingtown directory before that train is out of town
again. Once located, the officers of that lodge of M. K. O. R. must be
pleasantly instructed in the advantages of Transcontinental--the speed of
its trains, the safety of its operation, the convenience of its terminals,
the scenic splendors along the way, the excellence of its dining-car
service; all these things are spun with convincing eloquence by the
travelling passenger agent.

A few years ago, two travelling passenger agents, whose lines supplement
one another to make a through route across the continent, went down into
an Eastern manufacturing city to land business bound west to a national
convention of one of the biggest of the fraternal orders. There were other
passenger men heading toward that same territory, and the two men from the
connecting lines made an offensive and defensive alliance. When they
reached this town, they found that the chief officers of the local lodge
were two city detectives and a police justice. All three of the city
officers showed little enthusiasm about the coming convention. The
passenger men took off their coats--figuratively--and pitched in.

For three days, they ran up an expense account that must have all but
paralyzed the auditors of their companies, but they accomplished results.
After the first day of entertainment, the police justice said that there
would be an even dozen of them for the three-thousand-mile run, which was
going some. Most passenger men would have rested content on those laurels,
but this combination used that first day only to whet their appetites.
They started briskly out on the second, a little fagged, but still in
fighting trim, and by that night the two detectives united in promising
one or two filled Pullmans. The third day saw the two traffic solicitors
nearly dead, and the well-seasoned city officials just in fine trim. The
trim must have been fine, for that night they completed arrangements for
one of the biggest special train movements of that year: two hundred and
fifty enthusiastic brethren went three-quarters of the way across the
continent and back as a result of the work of these passenger men.

Once a travelling passenger agent went nearly too far in this
entertainment business. He got business, miles and miles and miles of it,
but he also got drinking far too heavily. One day, when he came into the
general offices very much the worse for entertaining, he bumped into no
less a man than the president of the road. That president was a strict old
soul. He had church connections, and he used to lecture his Sunday School
class on the evils of the liquor habit. He decided to make an example of
this young whelp of a passenger agent from off the road.

But just as the sentence was about to be pronounced, the general passenger
agent interfered. He went straight to the president and the wrath of an
honest man was in his eye.

"We don't intend to have drunken men working here," the president kept
saying. "It's the example--"

"If he drinks," said the G. P. A., "it's my fault, and I'm the man to let
go."

The president let his eyeglasses drop in astonishment.

"You?" he said.

"I'm guilty," said the G. P. A. "This man goes everywhere to get business
for us, and he gets it. He kneels with the preacher, he talks high art
with the Browning societies, and he gets drunk with the drinkers--all in
the name of this railroad system. Now we propose to kick him out, still in
the name of this railroad system."

The president saw the point, and together they took hold of the T. P. A.
and made him a decent, sober man. To-day he is one of the most efficient
officers of that very road, and he owes it all to that broad-minded G. P.
A.

Geniality, urbanity, courtesy are the major part of a travelling passenger
agent's equipment, as they are part of his chief's in these days, when the
rates have ceased to enter into the fight for traffic.

Rates?

The rates must be the same nowadays by all routes of the same class; and
so the T. P. A. _must_ bring out the excellence of his line, leaving none
behind because of a false sense of modesty. He is silent about other
roads, save as they may lead to and from the system that he represents.
You want to go to Kickapoo. You could go to Milltown by the
Transcontinental and get from there to Kickapoo most easily by the main
line of the St. Louis Southwestern, but the travelling passenger agent
frowns his first frown at the very suggestion. The St. Louis Southwestern
is the worst competitor that Transcontinental has for passenger traffic,
and the T. P. A. does not propose to send business over its rails. So he
ignores your suggestion.

"We have our own line into Kickapoo," he tells you--the old smile
returning. "You won't have to leave Transcontinental."

And such a line! It happens to be a branch of the worst jerkwater type. To
reach Kickapoo over Transcontinental you must go to Milltown and change
from the comfortable Limited to a less comfortable train, which takes you
to Quashalong Junction. There you find a seat on a local which jogs along
at twenty miles an hour for the greater part of the afternoon until you
get into Miller's Forks. When you reach Miller's Forks you almost abandon
hope. For the thirty-mile stretch from that cross-roads over into Kickapoo
is a grass-grown stretch of half-neglected track over which a combination
freight and passenger-train--adequately described on the time-card as
mixed--ambles once in twenty-four hours. By the time you have finished
that trip you will have arrived in Kickapoo without leaving the rails of
the Transcontinental, but you will also probably have registered a vow
never to travel on them again, if they can be avoided.

Right there is a traffic mistake. If the T. P. A. had been wise he would
have swallowed his hatred of St. Louis Southwestern and recommended that
you use it for that stretch from Milltown to Kickapoo. He let his zeal for
his road overrun his business judgment. A good many of them do. Only the
other day a man walked into a railroad station of a small city in the
Southern Tier of New York State and announced that he wanted to hurry
through to Binghamton.

"We have a train in five minutes, our 12:12," said the agent, all smiles.

The man hesitated. He wanted to do two or three errands in that small city
before he went on to Binghamton, and so he asked the leaving time of the
next train.

"Nothing until 6:18," the agent told him.

"That will be too late for me to get into Binghamton," the passenger said.
The agent did not reply, but turned his attention to other persons who
were waiting at the ticket-window. But the man from Binghamton was still
perplexed. An agent of the news company who ran the stand in that station,
came over and helped him out.

"The ---- (mentioning a rival and paralleling road) gets a train out of
here for Binghamton at 3:30," he explained.

The passenger thanked the news-agent, for his problem had been lightened
and started out for the other station. When he was gone, the
ticket-seller summoned the newsman and threatened to have him fired.

But there is a new order of things coming to pass even in this hot rivalry
for getting passenger traffic. Long ago, C. F. Daly, who is to-day
vice-president in charge of traffic for the New York Central lines, was in
charge of the city ticket-office of the Burlington, in Omaha. Those were
days when no loyal traffic-man was ever supposed even to breathe the name
of a competing road. But Daly held his loyalty firm, and still went
straight against that absurd rule. If a woman came into his office and,
after the way of some women travellers, finally decided that she wished to
travel over the rival Northwestern, he would not let her get out of his
office. He would give her a comfortable seat, and perhaps a magazine or
paper to read, and send one of his office-boys over to the Northwestern
office to buy a ticket for her. Sometimes before the office-boy could get
out of the place the woman would change her mind in favor of the
Burlington. If she did not, Daly did not worry. He knew that he was of the
new order of railroaders.

       *       *       *       *       *

Come back, for a final moment, to the travelling passenger agent. He may
be forgiven an over-zeal for the line which employs him, for that has been
his training from the beginning, and--which is far more to the point--he
is being measured by the results that he accomplishes. The road does not
pay him a salary and pay his heavy expense account (which the auditor
generally permits to contain various unvouchered items for entertainment)
without expecting results.

If he is a new man in the territory, he is measured against his
predecessor. Afterwards, he is measured month by month, against the
corresponding month of the preceding year. All tickets which were sold
from his territory, and in which his road shares, are credited to his
influence. It becomes a matter of cold calculations and of dollars and
cents. If this April does not show an increase over April of last year,
the T. P. A. must make a mighty good explanation to his chief. It will
have to be famine or pestilence or something nearly as bad to justify the
slump in ticket sales. An insinuation on his part that a reduction of the
service of his road was responsible for the slump would never be accepted
at headquarters.

[Illustration: THE NEW YORK CENTRAL RAILROAD IS BUILDING A NEW GRAND
CENTRAL STATION IN NEW YORK CITY, FOR ITSELF AND ITS TENANT, THE NEW YORK,
NEW HAVEN & HARTFORD RAILROAD]

[Illustration: THE CONCOURSE OF THE NEW GRAND CENTRAL STATION, NEW YORK,
WILL BE ONE OF THE LARGEST ROOMS IN THE WORLD]

[Illustration: SOUTH STATION, BOSTON, IS THE BUSIEST RAILROAD TERMINAL IN
THE WORLD]

[Illustration: THE TRAIN-SHED AND APPROACH TRACKS OF BROAD STREET STATION,
PHILADELPHIA, STILL ONE OF THE FINEST OF AMERICAN RAILROAD PASSENGER
TERMINALS]

So, all in all, the life of the travelling passenger agent is no sinecure.
It is easiest when he is in the home territory of his road, rather
pleasant when that road is non-competitive. But when he is out in
"foreign" territory, fighting for a road which is hardly more than a name
to the folk with whom he comes in contact, his difficulties increase;
when, if his road is one of the weaker fry, its trains slower and less
frequent than some of the other trunk-lines, his difficulties increase.
The differential-fares by which the slower competing roads are permitted
by their stronger brethren to charge a reduced rate between important
distant traffic points were adopted to help to equalize this difficulty.
But the differentials do not count, neither do the differential lines now
get their share of the through business. Last year fifty per cent of the
passengers between New York and Chicago went on the eighteen-hour train,
even though the regular full fare of $20 in each direction is increased by
an excess fare of $10, aside from the Pullman rates. Twenty-five per cent
more travelled on the limited trains, which makes an excess of $5, in
addition to Pullman rates, in each direction. It begins to look as if the
American public were willing to pay for added comfort and convenience.
Pullman operation has doubled within the past ten years. Pullman
chair-cars are operated to-day on hundreds of miles of branch line
railroads that would not have dreamed of such a luxury a decade ago.

In fact, we are moving toward first-class and second-class passenger
service by leaps and bounds. Less than twenty years ago the New York
Central established its Empire State Express between New York and
Buffalo, and, by means of the almost marvellous resources of its
advertising department, made it the most famous train in the world. Save
for a single parlor car or two, it has always been a day-coach train, no
excess fare being charged. Yet for many years (in recent years its
running-time has been slightly lengthened) it was the fastest regular
long-distance train in the world. Still, in the judgment of railroaders
to-day, another Empire State would be a mistake, even though the original
is, day in and day out probably one of the most popular and profitable
express trains in the world. But the judgment is different: the Lehigh
Valley, running the competing Black Diamond, between New York and Buffalo,
has already found it advisable to make its equipment all Pullman.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just as the travelling passenger agent forms the stock from which many of
the general passenger agents are finally formed, so does the country agent
aspire to the day when he will be given territory and sent out with his
gripsack, to sell transportation upon the road. Sometimes, though, as in
Daly's case, the road to traffic titles comes by way of the city
ticket-offices. These form an important function of the railroad's
passenger department. They are regulated carefully, through an
inter-railroad harmony, as expressed in the great national passenger
associations. We have already seen how they sell mileage-books and "scrip"
on their own account. For instance, a sort of tacit agreement specifies
how many ticket-offices a railroad may maintain in a given city.
Otherwise, the biggest and richest road might completely overshadow its
weaker neighbor in the number as well as in the magnificence of its
agencies. So an unwritten agreement, which is as strict in its way as the
law on cutting rates, states that this city may have so many offices for
any road, and that so many. It has become an exact rule.

The city ticket-offices, situated at advantageous corners in the various
busy centres of metropolitan towns, and towns having metropolitan
ambitions, save the average man a long trip, perhaps, to the station. They
will sell tickets, check baggage, answer innumerable questions. Answering
questions remains one of the big functions of the passenger-man.

Only recently, a sign was hung in a city ticket-office of one of the large
railroads in New York, which read:

"Remember that we are Here to Sell Tickets as well as Give Information."

That sign was a mistake. It was an affront to every person who entered
that ticket-office, and remember that every person who enters a
ticket-office is at least a potential passenger for the railroad that
operates it. It is only charitable to believe that the agent meant to say:
"Remember that we are here to give information as well as to sell
tickets," for the giving of information is a function of a passenger
ticket office. So important has this function become, that the railroads
have established desks in the largest of these city offices at which no
tickets are sold, but where questions are answered and railroad,
steamship, and hotel folders given out. "Public Service stations," the New
York Central has begun to call its city ticket-offices and, furthering
this idea of courtesy and affability, its general passenger agent has
opened a school for the training of its agents. They are taught to answer
questions quickly and accurately, and to be, above all things, courteous
to the persons who come before them and the potential travellers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just a final look before we leave this passenger department, at its
equipment. Its complications are large. Take this matter of tickets, for
instance. While the financial department of the road will receive the
money that comes in for their sales, and the auditing department takes
good care as to the accuracy of the agent's returns, the passenger
department has charge of printing and issuing the contract slips by which
it agrees to convey its passengers. There is a multiplicity of forms of
these, each bearing the signature of the general passenger agent.

On smaller roads, the number of forms of local tickets is greatly reduced
by writing or stamping the name of the destination on tickets. On a single
branch line, with 25 stations, just 600 different styles of printed
railroad tickets would be required otherwise; you can imagine the number
of styles required for an average system of 1,000 stations. Fortunately,
for the passenger department, the use of simplified forms of tickets,
where adroit cutting and tearing makes possible the use of a single ticket
form for an entire division, has reduced the big ticket-printing bills.
Only recently, a machine, on the order of a cash register, has been
invented, from which a ticket, accurately stamped and dated, with the
destination indelibly printed, can be delivered as demanded.

Still, with all these simplified forms of tickets, a big road will hardly
carry less than 5,000 standard forms. Then there will be anywhere from a
dozen to twenty special forms a week that will have to be printed--for
excursions, conventions, and special train movements of every sort. The
ticket-printing bill of a big road will easily exceed $40,000 a year. Its
folders will cost not less than $50,000, while the twelvemonths' bill for
newspaper advertising will more than exceed the combined figure of these
two.

All these details come under the jurisdiction of that urbane general
passenger agent. He supervises, in another department, the making and the
readjustment of rates--this last a seemingly endless task.

To make up rate-sheets, either in the freight or in the passenger
department, requires expert work. The fare between the same points on
competitive railroads must, in the present order of things, remain equal.
To cite an interesting instance: The A---- railroad long ago established
$6.00 as its passenger charge from N---- to S----. The B---- railroad,
although charging a higher rate per mile over its line, is obliged to meet
this rate of $6.00 in order to secure business from N---- to S----, even
though that makes many perplexing problems in its local rates. The
B----railroad mileage from N---- to S----, up its main line, is 288
miles--practically the same as that of its competitor. For the 146-mile
ride to G----, the first large way-station, it charges $4.50, for the
208-mile ride to M----, the next, $5.00. If a man were to go over its line
to S---- and stop off at G---- and M---- his fare from N---- to S----would
be $8.80. That is a typical case, and one that is repeated in every corner
of the country. Where a road comes into competitive territory its rates
must adjust themselves to those of its lowest-priced rival, otherwise it
could hardly hope for a fair share of the business. So the rates must
shade here and there; the rate-clerk must take good care to see that
wherever it is in any way possible, no combination of tickets can be
formed that will sell at less rate than a through ticket. When the
rate-sheet is completed and copies of it forwarded to the railroad
commission, it is, indeed, a sensitive organization.

But no sooner will the cumbersome rate-sheet be completed, before some
little road off in a distant corner of the country will send a printed
announcement of some slight change in its passenger charges. In an
instant, the whole mighty fabric of the rate-sheet must be torn apart and
reconstructed. If the St. Louis Southwestern, by reason of a single change
in the rates of the little Blissville, Bulgetown and Beyond (with which it
connects) is enabled to charge a few cents less than the rival
Transcontinental, its rate-sheet must be torn asunder and a new one
adopted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beyond the long desks where the rate-clerks keep at their tedious jobs of
constant readjustment of local and through rates, the passenger department
has located its ticket redemption bureau. It announces publicly its
willingness to redeem unused portions of its tickets, and the work of
figuring out the amount due on a ticket, sometimes half or three-quarters
used, requires a rate-clerk of ability and patience. The redemption clerk
holds a ticket up to the light for your inspection.

"They tried to put this over on me," he says as he shows a local ticket
which had been sent to him for redemption at full value. The pasteboard is
filled with small burned holes. "The breezy young man who forwarded this
exhibit to me claimed that he had used no portion of this ticket and then
apologized to me for its condition. His small boy, he said, had burned it
with Fourth-of-July punk.

"Punk? That was punk. The small boy did not do a thorough job. Every hole
burned there was burned to hide a conductor's punchmark. You can see the
edges of three of them; and those three punch marks show that the ticket
issued from B---- to T---- was used 300 miles from B---- to A---- and not
used from A---- to T----. When that young man threatened us with trouble
on that ticket deal, we threatened him with arrest. After that he shut
up."

So does the general passenger agent come in constant contact with the
great American public. His outside mail is probably the largest at
headquarters, and it contains letters of every sort, asking innumerable
questions, praising and damning his road with equal interest and force.
One letter will commend a courteous conductor, the next will find some
fault with the dining-car service. It is not so very long ago that a big
Eastern railroad sent out a general order that the raw oysters on its
dining-cars should be served affixed to their shells, because a woman from
Sioux City had written a positive assertion that the shells were being
used over and over again for canned oysters.

Some of the railroads have already begun to systematize this whole matter
of complaints. One New York City line which sells a large amount of
transportation in small packages every day (two million passengers is its
average in twenty-four hours) has a Harvard man at high salary just to
receive those letters and give diplomatic answer to each of them. Each
complaint is first acknowledged and then investigated; the person who made
the complaint is notified of the final action taken. If a matter of fare
is involved (the complicated transfer systems of New York make such
questions frequent), and the company is wrong, it cheerfully acknowledges
its fault and forwards car tickets as reimbursement. Many times when a
conductor or a motorman has forgotten his manners, he is sent to make a
personal apology to the aggrieved passenger, as a price of holding his
position. That street railway company has won many friends out of persons
who had complained to it, because of this method.

But here is the general passenger agent of a big steam road, who holds a
considerably different view of this very matter.

"We never get in writing on one of these complaints," he says. "We send a
man every time to make the matter right, and the man must be a diplomat.
He must understand human nature, and so well does he understand it, that
he makes the matter right in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred--turns an
enemy into a friend, a liability into an asset, makes a firm patron for
our road."

"Liabilities into assets!" That then is the work of the general passenger
agent and his remarkable department. "Liabilities into assets!" In these
days of cold judgments upon the managements of the big railroad
properties, such a man is worth his weight in gold to a big system. He
measures his worth in the assets that he brings to it.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE LUXURY OF MODERN RAILROAD TRAVEL

    SPECIAL TRAINS PROVIDED--PRIVATE CARS--SPECIALS FOR ACTORS, ACTRESSES,
    AND MUSICIANS--CRUDE COACHES ON EARLY RAILROADS--LUXURIOUS OLD-TIME
    SLEEPING-CARS--PULLMAN'S SLEEPERS MADE AT FIRST FROM OLD COACHES--HIS
    PIONEER--THE FIRST DINING-CARS--THE PRESENT-DAY DINING-CARS--DINNERS,
    TABLE D' HOTE AND A LA CARTE--CAFE-CARS--BUFFET-CARS--CARE FOR THE
    COMFORT OF WOMEN.


If a man stops you in Nassau Street, New York, in the late afternoon, and
you miss your favorite eighteen-hour train; if it is imperative that you
be in Chicago the next morning at ten o'clock, and (this a most important
"if") if you are willing to spend your money pretty freely, the railroad
will accomplish it for you. If you are well known, and your credit
accomplished with the railroad folks, it is highly probable that you will
find your special, ready to accomplish an over-night run of nearly 1,000
miles, standing waiting in the train-shed when you hurry to the station.
Even if your credit is not so established, the sight of several thousand
dollars in greenbacks will accomplish the trick for you. The train will be
ready in any event almost as soon as you.

If you are planning a novel outing, you may ring for a railroad
representative and he will bring to your house or to your office tickets
on any train and to any part of the world, or he will be prepared to
arrange a special train for a night's run or for a three months' swing
around the country. Your train may be of any length you desire and are
willing to pay for. You can hire a car and it will be handled either as
regular express trains or with special engines. You pay the bills and you
have your choice.

A run in a private car is the acme of luxury to the average man. These are
used for a variety of purposes in these comfort-loving days, and the sight
of one or more of them attached to the rear of a heavy train has ceased to
excite comment. The average luxury-loving millionaire has one--possibly
two--of these expensive toys attached to an entourage that embraces
ocean-going yachts, complete stables, and dozens of motor-cars of every
description. If he can claim some sort of responsible connection with a
large railroad system, he is likely to have his car hauled free from one
ocean to the other; and the millionaire likes these little perquisites. He
is not so far removed, after all, from the man who huddles in the corner
of the smoking-car and secretly hopes and prays that the conductor will
forget to collect his ticket.

To appreciate the number and variety of these cars take a look at the
passenger sidings at any of the large Florida beach hotels in midwinter.
Better still, run down to Princeton or up to New Haven at any large
football game. You will see parked there at such a time from sixty to one
hundred of these palatial cars, some of them private property, others
chartered for the occasion.

Even in the middle of the night this branch of luxurious railroad traffic
is still at your disposal. An emergency call summons you out of town for a
distance, and the night train schedules do not meet your needs. The night
train-master will meet your needs. He will act as the agent of the
railroad and arrange, while you hold the telephone receiver in your
fingers, the entire schedule for you. Trains will be held, connections
made; the telegraph is capable of arranging the details. If you demand
speed, the railroad will give it to you--if you are willing to pay the
price and give a release against damage to your precious bones. Increased
speed means increased risk to your railroader.

Maude Adams uses a special many Saturday nights to carry her down to her
Long Island farm at Ronkonkoma. Her place is far out of the regular
suburban district, and there are no regular trains that will enable her to
reach it after the evening performance. For ordinary service she is quite
content with a private car--the mania has its deathly grip on a good many
of our prosperous theatrical folk.

Lillian Russell used to live down in the Rockaway section of Long Island,
hardly outside of the New York City limits. When she played in the
metropolis a special train carried her six nights in the week out to her
suburban home. There were plenty of regular trains--theatre trains, in the
colloquialism of the railroaders--but the prima donna would have none of
them. She had acquired the private-car mania while she was on the road. So
her special stood night after night in the big railroad terminal in Long
Island City--a neat little acquisition for a prosperous lady. The nightly
ride cost her fifty dollars to the railroad company; and the generous tips
she lavished, from the engine-cab back, doubled that sum.

Hardly a prosperous star, these days, but demands in the contract a
fully-equipped car for the long, hard days on the road. The car has some
value for advertising; its greatest value, however, lies in the maximum
degree of comfort that it affords, as compared with the constant changing
from one country hotel to another. Sometimes the biggest of these folk let
the mania seize so tightly upon them that they go to excess.

Paderewski, on his first trip to America, made a flying journey up to
Poughkeepsie to bewilder the fair Vassarites. He shuddered at the thought
of what he was pleased to call the provinces. He had the popular European
notion of American small towns and their hostelries. Poughkeepsie has very
comfortable hotels, but Paderewski would not risk them. He would not sleep
in them, neither would he eat in them. A private car solved the first of
these problems; the second was met by bringing two cooks and a waiter up
from the New York hotel in which he was staying. He was paid $1,000 for
the concert, and his travelling expenses cost him more than half that sum,
which was a pretty good ratio.

Still, stage folk are not in the habit of counting either ratios or their
pennies, and the average prima donna would make some sacrifices at the
savings-bank in order to indulge herself in this extravagant and purely
American mania. The grand-opera folk indulge themselves to the limit,
invariably at the expense of the beneficent _impresario_. But even this
long-suffering publicist does not feel the expense so bitterly. Special
trains for opera companies make splendid advertising, but they do not cost
one cent more than regular transportation. For the railroads, acting under
the guidance of an all-wise and all-powerful commission down at
Washington, will issue, without extra cost, from sixty to one hundred
tickets for the man who orders a special train at two dollars a mile. In
this way the wise theatrical manager keeps his little flock segregated
while _en route_, and reaps gratuitously the prestige and the advertising
that ensue.

Even the cheaper companies have their own cars--gaudy affairs most of
them, their battered sides still reflecting the brilliancy of some gifted
sign-painter. You must remember seeing them in the long ago, back there at
the home-town, stuck in the long siding next the coal-shed, and surrounded
by admiring youth, getting its first faint taint of the mania. The
All-Star Imperial Minstrel Troupes, and the Uncle Tom shows, are the
graveyards of the private cars. Proud equipages that in their days have
housed real magnates and have been the theatres of what we like
mysteriously to call "big deals," once supplanted, drop quickly down the
scale of elegance. In their last days they come to the hard use of some
itinerant band of entertainers, to squeak their rusty joints and worn
frames as if in protest against a fly-by-night existence over jerkwater
railroad branches.

Come back again to those cars you see at the college football games, the
travelling private palaces that migrate up to Newport, the White
Mountains, and the Adirondacks in summer; that flock south in the winter
like the birds. The astonishing thing is that few of these cars are owned
by the persons who are using them. Of course, as we have already said, if
a man can lay claim to some railroad connection, he can get his car hauled
free over other lines and, perhaps, get it built for him; but more of that
in a moment. There are probably not more than 40 private cars in the land
that are owned by persons not connected with the railroads. This is an
astonishingly low figure, considering the number of these craft that are
constantly drifting about our 200,000 miles of track. Some society folk
have cars as a part of their daily life, but the storage costs are apt to
cause a man to think twice before he buys one. Mr. Rockefeller and Mr.
Morgan have managed to worry along very comfortably without contracting
the disease. As a rule, both of these men are willing to accept the
comfort of any of the fast limited trains that form part of the luxurious
equipment of the American railroad.

But the fact remains that the average citizen, when he is felled by an
intermittent attack of the private-car mania, is content to hire one of
the very comfortable equipages that the Pullman Company keeps ready at big
terminals at various points across the country. The arrangements for these
are exclusive of the price paid to the railroad companies for their haul.
A complete private car, equipped with staterooms, baths, private
dining-room, observation parlor and the like, costs seventy-five dollars a
day. For two or more days this rate drops to fifty dollars a day. An extra
charge is made for food; but the railroad will deliver the car without
charge at the point from which you wish to begin your journey.

[Illustration: CONNECTING DRAWING ROOM AND STATE ROOM]

[Illustration: "A MAN MAY HAVE AS FINE A BED IN A SLEEPING CAR AS IN THE
BEST HOTEL IN ALL THE LAND"]

[Illustration: "YOU MAY HAVE THE MANICURE UPON THE MODERN TRAIN"]

[Illustration: "THE DINING-CAR IS A SOCIABLE SORT OF PLACE"]

For the haul of these cars the railroads will charge you according to
their regularly filed tariffs, unless you have that valued connection with
some common carrier. This varies from a minimum of from eighteen to
twenty-five first-class fares. In other words, let us assume that the
minimum in a particular case is twenty fares. That particular railroad
will carry up to twenty persons in the car at its regular fares; if there
are more than twenty aboard it will get a full fare ticket from each over
the minimum allowance. That is all a matter established as the special
train rates are established, not by whim, but by law.

Strange as it may seem, the private car mania, in chronic form, seems to
attack some railroad presidents most violently. For reasons which show
that railroading is a business filled with fine tact and diplomacy, these
cars are called business cars. It is also remarkable that for size and
elegance they vary in almost inverse ratio to the size and importance of
the railroad that owns them. Big railroads, like the Pennsylvania, the
Harriman lines, and the New York Central rather pride themselves upon the
simplicity of their official cars. Some of these are plain almost to the
point of shabbiness. Contrasted with these are the private cars belonging
to the head of a great interurban electric line in Southern California, a
car so wondrously beautiful that it was carried all the way to Washington,
in the Spring of 1905, so that a thousand foreign railroad managers there
gathered in convention, might see the attainments of American
car-builders. Another Western railroad, a small steam line this time,
boasts a president's car with a dining service that cost $2,500. A little
Mississippi lumbering road spent $40,000 in providing a private car for
its operating head.

The big Eastern roads know about all of these cars. Their heads get
frequent invitations to take a run over the K., Y. & Z., or some other
enterprising jerkwater road that runs from the back waters to the bad
lands. Of course, they never take the trip, but they invariably see the
next step in the developments. It comes in the form of requests for a
"pass for haul of car and party" from Chicago to New York and return.
Time was when the New York Central and the Pennsylvania were laid low
under the avalanche of requests of this sort. Some of their slower trains
were laden down with long strings of these deadhead caravans, and on one
memorable occasion a whole section was made up of the prominent private
cars of decidedly unprominent railroad officers.

Since the introduction of the eighteen-hour trains between these two most
important cities of the country this burden has been lessened. These
fastest trains will absolutely not haul any private cars at any price; it
is a rule that would not be abrogated for the President of the United
States. So the railroaders of the West, from the big men like Stubbs and
Kruttschnitt of the Union Pacific down to the small fry, leave their cars
in the roomy terminal yards at Chicago and come to New York most of the
time on one or the other of the eighteen-hour trains. About the only time
their cars come East nowadays is when they are bringing their families to
the seashore for the Summer.

So much for the private cars. They are perhaps one of the most typical
things of the America of to-day, as we have seen. Actresses and
millionaires use them for their private comfort and convenience; tourist
parties roam forth in them; delegations proceed in them to conventions;
civic bodies find them agreeable aids to junketing. Sometimes a party of
sportsmen will charter a car and hie themselves off to a secluded spot
where the railroad roams through the forest, find an idle siding and use
their car for a camp for a week, a fortnight, or even a month. Cities and
States use private cars as travelling museums to exploit their charms,
some of them are travelling chapels for religious propagandism. The uses
of the private car are nearly as manifold as those of the railroad itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the beginning things were different. Our great grand-daddies drew no
class lines when they travelled, but were content to find shelter from
the storm, or upon pleasant days from the showers of sparks scattered by
the locomotive. But when the railroad began to stretch itself and to be a
thing of reaches, it was found advisable to run trains at night in order
to make quick communication between distant points. Travelling at night in
the crude coaches of the early railroads was an abominable thing, and
before the forties the old Cumberland Valley Railroad was operating some
crude sort of sleeping-cars. Within another decade there was much
experimenting of this sort. Old-timers on the Erie still remember the
sleeping-cars that were built on that road soon after the close of the
Civil War. There were six of them, more like summer cottages than cars,
for the Erie was then of 6-foot gauge, and its cars were 12 feet wide. The
berths were made up in crude form by hanging curtains from iron rods and
bringing the bedding from a storage closet at the end of the car. There
was a little less privacy in them than in the modern Pullman, but in the
eyes of Jim Fisk, whose love of elegant luxury was first responsible for
their construction, they were nothing less than palaces. One of them was
named after Fisk and carried his portrait in an immense decorative
medallion on each of its sides. The other cars were the _Jay
Gould_--without decorative medallions--the _Morning Star_, the _Evening
Star_, the _Queen City_, and the _Crescent City_. All you have to do
to-day, to set an old Erie man's tongue wagging, is to speak of one of
these cars. They were triumphs, and away back in that day and generation
they cost $60,000 each.

But while many men were fussing in futile ways to build comfortable cars
for long journeys, a man named George M. Pullman, over in Western New
York, was packing his goods and making ready to go to Chicago and build
his world-famed car-works there. Pullman's cars survived the others. He
bought in the Woodruff Company and some lesser concerns, and for many
years his only important rival was the Wagner Palace Car Company, a
Vanderbilt property. In course of time this too was absorbed, and the
Pullman Company had virtual control of the luxurious part of American
traffic, few railroads caring to run their own parlor and sleeping-car
service.

There are economic and sensible reasons for this in many cases. Some
railroads have great through passenger traffic, demanding Pullman
equipment in summer and little or none in winter. Others reverse this need
and so whole trains of sleeping and parlor cars go flocking north and
south and then north again with the private cars. Special occasions, like
great conventions, call for extra Pullmans by hundreds; and because of the
enormous capital that must be tied up, a single supplying company is best
able to handle the problem. Still, big roads like the New Haven, the
Milwaukee, and the Great Northern have been most successful in building
and operating their own sleeping and parlor-car service. A great road like
the Pennsylvania might do the same thing, and because of that possibility
the Pennsylvania was one of the first roads in the country to make the
Pullman Company pay it for the privilege of hauling its cars. As a rule,
the railroad pays the Pullman Company for hauling by the mile--a very few
cents a mile--and the Pullman Company also takes the entire receipts to
itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

The body of Abraham Lincoln was carried to its final resting-place in the
first real Pullman car that was ever built. President Lincoln rode in one
of Pullman's earliest attempts at railroad luxury, some sleeping-cars that
he had remodelled from day coaches on the Chicago & Alton Railroad and
that were put in service between Chicago and St. Louis in 1860. These cars
were almost as crude as the barbaric predecessors that had induced Pullman
to tackle the problem of railroad comfort approaching the standards of
boat comfort.

Leonard Seibert, a veteran employee of the Chicago & Alton, told a few
years ago of Mr. Pullman's first attempts to remodel the old coaches of
that road into sleeping-cars. Said he:

"In 1858 Mr. Pullman came to Bloomington and engaged me to do the work of
remodelling the Chicago & Alton coaches into the first Pullman
sleeping-cars. The contract was that Mr. Pullman should make all necessary
changes inside of the cars. After looking over the entire passenger car
equipment of the road, which at that time constituted about a dozen cars,
we selected Coaches Nos. 9 and 19. They were 44 feet long, had flat roofs
like box cars, single sash windows, of which there were fourteen on a
side, the glass in each sash being only a little over one foot square. The
roof was only a trifle over six feet from the floor of the car. Into this
car we got ten sleeping-car sections, besides a linen locker and two
washrooms--one at each end.

"The wood used in the interior finish was cherry. Mr. Pullman was anxious
to get hickory, to stand the hard usage which it was supposed the cars
would receive. I worked part of the Summer of 1858, employing an assistant
or two, and the cars went into service in the Fall of 1858. There were no
blue prints or plans made for the remodelling of these first two
sleeping-cars, and Mr. Pullman and I worked out the details and
measurements as we came to them. The two cars cost Mr. Pullman not more
than $2,000, or $1,000 each. They were upholstered in plush, lighted by
oil lamps, heated with box stoves, and mounted on four-wheel trucks with
iron wheels. The berth rate was fifty cents a night. There was no porter
in those days; the brakeman made up the beds."

Pullman built his first real sleeping-car in 1864. It was called the
_Pioneer_ and he further designated it by the letter "A," not dreaming
that there would ever be enough Pullman cars to exhaust the letters of the
alphabet. The _Pioneer_ was built in a Chicago & Alton car shop, and it
cost the almost fabulous, in those times, sum of $18,000. That was
extravagant car-building in a year when the best of railroad coaches could
be built at a cost not exceeding $4,500 each. But the _Pioneer_ was
blazing a new path in luxury. From without, it was radiant in paints and
varnishes, in gay stripings and letterings; it was a giant compared with
its fellows, for it was a foot wider and two and a half feet higher than
any car ever built before. It had the hinged berths that are to-day the
distinctive feature of the American sleeping car, and the porter and the
passengers no longer had to drag the bedding from closets at the far end
of the car.

The _Pioneer_ was not only wider and higher than other passenger cars, it
was also wider and higher than the clearances of station platforms and
overhead bridges. But when the country was reduced to the deepest distress
because of the death of President Lincoln, the fame of Pullman's _Pioneer_
was already widespread, and it was suggested that the fine new car should
be the funeral coach of the martyred president. This involved cutting
wider clearances all the way from Washington by the way of Philadelphia,
New York, and Albany to Springfield, Ill.; and gangs of men worked night
and day making the needed changes. Pullman knew that the increased
convenience of an attractive car built upon proper proportions would
justify these changes in the long run, and it is significant that the
height and width of the Pullman cars to-day are those of the _Pioneer_;
the changes have been made in the length. Not long after that car had
carried President Lincoln to his grave, General Grant started on a trip
west, and the Michigan Central Railroad anxious to carry him over its
lines from Detroit to Chicago, widened its clearances for the same
celebrated car. After that there were several paths open for the big car,
and work was begun upon its fellows. It went into regular service on
the Chicago & Alton Railroad; and the Pullman Palace Car Company was
formed in 1867. The alphabet soon ran out, and the company to-day operates
between four and five thousand cars in regular service. There is a popular
tradition, several times denied, to the effect that Pullman for many years
gave his daughters $100 each for the names of the cars, and that that
formed the source of their pin money.

[Illustration: AN INTERIOR VIEW OF ONE OF THE EARLIEST PULLMAN
SLEEPING-CARS]

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF A STANDARD SLEEPING-CAR OF TO-DAY]

While the dimensions of the car were largely set, improvements in its
construction have gone steadily forward, as has been told in an earlier
chapter. The interior of these luxurious modern cars has not been
neglected. From the beginning they have been elaborate in rare woods and
splendid textile fittings. The advancing era of American good taste has
done much toward softening the over-elaboration of car interiors--the sort
of sleeping car that George Ade used to call "the chambermaid's dream of
heaven." The newest cars present the quiet elegance and good taste of a
modern residence. Nothing that may be added in wealth of material or of
comfort is omitted, but the foolish draperies and carvings that once made
the American car the laughing-stock of Europeans have already gone their
way.

To make for luxury all manner of devices have been added to these cars.
The superintendent sometimes hears complaints from a traveller that the
sharp curves on some mountain division have spilled the water on his
bath-tub; and the switching-crews at the big terminals know that
turntables are kept busy turning the big observation platform cars so that
they will "set right," and the big piazza-like platform will rest squarely
at the rear of the train. For those persons who wish to pay for the luxury
there are staterooms, and the best of these staterooms have the baths and
big comfortable brass beds. After many years of unsatisfactory experiment
the electric light has come into its own upon the railroad train; and
even upon unpretentious trains the night traveller no longer has to
wrestle with the difficulties of dressing or undressing in an absolutely
dark berth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once the problem of housing folk at night had been met and solved, another
rose. If travellers might sleep upon a train, why might they not eat
there, too? The American eating-houses had met with a degree of fame.
There are old fellows who will still tell you of the glories of the
dining-rooms at Springfield, at Poughkeepsie, at Hornellsville, and at
Altoona. But the eating-house scheme had its great disadvantages. For one
thing, it caused a delay in the progress of through fast trains to halt
them three times a day while the passengers piled out of the cars and went
across to some lunch-counter or dining-room to ruin their digestions in
the twenty minutes allotted for each meal. For another thing, the process
of clambering in and out of the comfortable train in all sorts of weather
was unpopular. The well-established and equally well-famed eating-houses
along the trunk-line railroads were doomed from the time that the Pioneer
won its first success.

No more should a train tie up at meal-time than a steamboat should tie up
at her wharf for a similar purpose. The first dining-cars were called
hotel-cars; and the first of these, the _President_, was placed in
operation by the Pullman company on the Great Western Railway--now the
Grand Trunk--of Canada, in 1867. The hotel-car was nothing more or less
than a sleeping-car with a kitchen built in at one end and facilities for
serving meals at tables placed at the berths. It was well enough in its
way, but travellers demanded something better, something more hygienic
than eating meals in a sleeping place.

Pullman went hard at his problem, and in another year he had evolved the
first real dining-car, the _Delmonico_, which went into regular service on
the Chicago & Alton Railway. The _Delmonico_ was a pretty complete sort
of a restaurant on wheels, and not far different from the dining-car of
to-day.

To-day there are 750 successors to the old _Delmonico_ in daily service on
the railroads of the United States. A small regiment of men earn their
livelihood upon them; some genius, handy with a lead pencil, has estimated
that these serve some 60,000 meals--breakfast, lunch, and dinner--every
day. The amount of food and drink consumed is a matter that is left to the
statistician.

The average full-sized dining-car seats 40 persons, but that does not
represent the business it does. Unless the car can be completely filled
two or more times at each meal, it is not considered a profitable run. The
European method of reserving seats at "first table" or "second table" has
never obtained in the United States, and the wise man on a popular train
sacrifices his dignity and hurries toward the dining-car at the first
intimation that the meal is ready.

To take care of the hungry folk a dining-car crew of nine men is kept
busy. The car is in absolute charge of a conductor or steward, who is held
sharply accountable by the dining-car superintendent of the road for the
conduct of his men and of his car. He signs a receipt for the car
equipment before starting on his run out over the line, and he must see to
it that none of that equipment, not a single napkin or spoon out of all
his stock, is missing at its end. He is held in as strict account for the
appearance and behavior of his men. The waiters must be neatly dressed,
must have clean linen; the conductor himself must be something of a Beau
Brummel, carrying a certain polite smile toward each one of the road's
patrons, no matter how disagreeable or cranky he or she may be. For all of
these things and many others--maintaining a sharp guard over the car's
miniature wine-cellars, adding "specials" to the bill-of-fare for a given
day, acting as a cashier for the service--he receives a princely salary,
varying from $75 to $110 a month.

His crew, as far as the passengers see it, consists of five men, almost
always negroes. Back in the tiny kitchen is the chef, with two assistants,
preparing the food. The kitchen is tiny. It is less than five feet wide
and fifteen feet long, and the three men who work within it must have a
place for everything in it, including themselves. Obviously there is no
room for the waiters, and these receive their supplies through a small
wicket window.

If the kitchen is tiny, it is also marvellously complete. An ice-box fits
upon and takes half the space of the wide vestibule platform; the range
has the compact dimensions of a yacht's range; sinks, pots, and kettles
fit into inconceivably small spaces. Yet in these tiny cubbyholes one
hundred, ofttimes many more dinners, of seven or eight courses each, are
carefully prepared, with a skill in the cooking that is a marvel to
restaurateurs.

The _table d'hote_ dinner--the famous "dollar dinner"--of the American
railroad has almost disappeared. The constant increase in foodstuffs is
most largely responsible for this. The Pullman Company long ago gave up
this particular feature of passenger luxury, save in a few isolated cases.
It had ceased to be a particularly profitable business, this serving of
fine meals for a dollar each; and so the railroads themselves took it up
and prepared to make it a cost business for the advertising value to them.
Each railroad plumed itself upon its dining-car service--some of them
still do--and each was willing to lose a little money, perhaps, to induce
travel to come its way because of the superior meals it served upon its
trains. But as the price of food-stuffs continued steadily to rise, the
advertising feature of these meals began to be more and more expensive,
and the dollar dinner quickly disappeared. A high priced _a-la-carte_
service took its place, and the railroads sought to establish their
commissary upon a money-making basis.

The attempt has not been very successful. For the lifting of the
dining-car prices and the attempt to reduce running expenses has, on
some roads in particular, hurt the reputation of these "restaurants on
wheels," and so in due season hurt their patronage; brought their patrons
from folk who went out of their way to eat on dining-cars to folk who eat
there only because of dire necessity. And these last still have found
prices high and the result is to be eventually a return to former methods
in part--slower trains stopping again for meals at important stations, the
faster trains returning to the _table d'hote_. Beginnings have been made
along that line recently. The dollar dinner may never return to some
roads--although it remains a joy and a delight to travellers upon the New
Haven system--but the "regular dinner" at least, capable of quick service
in a crowded car, bids fair to have a renaissance.

While the problem of dining-car economy, and profit even, remains a
problem, the idea is nevertheless being steadily extended all the while to
branches and to trains that could not support full-sized dining-cars. To
meet these needs smaller cars--generally called _cafe_-cars--in which the
dining-compartment is much reduced in size, have been built and operated.
In these two cooks, two waiters and a steward form the working force and
the fixed charges of the outfit are correspondingly reduced. They are
further reduced in the operation of the so-called broiler-coach, which is
nothing more or less than a day-car with a kitchen built in, the entire
service being performed by one or two cooks and a like number of waiters.
Some sleeping-cars and some parlor cars still have kitchens where a single
accomplished negro may act as both cook and waiter, and these cars are
designated commonly as buffet sleepers or buffet parlor cars.

The dining-car department of the railroad will probably have more to do
than supervise the operation of these various sorts of equipment.
Restaurants and lunch-rooms at terminals and stations along the line may
fall under its direct supervision, and it will probably also conduct the
cuisine of the private cars of the railroad's officers.

The dining-car department has direct charge of all the men employed on
cars and in the lunch-rooms; it sees to it that the railroad's culinary
equipment is fully maintained; it buys food and drink, linen, silver,
china, kitchen supplies of every sort. The routing of the cars is
carefully planned to secure the most economical use of them. Few trains
running from New York to Chicago will carry a single diner throughout the
entire trip. These trains will use two, sometimes three cars during a
single-way trip between the cities. A single car will generally make the
daylight run with the train, to be dropped at night to continue its course
west again at daylight upon some other train needing meal service. The
first train will pick up a fresh diner in the morning to carry into
Chicago. In this way, a diner may take a week or more to make the round
trip from New York to Chicago. Obviously, her commissary must meet all
needs along the way. Staple supplies, liquors, dry groceries are all
placed aboard the car at the terminals. Fresh meats and vegetables are
picked up along the route. This town has an especial reputation for its
chickens; this for its grapes; this other for its celery. The dining-car
department knows all these, and it selects under the rare opportunity of a
housewife who has a market nearly a thousand miles long within which to do
her marketing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just as the glorious comfort of the American river steamboat of the
fifties was responsible for the plans for eating and sleeping aboard the
railroad trains, so it was responsible for the introduction of a finer
luxury in railroad travel, until to-day, when the resources of the general
passenger agent are taxed to discover some new ingenious joy to add to the
pleasure of going by this particular line. The full development of the
protected vestibule platform and the opportunity it afforded of easy
intercourse between the coaches of a train led to many new devices to make
the long cross-country trip of the traveller more than ever a thing of
joy. First came the buffet-car, with all the conveniences of a man's club;
and the car-builders have shown remarkable ingenuity in imitating the
mission-like grillroom interiors, despite the many limitations placed upon
them. No club was complete without a barber-shop, and soon every
fast-rushing limited of any consequence had a dusky servitor whose
sharp-bladed razor was warranted not to cut even when the train struck a
sharp curve at fifty miles an hour. Stationery, books, and magazines
became features of the buffet-car. After that there came a stenographer,
whose services were free to the patrons of the train.

Most of these things were for the comfort of men, who form the majority of
patrons of the railroad. But a considerable portion of femininity travels,
and it sent in a complaint that its comfort was being neglected. The
general passenger agents gave quick ear. The men's buffet, with its
comfortable adjuncts of smoke and drink was at the forward end of the
train, the women were considered in the big, comfortable observation cars
at the rear. They were given more stationery, more magazines, even a
caseful of books, running from the severe standard works to the gayest and
lightest of modern fiction. Ladies' maids were installed upon the trains,
and the girl running from New York up to Albany could have her nails
manicured while upon the train.

These are all details, but each goes to make the comfort of the traveller
upon the American railroad train. Such comfort is not equalled in any
other country in the world. From the moment he steps from his cab, the
American traveller passing through the magnificence of superb
waiting-rooms enters palatial trains, superior to the private trains of
royalty upon the other side of the ocean. A corps of well-trained
_attaches_ look to his comfort and his ease, every moment that he is upon
the train, whether his ride be of an hour's duration or a four-days' run
across the continent. Other railroaders whom he does not see, engine
crews, changing each few hours upon his run, signalmen in the towers along
the route, telegraphers, despatchers, train walkers, car inspectors help
in their small but important ways to make his trip one of comfort and of
safety. The entire organization of the railroad lends itself to that very
purpose.

The railroad does not stop at the mere exercise of its great function as a
carrier; it does not even stop with the exercise of its every ingenuity
toward safety in its transportation; it goes a little further and gives to
the man or woman who rides upon its rails, a degree of luxurious comfort
equal to if not even greater than that man or woman can receive at any
other place.




CHAPTER XIX

GETTING THE CITY OUT INTO THE COUNTRY

    COMMUTERS' TRAINS IN MANY TOWNS--RAPID INCREASE IN THE VOLUME OF
    SUBURBAN TRAVEL--ELECTRIFICATION OF THE LINES--LONG ISLAND RAILROAD
    ALMOST EXCLUSIVELY SUBURBAN--VARIED DISTANCES OF SUBURBAN HOMES FROM
    THE CITIES--CLUB-CARS FOR COMMUTERS--STATEROOMS IN THE SUBURBAN
    CARS--SPECIAL TRANSFER COMMUTERS.


When the Commuter slams his desk shut at the close of a busy day, he is
fully aware that he is a superior being. Other mortals condemned to hard
labor in the city may squeeze within the ill-ventilated confines of
trolley-car, elevated or subway train, may find their way to stuffy
apartments, which, if their fronts were to be suddenly removed, would look
for all the world like shoe-boxes stuck tier upon tier in a shop. The
Commuter thrusts out his chest. Not for him. His is a different life. He
even feels justified in thinking that his is the only life. There is
nothing narrow about the Commuter; the open breath of the country has
tended to widen him.

He finds his way to the showy railroad terminal, down the crowded
concourse with a human stream of other Commuters to the 5:37. That train
is part of his regular calendar of life. It has been such ever since he
took flight to the country, a dozen years ago. If the 5:37 should ever be
stricken from the time-card the Commuter would feel as if the light had
been extinguished. Once, when some meddler violently assumed to change it
into a 5:31, the Commuter was one of a committee who visited a terrified
general passenger agent and had the course of time set right again. There
is only one other train which must approach the 5:37 in regularity; that
is the 7:52, on which the Commuter slinks sorrowfully into the dirty town
each morning. Other trains may be jumped about on the time-card, the
Commuter is oblivious of their fate. But let his 7:52 be ten minutes late
into the big terminal three mornings in succession, and the Commuter
begins to write letters to the papers and to the officers of the railroad.

Once aboard the 5:37 the Commuter trails his way into the smoker. Jim, the
brakeman, who is the source of all trustworthy information about the
railroad, and who can even foreshadow the resignation of the president,
has stored away the table and the cards. They are produced for the daily
consideration of a dime and a game that runs week in and week out is ready
to begin. Smith, of the Standard Oil crowd, drops into his seat; Higgins,
the lawyer, into his; the others are quickly filled; packages--foodstuffs
from the cheaper city markets and hurried purchases made at noon from
handy shops--go into the racks, and the Commuter is oblivious until, as if
by instinct, a familiar red barn goes flying backwards. The game is off
again until to-morrow morning; he is sorting his own packages out of the
rack. The train halts for a single nervous moment, and he is on the
platform. The cars roll past him; the party are at a three-handed game
now.

The Commuter finds his way up a steep road to his home on the hillside,
his very own home. It looks as sweet, set in there among the bushes and
the trees, as it did the day he bought it; and that day it looked to him
as Paradise. When night comes, there comes a peace and quiet, a peculiar
country coolness in the air. The city is steaming from the hot day, and
through the night the pavements and the roofs still emit heat. The
Commuter has forgotten the city. He sleeps as he slept as a boy on a farm,
where a city was but a hazy dream in his mind. When he awakes he is
refreshed, invigorated. The country has repaid him for the trouble that he
has taken to reach it. He goes into town again on that blessed 7:52,
twice as good a workingman as the man who has the next desk to his, the
poor chap who had to sit on the apartment steps until after midnight in
order to get even a miserable degree of comfort.

That is why the city goes out into the country.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Commuter is apt to settle his thoughts upon himself, to forget that he
is but an infinitely small part of a mighty home-going army that nightly
calls all the passenger resources of the railroad into play. There are
more than 100,000 of him alone in the metropolitan district around New
York. The busy Long Island Railroad takes a host of him nightly off to the
garden spots of that wonderful land from which it takes its name; the
Central Railroad reaches off into the lowlands, and the Erie and the
Lackawanna into the highlands of New Jersey; the New York Central and the
New Haven tap the picturesque shores of the Hudson and the Sound.

Boston repeats New York in this human tide that ebbs and flows daily
through her gates. From both her North and South stations mighty armies of
Commuters come and go until one wonders sometimes if any one really lives
in Boston itself. There are more than 60,000 of this army at the Hub. In
Philadelphia, the Pennsylvania and the Reading handle from their terminals
an army of equal size each night; another finds its way from the smoky,
dirty heart of Pittsburgh out into the attractive towns that perch the
hills in her vicinage.

Middle West cities, even those of good size, differ from Eastern in the
fact that they are rarely hampered in their growth by natural conditions.
In big towns like Cleveland and Detroit, for instance, the natural and the
artificial electric transit facilities are so good as to bring the
commutation business to a minimum. Not so with Chicago. The Illinois
Central from the south, the Northwestern and the St. Paul from the north,
serve rapidly growing suburban areas that will compare with some of the
best in the East. Then, after the Commuters in the East are safely home,
another army is finding its way across the bay, and off to the north and
the south of San Francisco. These are the big centres of commuting as the
American railroads know it. In smaller measure it exists at every large
city in the country. The familiar monthly card ticket, representing its
cousin, that holy-of-holies--the annual pass, is issued from good-sized
villages and pretentious country seats. The Commuter is already a national
institution.

       *       *       *       *       *

Conductor John M. Dorsey, who used to run an Erie train out of Jersey City
in the long ago, once showed us what he thought was the first example of a
pure commutation business. It was a list issued to Erie conductors in
1860, and containing the names of 162 persons who travelled daily in and
out of New York by the way of Jersey City. These folk lived in Passaic
(they called it Boiling Springs in those days), and in Paterson, and all
the way up the line to Goshen and Middletown. When a man wanted to commute
then he paid a monthly fee to the railroad and they printed his name on
this official list. Such a scheme would be obviously out of the question
these days.

When New York refused to stop growing, and more and more people began
making the daily trip in and out of Jersey City, the handy method of the
commutation ticket was substituted for the cumbersome printed list, and
the Erie and all the other railroads began to cater to the Commuter with
special short-distance trains. Committees came to railroad officers from
various small towns and aided them in fixing a definite basis of fare,
which remains to-day at something between six-tenths and three-quarters of
a cent a mile. In later years, the real estate business became the science
that it is to-day, and the suburban business began to move forward in long
leaps.

[Illustration: "EVEN IN WINTER THERE IS A HOMELY, HOMEY AIR ABOUT THE
COMMUTER'S STATION"]

[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO THE GREAT FOUR-TRACK OPEN CUT WHICH THE ERIE
HAS BUILT FOR THE COMMUTER'S COMFORT AT JERSEY CITY]

[Illustration: A MODEL WAY-STATION ON THE LINES OF THE BOSTON & ALBANY
RAILROAD]

[Illustration: THE YARDMASTER'S OFFICE--IN AN ABANDONED SWITCH-TOWER]

"It seems incredible," said a railroad officer just the other day "but
this suburban problem is all but overwhelming for us. It does not increase
our revenues at so wonderful a pace, but it does increase in volume from
20 to 25 per cent a year; and think how that keeps us hustling, making
facilities for it. There is not a railroad entering New York to-day that
could not dismiss its passenger terminal problems to-morrow, if it were
not for the Commuter. There is not a railroad coming into New York that
could not handle all its through business in a train-house of from four to
five tracks. Instead of that, what do we see? The Erie with five through
trains requiring a terminal of sixteen tracks; the Lackawanna, with the
same number of through trains, a new terminal of even greater size, the
overwhelming passenger terminal problem being repeated at every corner of
New York, just because of the tremendous annual increase in the suburban
passenger business."

The great reconstruction of the Grand Central terminal facilities in the
heart of New York, and the erection of a new station there, as described
in detail in an earlier chapter, is directly due to the Commuter. When the
new station with its double tier of tracks is finished, there will be
thirty-two platform tracks in the double train-house, an amount far in
excess of that needed for even the great volume of through business that
goes and comes over the lines of the New York Central and the New York,
New Haven, & Hartford, the two systems that use it. And the new station,
involving a tremendous expenditure of money, of brains, and of energy, is
not all.

The New Haven has electrified its four-track main line all the way out to
Stamford, Conn., in order that it may in some measure cope with this
increasing flow of suburban traffic over its already crowded main-line
tracks. It has wrestled with the unanticipated problems of electrification
because it has been facing a situation that left it no time to experiment
elsewhere and approach its main-line problem with deliberation. More and
more folk were settling in the suburban towns in its territory each month,
and deliberation was quite out of their calculations. The Commuter is
rarely deliberate.

So the New Haven, with all the resources of a giant carrier, has found
each new measure of relief swallowed up in the new flood and has turned to
more radical methods. It has been apparent to its managers for some time
past that even the new Grand Central, with its wonderful capacity, would
some day prove inadequate, for the reason that the New York Central--the
actual owners of the property--was also trying to cope with its own great
increase in suburban traffic, and would eventually require more and more
space for its own Commuters. With such a possibility in the future--not a
distant future with the suburban business doubling in volume every four or
five years--the New Haven sought to develop an unimportant freight branch
leading from New Rochelle down to the Harlem River. It has almost finished
the work of transforming this into a great electric carrier, six tracks in
width. Railroad engineers show no hesitancy in saying that eight-track
trunks will be needed out of New York in every direction within a dozen
years. The Harlem River branch of the New Haven, once it is provided with
a suitable terminal, will become a great artery of suburban traffic. It
will give trunk capacity to make possible the development of a great new
area lying just inland from the Sound, and yet within from 40 to 50 miles
of New York City.

A third project in which New Haven capital is known to be interested is
that of a high-speed, four-track suburban electric railroad also to reach
into the Sound territory as far as Port Chester, with an important branch,
diverging to White Plains, the shire-town of Westchester County. This line
will feed into the main line of the New York subway, and so avoid cramping
the terminals still further. The terminals are the crux of the whole
great problem of handling suburban traffic.

The New York Central has also electrified its tracks for a zone of some 40
to 50 miles from its terminal. This work was started primarily by a
distressing accident in its old smoke-filled tunnel, that ran the length
of Park Avenue under Manhattan Island, but New York Central officers are
to-day free to admit that the electrification was close at hand in any
event. The operation of a terminal so closely planned as the new Grand
Central, with its train-sheds and yards built in layers, would have been a
physical impossibility with smoky, dirty, steam locomotives.

The New York Central has been, as we shall see in greater detail in the
chapter on the coming of electricity, the first of the standard steam
railroads entering New York to provide suburban trains of multiple unit
motor-cars, similar to those used in rapid transit subway and elevated
trains. The great advantage of these trains over trains handled by either
steam or electric locomotives is an operating advantage. The train may be
so quickly turned in terminals as to bring the terminal problem down an
appreciable percentage, and so to give a greater hauling capacity to
main-line tracks. The Central, wedged in tightly by the high hills that
lie to the north of the metropolis, has had to pin its faith to plans that
utilize the present tracks to the uttermost capacity.

The railroads crossing New Jersey and reaching the west bank of the Hudson
have not been behind the routes that enter from the north in providing for
the suburban business. The recently opened McAdoo Tunnel, linking the
Jersey terminals of the Erie, the Lackawanna, and the Pennsylvania with
both the downtown and the uptown theatre, hotel, and shopping district of
Manhattan, has been a great stimulus to the suburban development across
the Hudson.

The Lackawanna has done its part by boring a second tunnel under the
Bergen Hill, parallel to its original tube, giving a four-track entrance
to its fine new terminal, and relieving the congestion of suburban traffic
night and morning at its worst point, the neck of the bottle. The Erie has
already completed, as a part of its extensive terminal reconstruction-work
in Jersey City, a similar project, a four-track open cut through the stout
backbone of Bergen Hill. The open cut replaces completely the so-called
Bergen Tunnel, which has already become a matter of history.

We have already told of the Pennsylvania terminal in New York. The
Pennsylvania built the new station for through travel rather than for the
Commuter, at the outset. But the Pennsylvania, with the exception of a
brisk traffic out to Newark, is hardly a big suburban road, in the New
York metropolitan district. The great volume of Commuters who will flock
to its station nightly, will be bound east, not west. The Long Island
Railroad, its property stretching less than one hundred miles east from
New York, through what is one of the most attractive residential
localities in the world, is almost exclusively a suburban system. Long
Island is not a manufacturing or agricultural territory of consequence.
There is not a town of 10,000 souls east of the New York City line.
Freight traffic and through traffic, aside from some summer excursion
business, is conspicuous by its absence. Yet the Long Island operates
through its local station at Jamaica (an even dozen miles distant from the
new Pennsylvania terminal), more than 800 trains a day. That, of itself,
represents a volume of traffic, and speaks wonders for the desirability of
the broad and sandy island as an escape from the city to the country.

"We have from 18,000 to 20,000 Commuters all the year round," said a Long
Island official, just the other day; "and this branch of our traffic--our
chief stronghold--is increasing at the rate of 25 per cent annually. We
are trying to increase our facilities to keep pace with the demand made
upon them; that is why we became tenants in the new Pennsylvania Station.
For our share of that work we will pay $65,000,000--some money. But we cut
twenty minutes off every Commuter's trip in each direction every day, and
that is worth while in a day when every road is reaching out for new
business. We do not consider that $65,000,000 to save a man forty minutes
a day is money ill-spent; but I am frank in saying that we also expect our
25 per cent annual increase to remain for several years in order to make
good such an expenditure."

Part of that $65,000,000 is yet to be spent on the electrification of the
Long Island suburban lines, within a zone of from 30 to 40 miles out from
the new terminal. The through trains running to the far eastern points of
the island will run direct from the Pennsylvania Station as far as Jamaica
by electricity, heavy motors hauling the standard equipment. At Jamaica,
in a million-dollar transfer station that is part of the big improvement
scheme, the steam locomotives will take up their part of the work.
Electricity for long stretches of standard railroad where the traffic is
comparatively slight is still an economic impossibility.

So much for New York, where the lead has been taken in providing suburban
service on the railroads operated by electricity. The problem is being
approached in Boston--who, like her larger sister, refuses to stay "put."
South Station and North Station, on opposite sides of the city, are of the
largest size, but they are beginning to feel the strain of traffic, which
forges ahead every year. The Metropolitan Improvements Commission of that
city has already made a careful study of the problem. It plans to relieve
the situation by constructing a four-track tunnel from one station to the
other, and operating both of them--as far as suburban traffic is
concerned--as through stations rather than as terminals. In a word, Boston
& Maine local trains entering North Station would not end their runs
there as at present, but would continue through the proposed tunnel to a
second stop at South Station, where they would become outgoing New York,
New Haven, & Hartford suburban locals. The same operation would be
continued in a reverse direction. A more complicated adaptation of the
scheme from a construction standpoint would still use the connecting
tunnel and provide car-yards for the Boston & Maine trains outside of
South Station, with a similar yard for the New Haven locals just beyond
North Station. The main gain made by such a plan is the elimination of
switching--the same point at which the New York Central and the Long
Island have aimed in making their suburban trains of multiple units. With
the hauling in and out of empty trains to and from a terminal eliminated,
the capacity may be almost doubled. Another gain is the convenience to
passengers who under such a plan would be enabled to reach either side of
the city without changing cars, and a recourse to street transit
facilities. The Boston plan, of course, embodies a change from steam to
electricity as a motive power. It is one of the most comprehensive plans
yet submitted for the solving of the great problem of getting the city out
into the country.

In Philadelphia, they are feeling the pressure of the Commuter at both the
big downtown terminals, the Pennsylvania and the Reading, while the first
of these roads is already planning to electrify its suburban lines and to
give Broad Street Station exclusively to this class of traffic.
Philadelphia is such a wide-spreading and sprawling town that the trolley
lines have afforded little real rapid transit to the outlying sections,
while relief by subways and elevated lines has so far been meagre. As a
result, a great burden of interurban as well as suburban traffic has been
laid upon the railroads there, and they have been compelled repeatedly to
enlarge both track and station facilities.

The Illinois Central, carrying a heavy traffic south of Chicago, has
prepared plans for the electrification of 325 miles of its suburban lines,
and radical enlargement of terminal facilities. The Illinois Central has
been very progressive in its methods of handling the Commuter traffic. Its
side-door cars, permitting quick loading and unloading, have long marked a
progressive step in equipment. The Chicago and Northwestern, in its
splendid new white marble terminal on the West Side of Chicago, will give
its chief use toward the upbuilding of a suburban traffic, already strong
and well developed.

The Commuter covers a varied zone. His station may be less than a mile
from the terminal and his home still within the crowded confines of the
town, or he may be the last passenger of the train as it reaches the far
end of its suburban run. The average commutation district runs about 30
miles out, with by far the heavier part of the traffic in the first 15
miles of this. Most of the railroads that cluster in at New York, however,
issue commutation tickets out over a 70 or 80-mile radius. One man for
many years held the record as a long-distance Commuter. He preferred to
sleep nights within the quiet confines of Philadelphia and his 90-mile
trip to New York, with a 90-mile return at the end of every day became a
mere incident in his life. His record was beaten this year. A man arrives
and departs from the Grand Central Station five days out of the week, who
travels 320 miles on every one of them. He catches a fast train from his
home town at seven o'clock in the morning, breakfasts on the train, and is
at his New York office at 11:30 o'clock. He leaves his desk at 3:30
o'clock, dines on the returning express, and is home by eight. His daily
trip, with all incidental expenses, aggregates more than $12.00; so he
deserves to rank as the Champion Commuter.

If few Commuters can approach the mileage record of this man there are
many who do not hesitate at extra expenditures for their comfort. About
all of the best suburban expresses that come into New York carry some sort
of club or private-parlor cars. The club car is one of the most elaborate
developments of the entire Commuter idea. It is a comfortable coach, which
is rented to a group of responsible men coming either from a single point
or a chain of contiguous points. The railroad charges from $250 to $300 a
month for the use of this car in addition to the commutation fares, and
the "club" arranges dues to cover this cost and the cost of such
attendants and supplies as it may elect to place on its roving house. It
must guarantee a certain number of riders to the railroad every trip, so
the membership of the "club" is kept high enough to allow for a reasonable
percentage failing to use the car daily. Some railroads go at the thing in
another way. They supply the car and its attendants and make a monthly
extra charge, in addition to commutation. The car is entirely filled with
regular riders, so it is in a sense a club car.

Such a car has been running for some years on one of the suburban trains
of the Harlem road. It is unique in some ways, and in these an outgrowth
of early customs. The first of these began years ago, when the Oldest
Commuter began his habit of riding to and from town in the baggage-car.
There is something about a baggage-car that fascinates the ordinary man
traveller. Perhaps it is the solemn rule of the railroad that attempts to
prevent him from riding in this form of conveyance. At any rate in this
particular case the Oldest Commuter gradually picks up an acquaintance
with the baggageman; and, presuming upon that acquaintance gradually
appropriates the baggageman's old chair for his own use. The baggageman
was good-natured, for the Oldest Commuter was a generous fellow and never
forgot Christmas-times and the like. He got another old chair from
somewhere, and all was well until the Next Oldest Commuter absorbed the
baggageman's chair, and the baggageman had to bring a third into his car.
The Next to the Next Oldest Commuter swallowed that up, and after a time
there was a row of comfy old-fashioned chairs all around the edge of the
dingy baggage-car, and an atmosphere of smoke and good stories that warmed
the cockles of the baggageman's heart. You could have raised $100,000,000
for an enterprise from the crowd of men who rode regularly in that little
car, but the baggageman neither knew nor cared about that. He simply knew
that there was a good crowd of Commuters who rode with him daily.

After another little time the railroad took cognizance of that particular
baggage-car. The general passenger agent, who was a fellow both wise and
solemn, talked with the general manager, and one day that little club of
Commuters had a surprise. Instead of their baggage-car, the down train
hauled a bright new car all fitted with fancy things--curtains and carpets
and big stuffed chairs, and the baggageman was rigged out in a fine new
uniform as an attendant. The general passenger agent fondly imagined that
he had made the one really happy stroke of his existence.

He had not. His was a colossal mistake. The "club" called for its
baggage-car back again. Its members were men who were surfeited with
mahoganies and impressive stuffed chairs and thick carpets. They demanded
their old dingy car, with its four little windows, its rough board floor
and the wooden armchairs. They got it back. The big, new, showy car was
sent off upon another route; and the baggage-car--itself a club to which
many a soul enviously craves for admission--makes its run six times a week
on one of the fastest expresses on the line.

Groups of men have staterooms regularly reserved for them in the parlor
cars of the finest suburban expresses, and there is never a word said of
what goes on behind those closed doors. There come whispers of "antes"
that are as high as a church steeple, but the railroad does not concern
itself with the morals of its passengers to the point of breaking in upon
closed doors. The porters may know, but the porters are traditionally wise
and more than traditionally close-mouthed. One big New York editor hired
a stateroom for his daily ride in and out to his suburban home. His
secretary and his stenographer are closeted in it with him, and on the
50-minute ride twice each day he dictates the daily editorial utterances
that delight a great congregation of his readers.

Special trains for Commuters are no particular novelty. Almost every big
system has some daily suburban trains that are on its working time-tables
and not upon the schedules that are given out to the public. A group of
aristocratic Commuters living north of Boston in the district around
Manchester have their private special into the North Station every summer
morning. It is an all-parlor-car train, the most luxurious suburban on the
line, yet not one Commuter in a thousand knows a thing about it. A similar
train arrives and departs daily at the South Station. Others are in
service out of New York. You can buy both exclusiveness and elegance from
the railroad.

The Commuter is not more concerned about that 5:37 than is the railroad.
It makes train and Commuter both its concern, because that is the way it
seeks to build up its profitable suburban traffic.

"We are getting more of the city out into the country each year," says a
big suburban passenger agent; "and with the wide increase in the use of
electricity as a motive power for the standard railroads this business is
bound for increases that we can hardly foresee to-day. I think that I am
quite safe in predicting that another decade will see the belt of from 30
to 50 miles outside of New York terminals as thickly settled as the belt
from 10 to 30 miles is to-day settled. The railroaders have done their
part by expensive increase in terminal and track facilities; they have
helped the real-estate men in their broad advertising of the possibilities
of suburban life: the harvest is all that now remains to be reaped."




CHAPTER XX

FREIGHT TRAFFIC

    INCOME FROM FREIGHT TRAFFIC GREATER THAN FROM PASSENGER--COMPETITION
    IN FREIGHT RATES--AFTERWARDS A STANDARD RATE-SHEET--RATE-WARS
    VIRTUALLY ENDED BY THE INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION CLASSIFICATION
    OF FREIGHT INTO GROUPS--DIFFERENTIAL FREIGHT RATES--DEMURRAGE FOR
    DELAY IN EMPTYING CARS--COAL TRAFFIC--MODERN METHODS OF HANDLING LARD
    AND OTHER FREIGHT.


In England they speak of it as "goods" and regard it as almost a minor
factor in the conduct of their railways. In the United States it is
freight-traffic, and is the thing from which the railroads derive by far
the greater part of their revenues. In England it is represented by
delicious little trails of "goods-wagons," four-wheelers of from five to
eight or nine or ten tons' capacity, the "goods" often left exposed to the
rigors of winter, save for possibly a tarpaulin covering; in the United
States, fast-freights and slow-freights crowd upon one another's heels;
the sixty-ton steel car has long since come into its own.

If you do not realize the importance of the freight traffic, you should
talk to those shrewd old souls in Wall Street who measure a carrier, not
by its ticket sales, but by that fascinating thing that they call
"tonnage"; you should go out upon the line and ask any operating man how
his territory is holding up in traffic. He will answer you in tons, in
freight-cars moved within a single twenty-four hours. If you are still
unconvinced, go to the passenger man you know best. He will tell you that
while he is pleading vainly with the biggest boss of all for some new
Limited, eight or ten passenger cars all told, some shouldering
freight-hustler has been welcomed into the inner sanctum and comes out
with an O. K. for 800 or 1,000 box-cars or gondolas in his fist, a dozen
new freight-pulling locomotives in addition, for good measure. There is
your answer.

The passenger terminals may have all the magnificence in which we have
seen them, but the freight terminals are the real core of a railroad's
entrance into any town. For when you come to even the roughest figures,
you find that in extreme cases--such as the New Haven's, where there is a
congested territory, closely filled with thickly populated cities and
towns--the passenger receipts will hardly do more than approach a balance
with those from freight. In some cases the passenger earnings are hardly
25 per cent of the railroad's entire income; and cases like these are more
common than the New Haven, holding New England as its own principality.
Wonder not that Wall Street looks askance at any new line until it can
prove itself able to develop "train-load"--freight traffic, measured in
thousands of tons.

Your general freight agent, who is a sort of official cousin to the
general passenger agent, is the man who studies tonnage. More likely in
these days of the exaltation of titles, he is the freight traffic-manager,
with a group of subordinates around him and a traffic-skirmishing corps
out on his own road and the other connecting roads, who are making friends
with shippers, just as the young travelling passenger agents round up the
theatrical managers and the brethren from the lodges. The travelling
freight agents hang around sidings and breathe affection for manufacturers
and wholesalers; they welcome to their very arms the business
traffic-managers, who are really glorified shipping clerks for great big
concerns. And while they cultivate the road in detail, their big boss
studies the territory in general. The trade papers and the market
bulletins litter his desk; he can tell you strength or weakness in this
thing or that--why cotton is off, and wheat rushing upwards. Moreover, the
freight traffic-manager, himself, is not above friendships. He will pack
his own evening suit into a bag and go 500 miles willingly to give
shippers his own private explanation of the national rate complication.

Did we say rate complication? That seems almost too simple a name for the
subtle and intricate structure which tells us how much we must pay the
railroad for the transportation of our goods. When we were visiting the
passenger office, we saw something of the work of the rate-clerks there.
We learned that, in fact, the railroad creates various classes of rates in
the first place; local or round-trip tickets, at, say, three cents a mile
for occasional travellers; mileage books for more constant travellers,
which bring a wholesale rate of two cents a mile; a third and lowest rate
of something less than a cent for that urbane soul, the Commuter. For
excursions, where many, many persons were to be moved at one time, perhaps
upon a single train, other very low passenger rates were created. We also
saw how the railroad, trying to base its passenger charges on the number
of miles covered, is compelled to make delicate adjustments on through
charges between competitive points.

We speak of these things now, because in a way the passenger tariff
resembles the freight, and yet compares with it as a child's primer with a
Greek lexicon. In an earlier day the thing was very much worse. In fact,
at the very beginning there was no real scientific way in which the
railroad might regulate its charges, and on some of the very earliest of
steel highways the rates were made just half what they had been on the
toll-roads, and without regard to the cost of transportation. Thus the
competitive feature had its way early in the formulation of a rate-sheet;
and there is evidence to assert that in those early days when the railroad
had an opportunity it made its tariff as high as it thought folk would
stand without a riot, and thus the now historic phrase "what the traffic
will bear" came into coinage. As a matter of fact, in those days when
scientific bookkeeping was unknown the railroad had no way of accurately
knowing just how much it cost to operate, and how that cost should be
fairly apportioned between the different classes of its traffic.

The thing went from bad to worse as the great land carriers developed.
Each made its rate-sheet according to its own sweet will; it classified
freight precisely as it pleased, and the man down in New Orleans sending
goods to New Hampshire was puzzled as to the charges that would accrue
upon his shipment when it finally reached the northeastern corner of the
country. The competitive feature grew to be the strongest in the making of
the rate-sheet, unless it was the subtle influence of the railroad's
favored friends, an influence that showed its ugly head oftener in the
practice of rebating than anywhere else. The fierce competition that ruled
between the railroads in the seventies has never been approached at
another time. Ruinous rate-war after rate-war followed upon each other's
heels, and little roads kept dropping into bankruptcy, one after another.
There was a time in 1877 when a man might ship a carload of live-stock
free from Chicago to Pittsburgh, from Chicago away through to New York for
five dollars; and there is hardly a more expensive commodity for the
railroad to handle, than cattle. To appreciate what these wars meant to
the carriers, bear in mind that the week after this particular one was
settled it cost the old rate--$110 a car--to ship cattle from Chicago to
New York.

Out of such guerilla warfare came the one possible thing--cooperation. The
railroads were not then big enough to consolidate their properties, J. P.
Morgan had not then developed his fine art of welding them together. So
they did the next best thing and made secret contracts--pooling. That is,
they established a standard rate-sheet in their mutual territories and
bound themselves to abide by it for a certain length of time. They figured
out their relative percentages of business at the beginning of any
agreement, and took from the combined earnings of the pool, the same
percentages of receipts. The bitter outcry that went up across the land
against pooling still echoes. That practice with another now also
prohibited--rebating--really gave birth to governmental regulation of
railroads.

[Illustration: "THE INSIDE OF ANY FREIGHT-HOUSE IS A BUSY PLACE"]

[Illustration: ST. JOHN'S PARK, THE GREAT FREIGHT-HOUSE OF THE NEW YORK
CENTRAL RAILROAD IN DOWN-TOWN NEW YORK]

[Illustration: THE GREAT ORE-DOCKS OF THE WEST SHORE RAILROAD AT BUFFALO]

In 1887 the Interstate Commerce Commission was born, and ruinous
rate-warring practically came to an end. The Commission required the
railroads to file with it copies of all their rate-sheets, both freight
and passenger, and ordered that in almost every case thirty days' notice
should be given of any change in the tariff. This meant that the old
practice of tearing a rate-sheet apart in a single night, so as to jab
vitally into the heart of a competitor, was at an end. And a dignified
rate-war, with the opponents giving thirty days' advance notice of their
strategic intentions, is almost an impossibility.

Now come to the present. The freight-rate system of to-day is intricate,
fearfully intricate, but it is a system. It begins by classifying all
manner of freight into groups, for it must be apparent to any one that to
the railroad the cost of handling different commodities must vary
tremendously. Several factors make for such variation: the value of the
shipment and the degree of risk for its safe transportation that the
railroad must assume; its bulk, its weight, and the cost of handling at
terminals, as well as the cost of any special equipment that may be
necessary to carry it over the rails. No one would expect a railroad to
haul a box-car filled with several hundred thousand dollars' worth of silk
for the same price that it hauled the same car filled with coke. So the
railroad has grouped its freight into six general classes--varying from
the most difficult and expensive to handle down to the easiest and the
cheapest; and the rates for these six different classes also run in a
rough proportion.

Some 8,000 articles, ranging from arsenic to step-ladders and from
Christmas trees to locomotives, are grouped into these classes. Into them
has gone about everything that the railroad will handle, save coal and a
few other specialties which are rated as specific commodities and have
special published rates. So a man shipping feather dusters from South
Brooklyn to Ogdensburg, N. Y., would find that they came under Class 1,
and that he would have to pay 44 cents a hundred pounds for the haul. If
he was shipping steel beams between the same points he would find them
under Class 4 and he would find the tariff at 23 cents a hundred. These
six classes have been made standard throughout the country by all the
railroads in cooperation. The roads north of the Ohio River and east of
the Mississippi use the so-called Official Classification; south of the
Ohio and still east of the Mississippi, the Southern Classification; while
all those west of the Mississippi use the Western Classification. So the
shipper is no longer in much doubt in these matters, particularly in view
of the fact that the three classifications are very much the same in all
save minor details.

So much for the classification at this moment. It is quite simple when you
come to place it beside the tariff sheets themselves, the printed form of
an intricate structure, so great as to be almost shadowy in its workings.
You ask a freight traffic-manager about rates. He is a skilled man, a man
skilled in the economics of common carriers, and he tries his best to
explain simply to you the basing charges for the transportation of
commodities.

"Our rates," he says, "are formed by many things. In a general way, by the
competitive territory into which we go, and in specific cases by the
volume of business that comes or goes from a single point. The direction
of the movement, including whether cars must return empty or loaded, is
another factor. Then, of course, there is the great factor to which both
passenger and freight rates must comply--the necessity for the railroad
earning more than it pays out. Acworth, the English economist, says that a
railroad must pay for three things, the expense of maintaining the
organization, that of maintaining the plant, and that of doing the work.
Our revenues, from one source or another, must meet that triple expense."

Ask this big freight-man about charging "what the traffic will bear" and
he looks grieved. He turns about sharply and asks you:

"The earning-sheets of every railroad are public and they will show you
that they are but making expenses, in a few cases paying about half the
dividends that a healthy national bank or trust company or manufacturing
enterprise might be expected to return to its investors. That makes it
look as if we had begun to get some sort of scientific adjustment between
expense and revenue, does it not?"

You dodge the point. You have no desire to quarrel or to delve into high
railroad finance, and so you say you simply want to know about rates.

"It's a little simpler than Sanscrit," says the freight-man. "We begin to
figure on common or basing points--"

You interrupt and inquire as to what a "common point" really is. Then the
traffic expert gets down to primer talk and begins to explain the thing to
your real understanding. It seems that some years ago, when the railroads
first "pooled" they had to find an equitable method of making a
rate-sheet. Everybody made suggestions, and a Pennsylvania freight-clerk,
named James McGraham, made the right one. It was adopted and became the
standard of to-day--which goes to show that good can sometimes come out of
iniquity.

In this arrangement, the rate for each of the six different classes and
all the special commodities, between New York and Chicago was made 100 per
cent. Other towns, both further and less distant from New York than
Chicago were given proportionate percentages, St. Louis being fixed at
117, Pittsburg 60, Cleveland 71, Detroit 78, Indianapolis 93, Peoria 110,
and Grand Rapids at 100--the same as Chicago. At the eastern end of this
particular bit of territory--the Official Classification--a reduction of
two or three cents a hundred was made from the New York rates in favor of
Baltimore and Philadelphia, a corresponding addition of two or three cents
to meet the increased haul to Boston. No matter how you ship freight,
these rates now hold standard, as long as the railroads remain faithful to
their traffic associations. You may ship from Indianapolis to New York by
way of Cleveland and Albany, by Marion and Salamanca, by Columbus and
Pittsburgh, or by Cincinnati and Parkersburg, and although there is quite
a wide variance in mileage between these routes, the rate is the same on
all the different roads that go to form them.

This standard, simple as things go in freight-rates, was not adopted in a
moment. Bitter contentions on the part of cities and of shippers had to be
settled before it ruled. After it ruled, it was easy for each road to
build its own tariff upon it. Together these form a vast structure, one
that is constantly changing, as one road or another changes its tariff
under the pressure of shippers or of civic bodies, or possibly a desire to
establish more equitable schedules; and the work these changes make can be
imagined when it is stated that a single one of them in the Official
Classification territory causes more than eight thousand changes in the
rate-sheets of the railroads.

The choosing of Chicago as the "one hundred per cent" city in the
northeastern territory of the United States repeated the compliment to her
prowess as a traffic city, that the great yards which hedge her in for
miles have paid her for many years. She is one of the very greatest basing
points, where multiple rates or percentages are built from the single.
Most of the very important commercial cities share this distinction, which
is further shared sometimes by comparatively unimportant points that
happen to be the terminals of rather important railroads. Thus we find
Cincinnati and Henderson, Louisville and Evansville, St. Louis and
Davenport, Chicago and Peoria, Omaha and Sioux City, Kansas City and
Leavenworth, all possessing this railroad distinction.

So much for the standard rates. Just as certain railroad lines running
from New York to Chicago are permitted to charge two dollars less for
tickets than other "standard lines," because of slower running time, so
does the same factor make a "differential" in freight rates. Big roads
boast that they can haul the first-class freight--the "preference
freights"--from one city to the other in sixty hours. Others take a longer
time, and are permitted by their larger competitors to make their prices a
shade lower because of slower running time in freight service. Such a
"differential" is the Grand Trunk, handling New York-Chicago freight by a
roundabout route, from New York by water to New London, Conn., and thence
over the Central Vermont up into Canada and the Grand Trunk's main line.
Obviously such a longer route adds to the running-time and would be at a
keen disadvantage in securing travel, without a lower rate as bait for the
shipper. We have used New York-Chicago differentials simply as
illustrative cases. The differentials are apt to be found in any corner of
the country where there are long hauls and a number of railroads fighting
to secure them.

But the Grand Trunk as a factor in Chicago traffic to and from Boston
brought one of the earliest and most interesting decisions from the
Interstate Commerce Commission. St. Albans, Vt., complained to that board
that its local freight rate by Boston & Maine and Central Vermont from
Boston was higher than the through rate from Boston to Chicago. On the
face of it, it seemed as if justice must have rested with St. Albans, but
the railroad was able to prove its case and win a decision. It showed that
it could not live on shipments between Boston and St. Albans and other
local non-competitive points, or on the business interchanged between
these points. To earn its bread and butter it must fight for the rich
Chicago traffic; and to be in a position to fight for that traffic,
despite some disadvantage of location, it must make very low rates.

It proved that these low rates were possible for business that went
through in solid trains, like Boston-Chicago traffic, and that each of
these trains earned its proportion of the railroad's profit. For when you
come to handle freight at St. Albans, more particularly the case in still
smaller towns, you bring on a new traffic expense, and because of this
expense we get what is known as "back haul."

On the "back haul" small towns suffer and must probably continue to suffer
until a still more equitable system of railroad rates can be devised.
Sometimes it may come about in such a case at the St. Albans one just
cited; in other times because of water competition, as in the famous
Spokane case, to which we shall again refer; and sometimes it is merely an
arbitrary charge laid by the railroad. In such cases the railroad reasons
that it would cost, in time and train delay ten dollars for every dollar's
worth of freight switched off and delivered at certain small towns; and so
it figures upon hauling to the nearest large division point with large
yards, and sending it back from there on a way-train. When such a small
town is nearer the division yard at the far end of the route the back haul
charge develops, and the small town must grin and bear it. If the small
towns and the small cities, with their vigorous organizations, begin to
complain too bitterly of the present system, the traffic experts will turn
to them and say:

"Devise a better system. Perhaps you would like the Australian system,
where the charges diminish per mile, for each additional mile covered by a
consignment?"

That may look good to the Secretary of the Chamber of Commerce, who has
come down to headquarters with wrath in his eyes; it looks absolutely
equitable to every one; and he nods yes. The traffic-manager gleams with
joy. His quarry has stepped into the trap. He turns upon him.

"Where would your dandy little town of 35,000 contented folks be under the
Australian system?" he demands. "The Australian system would concentrate
all business at water traffic points, along the seaboard and the great
lakes and rivers; it would concentrate all manufacturing at the points
from which comes the raw material. Where would the seven wholesalers of
your town that we are all so proud of be located under the Australian
plan? If the railroads were to adopt it, it would save millions of dollars
in bookkeeping alone, but there would not be an interior distributing
point in the entire country."

The Secretary of the C. of C. is flustered. He was a young newspaper
reporter before he reached his present high estate. He flounders. The
traffic man is a man of ready wit and even readier figures. Still the
young Secretary feels that he must show a few grains of wisdom, and so he
gently makes inquiry about the Spokane case.

That Spokane case, also a famous decision of the Interstate Commerce
Commission, shows another factor in railroad rate-making, the serious
influence of water competition. Indirectly it also includes the principle
of the back haul. Spokane, which is much nearer Chicago than Seattle, was,
like St. Albans, paying a higher rate for the "short haul" than Seattle
was paying for a much longer haul. But Seattle is a prosperous port, and
if the railroad did not make a very low rate to it, all the slow freight
would go to it by water, where much lower transportation expense
invariably makes much lower rates, and the railroad, to save its own skin,
as it were, must make a low through rate there, charging a back haul or
higher rate to Spokane from the large eastern points. If it charged
Spokane a proportionate rate of the one to Seattle, which would then be
lower, all the other inland towns would demand the same privilege, and the
railroad would then be hauling property at a loss--a business which can
have but one inevitable result.

"You see how complicated it all is," the traffic manager tells the young
Secretary, "and how we must use judgment all the while. We've got to
figure individual cost for certain distances and localities and directions
of traffic, figure in the varying cost of handling different sorts of
freight, and then put in a percentage of the general cost of the business,
just as the restaurant-keeper makes each patron pay proportionately for
the cost of bread and butter, heat, light, service and rent, no matter how
large or how small his check may be on any one occasion.

"We must use judgment, and we must make rates to keep the goods moving all
the while. Suppose that both nails and crowbars are made in Pittsburgh and
only nails are made at Williamsport. Suppose then that the rate from
Pittsburgh to New York for both crowbars and nails is fifty cents a
hundred, but that the rate from Williamsport to New York was but 38 cents.
What chance would the nail manufacturer in Pittsburgh have against his
competitor in Williamsport, when both men are making annually nails in
tens of thousands of tons? It is to help the Pittsburgh man that we make a
special 38-cent rate on nails from his town to New York; and when we keep
filing these commodity rates at Washington, your shippers ask why we can't
have a standard rate-sheet, or the Australian system. The next time some
one of them finds that he cannot sell plough shares in Texas because a man
down in Fort Wayne has him beaten on standard rates, you watch him hurry
here and ask for a special one.

"It is out of this clamor and contention of almost myriad interests, the
ambitions of just such thriving little cities as your own, out of the
skilled arguments of brainy men that the rate-sheet is born and kept
living in a state of perpetual healthy change."

We are tired of rates and the factors that go to make them, and inquire
what is the A, B, C of a freight transaction between the railroad and a
shipper. The traffic-man makes it quite clear to us.

"When one of our agents receives a consignment of freight," he says, "he
immediately issues a bill of lading to the shipper, or consignor, as a
receipt and as a contract for the shipment. From his duplicate of this
bill of lading he makes out a way-bill, or manifest, which will accompany
the car until the freight reaches its destination. This way-bill describes
the shipment and the car into which it has been loaded, specifies the
shipping point and the destination, the consignor and the consignee, the
rate and whether or not the charges have been paid in advance or are to be
collected at destination. A copy of this way-bill is given to the
freight-conductor, who gives the station agent a receipt for the
consignment. At that place of destination a freight-bill, containing a
description of the shipment similar to that of the way-bill, and showing
in addition the total charge collected or to be paid, is rendered to the
consignee, and his receipt is taken for the shipment when it is
delivered."

"It seems quite simple," you breathe softly.

"It is not," is his reply, "for it has its complications. I'll show you
one of them."

We step through swinging doors of green baize and for a moment from a
traffic into an operating department, but an operating department that for
the telling in a work of this sort is best allied with the story of the
freight traffic. The traffic-manager points to a man sitting at a square
and littered desk, his thoughts with sturdy intent upon the mass of
correspondence which he is quickly sifting.

"He is the best car-service man in the country," says our guide; and you
recall when you were in the auditor's office, that an accounting was being
kept between the lines for the use of one another's cars that went on
through runs off upon strange or "foreign" lines. The traffic-man
continues: "Ours is not a big road, as some roads go. Yet we receive about
40,000 cars a month and, of course, deliver something like the same number
in the same thirty days. Yet there is not an hour of any day of the month
that this man cannot tell where any one of these cars is, just how long it
has been upon our tracks, just how much free time the consignee has for
unloading it, or just how much he will have to pay the railroad for his
delay in emptying it, so it can get back into service once again."

That waiting charge, the traffic-man explains, is known in the parlance of
his business as "demurrage"; and it is another keen example of the
constant use to which a railroad puts its equipment, of the tremendous
economy that is beginning to be practised in the modern science of
railroading. You are introduced to the car-service man, bend low over his
desk as he explains a bit of his work to you. Here, for example, is a car
filled with automobiles bound from Detroit to a dealer in Worcester, Mass.
This car, in a train of some 60 others, leaves Detroit east-bound over the
Michigan Central Railroad. At Buffalo it is switched to the tracks of the
New York Central & Hudson River Railroad. On the evening of the second day
it arrives at Rensselaer, across the Hudson River from Albany, and is
given over to the Boston & Albany Railroad. To make a concrete instance,
let us see how the B. & A. handles the thing through its car-service
department.

That department swings into quick action automatically, as soon as the car
strikes B. & A. rails at Rensselaer. The freight agent there makes a note
of the car and its contents from the way-bill which accompanies it; makes
special note, perhaps, of the fact that it is a car designed particularly
for the transportation of automobiles. Now let us presume that this big
box-car is owned by the Michigan Central. The Boston & Albany will pay
that owner railroad 35 cents a day rental--"_per diem_," in the
phraseology of the railroads--for the time it is upon B. & A. rails. There
are at that very time perhaps hundreds of B. & A. cars on the Michigan
Central, and at the end of 30 days these accounts and many, many others
are sent to the auditor's department, where they are balanced between the
roads with the general freight and passenger accounts.

This movement of freight cars makes a valuable barometer of the general
condition of business. The daily papers have a custom of making national
compilations of car-service reports part of their most interesting market
news. In dull seasons the cars come home from long service on other roads.
But in very busy seasons all roads have little compunction about borrowing
"foreign" cars for use in their local service. With shippers begging cars
from every quarter and threatening all manner of dire things, 35 cents
daily is a small rental to pay for the use of a roomy car. Besides, the
other fellows are all doing the same thing, and no one road can hope to
get all its cars back even with the use of a vigilant corps of young men
who search "foreign" yards. But in the dull seasons they come trundling
home, like lost cattle finding the big barn once again. In the business
depression of 1907, a Western car-service man received cars that had been
absent from the home road for seven years.

We turn from the car-service men back into a department that is strictly
traffic. Coal service is one of the principal sources of income for this
particular railroad. It stretches some of its branches into bituminous
fields, and others through the anthracite fields that Nature, in some
freakish mood, implanted in just a few counties of Northeastern
Pennsylvania. That entire country is comparable to a cut of beef, the coal
veins resembling streaks of fat that run hither and thither. As in beef,
the lean predominates. The fat streaks are the valuable coal veins, the
lean the earth, slate and rock in which the coal was planted during some
great convulsion of Nature in the process of the creation of the world.
How it got into this particular spot science cannot tell. What it is,
further than the fact that it is mostly carbon, science only guesses. It
guesses that it was originally bituminous coal and that by some process of
intense squeezing in an upheaval of Nature, the oil and tar and gas of the
bituminous coal was squeezed out and the much more valuable anthracite
deposits created.

Mining consists in getting the streaks of fat anthracite out of the bulk
of lean earth and rock. The veins run well down into the mountains, and,
as do the little streaks of fat, lose themselves in the rock, or lean, to
continue the simile. Some of the veins are but a few feet in thickness,
while some run to as high as twenty and thirty feet, and, as a rule, the
farther down into the earth they go the better the coal; and the farther
down you go the more difficult and expensive is the mining.

Now, here is a traffic that demands and receives special attention. In
other days the mining of anthracite coal was, itself, merely a department
of operating for the half-dozen systems that stretched their rails into
that valuable Pennsylvania corner. That work has now been removed into the
control of separate mining companies; but the handling of coal is a great
function of not only these roads, but of the systems that reach their
tendrils into the valuable bituminous fields here and there about the
country.

[Illustration: THE GREAT BRIDGE OF THE NEW YORK CENTRAL AT WATKINS GLEN]

[Illustration: BUILDING THE WONDERFUL BRIDGE OF THE IDAHO & WASHINGTON
NORTHERN OVER THE PEND OREILLE RIVER, WASHINGTON]

To fill the coal-bins of New York City alone, requires some 10,500,000
tons of anthracite yearly. Now you cease to wonder why this road has a
coal traffic expert, a man of surpassingly good salary. He keeps keen
oversight over the operating department in its handling of this giant
traffic, sees to it that the trains come over the mountains and into the
great terminals at Jersey City in good order, and that the railroad's
marine department is ready with tugs and scows and lighters to handle the
product as it comes in, in thousands of tons every twenty-four hours.
This would all be quite simple if the trains and the boats were always
running on schedule. But the unexpected constantly comes to pass in
railroading, and so the railroads provide against emergencies by
establishing great coal storage plants outside of New York and other large
cities--communities that would be in dire distress if their coal supply
were cut short even for twenty-four hours. Sometimes about 500,000 tons
will be kept in a single one of these storage piles--a black mountain
running lengthwise between sidings and served with giant cranes.

We are back in the traffic-manager's comfortable office for a final word
with him. He is fumbling with his own correspondence. It seems that a
lawyer down in Washington has been saying that he could save the railroads
of the land a million dollars a day in the economical operation of their
property, and the railroader is exceedingly wroth at that assertion.

"He speaks of pig iron, and says that we should teach our laborers the
minimum movements necessary to put a single pig in a car--just as masons
have been taught to handle brick with minimum effort and a maximum economy
in work accomplished has been effected." The traffic-man laughs, rather
harshly. "The lawyer is all right, except for two things; and his anecdote
about the brick is certainly well told. Only it just happens that the
railroad does not load or unload freight by the carload--that is the duty
of the consignor and the consignee--and it also happens that pig iron
rarely is handled "L.C.L." In carload lots it is not loaded or unloaded by
hand, but by big magnets on a crane which picks up a ton of the bars at a
time and thinks nothing of it."

The freight traffic-manager has made his point once again, and he is
satisfied. He tells a little of the modern methods in freight handling,
one of them how an ingenious packing-house expert in Chicago saved
thousands of dollars annually in the handling of lard. In other days lard
was rolled aboard box-cars, a barrel to a hand-truck, a rather slow and a
rather costly process. The Chicago man devised a method of melting lard
and, while it was fluid, pouring it, like petroleum, into a tank-car. When
it reached its destination at some big terminal, the lard was again melted
to fluid and poured out from the tank. That is the science of big freight
handling to-day. Not alone do cranes, with magnet-bars handle pig-iron and
castings by the ton, but great hoists at Cleveland and Conneaut and the
other big lake towns close to the Pittsburgh district reach deep into the
hearts of giant ships, bring from them the ore of Lake Superior's shores,
and fill the whole waiting trains within fifteen or twenty minutes. Into
the empty holds of the ships they pour bituminous coal from Western
Pennsylvania and West Virginia, a carload at a time. The hoist-crane
reaches down to the dock siding for a gondola, snaps the car-body off from
the trucks, lifts it aloft over the open hatch of the waiting vessel, and
turns it upside down. In less time than it takes to tell it, the coal is
in the ship, and the car-body is being slipped back again upon its
trucks.




CHAPTER XXI

THE DRAMA OF THE FREIGHT

    FAST TRAINS FOR PRECIOUS AND PERISHABLE GOODS--CARS INVENTED FOR
    FRUITS AND FOR FISH--MILK TRAINS--SYSTEMATIC HANDLING OF THE
    CANS--AUCTIONING GARDEN-TRUCK AT MIDNIGHT--A HISTORIC CITY
    FREIGHT-HOUSE.


Perhaps you have seen a gay Limited in green and gold start forth with
much ado from some big city station, and have concluded that the romance
of the railroad rests with it; that the long lines of murky-red freight
cars have little of the dramatic about them. If you have thought that, you
have thought wrong.

Romance and drama reach high climax sometimes in the transportation of
commodities. Fast trains, running upon the express schedules of the finest
Limiteds, sometimes bring silk, $2,000,000 or $3,000,000 worth to the
train, across the continent. A special may be hired by some impatient
manufacturer to send a shipment through half a dozen States. There are
notable speed records in the handling of fast freight, records of notable
trains that are as well known among the traffic specialists as the
Limiteds are known to the outside world.

There is drama, too, when the railroad brings the food up to the city, for
it counts as one of its greatest functions this filling of the city's
larder. It sets aside certain high officers in its traffic department for
the handling of market produce; it provides special facilities for
gathering it, special facilities for moving it, special terminal
facilities for delivering it in the hearts of the great cities. Sometimes
it even goes further and provides and organizes great wholesale markets,
building up its traffic by going as far as possible in facilitating the
constant replenishing of the city's larder.

That is why these long dark caravans, the fast preference freights that
are the pride of the railroad's traffic head, go so quickly over the rails
to town. One of them halts in block for an instant to let a brightly
lighted passenger train go in ahead of it. While it is halted we climb
aboard and engage its conductor in conversation. He is a clever fellow, of
the type of the coming railroader. Only last summer, we found a freight
conductor thumbing his "Sartor Resartus," and discussing Carlyle as a
stylist.

"Yes, we do bring some food up to town," he admits. "I've got enough grub
aboard these eighty cars to feed several regiments. We've two
refrigerators of meat from Omaha, two from Kansas City, one from Chicago.
The Chicago car has been iced twice--at Elkhart and at Altoona. The other
cars had to have an extra filling at Hammond, on the outskirts of Chicago.
Soon we'll have crisp cold weather and we can cut out the icing.

"The boss? The boss will be worrying still. Just as soon as he can cut
down his refrigerating stations at the division yards, he'll be fretting
about getting those big ice-houses filled for next summer. He's got a lake
tucked up in the mountain divisions somewhere, and we've got a branch
running in a couple of miles there, and we just pull out the ice during
the winter months. You take any of these trunk-lines and it has to have a
lake for its refrigerating stations. It's just one of the many little
kinks in running a road."

We express a desire to see the big preference train, and--the block being
still set against her--we go forward in the black shadows of the cars, the
train boss's arm-set lantern showing our way to us. He stops beside a
string of white and yellow box-cars.

"California fruit," he says; "they don't think anything of sending it all
the way across the continent. You might have thought those ranchers over
there on the Pacific coast would have been discouraged when they were told
that there were a dozen icing stations between the two oceans, and that
the icing cost was prohibitive. They weren't a bit. They just sat down and
did some tall thinking, and after a while they developed this type of car.
We call it pre-cooled. The car is cleaned and brought to a chill before
loading. After that the temperature is not allowed to rise while the fruit
is being piled away inside. It is closed and sealed, while still ice-cold,
and icy-cold she comes bumping her way east over three or four thousand
miles of track. It may be scorching down there along the S. P.; they may
be just gasping for air in the Missouri bottoms; but that pre-cooled car
comes right along, keeping its cargo fresh and cool and pure. We can
deliver her anywhere here on the Atlantic seaboard, and no risk of
spoiling the stuff."

We slip along another half-dozen cars. The conductor halts again and
fumbles with his way-bills.

"There's the boy," he laughs. "He's halibut. There's half a dozen halibuts
along here in a string."

We do not like to show an utter ignorance of the food question and we
venture an assertion.

"Halibut comes from Newfoundland?" we ask. "How do you get it around
here?"

The freighter grins sympathetically at our lack of knowledge.

"Bless you," he says. "That little fishing pond up there on the Banks
isn't big enough for a land which has 27,000,000 folks gathered in its
cities. These cars have come in from big Yem Hill's road--all the way from
Tacoma up on Puget Sound--State of Washington. Some of those people who
live in Boston might have a fit if they knew that their beloved halibut
was born and raised in the Pacific Ocean; but that's the truth of the
matter.

"This fish (and some of it's going straight to Boston to be sold in the
very shade of Faneuil Hall), has come 7,000 miles to be eaten on the very
shores of the Atlantic. When the fishing ship that caught this cargo was
fifty miles off the docks, she began calling Tacoma with her wireless. The
yardmaster of the Northern Pacific was ready there for the news from that
rat-a-tap. He had a string of refrigerator cars ready; they were ready and
set out along the wharf by the time the ship was made fast.

"Five minutes later the fish were being loaded into the cars. They had a
gang of stevedores working there clock-like, as those fellows work around
the big tents of a three-ring circus. First there went in a layer of ice,
then a layer of fish, then another of ice. In thirty minutes the job was
done. In forty-five minutes that string of fish-cars was coming east on an
express-train schedule. It was knocked apart at St. Paul and again at
Chicago. Here's our share of the spoils, and we're not loafing here on the
old main line.

"We're preference freight, if you please, and no old bumpety-bump with
coal and ore taking the low-grade tracks. They sandwich us in among the
all-Pullmans, even when we're on the four-track divisions, for food is
quick; food won't keep forever; and those folks down in the city are
getting hungry."

He starts to say more, but the engine call halts him. The block is clear
once again. The conductor catches a car step, the "preference" starts
forward with all the rattling shakes and bumps peculiar to a long freight
train. In a minute or two the red tail-lights are grinning at us from half
a mile down the track. Another big freight goes scurrying by us--more
market stuff, more meat, more fish for the hungry town, a town which
houses 4,000 folk within a single congested tenement square. A third train
follows; all refrigerator cars it is too. They come in quick succession,
these market trains, to the metropolis. The railroad is doing its part.
To-night again, the food is going up to the city.

The scene changes. Now we are off in the rolling country of
up-State--dairy country, if you please. The railroad that stretches its
thick black trail the length of the valley is no four-track line, with
heavy trains coursing over it every three or four or five or ten minutes.
This is but a single-track branch; in the parlance of the railroaders it
is a "jerkwater"; and the coming of its two passenger trains and that of
the way-freight each day are events in the little towns that line it.
Still, even this little branch is doing its part in the filling of the
city's larder. This branch has the filling of the city babies' milk
bottles as its own particular problem.

At early dawn, the muddy brown roads that lead to the little depot there
at the flour mills are alive. The farmer boys are bringing the milk to the
railroad. Down the track a few hundred yards beyond the depot is the
slick, clean, new milk-station. Over across the brook is the
cheese-factory, deserted and given over to the gentle fingers of decay.
Those two buildings tell the story of changing times; in their mute way
they tell the growth of the American city.

In other days this township made cheese. To-day they drive the milk to the
depot. Each morning finds a big refrigerator car, built in the fashion of
passenger equipment, so that it may be handled on passenger trains, at the
milk station. The farmer boys are prompt with their milk, it is checked
and weighed and placed in the car, in cans and in bottles. Hardly has the
last big ten-gallon can gone clattering into the car before the whistle of
the warning local is heard up the line, just beyond the curve at the
water-tank. While the train is at the depot, in all the bustle of the
comings and goings at a country station, the engine makes quick drill
movement and picks up the milk-car.

Farther down the line that same train picks up more milk-cars. By the time
it reaches the junction where it intersects the main line it is a
considerable train for a branch line. Indeed at the junction there are
more milk-cars, from other branches that ramble off into the real
back-country. There are enough of them now to make a train through to the
city. The trainmaster has a good engine ready for every afternoon, and the
milk express goes scurrying into town with passenger rights and on
passenger schedules. You cannot hurry the babies' milk through to town any
too quickly.

This is all first-day milk. You can take a compass, place the pin-leg
squarely in the heart of the busy town--a place of brick and asphalt, of
steel and concrete, without ever a hint of growing things--and with the
pencil-leg trace a segment of a circle--the outer line some 200 miles
distant from the centre. Afterwards you can draw a second circle segment,
its outer line some 350 miles from the same town centre. From within the
inner circle comes the first-day milk, delivered to the railroad during
the early part of a day and on the householder's table in the big city the
next morning. From without this inner circle and within the outer, comes
the second-day milk which has another twenty-four hours in its transit to
town. The whole thing, once rather badly handled by itinerant single
dealers, has been reduced to scientific business by skilful cooperation
between the big milk-dealers of the present day and the railroads.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is night.

The last of the office lights in the towering buildings has been snuffed
out. Downtown is quiet--quiet for a little time, for soon after sun-up it
will be a vortex once again; these narrow, deep-canyoned streets will be
astir and human-filled once again. But at nine o'clock in the evening the
policeman's footfall on the pavement echoes in lonely streets. A tired
bookkeeper scurrying home after a vexatious hunt for his balances gets
sharp scrutiny from the policeman. Downtown is asleep.

Then, from around the turn of a sharp corner comes a night train of
wagons, drawn by a small brigade of horses. These are not filled with
market-truck; market-truck will not reach the town till midnight at the
earliest. These are great high-boxed vans, painted white, a bit gaudy in
lettering. They make you think of those long-ago days when you used to go
down to the depot to see the circus come in, for the big wagons are
precisely like those that used to shroud mystery as they rolled from the
trains down to the show-lot. We follow this procession of half a dozen
great vans, follow it through the twisting, narrow streets of downtown,
across a famous old ferry, straight up to the long sheds of a railroad
terminal.

On the one side of the terminal, the passenger trains are coming and going
at all hours. By day this shed at which the big vans back, each into its
own carefully marked place, is a general freight-house; by night it is
given over to the stocking of the city babies' milk bottles. The ferried
vans are hardly emptied of their empty cans and cases before the first of
the milk trains comes backing in at the other side of the long covered
platform. Hissing arcs up under that slimsy roof throw high lights and
deep shadows here and there and everywhere. They show the platform-men
tugging at the car fastenings before the brakes are fairly released. In
another minute, the big side-doors are thrown open, almost simultaneously,
in still another, the place is alive with the rattle of trucks. The
milk--tons upon tons of it--in ten-gallon cans and in cases of individual
bottles, is being loaded within those circus-like cans. A second
milk-train comes bumping in at a far platform. There is another brigade of
vans waiting for it there. A third train is due to arrive in another
half-hour. The vans that it will fill are already beginning to back into
place and unload their cans and cases upon the platforms.

Here are almost 200 great four-horse trucks being filled simultaneously,
and all working with the almost rhythmic harmony of organization. You want
to know how they do it? Ask that man over there, he in a short rough
coat, who carries a lantern on his arm and with it peers interestedly into
every one of the cars. That man's word is law on this platform, for he is
its boss. He has been filling the babies' milk bottles from this
particular terminal for almost a quarter of a century now. His railroad
was the first to bring milk into a large city.

"We get it over," he will tell you, "by the experience of some little
time, and by planning. You saw the numbers on the team side of this milk
platform. That's only half the problem. There are a dozen different
milk-handling concerns doing business at this shed, and their stuff comes
together on this one train. Yet we get the thing out by having each
concern--each truck--come up to its own position at the team side. The
other half of the problem we solve by having a certain position for each
milk-car.

"Here is the Hygienic Milk Company up on the Heights. You have seen their
fancy dairies all over town. Well, the Hygienic has a station up at
Bottger's, on our Lancaster & Essex division, that fills two cars at that
station every blessed day. Their two cars stand in beyond this No. 14
pillar every night; so we know just where to direct their trucks. That's
business--just system. We spot the cars every night."

"Spot the cars?" you interrupt. He smiles a bit at your ignorance.

"This train is made up in just the same fashion every night," he explains.
"These two Hygienic cars are always the fifth and sixth. If they were the
eighth and ninth some nifty evening--if some smart Aleck of a yardmaster
up the line would take to shuffling up these cars as you shuffle a deck of
cards--we would have a near riot here, and I couldn't get these platforms
cleared of the milkmen for that market-truck train that backs in here from
the south every night at 11:55.

[Illustration: INSIDE THE WEST ALBANY SHOPS OF THE NEW YORK CENTRAL:
PICKING UP A LOCOMOTIVE WITH THE TRAVELLING CRANE]

[Illustration: A LOCOMOTIVE UPON THE TESTING-TABLE AT THE ALTOONA SHOPS OF
THE PENNSYLVANIA]

[Illustration: "THE ROUNDHOUSE IS A SPRAWLING THING"]

[Illustration: DENIZENS OF THE ROUNDHOUSE]

"So they keep closely to the formation of our trains, and that of
itself is no terminal problem. Away up the line 90
miles--150,--250,--everywhere that we have a big junction yard, the yard
boss has his positive instructions about these milk trains. By the time
this fellow has cleared out of P---- J----, 90 miles up the road and our
nearest road yard outside of the metropolitan district, it's always in
just the shape you see it to-night. After that there's nothing to be done
here except cut off the road engine at our terminal yard and pick out a
switcher to back her into position at this shed. It's nice work, and night
after night that engineer of the switcher does not vary four inches in the
locations of these car-doors."

He lifts his lantern, and we peek into the interior of one of these cool
milk-cars. This has the bottled milk in cases. The cases are packed four
tiers high--never higher--and your guide explains to you that four cases
is the limit of a hand-truck. All these things make for simplicity in
handling. You peer into another car. The ten-gallon cans are in long
diagonal rows, covering the entire floor of the car. They form a regular
tessellated pattern, like the marble tiling of old-fashioned hotels and
banks.

"Those little farmer boys," says the platform boss, "sure do that trick
well. That speaks pretty neat for Sullivanville. They all used to put the
cans in straight rows, running lengthwise of the car. One day one of the
smartest of those Sullivanville boys discovered that by putting the cans
in diagonal rows, this-wise, he would gain a hundred cans in the loading.
That added a thousand gallons to the capacity of the car. The Super gave
him a good job, and some day you'll see he'll be running a railroad of his
own."

       *       *       *       *       *

Midnight.

Downtown is still more deserted, if that is possible, than when we first
saw it three hours ago. The stillness of the deep night is hard upon the
city; yet here on this broad quay street which runs its stone-paved
length up and down past the wharves of the harbor-front, all is alive.

This is the midnight market. Under the very noses of the steamships that
have brought this garden-truck up from the south, it is being auctioned
off to a hundred or so keen-nosed, keener-witted wholesalers. They wander
about under long awning roofs erected in the centre of the street, through
the gaunt open shadowy spaces of the piers, poking into the tops of
barrels, pinching, tasting, critically examining all the while that they
are dickering in prices. When the day is fully born and downtown alive
once again, there will be other wholesale markets, more sedate-looking
affairs in rooms that have been built for the purpose by the traffic
departments of the railroads. In these rooms, with the seats arranged in
tiers and each seat having a broad writing arm like a college classroom,
fruit and vegetables will be sold in carload lots. There will be records
of prices--quotations. The thing will approach the dignity of those
bourses where cotton and coffee and metals and securities are sold.

But the midnight market scorns such formalities, such dignities. It clings
to its own hubbub--its own unsystematic way of accomplishing a great
business. It prefers to sell as the stuff is unloaded; that has been its
method for three-quarters of a century and any method that has stood 75
years is at least entitled to a measure of consideration. But not all its
offerings have come by these big coasting steamships, whose outlines show
vague at their piers in the darkness of the night. For, grinding against
the piles of these same wharves, as the unseen tide changes, are groups of
car-floats that have been ferried from the great railroad terminals across
the river. Each car-float has two trackfuls of refrigerator cars--12 or 14
or 16 in all--lined against a long roofed platform running just above
keel. When the pert and busy little tugs have pushed and pulled and bunted
the floats all into position, the platforms are quickly connected by
gangways, canvas-covered against the stress of hard weather. A great
freight-house, almost Venetian in type, floats upon the surface of the
silent river and becomes part and parcel of the pier itself. After that it
is quick work to open each of the cars--to wheel out sample barrels of
potatoes, of cabbage, of celery, of lettuce, of cauliflower--all the
growing things of country farms that go to feed the hungry city.

The trading here is over in an hour, or two hours at the longest when the
shipments are heavy; and then the wholesalers are wheeling their wagons
into place to cart away their purchases to their own stores and
warehouses. From these the retailers--the men who carry on their
businesses in stalls in the public market-houses and those that have their
own little shops on the street corners--make their selections. If you are
a city man, you may now know that your grocer at the corner is up betimes,
when the sun is just showing himself on lazy September mornings. He has
been poking his way with his own horse and wagon down to the wholesalers,
buying his day's stock and getting it placed just before the earliest of
the housewives begins her marketing.

You demand a concrete example of a city freight-house; and here it is--the
historic St. John's Park of the New York Central & Hudson River Railroad
in New York. Up over the lines of the Central, back for hundreds of weary
miles, you may hear the railroaders speak of "the Park," you may see long
strings of cars, bearing merchandise tagged through to it. At Sixtieth
Street, where the big freights of the New York Central come to a final
halt, you see the cars sent south in long strings, each hauled by a red
dummy locomotive and preceded by a boy astride a horse and holding a red
flag, a familiar sight to all New Yorkers who reside upon the far west
side of the town.

St. John's Park handles a very large percentage of all the perishable
food that comes into New York each day. It is the dingy freight-house that
fills the double block between Hudson and Varick and Beach and Laight
Streets; and when you ask, "Where is the park?" they will tell you that
there was a day when the entire site of this freight-house--possibly the
most congested in the world--was a gentle tree-filled square that faced
old St. John's Church. There is never a trace of the park nowadays. The
old church now faces a narrow street wherein truckmen shove and elbow and
disappear in the gates of the freight station.

On the Hudson Street side of the structure six pairs of railroad tracks
curve into it; and far above on the cornice of the structure one can see
the benign figure of the old Commodore--a heroic bronze surrounded by
replicas of the trains and the steamships that he loved so well. The
building of the large freight station on the site of St. John's Park away
back in 1868 was a real accomplishment to the first of the house of
Vanderbilt. Think of it: that freight-house could hold 100 cars. There was
nothing else in all the broad land quite like that!

Into St. John's Park at dawn come trainloads of produce. Even before the
doors of the freight-house have opened, at six, a string of "coolers" has
stopped in Hudson Street and the commission men are carting out the
poultry. As soon as the station gets down to real business, butter and
eggs and cheese pour in through it in carload lots.

"It doesn't bother us much," the foreman tells you. "Still, on the Monday
before Christmas we had a fairly brisk day. We had 155 cars of turkeys
alone that morning."




CHAPTER XXII

MAKING TRAFFIC

    ENTICING SETTLERS TO THE VIRGIN LANDS OF THE WEST--EMIGRATION
    BUREAUS--RAILWAYS EXTENDED FOR THE BENEFIT OF EMIGRANTS--THE FIRST
    CONTINUOUS RAILROAD ACROSS THE AMERICAN CONTINENT--CAMPAIGNS FOR
    DEVELOPING SPARSELY SETTLED PLACES IN THE WEST--UNPROFITABLE BRANCH
    RAILROADS IN THE EAST--DEVELOPMENT OF SCIENTIFIC FARMING--IMPROVED
    FARMS ARE TRAFFIC-MAKERS--NEW FACTORIES BEING OPENED--HOW RAILROAD
    MANAGERS HAVE DEVELOPED ATLANTIC CITY.


Your railroad manager of other days was content with the traffic that was
offered him--if indeed he deigned to accept it all. For those were the
business methods that obtained everywhere in the other days. When
competition became the moving force in modern business, the railroad felt
it. The land had become gridironed with tracks; business did not offer
itself so freely as it had at the outset. When there came a division
between routes of a traffic that had formerly belonged to a single route,
earnings fell away and stockholders began to ask uncomfortable questions
of the men who operated their railroad properties. Then the fight for
business began--at first, as we have already seen, by a lively rivalry
which showed itself in a merciless slashing of rates. Such fighting
methods reacted on the railroads, and their rate-sheets became code and
law, only a little less holy than the Federal Constitution, long before
the Interstate Commerce Commission exerted its beneficent paternalism over
the railroads of the land. But with the rates equalized between the
railroads, the competition remained. The one obvious solution of the
situation which was left was put into effect. The railroads began to make
traffic.

The making of traffic is the most recent and the most highly developed
branch of the science of railroading. The first of this specialized
business-getting began just before the Civil War. Some of the railroads
had put their lines back a little way from the western portion of the
Great Lakes along in the late fifties, and they needed folks to live along
those lines. It goes without saying that a railroad going into an
unpopulated country would never be any great "shakes" of a railroad until
people came to dwell along its lines. So the railroad from Galena to
Chicago--afterwards the foundation stone for the mighty Northwestern--the
Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul, and one or two others started emigration
bureaus. Then men who owned those early railroads knew the possibilities
of the virgin lands into which they stretched their rails. The proposition
that confronted them was to let the folk who lived in the East and even
those who were herded in the crowded lands across the Atlantic, know these
same possibilities. By means of their first emigration bureaus they
accomplished their proposition. Advertising was a crude science in those
days, but advertising helped. Throughout the troublous years of the war
the men from the East who had read of the glories of the Middle West, who
had listened to the tales of the agents of the railroad and coupled them
with those of returning travellers, began pouring over the new and
struggling railroads. They carried their goods and chattels with them; and
so the railroad men knew that they were not going back to the old homes
again.

At the close of the war these tides rose to flood. The railroads no longer
struggled. There was a steady flow of traffic over their rails, and they
were able because of it to engage capital to stretch their rails a little
farther west. After they had moved another stretch, the tides of
emigration still flowed. That process might have gone ahead in orderly
fashion until the Pacific had been reached, if the scheme had not been
upset.

They built too many railroads, they overworked their idea. In the broad
reaches of the Middle West, lines of steel crumbled into rust, and
cross-roads dreamed vainly that they would become villages. Many a
struggling village failed to become the city that her enthusiastic
residents had fancied. They had the big boom in Kansas, and the bigger
collapse that followed. After that, folk stayed East for a while, and the
business of making traffic in that territory became an advanced science.

There was another factor in the situation. You will remember that the
Summer of '69 saw the first continuous railroad across the American
continent--the combination of Central Pacific and Union Pacific. The huge
success of that railroad was inspiration for others. In the generation of
men that followed the rails that reached from Atlantic to Pacific were
multiplied. After that there was a new problem for the owners of the
transcontinental railroads. Their statistical charts of originating
traffic showed great black masses at either end of the line--where
connections were made with the great traffic-bringers from the East, and
where the rails ran upon the docks of the Pacific shore. Between those two
points was a thin black line, like spider-thread. To make that line black
and firm at all points, to bring masses of new traffic at intermediate
points, was the demand that the railroad-owner made of his
traffic-manager.

It is being done to-day. It has taken time, money and almost incredible
patience; but it is being done. This is a broad land, and there is still
much to be done. In Montana, there is a single county with an area
exceeding that of Maryland and a population less than that of the smallest
ward of Baltimore; and near-by there is another county, as large as
Delaware and Connecticut combined, with mere handful of residents. These
are typical. There are great open stretches to the southwest; and the
Santa Fe, working hand in hand with the Harriman lines, is busy populating
and developing these. In the North Country, James J. Hill's railroads and
the new outstretched arm of the Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul are doing
much to exploit the unfarmed lands of Montana, and the intensive
possibilities of Washington for fruit-raising, market-gardening and the
like. Up and down the Pacific coast, the railroads are uniting in similar
campaigns of development.

Hill began the campaign in Montana. He is a dreamer and a far-seer. When
he began making presents of blooded bulls to the farmers out along the
Great Northern, folk laughed at him, some of his directors thought that he
had gone crazy. They thought differently when they knew the results, when
they got the traffic reports of the cattle business that was growing along
the line.

That thing was typical. The railroad--Hill's railroad and all the other
big transcontinentals--lent itself to the fine development of all the
traffic that might possibly be obtained within its territory. Heretofore
it had roughly combed traffic possibilities, now it began to screen them
with a fine mesh screen. The emigrant bureau did its part of the work; the
railroad went further and set itself to develop every inch of available
land along its lines. Attractive excursions brought settlers to the new
country, the railroad was of practical assistance in finding locations for
them. Everything is being brought toward the development of those great
new States of the West: cross-roads are beginning to become villages;
villages, cities. A little time before his death, Mr. Harriman announced
that there would be four great cities spread across the American
continent--New York, Chicago, Salt Lake, and San Francisco. He then took
it upon his own rather roomy shoulders to make Salt Lake City worthy of a
place in the file.

From this activity in the West, the Eastern railroads have stolen a
lesson. Originally built in many cases to serve the needs of the farmers
of some particular locality, they have become merged and welded in a way
that has caused them to serve the industrial interests of the country more
particularly than the agricultural. One of the valuable old properties of
the Pennsylvania Railroad in New Jersey rejoices in the name of Freehold
and Jamesburg Agricultural Railroad.

When, after the serious slump in traffic that followed the panic in 1907,
the railroads of the East found themselves, for the first time in a
decade, with more facilities than freight, they began to cultivate more
carefully the traffic branch of transportation science. They took quite
readily to the lesson that the transcontinentals gave them. Then they
proceeded to put it into effect in practical fashion.

For some years past the problem of the unimportant branches has been a
serious one with the big Eastern systems. These branches, many of them
once profitable feeders, have been allowed to deteriorate and retrograde,
while main-line traffic developed and increased under active conditions of
competition. The little towns along the branches seemed to retrograde too;
while the busy cities of the country, strung along the main lines of the
railroad, absorbed new growth and new energy. Sometimes the branch lines
were paralleled by interurban electric railroads, which were able to
operate at far less cost than steam railroads, and consequently to charge
lower rates of fare; and their slight passenger traffic continued to grow
lighter. The freight traffic had long since dwindled to slim proportions;
the branch lines were almost entirely agricultural railroads; and the
farmers of the East were discouraged and disheartened.

The new movement began in Western New York, which is fairly gridironed
with a network of these unprofitable branch railroads. It was started even
before the panic of 1907. New York State, with its great resources and
its fat treasury, has long been engaged in the development of scientific
farming--which means farming for the largest profit that can be brought
from the soil. It has a great agricultural school as a part of Cornell
University, and an interesting experimental school along similar lines at
Geneva. These schools have done a great work. They have educated young men
to be modern farmers, in every sense of that phrase; and they have sent
leaflets to every corner of the Empire State. But even these methods were
not far-reaching enough. It is not every farmer's boy in these days who
can afford to go down to Ithaca for a college education in the tilling of
the soil; few of the older men care to mingle with the boys at such an
institution. Even the pamphlets sent out from Geneva were not sufficient.

So when the railroads, seeking to make traffic in a dull time and to
rehabilitate their branches in the farming districts, made alliance with
the agricultural schools, special trains were sent out into the farming
districts, and these trains carried a competent corps of instructors from
the schools. Day coaches made good school-rooms for the itinerant
institutions; and a baggage-car, filled with specimens of fruit and grains
grown under scientific methods, was generally attached. The Western roads
had used similar trains with success in building up their virgin
territories. The use of the scientific schools in connection was the
Eastern adaptation of the idea.

A train of this sort will "make" half a dozen towns in the course of a
day. The towns are not far apart, and the schedule generally permits a
stop of about an hour in each. The coming of the "farmers' special" has
been thoroughly announced by handbills, posters, and the local newspapers.
Whether the day be wet or fair, the appreciation of the enterprise that
started the special out is sure to be manifest in a crowd that packs the
day-coaches and not infrequently causes overflow meetings to be held
from the rear platform of the train.

[Illustration: IN THE FAR WEST THE FARM-TRAIN HAS LONG SINCE COME INTO ITS
OWN]

[Illustration: "EVEN IN NEW YORK STATE THE INTEREST IN THESE ITINERANT
AGRICULTURAL SCHOOLS IS KEEN, INDEED"]

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF THE DAIRY DEMONSTRATION CAR OF AN AGRICULTURAL
TRAIN]

There is no cause for disheartenment in the soul of the farmer after he
has been down to the train. He learns the things that his land is capable
of and yet has never reared for him. Take the perennial and hardy alfalfa,
for instance. Crowd into the car, where a hundred earnest men from the
country-side are gathered and listening to the man from the State
Agricultural College, who talks on it.

"An acre of good alfalfa," he is saying, "produces twice as much
digestible nutriment as an acre of good clover. It is therefore profitable
to our farmers to make every effort to establish alfalfa fields. Your
climate is favorable to alfalfa, which can be grown on a variety of soils.
The most favorable is a gravelly loam with a porous sub-soil. There must
be drainage, fertility, lime, and inoculation. Alfalfa is a lime-loving
plant, and if you haven't a limy soil, apply lime at the rate of one to
two thousand pounds per acre. These figures will be given you in a
pamphlet as you leave the car."

And so it goes. If the train is in one of the great fruit-growing
districts of western New York, fruit is the theme of the lecturers. There
is no product that the soil may give, directly or indirectly, that is too
humble for the attention of the farmers' special. All the roads in Western
New York have taken part in the campaign--the New York Central, the Erie,
the Lehigh Valley, and the smaller roads have sent out the train over the
lines, each in due turn.

The idea has gone into the Middle West and back to Pennsylvania. The
Pennsylvania Railroad, which creates traffic from every conceivable
source, has operated since November, 1908, four agricultural specials and
two fruit-tree and shrubbery specials. The agricultural schools of the
great territory it traverses have furnished the lecturers and the
material. Now it is preparing to establish down in the Eastern Shore
country between the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Ocean, a development
farm, in which it will show the farmers of that agricultural district the
greatest use that they can make of their land, the greatest results that
it can be brought to yield. It has gone down into the sandy southern part
of New Jersey and made the potato crop for New York and for Philadelphia
into a vast yield,--a profit both for the farmer and for the railroad
which has created the traffic.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first of these development farms in the East was that established by
H. B. Fullerton, under the auspices of the Long Island Railroad, at Wading
River, N. Y. The Long Island possesses a territory that particularly needs
development of that sort. It has a good suburban territory adjacent to New
York City, but after that there is not a town of importance the entire
length of its lines. There is no manufacturing of consequence out upon its
line and it has been driven to the necessity of making traffic.

Fullerton's Farm is another traffic-maker by educational process. He has
taken the worst of the sandy soil that makes thousands of acres at the
east end of the Island, and he has created from it a model farm. The farm
has had to pay its way. It has not been nurtured under any extensive
appropriations from the railroad, but it has had to win its success under
the same conditions that would confront the farmer who measured his
capital in hundreds, rather than in thousands of dollars. It is teaching
the lesson that it has sought to teach. Arid soil, on the very hearthstone
of a metropolitan city, is being given over to profitable truck-farming;
and the Long Island Railroad for its modest farm investment is beginning
to harvest appreciable traffic returns.

The New York Central, under the guidance of its president, W. C. Brown,
who is keenly interested in the revival of farming in the East, and who
personally directed the operation of the "farm specials" over its lines,
has purchased two demonstration farms--one in Central, the other in
Western New York. It has hired a competent farmer to have charge of
them--T. E. Martin, of West Rush, who made a famous record for himself in
growing 300 bushels of potatoes to the acre on land that had never before
grown more than sixty. They will also serve as object lessons, and when
they have been developed to their capacity, they will be sold at a far
higher price than the song for which they were purchased in rundown
condition. The proceeds will be turned over to the purchase and
development of neglected acres in other sections along the lines of that
system.

The New York Central is also making its own special development of the
"farm special" idea, by taking two coaches and making them into
"agricultural cars" at its West Albany shops. These cars will not run
sporadically on special trains but will be in use the entire year round,
being dropped at one little town after another for a day or two days or
three days, in order that the farmers from the surrounding district may
drop in to receive a little practical information.

Through the schools of a number of corn-growing States, into which this
work has spread, boys and girls are being stimulated by prizes to plant
little patches of corn. Out of each community where such an exhibit is
held, ten prize-winning ears are sent to the country fair. From this the
best ten ears are sent to the State fair, and interstate competition is
already being developed.

There is another side to this. The railroads are making more than a new
traffic for themselves, they are making a new wealth for the communities
through which their rails are stretched. It has been estimated by a
Pennsylvania agronomist that the value of the staple farm crops in the
Keystone State in a single year exceeds $170,000,000; and that some
224,000 farmers entered into this production. If by training and
education each of these farmers can increase his yield of corn one bushel
to the acre, the additional corn revenue from that one State would be
$1,044,000. Further than that, he says that $780,000 would roll into the
pockets of these farmers if they would choose their seed corn carefully
and thus add ten kernels to each ear of corn grown by them in the course
of a twelvemonth. That sort of thing looks like a cooperative benefit from
almost any angle from which you may view it.

The Rock Island Railroad has begun to preach dry farming down through the
Southwest. Wheat six feet in length is exhibited by that railroad in its
offices throughout the East as sample of what the farmers in its territory
do, under its help and supervision. That sort of thing silently makes
traffic every day in the year. It is worth a dozen times what it costs the
railroad.

But the railroad is not confining its efforts at making traffic to the
products of the soil. What is good method with the farmer is similarly
good method with the manufacturer. So you now see the railroads, east and
west, working with the aid of industrial commissioners. The industrial
commissioner is like a High Minister of Commerce.

Take, for instance, a typical railroad running from New York to Chicago.
It has ample docks upon the sea board, extensive ramifications within the
coal-mining districts; in the West it taps both the Great Lakes and the
transcontinentals, which reach across the land to the Pacific. In all this
district it is under hard competition, gaining its traffic--every ton of
it--by the sweat of the general traffic-manager's brow. That railroad has
its Industrial Commissioner, and if you are a prospective manufacturer
looking for a site for a new plant, you are sure to come to him. You tell
him that you want to build a factory. He tilts back his chair and looks at
you easily.

"What kind of a factory?" he asks. "We've room for 10,000 more along our
rails. If it's a silk mill I can suggest Paterson, where the help is
trained, and the dyes and raw materials handy. If you are going to turn
out a steel product somewhere in the Pittsburgh district, Youngstown,
Ohio, is the most economical point in the United States to-day for the
turning out of finished steel. Perhaps yours is a canning factory," he
laughs. "If you want to can fruit we can fix you out up in Western New
York among the orchards; if you want to can tomatoes, well, sir, there is
nothing like Indiana for tomatoes."

You specify your new business and its requirements in some detail. The eye
of this practical Minister of Commerce illumines.

"I have the very thing you want," he says, without hesitation. "Over at
W----, just half a mile above the city limits along the river. It has
siding facilities." (You may be fairly certain that the siding facilities
give chief access to the railroad that employs this particular
Commissioner.) "And you say you want fresh water. Well, there's five
thousand gallons a day of the purest soft water in the East for you."

His eyes shine with enthusiasm. He reaches for his paper block and the
next instant he is sketching the plot for you with remarkable accuracy,
and with a similitude of scale. Here is the river and there is where you
can build your dam. Over there is the main line of the best railroad in
America (he leaves no doubt in your mind as to that); and your siding can
go in there with less than a quarter of one per cent grade. The highroad
is there, and close by it the trolley leading into town.

"They've a surplus of help of the kind you want in W----," he adds.
"You'll never run short of hands there."

It sounds good, and within a week you are bound to W---- with him to meet
the Secretary of the Chamber of Commerce. If things are as he has
represented them to you, and your mind is unbiased, you build your
factory, and the railroad picks up 200 tons a day off your siding. That
single transaction has been worth the Commissioner's salary for a year to
it. There is a variety of method in making traffic.

       *       *       *       *       *

The general passenger agent has to keep his end up. Any G. P. A. of to-day
found entertaining the old-fashioned idea that the traffic that flows of
its own volition up to the ticket-wickets is going to be sufficient to
satisfy his employers is out of present-day development. The general
passenger agent who gets patted on the back nowadays is the man who goes
to the president in a dull season with a sheet showing gains over a
preceding busy season. He may have to bring water from stones to increase
that tide of traffic, but it must be increased. There are no two ways
about what is expected of him.

So he gets out, like the traffic people from the freight end of the
railroad, and he keeps in constant touch with his territory, with the
towns along the line and the agents who are working under him. If he is
instrumental in locating a big convention at some point where his line
will receive the lion's share of the business, that is a good trick and
worth while. A lively convention will do a lot toward bracing up a weak
passenger sheet in some dull month.

One railroad reaching out of New York into the mountains at the
northeastern corner of that State and losing itself at some obscure town,
a railroad without valuable connections and ramifications, has made its
passenger business a little gold-mine by scientific nurturing. It sent its
passenger representatives up into the country towns, and they sought to
improve conditions of every sort there. They started agitation for better
roads from the railroad into the uplands where city folk were prone to
wander; they helped the boarding-house landlord and the country
hotel-keeper to bring their facilities up to attractive standards. In some
cases they induced capital to come in and build new hotels. In every case
they offered free space in the railroad's summer resort literature.
Under a single general passenger agent pursuing such a campaign
unflaggingly the passenger receipts of that small railroad increased 125
per cent in eight years!

[Illustration: THE FAMOUS THOMAS VIADUCT, ON THE BALTIMORE & OHIO AT
RELAY, MD., BUILT BY B. H. LATROBE IN 1835, AND STILL IN USE]

[Illustration: THE HISTORIC STARUCCA VIADUCT UPON THE ERIE]

[Illustration: THE CYLINDERS OF THE DELAWARE & HUDSON MALLET]

[Illustration: THE INTERIOR OF THIS GASOLINE-MOTOR-CAR ON THE UNION
PACIFIC PRESENTS A MOST UNUSUAL EFFECT, YET A MAXIMUM OF VIEW OF THE OUTER
WORLD]

Take the case of Atlantic City. That town used to be a collection of
wooden hotels, set along a sandy, pleasant beach, which were content with
six or eight weeks of good business in midsummer. The railroads that
stretched their rails down to it registered good earnings during that hot
season, and they had to put in extensive plants to handle that six or
eight weeks of heavy traffic. The extensive--and expensive--plants were
idle a great part of the year, and there was a lot of capital wasted. The
managers of the railroads told the summer hotel proprietors that, and
asked why beach property should be a losing investment ten months out of
the year. That was a new sort of proposition for a summer resort hotel
proprietor but it seemed sound argument and the hotels extended their
seasons at either end. They combined with the railroads in making
attractive special rates for these duller parts of the season, and before
long the spring was well nigh as popular and as profitable as midsummer.

Folk came over from Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, and up from Baltimore and
Washington, to spend their summers at Atlantic City, and the scientific
business-making there created a fashionable season for Northerners from
Easter forward. The building of wooden hotels ceased, and fireproof
structures of brick and stone, steel and concrete, began to rise along the
beach. Capital ceased to lie idle at Atlantic City. The hotels began to
keep open the year around, and the scientific method of the biggest of the
railroads had been so effectual that it built a million-dollar bridge
across the Delaware at Philadelphia to handle through traffic down to
Atlantic City.

Still the railroads worked in harmony with the hotels, and the fashionable
season began at Christmas instead of Easter. Before long they will make
the fall fashionable, and then the hotels will be crowded all the year
round. When there is a lull in the season they bring on half a dozen
conventions and fill the trains and the hotels with the delegates. That
Atlantic City plant does not lie idle much of the time. There are nearly
800 hotels there to-day--more than fifty of them huge structures--and on a
busy day 300,000 people are along the famous boardwalk above the beach. In
dull days the big hotels are comfortably filled. The hotel men have made
fortunes, the railroads have added millions of dollars to their passenger
earnings because of Atlantic City.

There you have the best example of this new creed of the practical
railroader--making traffic. It is not a lost example. Across the land
every city and town, every resort, from the haughty spa with a cluster of
brilliant hotels down to the humblest inn that ever cuddled by the shore
of a silvery lake, is taking notice of the creed. The farmer is bending
himself to increase the yield of his land, while the railroad reaps a
benefit. The marketman from town is reaching out for better sources for
his needs; the railroad helps him and reaps a benefit. The resort hotel
arranges a joint rate and ticket with the railroad, which covers both
transportation and board for a "week-end" in the dull season, and the
passenger receipts are swelled in some degree.

That is what the railroader calls making traffic.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE EXPRESS SERVICE AND THE RAILROAD MAIL

    DEVELOPMENT OF EXPRESS BUSINESS--RAILROAD CONDUCTORS THE FIRST MAIL
    AND EXPRESS MESSENGERS--WILLIAM F. HARNDEN'S EXPRESS SERVICE--POSTAGE
    RATES--ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION OF GREAT EXPRESS COMPANIES--
    COLLECTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF EXPRESS MATTER--RELATION BETWEEN
    EXPRESS COMPANIES AND RAILROADS--BEGINNINGS OF POST-OFFICE
    DEPARTMENT--STATISTICS--RAILROAD MAIL SERVICE--NEWSPAPER DELIVERY--
    HANDLING OF MAIL MATTER--GROWTH OF THE SERVICE.


While the great transportation functions of the railroad are devoted to
the comparatively simple problems of soliciting and carrying both
passengers and freight in ordinary channels, there are, nevertheless,
special functions of the carrier that demand some slight attention in
passing. These functions might quite properly be known as the by-products
of transportation. The most important of them are the carrying of small
packages of rather greater value than that the railroad ordinarily gives
to the goods that it handles in its own cars, and the carrying of letters
and periodicals. These last two are handled as a monopoly by the Federal
Government, which also competes with a half-dozen big private corporations
in the transportation of merchandise in small individual lots. The
Government calls its service the railroad mail and it is the bone and
sinew of the Post-office Department. The private corporations, creeping in
upon what is also generally a government monopolistic privilege in other
lands, handle what they are pleased to call the express business. Their
business has grown up alongside of that of the United States Government
and the development of the two has run in very similar channels.

       *       *       *       *       *

The express business, like a good many other big businesses, began in
rather simple fashion. Before the railroad came into being, the citizens
in the different towns of the young and rather sprawling nation along the
Atlantic seaboard found it a difficult problem to communicate with one
another. They used to entrust letters and valuable packages to the drivers
of stage-coaches or to the captains of coasting-vessels. If the drivers or
the captains remembered the letter-packet or the package, it was safely
delivered. If they forgot--! So, when the railroad came and drove the old
stage-lines out of business, the conductors of the trains were asked to
accept this side responsibility as an informal part of their work. As long
as this messenger function remained a slight thing, the railroads paid
little attention to the practice, but after a while, the conductors got to
paying more attention to it than to running the trains and the railroads
finally had to stop it.

In the golden age when the conductor's job was developing this valuable
perquisite, William F. Harnden had charge of a passenger train on the old
Boston & Worcester Railroad--a part of the Boston & Albany, which, in
turn, is a part of the New York Central lines. Harnden had entered
railroad service in 1834, when he was but twenty-two years old. He foresaw
the day when the railroads would have to put a stop to their conductors
acting as messengers for the general public, and so, a few years after he
had gone to work for the Boston & Worcester, he went to the superintendent
of that highly prosperous little line, as well as to the highly prosperous
Boston & Providence, and asked for an exclusive contract for an express
service over it as part of a through route between New York and Boston. So
it came about that in a Boston newspaper of February 23, 1839, the
following advertisement appeared:

    "Boston and New York Express Car. William F. Harnden has made
    arrangements with the Providence railroad and the New York Boat
    company to run a car through from Boston to New York and vice-versa
    four times a week commencing Monday, March 4. He will accompany the
    car himself, take care of all small packages that may be entrusted to
    his care and see them safely delivered. All packages must be sent to
    his office, 9 Court street, Boston; or 1 Wall street, New York."

That "car" was a flight of Harnden's imagination, because for several
months a valise sufficed to carry all the packages that were entrusted to
his care. But he progressed, and after a little time he found it necessary
to engage his brother and still another man to act as messengers with him.
The following year he extended his express service to Philadelphia and to
Europe. You may be sure that the success of Harnden's experiment was being
noticed by the thrifty New Englanders. Alvin Adams, who had been in the
grocery commission business up in Vermont, established an express service
of his own in 1840, which in due course of time was to become the Adams
Express Company. It is possible that there might have been to-day a
Harnden Express Company as well, if America's pioneer expressman had not
died six years after establishing his interesting venture.

After Alvin Adams, came a host of express services springing up all over
the eastern end of the United States. Henry Wells, who had been the
associate of Harnden in the development of his business, formed a
partnership with one George Pomeroy for a service between Albany and
Buffalo. William G. Fargo, the freight-agent for the one-time Albany and
Syracuse Railroad, was the freight-agent for Pomeroy and Wells at Buffalo
in 1842. Wells and Fargo eventually got together, and in the throbbing
days of the late forties and the fifties, Wells, Fargo & Co. became an
express service of magnitude, a concern not to be lightly reckoned with.

Strangely enough, the express companies came to their first prosperity
through the thing that they are now forbidden to carry--letters. For in
the early forties the United States Post-office Department demanded six
cents for carrying a letter thirty miles, eight cents for sixty miles, ten
cents for one hundred miles--the ratio steadily progressing until
twenty-five cents was charged for 450 miles. Those rates had been in
effect since the department was first established, and the service was
fearfully slow, and untrustworthy into the bargain. The new express
companies took advantage of their opportunity and--to cite a single
instance--they would carry a letter from Buffalo to New York for six
cents, while the Government charged twenty-five cents for a similar, but
an inferior service.

In 1850 the express services were beginning to be merged--Livingston &
Company and Wells & Company had already formed the American Express
Company. Four years later, Adams & Company, Harnden & Company, and some of
the smaller express services united in the formation of the Adams Express
Company,--and in that year the minstrel men began to ask the question:
"For whom was Eve made?" The United States Express Company was also
organized in 1854, and all this while Wells, Fargo & Company were forming
history for themselves in the Far West--carrying mail out to the gold
miners and their precious dust east in return.

[Illustration: A PORTION OF THE GREAT DOUBLE-TRACK SUSQUEHANNA RIVER
BRIDGE OF THE BALTIMORE & OHIO--A GIANT AMONG AMERICAN RAILROAD BRIDGES]

[Illustration: "IN SUMMER THE BRAKEMEN HAVE PLEASANT ENOUGH TIMES OF
RAILROADING"]

[Illustration: A FAMOUS CANTILEVER RAPIDLY DISAPPEARING--THE SUBSTITUTION
OF A NEW KENTUCKY RIVER BRIDGE FOR THE OLD, ON THE QUEEN & CRESCENT
SYSTEM]

By the beginning of the Civil War, there was a well established business,
a business established with admirable foresight. Such men as Adams, Wells
and Fargo, and Benjamin F. Cheney, one of the founders of the American
Express Company, said that the express business should be kept within
narrow limits--so within narrow limits it has been kept, and to-day when
Harnden's suitcase has developed into a business paying luscious
dividends on more than a hundred million dollars of capital stock, there
are five great companies: the American Express Company, the Adams Express
Company, the Wells, Fargo Express Company, the United States Express
Company, and the National Express Company. The interests of these
companies are closely interwoven--for instance: while the National Express
Company is operated as a separate business, it is absolutely controlled by
the American Express Company. In addition to this Big Five, there is a
cluster of smaller companies, such as the Great Northern Express Company,
of J. J. Hill's system, the Southern Express Company, the Long Island
Express Co., and two thriving carriers in the Dominion of Canada. These in
turn are more or less closely affiliated with the larger companies.

The express companies no longer force a man to bring his shipment to their
offices. In every considerable town, there are whole fleets of wagons that
reach to the outermost limits, both for collection and for distribution.
In this service the automobile truck has begun readily to displace the
older type of horse and wagon. The wagon service brings the express
package, no matter how small or how large, to a central distributing
depot, where all are gathered together and sent, in through railroad cars,
to their destinations, being handled very largely as we have seen the L.
C. L. freight handled in the great transfer houses of the railroads. The
express company guarantees the safe delivery of the package that is
entrusted to its care. This package may be of the smallest sort
imaginable, or it may be a consignment of a million dollars in specie. In
either case, the express company still accepts the entire responsibility.

If there are whole brigades of delivery wagons in the cities there are
also whole platoons of special cars owned by the railroads and dedicated
to the express service. This brings us to the crux of the express
question--its relations to the railroad. These are embraced in voluminous
contracts and subcontracts--which are generally placed among the secret
archives of all the companies that subscribe to them. The Interstate
Commerce Commission, at Washington, has had, however, access to most of
these contracts and of them it has said:

    "The contract between an express company and a railroad company
    usually provides that the express company shall have the exclusive
    right to operate upon the lines named for a definite term of years;
    that all matter carried on passenger trains, except personal baggage,
    corpses, milk cans, dogs, and certain other commodities, shall be
    turned over by the railroad company to the express company; that the
    railroad company shall transport to and from all points on its lines
    all matter in charge of the express company; that special or exclusive
    express trains shall be provided by the railroad company when
    warranted by the volume of express traffic; that the railroad company
    shall furnish the necessary cars, keep them in good repair, furnish
    light and heat and carry the messengers of the express company as well
    as all necessary equipment; that the railroad company shall furnish
    such room in all its depots and stations as may be necessary for the
    loading, unloading, and storing of express matter; that the express
    company may employ during the pleasure of the railway any of the
    agents of the latter as express agents and may employ the train
    baggage-men as its messengers.

    "The express company, on its part, agrees to pay a fixed per cent of
    its gross receipts from handling express matter; to charge no rate at
    less than an agreed per cent of the freight rates on the same
    commodity--usually one hundred and fifty per cent; to handle, free of
    charge, money, bonds, valuables, and ordinary express matter of the
    railway."

The railroad mail service is, in many ways, closely analogous to that of
the express service. To it also, are devoted whole platoons and brigades
of especially equipped cars, and it comes under the direction of the
capable traffic officers of a great government department.

The Post-office Department is practically as old as the nation itself. For
it was away back in November, 1776, that Ebenezer Hazard, who had been
appointed Postmaster General to the Continental Congress, filed a
memorandum of gentle complaint because of the long distances he was
compelled to travel to keep pace with the wanderings of the Continental
Army. But it was not until George Washington had become President of the
United States, in April, 1789, that the Post-office Department came into
any real semblance of organization. Samuel Osgood, of Massachusetts, was
the man to whom was given the task of making a real business out of what
had once been a haphazard courtesy of the past of stage-drivers and ships'
captains. Some men had made individual businesses out of the management of
stage-routes--in fact, Benjamin Franklin was an early postman. But the
United States Government from the beginning created the mail service as a
monopoly for itself--following the rule of other nations.

In 1789 the Post-office Department was a crude enough affair. The
Postmaster General had but one clerk, there were but 75 post-offices and
1,875 miles of post-roads in the whole country. In the first year of the
department's activities the cost of mail transportation is given as being
$22,081, with the total revenue $37,935. The total expenditures of the
department that year were $32,140, leaving a surplus for the twelvemonth
of $5,795, a somewhat better showing than has been made in some years
since that time.

The report of the Post-office Department for the year ending June 30,
1910, lies before us as we write this chapter. It tells the graphic growth
of a great business in one hundred and twenty years. For in this last
twelvemonth the receipts were $224,128,657--a really vast sum compared
with that modest $37,935 for 1789-90. The expenditures for this year
ending June 30, 1910, were even higher--$229,977,224--leaving a deficit of
$5,848,567. The Postmaster General has asserted, however, that he will
have succeeded in turning that loss into a slight profit for the year
ending June 30, 1911. These figures do not alone show the growth of the
mail service of a great land that has become entirely dependent upon this
great function of its business and social life. Think of the 75
post-offices of 1789, compared with the 59,580 offices of 1910--and that
because of the marvellous development of the rural free delivery during
the past ten or twelve years, a decrease from the high-water mark of
76,688 in 1900. Figures are sometimes impressive and the statistics of the
Post-office Department show that 78,557 postmasters, clerks, and carriers
give the major portion of their time to its service. In addition to these,
those same statistics enumerate 40,997 rural delivery carriers, who bring
the entire post-office force up to the astounding total of 119,554 men and
women.

       *       *       *       *       *

Without the railroad the Post-office Department could not have come to its
present great development as one of the chief arms of government activity.
The postal service is an interesting adjunct of the railroad; the railroad
is a vital factor in the successful conduct and development of the postal
service. Away back in 1836, Postmaster General Barry, in his annual
report, spoke of the rapid multiplication of railroads in all parts of the
country and asked if it was not worth while to secure the transportation
of mail upon them. He added:

"Already have the railroads between French Town, in Maryland, and New
Castle, in Delaware, and between Camden and South Amboy, in New Jersey,
afforded great and important facilities to the transportation of the great
Eastern Mail."

As General Barry wrote, the Baltimore & Ohio was spinning its extension
lines from Baltimore to Washington, and he expressed an opinion that with
that line a through mail service from New York to Washington might be
accomplished in sixteen hours. That service is now made between those
cities in five hours. General Barry's appeal must have brought fruit, for
Congress, on July 7, 1838, passed an act approving every railroad in the
United States as a post-route.

The railroads accepted this responsibility with alacrity. The Baltimore &
Ohio equipped compartments in baggage-cars running between Baltimore and
Washington, which were kept tightly locked and to which only the
postmasters of those two cities had access. Still the early methods of
handling merchandise of every sort were crude and it was not until the
days of the Civil War that the railroad mail service began to attain
anything like its present precision and dispatch. Most great organisms are
apt to trace their development to the brilliancy or the inspiration of one
man or a group of men, and the railroad mail service has been no exception
to that rule.

W. A. Davis, a clerk in the post-office at St. Joseph, Missouri, in 1862,
conceived the idea that railroad mail could be assorted on the cars before
it reached St. Joseph. In those days, St. Joseph was a pretty important
sort of a place. The overland mail started west from there, and Davis
thought that if it could be at least partly assorted before it reached St.
Joseph, there would be no delay in starting overland. The Post-office
Department encouraged him and he began what was destined to become the
most important and interesting function of the railroad mail service.

In the same years that Davis was studying out postal problems at St.
Joseph, Col. G. B. Armstrong was assistant postmaster at Chicago. He was
asked by Postmaster General Montgomery Blair, of President Lincoln's
Cabinet, to undertake the development of the railroad mail service. He
accepted the task August 31, 1864, and a little later was made General
Railway Mail Superintendent, a position which he held until 1871, when he
was compelled to retire because of ill health. Col. George S. Bangs, of
Illinois, succeeded him, and to Col. Bangs was given the opportunity of
the third great development in the railroad mail service. In his report
for the year 1874 he discussed the possibilities of establishing a fast
and exclusive mail train between the two great postal centres of the
land--New York and Chicago. To quote from Colonel Bangs' report:

    "This train is to be under the control of the department so far as it
    is necessary for the purpose designed, and to run the distance in
    about twenty-four hours. It is conceded by railroad officials that
    this can be done. The importance of a line like this cannot be
    overestimated. It would reduce the actual time of mail between the
    East and the West from twelve to twenty-four hours. As it would
    necessarily be established on one or more of the trunk lines having an
    extended system of connections, its benefit would be in no case
    confined, but extended through all parts of the country alike."

Postmaster General Jewell liked Col. Bangs' idea and told him to arrange
with the Lake Shore Railroad and the New York Central & Hudson River
Railroad for a fast mail train to leave New York at four o'clock in the
morning and make Chicago in twenty-four hours. But the Post-office
Department, while it might grandly order fast mail trains into service,
had no appropriation from which to pay for them. Nevertheless, Col. Bangs
appealed to the older Vanderbilt, owner of both the New York Central and
Lake Shore Railroads. Commodore Vanderbilt was not a sentimentalist. He
had little use for men who came to him with risky propositions and empty
pocketbooks. Nevertheless, the mail train idea appealed to the old
railroader, and he turned to his son, William H. Vanderbilt, and asked him
what he thought of the idea. The younger Vanderbilt suggested building the
special cars needed for this service and placing the train in operation,
with hopes of remuneration by the following Congress. He felt that the new
trains would instantly become so popular as to compel Congress to provide
for their up-keep.

"If you want to do this, go ahead," said Commodore Vanderbilt, "but I know
the Post-office Department, and you will, too, within a year."

William H. Vanderbilt went ahead. He constructed and placed in service
such trains--of glittering white and gold--as the railroad had never seen.
Nightly they made their spectacular run between New York and Chicago with
clock-work regularity. They never missed connections. The Pennsylvania
Railroad quickly followed the example of its traditional rival. Within a
half-year the United States had such a mail service as it had never
dreamed of possessing, a mail service a quarter of a century ahead of any
other nation in the world.

And yet Congress did the very thing that the sagacious old Commodore
Vanderbilt had predicted. It absolutely refused to pay for the fast mail
trains, and they were taken out of service. There was another factor in
the situation, however, and that always a lively factor--the public. When
the man out in Sioux City found that his mail was again taking eighteen
additional hours to reach him from New York, he rose up in all the fulness
of upstrung wrath and let his Congressman hear from him. And he was only
one of tens of thousands whose business comfort had been heightened, quite
imperceptibly, by the new trains, and upset very perceptibly by their
withdrawal. They were returned to service in 1877, and have since become
so recognized and useful a function of the mail service that it would be a
brash Congress or Postmaster General who would even attempt to tinker with
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes you brush elbows with the railroad mail service. You notice
perhaps, the big heavy car up forward in the long train, with its open
door and its gallows-like crane for snatching mail-bags, at cross-road
stations, where the through train does not even deign to slacken speed. If
you have had an important and delayed letter to post, you may have
breathed your little prayer of thanks to the railroad mail because you are
able to drop it into the slot of a car that stood, that was halted for an
impatient minute or two in its race overland. But these are hardly more
than superficialities of the service. If you wish to come closer to its
heart, present yourself sometimes just before dawn at one of the great
railroad terminals of a really metropolitan city. You had better present
yourself in spirit and not in flesh, because this busy time--when most
honest men are asleep--is not a time when visitors are welcomed. The
Government is singularly diffident about showing the inner workings of its
Post-office Department.

But these inner workings are alive and alert at three o'clock of the
morning that you come to the platform sheds of the big terminal--you can
see the shadowy outline of the darkened building itself rising up behind
you. Most of its platforms which by day are constant and brisk little
highways, are also darkened. The long files of empty coaches that line
these platforms reflect in their many windows the signal lights of the
outer yard. Now and again you catch the flicker of a pointed yellow light
against the background of blackness--the bobbing of a watchman's lantern
as he sees that all is well in the few hours of comparative quiet that
come to this great terminal.

This one train platform is alert and alive--brilliant under the
incandescence of electricity. A brigade of shirt-sleeved men line it,
while to its outer edge one great wagon after another--each showing the
red, white, and blue of government service under the reflections of the
arcs--comes rolling up, with a fearful clatter over the rough pavement of
the station yard. From the cavernous recesses of these great wagons their
stores are poured forth--dozens and dozens of mail sacks of leather and
canvas, each tagged and directed with absolute accuracy.

The grimy granite bulk of the general post-office is a scarce half-dozen
blocks away from this terminal--an easy span for each of the great
mail-wagons. Into that general post-office the mail--letters, newspapers,
packages, all of inconceivable variety--has been pouring at flood-tide
ever since the close of business nine hours before. The carriers with
their heavy pouches began this tide; wagons bringing their contribution
greatly swelled it. From the nearer stations the mail came, silent and
unseen, through the giant pneumatic tubes that reach out from the general
post-office, under city streets, like great arteries. Underneath the
ghastly green mercury lamps of the distributing floor of the general
post-office, the first steps were taken toward separating the flood.
Expert mail-clerks, working under tremendous tension, made a rough
classification of all that come under their trained fingers--sometimes by
counties, again by States, or even a group of States. One great
subdivision was transcontinental and transpacific. This train with its
close connections on the Western lines will reach San Francisco just in
time to catch there a big, red-funnelled steamship about to depart for
Yokohama and Hong Kong. At Hong Kong the red-funnelled boat will connect
with a P. & O. steamer whose screws will hardly cease revolving until she
reaches Calcutta. The railroad mail service is a thing that reaches much
farther than the rights-of-way of the railroads themselves.

There are seven cars in this train--five cars for the postal service and
two chartered by the morning newspapers. There are no coaches. Now and
then one of these flyers will deign to carry a single sleeper, but such is
the exception. The fast mail does not stop to quibble with such trifles as
passengers. It even turns its shoulders upon the express companies--they
have their own fast special trains across the continent.

The last of the mail-wagons has delivered its valuable load to the cars.
The final newspaper wagon comes dashing up to the platform--its horses
a-froth and its driver on the edge of profanity.

"Here's the firsts," he yells. "Big fire down the water-front and they
wanted to make the edition with it. We were three minutes late."

Three minutes late! Seventeen minutes ago the last of the smoking-hot
forms came from that newspaper's stereotyping rooms and here are the first
ten thousand copies of the morning's run--fresh and damp smelling of the
forest. Before the driver began his hurried explanation of delay, the
copies were being thrown into the last car. He had hardly finished before
a big bell, high-hung somewhere in the invisible blackness, speaks its one
brief note of authority; lanterns are raised alongside the full length of
the train--the seven big cars are softly getting into motion. And before
this train is fully in motion the newspaper's messengers are busy with the
papers that have been thrown in at the open door; before it has bumped its
way over the wide-spreading "throat" at the entrance of the terminal, they
are bringing the first semblance of order out of the miniature mountain of
newspapers piled high on the car floor.

Chaos, did we say? Well, hardly that. The circulation manager of the
metropolitan morning newspaper has been called a "field marshal of the
empire of print," and field marshals incline to order rather than to
chaos. It is less than seventeen minutes from the first of that torrent of
newspapers pouring from the hopper of the grinding press, yet here they
are, each in an accurate bundle of not more than two hundred and fifty
copies, and accurately tagged. The label of each bundle bears in big clear
letters the news company or dealer to whom it is consigned, the town, the
railroad and its connections. There is not much chance for errors here.

As the newspaper messengers begin to arrange their stock--the papers for
the nearest towns on top so that they may be most easily reached, to be
thrown off while it is still dusk, so that Mr. Early Riser may read his
favorite metropolitan journal as he sips his breakfast coffee--so are the
mail-clerks in the cars ahead bending to their tasks. Roundabout them are
rows of pouches held in iron frames, with their hungry throats held wide
open, and infinite racks of small pigeon-holes--the same kind that you
remember in the up-country post-offices. When the pouches first come into
the car they are opened and their contents "dumped-up," to use the
parlance of the service, upon the shelf-like tables that run the length of
the place. The next process is "facing-up"--bringing addressed sides of
all the matter uppermost for facility in distribution. And after that the
distribution itself--no easy matter when all the world is constantly
writing to all the world, and the criss-cross currents are all but
innumerable.

So come all classes of mail to these swift-flying cars--letters,
newspapers, packages, the specially protected registered mail,--and for
all of these classes the apparently endless sorting goes steadily forward,
while the train rounds sharp curves and sends the ordinarily sure-footed
clerks clutching handrails for balance, under the dead glow of acetylene,
holding each separate mail-piece for a fraction of a second--sometimes
longer if it be a "sticker" in the chirography or the detail of its
address--and then shooting it into the proper pigeon-hole or open-mouthed
pouch. Some of these cars are destined for cities or States or groups of
States--the wheels under one of them are not going to cease revolving for
any length of time until it stands on the long Mole, opposite San
Francisco, and the through pouches, with the British coat-of-arms and the
meaningful "G. R." stamped upon them, are being shipped aboard the
red-funnelled steamship which is to carry them on the last leg of their
long journey over two seas and a broad continent, from London to Hong
Kong.

These trains are no longer novel on the modern railroad. They are
established features of the train service. From New York City goes forward
one-sixth of all the mail matter originating in the United States. The
aggregate circulation of all the New York morning newspapers is somewhat
larger than the aggregate circulation of the morning newspapers of the
other cities of the country, so from New York there goes forth between
midnight and dawn a flotilla of special mail and newspaper trains. Two of
the fastest of these start from the Grand Central Station. The "Boston
Special" of the New York, New Haven & Hartford leaves that spacious
terminal at just 2:10 A. M., no matter what desperate excuses may be
telephoned at the last moment by some circulation manager who is
confronted by a disabled press, or some such disaster. It slips through
the suburban territory without halting--the nearby commuters are served
with their papers and their mail by the early morning locals. Bridgeport,
at 3:31 A. M., is the first halt; New Haven, at 3:52, the second. At New
Haven, the papers for Hartford, Springfield, and the whole Connecticut
valley country are thrown off. At New London, which is reached at 4:53 A.
M., go the papers for Norwich, Worcester, Newport, and New Bedford. One
more halt, at Providence, and the train, running as fast as the fastest of
New Haven flyers, is at the South Station, Boston--at just 7:20 o'clock. A
Boston & Maine flyer, taking mail and newspapers away up the coast through
three States, leaves the North Station at 8:01 A. M., and so there follows
a quick transfer of mail and newspapers through the twisting streets of
the Hub.

The other early morning flyer leaves the Grand Central at 3:05 o'clock,
and it makes its course over the main stem of the New York Central Lines.
It reaches Albany at 6:30 o'clock and not only distributes there for
Western Massachusetts and Vermont, the upper Hudson Valley and the Lake
Champlain territory north to Montreal, but overhauls a passenger train
that left New York a little after midnight. It continues its course
through the heart of the Empire State--reaching Syracuse at 10:05 A. M.
and Rochester at 11:47 A. M. At Buffalo, which is reached at 1:20 P. M.,
there are important connections for the West and Southwest, and the
Chicago letters in that grimy train are going out on the first delivery
from the Chicago post-office the next morning.

The Pennsylvania hauls two great trains--built up of mail sections from
its new terminal on Manhattan Island, which has a great post-office in
process of growth, built over a portion of its platform tracks, and
newspaper sections from the old Jersey terminal, which is still most
convenient to a majority of the metropolitan papers. The first of these
trains is bound for the South and the Southwest. It leaves New York at
2:20 A. M., passes Philadelphia at 4:25, and steams into Baltimore at 6:40
A. M. Another hour sees it in Washington and transferring its load to the
mail-trains that are about to start for the long journey to Atlanta and
New Orleans. A New Yorker sojourning for a part of the winter at Palm
Beach, Florida, can be sure of having his favorite Sunday paper not later
than Tuesday morning.

The second Pennsylvania train leaves thirty minutes later and follows the
main line of that much-travelled highway all the way to Pittsburgh, which
it reaches just at noon. Other railroads out of New York start fast
newspaper and mail trains just before dawn and combine regular passenger
facilities with them--the Lehigh Valley despatching a flyer at 2:00
o'clock from the old Pennsylvania terminal in Jersey City for the populous
northeastern corner of Pennsylvania and the so-called Southern Tier of New
York State. The Lackawanna reaches a somewhat similar territory by its
fast express, which leaves Hoboken at 2:30 o'clock.

A similar cluster of mail and newspaper flyers starts out of Chicago early
each morning--east over the Lake Shore, the Michigan Central, and the
Pennsylvania, south over the Monon and the Illinois Central, and west and
northwest over the Northwestern, the Rock Island, and the Santa Fe. Other
great cities follow the same programme in lesser scale--there are many
important fast-mail trains that make their departures from initial
terminals throughout all the daylight hours and late into the evening. A
regiment of mail-cars make their way over the face of the land on fast
through expresses of every sort. The postal service is a business of
magnitude within itself.

The Postmaster General's report for the year ending June 30, 1910, gives a
clear conception of its magnitude. He showed then that there were 176 full
railroad post-office lines, manned by 1,736 crews of 8,332 clerks. There
were also 1,392 compartment railroad post-office lines--lines in which a
portion of a baggage or smoking-car is partitioned for the sole use of the
postal service--manned by 4,085 crews of 5,407 clerks, 18 electric car
lines with 20 crews and 22 clerks, and 55 steamboat lines with 98 crews
and 86 clerks. Of the cars built for the exclusive use of the railroad
mail service, 1,114 were in use and 206 held in reserve, while 3,208 of
the compartment cars were in use, 559 of these being held in reserve. In
addition, the Post-office Department operates 25 trolley mail-cars.

Great progress has been made in the substitution of steel mail-cars for
wooden ones--a real step forward when one pauses to consider the dangerous
position in which the mail-cars are placed in most trains. The records of
the Post-office Department are filled with stories of heroism on the part
of mail-clerks in saving, both the extremely valuable merchandise that is
given to their care, and vastly more valuable human lives. The list of the
post-office employees who have met death while on duty in the railroad
mail service is not a short one.

But the railroads are cooperating with the Government in giving the
finest type of steel cars to its mail service,--sixty of these are already
in use on the Pennsylvania system,--for, as we stated at the outset of
this chapter, the transportation of Uncle Sam's mail is no slight function
of the modern railroad. The big operating men across the land are
constantly bending their heads with those of the post-office officials
toward the betterment of that transportation.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE MECHANICAL DEPARTMENTS

    CARE AND REPAIR OF CARS AND ENGINES--THE LOCOMOTIVE CLEANED AND
    INSPECTED AFTER EACH LONG JOURNEY--FREQUENT VISITS OF ENGINES TO THE
    SHOPS AND FOUNDRIES AT ALTOONA--THE TABLE FOR TESTING THE POWER AND
    SPEED OF LOCOMOTIVES--THE CAR SHOPS--STEEL CARS BEGINNING TO SUPERSEDE
    WOODEN ONES--PAINTING A FREIGHT CAR--LACK OF METHOD IN EARLY REPAIR
    SHOPS--SEARCH FOR FLAWS IN WHEELS.


To care for its rolling-stock the railroad creates two distinct functions
of its business. All the care of its permanent way, including tracks,
tunnels, bridges, comes under the control of the Maintenance Way
Department. Similarly, the Mechanical Department assumes control of the
cars and engines, sees to it that each is maintained to its fullest
efficiency, both by care in daily service and by certain visits to the
shops at regular intervals, for repairs, reconstruction, and painting.

To do all this requires a large plant, both in buildings and machinery. It
is distributed at every important point along the railroad. At terminal
and operating points, roundhouse facilities of greater or less extent are
sure to be located, and at the headquarters of each division these are
generally expanded into shops for the making of light repairs and to avoid
handling crippled equipment for any great distance. One large shop plant
is apt to suffice the average railroad for the heavy repair work. If the
road stretch to any extraordinary length, even this feature is apt to be
duplicated in order to concentrate this repair work as far as possible.

All this concerns the care and repair of the locomotive--which the
railroader quickly groups under the title "motive-power." To care for the
engines while they are in use out upon the line, to see to it that
engineers and firemen alike handle these mechanisms with economy and
skill, is a responsibility that is placed upon the road foreman of engines
of each division. He has supervision over smaller roundhouses but at any
of the larger of these structures there is a roundhouse foreman in direct
charge. The railroad long ago learned that its best economy rested in
having plenty of executive control. That has come to be one of the maxims
of the business.

There is a master mechanic in charge of the division shops and in many
cases he has authority over the road foreman of engines and the roundhouse
foremen. Then under him he has his various assistants, forming a working
force not at all unlike that of the average iron-working shop. All this
organism is gathered together under a superintendent of motive power, who
in turn may report to a general mechanical superintendent. This official
answers only to the general manager, or, in some cases, to a
vice-president to whom these functions of the care of the railroad are
delegated.

The proposition of the cars is generally treated quite apart from that of
the locomotive, and separate shops under the direction of a master
car-builder and his assistants are located at a few points upon the
system, where they may be of fairly easy access. Rough repairs (the
car-builders term these "light" repairs) to cars are carried forth at each
division yard. This work is almost entirely confined to the freight
equipment, and a good part of it goes upon "foreign" cars--cars that do
not belong at all to the railroad making the repairs.

This feature of the repair work is a direct result of an elaborate system
of interchange in freight equipment upon American railroads, in order to
prevent the breaking of bulk in the shipment of merchandise from one line
to another. Cars will break down when they are many hundreds of miles away
from home, and the railroad upon which they are operating at the time
carts them to the nearest temporary repair yard or to its own shops, makes
the necessary repairs, and charges for them in accordance with a scale
prepared by the national association of Master Car-Builders. This
necessitates a vast deal of bookkeeping and is only one of the many
complications brought about by our extensive plan of railroading in
America.

The railroad will probably build the greater part of its freight
equipment, although in these days of the supplanting of wood by steel in
car-construction the companies are apt to stand appalled at the cost of
the steel working machinery, and to buy their cars direct from the
manufacturers very much as they purchase their locomotives. Passenger
equipment is almost invariably secured in this way. It is a big railroad
indeed that seeks to construct for itself the huge travelling palaces that
the passenger of to-day has come to demand for his comfort. The repairing
and the painting of these elaborate vehicles is enough of a proposition in
itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

To begin at the beginning, one first comes in contact with the mechanical
department as it comes into constant contact with the operation of the
railroad. This is the more quickly observed at the roundhouses, those
great circular structures that are a feature of the railroad section of
every important town. In England the "engine sheds," as they are there
known, are simple enough structures, housing a series of parallel tracks,
which are served by either a transfer table or switches. Such a plan is
pursued in this country only where space is at a premium--as in the heart
of some great city where realty is exceedingly high-priced; for the heads
of our railroads have held tenaciously to the easily operated turntable
and roundhouse scheme. The table, generally driven by electricity or a
small dummy engine, forms the centre, the roundhouse a segment of the
entire rim of the wheel. The great advantage of its simple design lies in
the fact that it is instantly possible to get at any one of the fifty
or more locomotives that it houses. It is this feature that has endeared
it to the railroad man for many years.

[Illustration: TRIPLE-PHASE ALTERNATING-CURRENT LOCOMOTIVE BUILT BY THE
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO. FOR USE IN THE CASCADE TUNNEL, OF THE GREAT NORTHERN
RAILWAY]

[Illustration: HEAVY SERVICE, ALTERNATING AND DIRECT CURRENT FREIGHT
LOCOMOTIVE BUILT BY THE WESTINGHOUSE COMPANY FOR THE NEW YORK, NEW HAVEN &
HARTFORD RAILROAD]

[Illustration: THE MONOROAD IN PRACTICAL USE FOR CARRYING PASSENGERS AT
CITY ISLAND, NEW YORK]

[Illustration: THE CIGAR-SHAPED CAR OF THE MONOROAD]

The locomotive that hauls the train goes to its "stall" in the roundhouse
directly after its work is done. Its crews, having finished their run,
desert it for the time being, and it comes within the charge of the
roundhouse foreman and his "hostlers." These old terms are reminiscent of
the days when the roundhouse was a real stable and its denizens flesh and
blood horses. Now the denizens of the roundhouse are iron horses, and in
their great size as they rest within their house they are indicative of
the progress that has been made in the design and construction of railroad
equipment.

On the way to the roundhouse, possibly on the way from it (the practice
varies on different railroads) the engine will stop at the ash-pit. It
will have its fires cleaned in a long pit that runs underneath a section
of track, and then pass on to the coaling-shed. The long pit at some
points is filled with iron buckets that run on wheels into which the ashes
are dumped and these are emptied by overhead crane apparatus into a nearby
line of empty gondolas, ready to be taken away to be disposed of.

At the coaling shed the tender is filled, some twelve or fifteen tons
being required if the engine is large; the water-spout fills the capacious
tanks, while the hostlers take good care to see that the sand-box is
filled, as a precaution against slipping on the next steep grade. Then on
to the turntable and the waiting stall, until ready to go out again upon
the regular service or extra duty. During that time it will be both
cleaned and inspected. The fireman may be held responsible for the cleanly
appearance of his engine above the running-board. Below that, the work
will be delegated to the roundhouse force. The fireman will probably feel
that it should clean all the engine. When he feels particularly aggrieved
over the matter it is time for him to meet one of the veterans of the
service, who will tell him of the days when the engines were gayly
ornamented with brass and light-colored paints, and the fireman's career
had added to it an endless campaign with his wiping rag against the
tendency of the bright-work to tarnish. There are some things that
decidedly favor the fireman of the present time.

There are not always sufficient roundhouse facilities at every point; the
traffic of our railroads has a way of constantly running away from the
facilities; and so there are many times when the engines must be housed in
the open. But the vigilance and the care upon them are never relaxed. The
railroad that is foolish enough to try to save upon the maintenance of its
motive power sooner or later pays a terrible price for its penurious
folly.

So it comes to pass that every engine makes a regular visit to the shops,
generally at periods of from ten to fourteen months, depending upon the
service in which it is engaged. On some of these visits, it will be pretty
completely dismantled, and a travelling crane running the full length of
the erecting shop will soon lift the heavy boiler from frame and wheels
and carry it down to the boiler-makers, with no more difficulty than an
automatic package carrier in a dry-goods store would have. There is a deal
of pride and rivalry between the men as to the facility and speed that can
be shown in taking an engine in hand, dismantling it completely, making
necessary repairs, setting it up again and placing it in service once
more. The men of the Erie shops at Hornellsville succeeded in doing the
trick a year or so ago in the remarkably short time of twenty-four hours.
In that brief time a locomotive came in from the road, bedraggled and
begrimed and marked "TBMF" for the benefit of the shop-men. "TBMF"
translated means "Tires, Boxes, Machine, Flues," so specifying the engine
parts to be repaired. In the slang of the repair shop the men say "To Be
Made Fast." These four requisites are the ones most necessary to make the
locomotive fit for from 50,000 to 75,000 miles of service before she
shall again turn into the shop. To make them in twenty-four hours required
some planning on the part of the Erie shop foremen at Hornellsville, and
yet it was only a few weeks after 1734 had come out of the Hornellsville
plant fit for revenue service in a single day and night, before the men of
the rival Susquehanna shop wished a chance at a contest of that sort.
"TBMF" generally keeps a locomotive in the shop for from a fortnight to
three or four weeks; the Canadian Pacific considered that it had done a
remarkable thing in effecting these repairs on a locomotive, with a
super-heater, at its Winnipeg shops in 57-1/2 hours. The Hornellsville
record was one most remarkable. But the Susquehanna shop men took 2018 in
off the road after 70,000 miles without repairs; took in the big puller at
7 o'clock in the morning, made the heavy "TBMF" repairs, and turned her
out for revenue service at 7:34 o'clock in the evening--thirteen hours and
thirty-four minutes. At midnight she was pulling a heavy through freight
west once again, and a most astounding record in American shop work had
been consummated.

       *       *       *       *       *

The United States have few such towns as England possesses in Swindon and
in Crede, railroad towns in the distinctive sense that they were the
absolute creation of the railroad in the first instance. There is many a
town from one ocean to the other that has owed its stimulus and
development to the location of large railroad shops and terminals within
its boundaries, but the railroads have, as a rule, dodged the creation of
distinctive towns. Pullman, within the outskirts of Chicago, was a
monumental failure in this very sort of enterprise. It was designed and
built to accommodate the great car-building shops of that man who did the
most of all men to make luxury in railroad traffic--George M. Pullman; and
no greater care was shown in the construction and design of the works than
was given toward the stores, the churches, the schools, and the homes of
the workmen. Pullman was decidedly a model town; yet Pullman was a
failure. Other model towns of the same sort in Europe have been marked
successes, and that very thing may well serve to illustrate the difference
in temperament between the American and the European workingman. The
American resents too much being done for him; he is instinctively jealous
of his individuality.

Away back in the long-ago the Erie created a railroad town at Susquehanna
in the extreme north part of Pennsylvania. It built shops there and soon
after repeated the experiment at Hornellsville in the southwestern part of
New York State. The Baltimore & Ohio Railroad similarly developed
Cumberland, Maryland; and the Lake Shore, Elkhart, Ind. These are few of
many instances where a great railroad shop has served to develop a sizable
town. In some others they have developed important suburbs of large
cities, as the Lake Shore's plant at Collinwood, at the eastern edge of
the city of Cleveland; and the great shops of the New York Central at
Depew, in the outskirts of Buffalo, which were built when the plant at
West Albany could no longer accommodate the rolling-stock of a rapidly
growing system.

In Altoona, Pa., the United States possesses probably the only distinctive
railroad town of extent within its boundaries. Altoona was the creation of
the Pennsylvania Railroad more than half a century ago, and its progress,
carefully stimulated, has proceeded step by step in company with the
progress of one of the largest of American railroad systems. The mistakes
of Pullman have not been repeated at Altoona. If the Pennsylvania Railroad
has ruled the city in the hills, it has ruled it tacitly and tactfully at
all times. It has avoided even the appearance of paternalism, and the
growth of Altoona has been measured by the growth of the country, which in
its turn is measured with marvellous accuracy by the growth of the
railroad traffic. So a trip to Altoona and through its great shops will
be illustrative of the very best practice in the construction and
maintenance of a railroad's car and engine.

The Altoona shops are unusual in the fact that both locomotives and cars
of the highest capacity and finest type are built within them, in addition
to a great repair and refurnishing work being carried forward there at all
times. To do this work, the plant, employing during the seasons of
heaviest traffic something like 15,000 men--is divided into several
divisions that stretch themselves along the railroad tracks for about six
miles.

The first of these divisions consists of the foundries, devoted largely to
the manufacture of cast-iron car-wheels of every size and grade. Extensive
cupolas, core-rooms and moulding-floors are provided for making 1,000
car-wheels every 24 hours. There is the blacksmith shop as part of this
particular plant. The blacksmith is one of the handiest of men about a
railroad shop and one of the few to survive the almost universal
introduction of machine processes. There are also the machine and pattern
shops, together with a large foundry for the manufacture of castings for
cars and locomotives, having a capacity of 200 tons a day.

The second division of industrial activity at Altoona is the locomotive
repair shop. This is the largest of all the individual plants at that
point, employing about 5,000 men, and with its three- and four-story
structures built closely within a busy yard it is a veritable city within
a city. It has a capacity of about 1,800 reconstructed and repaired
locomotives a year and is a shop well calculated to fill any one with
respect.

The third division is the Junction shops, where the new locomotives are
built; 1,800 men are employed within it, and there men take the new
castings and forgings (most of the castings coming up from the giant
foundries that we have just noticed), and from them they create that
almost human thing, the railroad locomotive. When the locomotive emerges
from that shop it takes its turn upon the testing-table, the mechanical
experts place their final stamp of approval upon it, and at last it goes
out from the shop, under its own steam, to perform the great work for
which it was created.

The testing-table is one of the most interesting of Altoona's activities.
The engine is run upon a series of wheels that fit exactly underneath its
own; it is fastened snugly into place; connections are made with a score
of pipes and rods that fit upon its mechanism, and it starts off for a run
up over the division. It runs miles and miles, snorting furiously over the
hard grades and under the heavy loads it has to haul, and yet it does not
move even the finest fraction of an inch from that testing table. Its
mechanism throbs with energy, its wheels revolve at a fearful rate; yet it
is a helpless caged creature in a seemingly impotent energy, as the men in
charge of the test watch a dozen dials, notebooks in hand. The big driving
wheels turn only upon the friction wheels beneath them but the engineers
who are conducting the test can tell the speed at which the locomotive is
travelling--in theory--by the almost human needles upon the dial-faces.
There is more delicate scientific apparatus behind the engine. It is
stripped from its tender for this test, and by this apparatus the pull of
the engine upon the dead load of the train can be exactly estimated in
pounds and ounces. Nor is this all. The friction wheels underneath the
drivers are controlled by powerful water brakes, and by the regulation of
these brakes, strains or handicaps can be placed upon the engine exactly
similar to those of the grades it may have to reach over a heavy
mountainous stretch of railroad.

There is no guess-work about modern railroading. Many hundreds of
thousands of dollars are spent each year in expert scientific tests of
every sort, in the salaries of men who devote their entire time to this
work; and the railroads reap the benefits in many more hundreds of
thousands of dollars in operating economies. Railroading is a pretty exact
science; the big engine on the testing-table at Altoona is only one of a
host of evidences of the skill and genius that are being brought to bear
upon the operation of the great railroad properties of the country at the
present time.

This engine goes upon diet. Dr. Wiley down at Washington with his young
men sustaining themselves scientifically upon measured and selected foods
has something of the same method that is shown with the test engine up at
Altoona in the hills. Its supply of coal is carefully weighed and analyzed
by sample. An accounting of the amount consumed down to ounces is
carefully kept, the water supply is also examined and measured with great
care. When the test is finished and the big chaotive engine has covered
miles of theoretical grades with a long theoretical train hitched on
behind, the experts get busy with their pencils and begin to prepare the
reports upon which their chief may rely when he goes ahead to construct
another gross of 100-ton locomotives.

       *       *       *       *       *

The car shops rank next in importance to the locomotive shops. The foreman
of this plant tells you casually that it has an annual capacity of 300 new
passenger cars and 3,600 new freight cars. It is a great plant of itself,
some seventy acres of ground covered with great construction buildings.
Some of these are in roundhouse form, for convenience in handling
equipment under construction; others are set side by side and easily
reached by use of a long transfer table.

The work of erecting the freight equipment is carried on quite separate
from that of the passenger car work. The almost universal use of steel in
the manufacture of every sort of freight car, save the box-cars, which
still have wooden walls and roof built upon a steel foundation, has made a
large steel-working shop a necessary adjunct of every car-building plant.
One of the most interesting features of the Altoona car-building plant is
a giant hydraulic press situate in the open, just outside of the
steel-working plant. This press brings a dead weight of 1,500 tons down
upon the sheet of steel that it receives. It is used in making the sills
of the freight-cars--"fish-bellies," the master car-builders call
them--and under that giant press a sheet of steel, one-half inch in
thickness and from thirty to forty feet in length, is bent into shape as
easily as you might bend a sheet of soft cardboard within your fingers.
The press makes many hundred "fish-belly" sills every working day, and it
pays its way.

The steel-working in this shop has been carried forth into passenger car
construction and a great shed given over for that work. Within it one sees
the gaunt frames of the cars that are to be, gaining shape, until at the
far end of the shop is a line of the cars, completed as far as the steel
workers can carry them, and ready to be swung by one of the ever-busy
switch-engines to the finishing shop, and then finally to the paint shop.

Even with the steel car coming into its own, there are still hundreds of
thousands of wooden cars in operation; and the construction of wooden cars
will not cease for many years. While steel as a raw material is not far in
advance of the cost of wood these days, the cost of fashioning it into
cars is still so excessive as to make it impracticable save in cases of
extremely profitable operation. One of the strongest points in favor of
steel in car-construction is that of the economy of its maintenance,
always a strong point with railroad men. The wooden car feels the wear and
tear of life upon the rail keenly; in the case of a wreck it is not to be
even compared with the steel car.

It should not be forgotten, though, that the railroads have many thousands
of wooden passenger-coaches still in service, and the substitution of
steel equipment for these has only just begun. The average life of a car
approximates twenty years, and the simplest of railroad economics demands
that these cars be retained for their active life. As they wear out steel
cars can be, and they already are being, substituted by the great systems.
This new equipment is being used at first upon the main lines and through
trains, where both speed and density of traffic demand the railroad's best
equipment. Gradually it will be spread to the trains and branch lines of
less importance.

With the wooden car still a factor in railroad equipment, the carpenter
has not yet lost his vocation in the shops. There is much of the coarser
work on the freight cars for him; in the elaborate passenger coaches,
dining-cars and other equipment of that class, the great mass of cabinet
work still demands the cunning of his hands. Here in the miscellaneous
carpenter-shop he is at work upon a seat frame for a day-coach, a shade
fixture, a broken chair from a dining car, a baggage truck from some
station; there is plenty of work for the carpenter around a car-shop.

It is a matter of pride with the railroad to keep its passenger equipment
bright and shiny and new of appearance. It is part sentiment and part good
business. For a railroad cannot hope to attract passengers with dirty,
unkempt, weather-beaten cars. So it is that the paint-shop is a large
function of the car-shop. American railroads may not go quite as much into
gaudy car decoration as do the railroads of England and continental
Europe. Each year the canons of simple good taste are driving the
car-designers to plainer models, but no expense is spared to make
car-surfaces, within and without, as bright and shiny as those of a
private carriage or an automobile.

So it is that a passenger coach spends from eighteen to twenty days in the
paint-shop alone, in its period of refurbishing. It is primed at first and
then it receives from three to five coats of surfacer. This is all
hand-work, requiring both strong muscles and infinite patience on the part
of the painters. Two or three coats of the standard color of the railroad,
by which its equipment is known distinctively, are given to the exterior.
Lettering and striping follow, then finally two coats of fine varnish are
flowed and rubbed to a high and brilliant polish.

The car is now ready for the dust and the dirt of the line. About every
year it will come back again for re-varnishing and at the end of about
eight years it will again undergo practically the same treatment within
the paint-shop as was given it at the beginning. It will come in rusty and
begrimed after many thousands of miles up and down the toilsome line.
Within three weeks it will emerge from the paint-shop fresh and radiant,
having obtained a new lease of life.

If the same process were to be applied to the freight equipment, the
paint-shop would be of almost unlimited size. But freight-cars are not
varnished. They are merely painted with the best of time-resisting
pigments, usually a dull and sombre red. The freight-cars literally go
through a bath in the paint-shop. Expert painters stand, like
fire-fighters, with a hose-nozzle in their hands. Through the hose the
paint is forced, gallons upon gallons of it; and when it is all over the
freight-car is a fine, even red, just like the painters themselves. The
lettering is a quick matter, with the use of stencils.

       *       *       *       *       *

There remain two other great divisions of a central plant of this
sort--locomotive repair shops and car repair shops, for the needs of the
immediate divisions with their heavy traffic. These shops, extensive in
themselves, present no radical differences from the usual division shops
which a great railroad maintains at every division operating point in
order to keep its rolling stock in the best of order. They are used to
make light repairs. The master mechanic is a discerning man. He must know
and judge accurately when a disabled car or locomotive should go to the
company's main shops, when the repairs can best be made at the local
plant. It is one of the points upon which the economy of the shop system
depends.

On this matter of shop economy whole volumes might be written, and have
been written. In the beginning of shop practices there was little system
in these matters, just as the shop work was reckoned far below its real
importance. One of the earliest of real railroads was the Columbia &
Philadelphia--nowadays one of the main stems of the Pennsylvania's trunk
line--and it was from the beginning a railroad of quite heavy traffic,
double-tracked and reaching into a fat country. Yet a shop at Parkersburg,
halfway up the line, employing forty men in all, was considered quite
enough for the maintenance of equipment. If one of those early engines
broke down at either terminal, the engineer, the fireman and perhaps the
local blacksmith had to make their own repairs.

Nothing was standard, not even the sizes of such simple affairs as nuts
and bolts. Years of railroading have changed all this. The
master-mechanics and the master car-builders meet in annual sessions; and
by means of reports from their expert committees have been evolved
standards in every detail of rolling stock--standard materials, standard
compositions, standard sizes, even standards in nomenclature of railroad
apparatus down to the smallest parts.

Even with this assistance there still remains a mass of detail in every
railroad shop; and a large clerical force is one of its greatest
efficiencies. A sharp and accurate accounting is kept of the cost of
repairs upon each locomotive and car, even such general shop costs as gas
and heat are pro-rated against it. There is no time that the railroad
cannot tell to a nicety the precise cost of each unit of its equipment.

These units are not, in many roads, increased, without precise orders from
the board of directors or the executive committee of the board. In order
to get around this rule some niceties in reconstruction have been known. A
single timber of a worn-out freight car has kept the unit and the number
of the old car, and going into the new has prevented the creation of a
forbidden unit.

The system upon which cars and locomotives are numbered varies greatly
upon different systems. In some cases the first figures of the numbers
indicate the class and style of the car or locomotive, in others they mean
nothing. When a car or a locomotive is nigh worn out its number passes
from it and is given to some newcomer. The old servant has a neatly
painted "X" placed before its number. That "X" is its death warrant. In a
little time it leads the way to the scrap heap.

       *       *       *       *       *

The men who labor in the railroad shops see little of the romance of the
line. Their work is much like that of the men who work in every sort of
large shop. Their responsibility is not less than that of the other
railroaders, the men to whom 150 or 300 miles of line and out-spread towns
are as familiar as the very rooms of their own homes. A flaw in the steel,
a careless bit of shopwork, may serve to derail the express at the least
foreseen moment, to cause disaster in the ringing way that every railroad
man sees at one time or another. It may not always be possible to trace
the responsibility for such an accident. But there is a responsibility,
and the men who work at forge or lathe, at press or planer feel that it is
there. They form no mean brigade of this great industrial army of America.

Such responsibility continues outside of the main shops to the smaller
shops, down to the roundhouse forces, by whose care and vigilance the big
locomotives are kept fitted for their important work; down still farther
to the car-inspectors, who, blue signal-lights in hand, creep through the
long freight-yards of a winter's night to strike the flaw in the metal, to
sound the note of alarm before the worst may come to pass. Some of these
last you hear in the night as you scurry across the country. As you rest
in your berth, and the express is changing engines at some division point,
you may hear the car inspectors coming along the train, striking with
their hammers against the wheels, listening intently for the false ring
by which they may detect trouble. If you trouble yourself to lift the
curtain of your berth, you may see them, a grimy crew, working busily with
their hammers, thrusting their torches in among the trucks to see that all
is well.

Responsibility for the safety in railroad operation does not cease at the
doors of the mechanical department.




CHAPTER XXV

THE RAILROAD MARINE

    STEAMSHIP LINES UNDER RAILROAD CONTROL--FLEET OF NEW YORK CENTRAL--
    TUGS--RAILROAD CONNECTIONS AT NEW YORK HARBOR--HANDLING OF FREIGHT--
    FERRY-BOATS--TUNNEL UNDER DETROIT RIVER--CAR-FERRIES AND LAKE ROUTES--
    GREAT LAKES STEAMSHIP LINES UNDER RAILROAD OWNERSHIP.


In the beginning land transportation must have looked up in something
resembling fear and awe to water. We can picture the railroad of the
thirties as a slender but resourceful David facing the veritable Goliath
of water carriage. In earlier chapters of this book we have shown how the
canals, representing a distinct phase of water transportation, sought to
throttle the railroads at the beginning. But the modern railroad has no
fear of water rivalries, either upon the coast or inland. Just as the
first railroads were ofttimes timidly built as feeders or complements to
water routes, so to-day almost every inland water route is part of a
railroad--in operating fact if not in actual ownership. The tables have
been turned--the railroad finally dominates. Nine-tenths of all the great
water routes in and aroundabout the United States are more or less
directly owned and controlled by the railroads. They have become, in every
sense, corollaries to land transportation.

This is more distinctly shown in some sections of the land than in others.
For instance, up in New England, where the interests owning the New York,
New Haven & Hartford Railroad have accomplished direct or indirect control
of all but a comparatively few miles of the steam and electric railroads
in five great States, they have also acquired the steamship interests of
that district. The New Haven's original excursion into the steamboat
business was when it absorbed the Old Colony Railroad--almost a score of
years ago--in order to ensure its entrance into Boston. The Old Colony
owned a well-famed and highly prosperous steamboat line from Fall River,
Massachusetts, to New York City, part of its through New York-Boston
route. Eventually the New Haven acquired all the brisk and busy steamboat
lines which ran up the Sound from New York to several Connecticut
ports--Bridgeport, New Haven, Hartford, New London, and Stonington. Any
one of these lines was not, perhaps, so much of an acquisition in itself,
but all of them were potentials in a future rate situation that might
arise. It was good executive management to have these potentials under
firm control, and so the New Haven established water routes as a
recognized factor of its business--under the separate corporation title of
the New England Navigation Company. Once when a new company, under the
mellifluous title of the Joy Line, sought to injure its coastwise business
by establishing cut-rates from Providence to New York, the New Haven
placed two of its older boats in a rival and lower-priced service, and, by
means of its great resources, was able to bring the Joy Line into its
fold. Later, when the Enterprise Line tried a like programme, the New
Haven followed the same aggressive tactics and brought the Enterprise Line
to bankruptcy. These things are mentioned here in no spirit of criticism.
But they are the facts that make it impossible for really independent
lines of steamboats to run between New York and Providence for any great
length of time, despite ample docking facilities and a great free port at
each of these cities.

The Metropolitan Line tried to maintain an independent line between New
York and Boston with the two finest steamers ever placed in coastwise
service--the _Yale_ and the _Harvard_. One of these boats left each city
at five o'clock in the afternoon and performed the ocean voyage of 330
miles over the "outside route" in just fifteen hours--and with amazing
regularity. But the New Haven Railroad found it to its interest to control
the coasting lines around about New England, and so the _Yale_ and
_Harvard_ were last winter banished to the Pacific coast.

This is all part of the business of managing great railroad systems. For
similar reasons the Pennsylvania Railroad found it advisable to bring a
group of steamboat lines plying on Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries
under its control, the Harriman lines to reach out and establish ownership
of the lines plying up and down several thousand miles along the Pacific
coast--these are but a few instances out of many. As yet no large American
railroad has essayed to control a transatlantic line, although both the
Hill and the Harriman properties are interested in the transpacific
carrying business. The Canadian Pacific, however, has already
well-established lines across both of the great oceans--making a
continuous route under one management from Liverpool, England, to Hong
Kong, China. Moreover, it is now building four great steamships which are
to be finished simultaneously with the Panama Canal and which will ply
through it from New York direct to Hong Kong. The Canadian Northern has
also recently embarked in the transatlantic carrying business. The
Canadian Pacific and several of the large railroads of the northern part
of the United States maintain lines of sizable gross tonnage on the Great
Lakes--but of these, more in a little while.

[Illustration: A MODERN RAILROAD FREIGHT AND PASSENGER TERMINAL: THE
TERMINAL OF THE WEST SHORE RAILROAD AT WEEHAWKEN, OPPOSITE NEW YORK CITY]

[Illustration: HIGH-SPEED, DIRECT-CURRENT PASSENGER LOCOMOTIVE BUILT BY
THE GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY FOR TERMINAL SERVICE OF THE NEW YORK CENTRAL
AT THE GRAND CENTRAL STATION]

Even if a railroad is not engaged in the steamship business, as such, even
to the extent of one or two small steamboats on inland waters, it may
still possess a considerable harbor fleet,--wharves, and slips--that,
taken together, make a sizable aggregate. Every railroad that has any sort
of ambition to be considered a trunk-line will count upon having one or
two or even more terminals upon navigable streams, and at these it will
protect itself by having its own wharves and landing-stages--even grain
elevators, if it is putting out its hungry fingers for the great traffic
in food-stuffs that sweeps out over the land and water transportation
routes of America. Such a terminal means a railroad fleet--ferries, scows,
lighters, a little company of stout and busy tugs. It means that the
railroad must pay attention to marine laws and marine customs.

       *       *       *       *       *

When a railroad boasts of a terminal in such a city as Boston, New York,
Baltimore, New Orleans, or San Francisco, its fleet of harbor craft is apt
to be quite a sizable navy. Take, for instance, the New York Central's
fleet in and around New York harbor. It consists of 269 vessels, divided
into the following classes: 9 ferry-boats, 22 tugs, 7 steam-lighters, 50
car-floats, 10 steam-hoist barges, 25 open barges, 6 scow barges, 105
covered barges, and 35 grain-boats. And out of all these barges, 10 are
further equipped for refrigerator use.

In such a fleet, eliminating of course the ferry-boats which have their
own peculiar uses, the tugs are almost the sole motive power. There is a
bit of poetry about them, too, even if they are short and stubby, ofttimes
poking their cushioned noses impertinently up against larger and far more
stately craft. But no captain, even though he walk the bridge of an
eight-hundred foot steamship, sneers at a tug. It takes eighteen of them
to place the new giant _Olympic_ in her wharf on the North River, and no
crack company of horsemen ever moved in more precise drill or better
cooperation than these noisy, punting, helping-hands of the harbor of New
York. For ocean ports are different from those along the lakes. A captain
sailing a five-thousand ton ship on fresh water would be ashamed to use a
tug at Detroit, or any other of the Great Lake ports, even where the
current runs almost like a mill-race, unless he was turning in a channel
whose width was but a wee bit more than the length of his ship. But
Detroit and Cleveland and Buffalo and Chicago do not have the tides--and
it is the tide that makes harbor navigation a finely specialized science
at the big ocean ports.

All of the big Atlantic ports save New York have abundant track facilities
alongside the piers, where berth the ships from half the world over. In
New York, the same geographical conditions that have gone to make her so
superb a port and given her so generous a harbor-frontage have blocked the
railroads in their efforts to reach all her piers with unbroken rails. So
the railroads entering that harbor have found it necessary to provide
themselves with such fleets as we have noticed as belonging to the New
York Central. For inland shippers seem to have a preference for sending
their east-bound export merchandise through New York, because of the
frequency of sailings from her wharves to half the recognized ports of the
world.

If you are a manufacturer--at Utica, N. Y., let us say--and you wished to
send a carload of your product to London, Eng., you would find that the
railroad definitely agrees to do certain things for you. On your minimum
basis of a carload lot it will place that carload at any pier in the
harbor of New York. Indeed, it would do a little more. If some of that
carload lot that starts down out of Utica is going to London, some more on
a different ship to Calcutta, and still some more on a tropic-bound liner
to South America, the railroad would make free delivery of your
consignment to the piers of these three ships. It limits, however, the
delivery of a carload lot to three different piers.

This sounds simple, perhaps, and, in reality, is not. For in a single day
of twenty-four hours there may arrive at Weehawken and Sixtieth Street,
Manhattan--the two great freight terminals of the rails of the New York
Central system at New York--from four to six hundred, eight hundred cars,
perhaps, filled with merchandise bound for half a hundred different
piers, along from forty to sixty miles of water-front.

Now you see the use of all this army of lighters and barges--stubby-nosed
craft, awkward craft, boats that have not even a single stanza of the
poetry of the sea written upon their contents. By night, by day, when an
imperial city throbs with the bustle of brisk endeavor, and still when it
tries to snatch a few brief feeble hours of rest, in summer, in winter,
when the two rivers and the great upper bay of New York harbor are alive
with gay pleasure craft, and in the trying hours when a pilot's path is
fraught with the dangers of drifting ice and laid through gray blankets of
mist, this great interchange of freight of every sort goes forth. The
eight or ten great railroads that terminate in New York are pouring export
merchandise to all of her piers, while from those long sprawling
structures they are drawing up imported goods to go forward to every
corner of the land. And in addition to this there is the vast local
commerce of the City of New York, which, as we saw when we were
considering the freight terminals, back in Chapter VII, is no slight
matter of itself. But this traffic, as well as much of that of the great
interchange between the railroads terminating at New York, is handled most
effectively by the car-floats on each of which twelve to sixteen standard
box-cars may be loaded with great expedition.

But the clumsy barges and the lighters and the still clumsier car-floats
are of little use without the tugs, and these last are the quick couriers
of the harbor. Twenty of that New York Central fleet are kept in constant
use in the North and East Rivers, and along the harbor shores to Jersey
City, Bayonne, and the southern parts of Brooklyn. They do not lie idle,
save when they are finally forced to "lay up" for a little time for
repairs. And then a reserve tug is in service without delay.

Here is the modern economy of railroad equipment--even though this be the
part of the railroad that is afloat. A tug pulls up to a dock, its crews
are off almost before their "relief" is standing at its station, and
making sure that the craft is in as good order as they left it. While the
"relief" is finding its tired way toward home the tug is off again. Its
work is constant. Its work is not easy. It does not seem to be systematic
and yet it is--wonderfully systematic.

For here and there about the harbor the captains of these N. Y. C. tugs
get their orders--just as conductors of the trains upon the steel highways
get their clearance cards and yellow tissues. A half-dozen stations give
orders, and these are but the speaking stations of a single man who sits
before a telephone switchboard close by a narrow street of down-town
Manhattan and directs tug movements through the crowded harbor, just as
easily as a despatcher moves extra freights over a crowded stretch of
single-track line.

The traffic runs flood-high and the station men gossip of the whispered
complaints of the tug-crews, but the man at the switchboard only smiles. A
traffic solicitor who plies his heartbreaking work on the floor of the
near-by Produce Exchange comes over to him and says:

"I've promised Smith & Russell delivery of ten cars of flour at Pier 32,
East River, at seven o'clock to-morrow morning. We can't go back on them."

The man at the switchboard does not lose that smooth-set smile, even
though the loudly ticking clock, just above the plugs and cords, shows him
that it is already six o'clock of the evening of a day when the harbor
freight has run flood-high.

"All right," he laughs, "Smith & Russell can count upon us."

And the next moment he is ordering Tug Twenty-seven to go from the
Sixtieth Street pier over to Weehawken to get that small mountain-range of
flour-bags that the "huskies" have already begun to build on a
pier-floor, alongside of a string of dusty, grimy cars that have bumped
their way east from Minneapolis.

Perhaps you are interested in the personality of Tug Twenty-seven. Take
yourself away from the cool-witted despatcher and look down upon this
craft--the queen of a railroad pet marine. She is as resplendent in her
green and gold as any gentleman's yacht, and her crew even more proud of
her. She stands in the water, a mere 110 feet long and 24-1/2 feet beam,
but those wonderful shining engines in her heart can develop 1,200
horse-power--as much as many steamboats of three times her size. Her
watertube boilers can withstand a locomotive pressure of 185 pounds to the
square inch, she has all the accoutrements of coast liners--steam steering
gears and electric lights among them. No wonder that her captain waxes
eloquent about her.

Now ask him about what she can do. That he takes as personal achievement,
and these harbor men are a bashful lot. Still, you can worm it out of him,
and after a while you find that Tug Twenty-seven has just brought a
punt-nosed car-float, with sixteen loaded cars upon her rails, around from
Corlears Hook, through the press of shipping, and around the Battery where
cross-tides battle against one another and against craft of all sorts, up
to Weehawken "bridge" in forty minutes--which is not so very bad for a
ten-mile run through a congested harbor.

"Time counts," adds the captain. "If they had given me another twelve or
fifteen minutes I could have brought around two of the floats--put
together 'V' fashion and the Twenty-seven with her nose stuck up into the
'V'."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the harbor of New York is a great cluster of ferry-boats operated to
overcome her barrier rivers by the several trunk-line railroads whose
systems terminate at a long water-jump from the congested Island of
Manhattan. To compete with railroads boasting terminals on Manhattan
Island itself, these lines have been compelled to equip and operate
extensive ferry fleets across both the East and the North Rivers. Across
the first of these streams operates the navy of the Long Island Railroad,
while across the Hudson ply in an intricate interlacing more than a dozen
ferry routes of the Central Railroad of New Jersey, the Pennsylvania,
Erie, Lackawanna, and the West Shore Railroads. The recent completion of
the New York-Jersey City-Newark routes of the Hudson tunnels, as well as
the inauguration of passenger traffic through both North and East River
tunnels to the new Pennsylvania terminal in Manhattan, has caused the
abandonment of two ferry routes and curtailment of service upon several
others. Tunnel-diggers and bridge-builders make havoc with ferry routes,
which must always remain liable to many delays because of fog, floating
ice, and such other adverse weather conditions.

Still the railroad ferries round about New York derive no small income
from the trucking service of a metropolitan city which has had to struggle
for many years against great intersecting rivers, and so they will
probably continue to be for many years interesting and picturesque
features of New York harbor.

But perhaps the most interesting of all the ferry routes of New York
harbor is the attenuated line from the New York, New Haven & Hartford
Railroad's waterside terminal at Port Morris in the Bronx, for ten miles
through the East River, Hell Gate, around the sharp turn and tides of
Corlears Hook and again of the Battery, and across the Hudson River to the
old terminal of the Pennsylvania Railroad in Jersey City. Over this route
goes through traffic--freight and passenger--from New England to the South
and the Southwest. The freight-traffic is handled largely by car-floats in
charge of the busy puffing tugs, while the passenger traffic goes in
ferry-boats different from the others that ply in New York harbor.

For these ferry-boats are really nothing more than a bettered type of
car-float--a type equipped with powerful engines for self-propulsion.
Through passenger trains run each day and each night between Boston and
Baltimore and Washington, and these trains are handled between Port Morris
and Jersey City upon them. The familiar _Maryland_, which is operated
jointly by the New Haven and the Pennsylvania systems upon this route,
will receive an entire passenger train of ordinary length, excepting, of
course, the locomotive, upon her great deck, which is, in reality, a
miniature railroad yard, equipped with two long parallel tracks that can
be quickly attached to the ferry-bridges at Port Morris and Jersey City.
The trip, with the loading and unloading of the train, is accomplished,
under favorable weather conditions, in about an hour.

It makes a pleasant break in the day trip from the capital of New England
to the capital of the United States, to spend an hour tramping up and down
a broad ship's deck, or dining in a roomy, sun-filled cabin, while New
York itself is as completely ignored as any small way-station along the
run. New Yorkers themselves have long since become too accustomed to
seeing the long train ferried upon the water-way that separates the two
greatest boroughs of the city, to give it more than passing thought. This
ferry is also finally threatened by the bridge-builders. As this is
written, workmen are already preparing the pier foundations for a great
railroad bridge that is to span the East River not far from Hell Gate, and
which is to give an unbroken line of rails from the New Haven's terminal
at Port Morris, through Long Island City, to the Pennsylvania's tunnels
and terminal in Manhattan Island.

So, also, have the tunnel-builders contrived to rob the through traveller
on the Michigan Central of the more or less thrilling water transfer from
Canada to the United States at Detroit. The Detroit River tunnel has
superseded one of the most important car-ferries in the country, but it
has given to the operating heads of the Michigan Central one of the very
shortest through routes from New York to Chicago and robbed them of one of
the fearful handicaps of their main line--the possibilities for constant
and exasperating delays to their through trains while being ferried across
the Detroit River.

Do not underestimate the possibilities of those delays. Within the past
ten years, the transport _Michigan_, plying from Detroit to Windsor, the
Canadian town directly opposite, and carrying a Chicago-Montreal flyer,
was stuck for ten hours in the ice, so near the slip that a long plank
would have almost reached from her deck to the wharf. That, in the lesser
form, has been the history of winter after winter at the Detroit ferry.
Shipbuilders have done their best to meet the obstacle by building
car-ferries of tremendous power, sometimes even equipping them with both
side-wheels and screws. But the real problem of possible delay can only be
solved there by tunnels, and it is expected that the Grand Trunk, the
Canadian Pacific, and the Wabash--which still use the car-ferries across
the Detroit River--will sooner or later either tunnel beneath it or
acquire trackage rights through the Michigan Central tubes.

The Detroit River is a narrow but important part of the tremendously
important water highway up the Great Lakes, and at every part of the whole
length of that highway the railroads have tried to break their way across.
It has not been found impossible to bridge the St. Lawrence or the Niagara
Rivers or the wide straits at Sault Ste. Marie, but there are other
points, even besides Detroit, that have as yet baffled the genius of the
bridge-builder. One of the most important of these is where Lake Michigan
forces its outlet into Lake Huron through the two peninsulas of the great
State that bears its name. To make the two parts of Michigan physically
one with unbroken rail will probably not be accomplished in many years.
In the meantime the stout and tremendously powerful ferry _Algomah_--built
so as to literally crush the ice down under her tremendous bows--plies
between Mackinac City, the Island of Mackinac, situated midstream, and St.
Ignace, on the north shore of the broad strait. Despite the fearful
severity of the winters in northern Michigan the _Algomah_ keeps that
important path open the year round--not only for herself but for the great
car-floats that follow in her wake.

What is possible at the Straits of Mackinac is also possible across the
widest part of any one of the Great Lakes--excepting always the
emotionless Superior. At least that is the way the railroad traffic men
have argued for many years, and so for these many years car-ferries have
plied successfully across the very hearts of three of the lakes. Of all
the chain, Lake Michigan offers the greatest natural obstruction to the
natural traffic movements of the land--its great length, stretching north
and south, forming an obstacle to through rail movements, and contributing
not a little to the railroad importance and the wealth of Chicago.

So it was that car-ferries were established many years ago across Lake
Michigan and are operated throughout the lake to-day--from Manitowoc,
Kewaunee, Milwaukee, Menominee, and Manistique on the west shore of the
lake, to Frankfort, Ludington, Northport, Grand Haven, St. Joseph, and
Benton Harbor upon the east shore. These vessels are of different
construction from the ferries that cross the narrow Detroit River. They
lack the low freeboard and the other typical ferry construction, and are,
instead, deep-gulled vessels, generally built of steel and always of great
structural strength.

"Like the river ferries," says James C. Mills, "they are ice-crushers, but
of greater size and power. During two or three of the winter months the
lakes are frozen in a solid sheet of ice for twenty and thirty miles from
the shores, and in extremely severe winters the ice-fields meet in
mid-lake. To keep a channel open in the depth of winter even for daily
passages back and forth, is a hazardous undertaking for the hardy
mariners. The frequent gales which sweep the lakes break up the fields
into ice-floes which, driven one way or another with great force, pile up
in huge banks, often in the direct course of the transports and as high as
their upper decks. At such times they free themselves only after repeated
buckings of the shifting mass of ice, sometimes miles in extent, by
running their stout prows up on the edge of the mass, breaking it down by
their sheer weight, and ploughing through the ragged, grinding blocks of
ice thus formed."[1]

    [1] "Our Inland Seas," by James C. Mills, 1910.

Four tracks, running the full length of the ship, generally fill the main
deck of these trans-lake ships. The loading of the cars on to these tracks
is accomplished at the stern, the bow being built high and, as we have
just seen, somewhat after the fashion of an overhanging prow. The main
deck is completely roofed over with cabins and deck-houses, so that,
viewed from the rear, the ship seems to be an itinerant pair of railroad
tunnels, dark and gloomy. The upper decks are gay with the resources of
the marine architect--for the greater part of these boats offer
accommodations for passengers as well as for from eighteen to thirty
freight cars. These great ferries form valuable feeders to the Grand
Trunk, the Pere Marquette, the Ann Arbor, and Grand Rapids & Indiana, and
some minor routes crossing Michigan.

Similarly, car-ferries crossing Lake Erie from Cleveland to Port Stanley
are considerable factors both in general merchandise and in the coal
trade. Another Lake Erie route of heavy tonnage extends from Ashtabula,
Ohio, to Port Burwell, Ontario. Within the last few years a car-ferry has
been established across Lake Ontario, from Charlotte--which is the port of
Rochester, N. Y.--to Coburg on the Canadian side, which has already
developed for itself a considerable traffic.

But the car-ferries, extensive as they are, form but a small portion of
the railroad interests upon the waters of the Great Lakes. Almost all of
the great lines through those much-travelled waters are the property of
some railroad system whose rails touch one or more of their terminals.
Thus the Northern Steamship Company, running from Buffalo to Chicago and
Duluth, touches the rails of its parent company, the Great Northern
Railroad, at this last port. The Erie & Western Transportation
Company--popularly known as the Anchor Line--also running from Buffalo to
Duluth, is a Pennsylvania property. Both of these lines are operated for
passenger service, as well as freight. The New York Central and the Erie
cover the same territory with exclusively freight routes. The Rutland
Railroad has a line all the way from its western terminal at Ogdensburg,
on the St. Lawrence River, to Chicago. The Canadian Pacific and the Grand
Trunk operate important lines through Georgian Bay and Lake Superior. Even
a small road, like the Algomah Central, has its own freight and passenger
steamboats running south from the Soo as far as Cleveland, Ohio. It is a
pretty poor line with Great Lakes terminals that cannot boast some sort of
steamship service of its own.

In the development of the coastwise and the inland waterways of the United
States, the railroad may be doing the nation a far greater service than it
imagines. For the general trend of railroad expansion in the country
to-day seems to be toward a development of the auxiliary water-routes
rather than toward their curtailment. The railroad has finally realized
that some coarse commodities can be carried far more economically by water
than by rail. It is to-day seeking to avail itself of that acquired
knowledge. If competing and feeding trolley lines are good things for
railroads to own--and the present-day judgment seems to be that they
are--the same rule holds doubly good in regard to both competing and
feeding water-routes.




CHAPTER XXVI

KEEPING IN TOUCH WITH THE MEN

    THE FIRST ORGANIZED BRANCH OF THE RAILROAD Y. M. C. A.--CORNELIUS
    VANDERBILT'S GIFT OF A CLUB-HOUSE--GROWTH OF THE RAILROAD Y. M. C.
    A.--PLANS BY THE RAILWAYS TO CARE FOR THE SICK AND THE CRIPPLED--THE
    PENSION SYSTEM--ENTERTAINMENTS--MODEL RESTAURANTS--FREE LEGAL
    ADVICE--EMPLOYEES' MAGAZINES--THE ORDER OF THE RED SPOT.


The historic gray Union Station, which still stands at Cleveland, housed
what was destined to be the very first systematic effort of the railroad
to get in touch and keep in touch with its men. In that building, once new
and splendid, but now old and grimy, George Meyers, the depot master,
gathered a group of railroaders on a Sunday away back in 1870. The man
came again on a second Sunday, still again on a third; after a little
while those Sunday afternoon gatherings became habitual, and a new kink in
all the intricacy of railroading was established. The meetings were partly
religious and partly social, and eventually they led to a distinct
innovation in that depot.

This little conference of Meyers was, in 1872, developed into the first
organized branch of the railroad Young Men's Christian Association.
General John H. Devereux, the general manager of the Lake Shore & Michigan
Southern Railway; Reuben F. Smith, of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh Railroad,
and Oscar Townsend of the Big Four Railroad were chosen directors of the
branch. Henry W. Stage, a train-despatcher on the Lake Shore, was
earnestly and intensely enthusiastic in this work; and because of his zeal
and enthusiasm, together with that of George Meyers, this branch was
successful from the outset.

The Lake Shore Railroad, whose headquarters were in that same Union Depot
at Cleveland then was and still is a pet property of the Vanderbilt
family, also owners of the great New York Central system. The heads of
that family began watching the Cleveland experiment with unusual interest.
The reports that came from them were unusual. That scheme of the depot
master's seemed to be making a better grade of railroader in and around
Cleveland, and any institution that bettered the type of railroaders
interested the Vanderbilts. So the thing that Meyers had founded soon had
wealthy patrons and strong friends.

The Vanderbilts kept their shoulders to the wheels of the railroad Y. M.
C. A., kept it out of the ruts and from falling. They saw it introduced
here and introduced there on their group of railroads; saw it spread to
other lines; and finally, Cornelius Vanderbilt himself built a splendid
club-house for railroad men at the great terminal of his road in New York
City and turned it over to the management of the railroad Y. M. C. A. That
house, standing almost in the shade of the Grand Central Station, after a
quarter of a century, still ranks as one of the distinctly fine club-homes
of a city that is opulent in club-houses. It is still dedicated to
simplicity, to democracy, to decency, and to good fellowship.

There is not a railroader coming into the big passenger terminal--from
either the New York Central or the New Haven system--who is not welcome to
it, day or night. Engineers, firemen, conductors, trainmen all come into
its hospitable door after a long hard run to find the clean comfort of
good meals, bath, comfortable beds, good fellowship awaiting them. There
is the peculiar and the successful field of the railroad Y. M. C. A.;
perhaps as much as any, the real reason for its pronounced success.

Few railroaders in train service can leave their homes in the morning,
"double their runs," and be home at night. The hard part of the business
is that in most cases a man will have to spend one night, occasionally
two nights, out on the run. The difficulties of this are not readily
understood without a slight examination. In a large city the railroader
finds that it is a shabby sort of a hotel or lodging-house that can come
regularly within his scheme of economy. When he strikes the little town,
or frequently the big terminal or division freight-yard around which is no
town at all, the problem only multiplies. J. M. Burwick, a veteran
conductor of the Duluth & Iron Range Railroad, told that problem in his
own sincere way last year at a big dinner of railroad men in St. Louis.

"I left home a beautiful morning in '72," said Mr. Burwick. "I went down
to Lafayette and to my first boarding-house; and up to that time I don't
think any railroad man ever found a boarding-house except it was tied up
to a saloon. I was in a place like that. Another place I was running into
was where they made a division point in a corn-field. The company built a
large building for the benefit of the men, and then they rented it to be
run as a hotel. But the man in charge ran it to make money, and the steak
he cut with his razor. I know he did, because it was so thin. At other
places we had to sleep in a hot yard, in a hot caboose not fit for a man
to try and sleep in; and then we had to stay awake on the road that
night."

That was Burwick's testimony as to the conditions just before the coming
of the railroad Y. M. C. A. An engineer from the New York Central, a man
who had slept many nights in that comfortable club-house at the Grand
Central, went up into Canada a few years ago and took an engine on a
division running out of Kenora. The only place that a railroad man could
find board and lodging in that town at that time was a boarding-house with
the saloon attachment, and he was welcome there for but a limited time,
unless he was a reasonably liberal patron of the saloon. The engineer--his
name is McCrea--changed that order of things and established a branch
of the railroad Y. M. C. A., which in four years gained 300 members and
threatened to close the saloons of the place.

[Illustration: THIS IS WHAT NEW YORK CENTRAL MCCREA DID FOR THE MEN OF THE
CANADIAN PACIFIC UP AT KENORA]

[Illustration: A CLUBHOUSE BUILT BY THE SOUTHERN PACIFIC FOR ITS MEN AT
ROSEVILLE, CALIFORNIA]

[Illustration: THE B. & O. BOYS ENJOYING THE RAILROAD Y. M. C. A., CHICAGO
JUNCTION]

[Illustration: "THE BROOKLYN RAPID TRANSIT COMPANY HAS ORGANIZED A BRASS
BAND FOR ITS EMPLOYEES"]

Now you get the reason for the welcome that the railroad-owners gave this
work of the Y. M. C. A. It was not the religious idea alone--men differ in
their views of that sort of thing--but one of the most stringent of all
railroad rules is that prohibiting the use of liquor by the men, or their
frequenting bar-rooms. The necessity of that rule appears upon the face of
it. But the Canadian railroad could do little toward enforcing it in a
place like Kenora, before McCrea, of the New York Central, arrived there.
The railroad Y. M. C. A., with its comfortable housing facilities, its
vigorous stand for better morals and better men, has made that rule one of
the easiest in the book to be strictly observed. That is why the
railroad-owners and the railroad heads, whose religious views have
sometimes been at variance with those of the Y. M. C. A., have given
hearty endorsement to its work along their lines. They like the sort of
man it finishes.

So the railroad Y. M. C. A. has grown. It now has some 240 branches
reaching from Hawaii, in the West, to some important division points in
Eastern Maine. None of these have houses that can be compared, of course,
with the comfortable home at the Grand Central Station in New York. In
fact, some of them are still housed in crude fashion, in an abandoned shed
or depot that some railroad has fitted up as a start in the work, over
some store or freight-house perhaps; but each year sees these replaced by
neat homes, such as those at Harrisburgh, on the Pennsylvania; at
Collinwood, O., on the Lake Shore; at Baltimore, on the B. & O.; at the
St. Louis Union Station, and the Williamson, W. Va., on the Norfolk and
Western Railway. On a single system--the New York Central--there are 38
associations, with 27 buildings built for the purpose and valued at
$700,000, and a very active membership of 12,799 railroaders. In the
national organization membership there are more than 85,000 men,
representing every department of the railroad service. An average of
15,500 meals--and mighty good reasonably priced meals they are, too--is
served daily, while more than 50,000 railroaders come to the club-houses
each twenty-four hours.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beyond the necessity for maintaining the moral fibre of the railroader
(and it is astonishing how little maintenance such a corps needs) is the
decent necessity of taking care of him in case of illness. Railroading,
with all the safety devices that have multiplied in its service within the
past quarter of a century, is still a hazardous occupation to the men who
are out upon the line. The list of cripples, and the death-list of a
twelvemonth, are still appalling things--appalling in the aggregate,
fearful in any single concrete case, a case where there may be a helpless
wife and little children to be brought into the reckoning.

The railroads have begun to shoulder their responsibility in this matter.
Legislation has helped in the matter but to-day big carriers are preparing
to do even more--to pay premiums and carry some form of casualty insurance
on each of their employees, who may be engaged in a hazardous part of the
work. That thing is going to do more than any other one thing possibly
could do. When a big railroad realizes that its bill for premiums is going
to be reduced by the addition of many simple protective devices, those
devices are going to be instantly adopted. That is the way of railroads,
and of business, although it is not to be charged for a single moment that
the American railroads have not done much within the past 25 years toward
raising the margin of safety for their employees.

Of course, the railroaders have long since had their insurance, although
the regular life companies look upon them with distrust as risks. They
have been forced either to pay high premiums in the regular companies or
else to organize insurance of their own. Their brotherhoods have carried
forth this work with interest and with skill. These brotherhoods, or
unions, of the locomotive engineers, the firemen, the conductors, the
trainmen, and several other branches of the service, have been mighty
agents, too, in the development of the moral fibre of the American
railroader. Lack of space prevents a consideration of each in detail. To
do them but simple justice, to sing the epic of the mighty Brotherhood of
Locomotive Engineers, for instance (which has only recently finished a
great building of its own in Cleveland), would require a volume for
itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the railroads have not been negligent in this matter. For instance, a
man on the Baltimore & Ohio can pay $1.00 a month out of his pay envelope
and have $1,000.00 life insurance. He can likewise pay $3.00 a month, and
$3,000.00 will be paid his heirs upon his death. The railroad company
stands back of this fund and guarantees the insurance. It makes good from
its own treasury any deficit or shortage that might be incurred in its
operation.

For twenty years the Pennsylvania has conducted a similar work, under the
title of the Voluntary Relief Department. Membership in this is, as the
name indicates, purely voluntary, the road's employees being admitted,
after favorable physical examination, up to the age of 45 years and 6
months. The Pennsylvania Railroad Company in this instance also stands as
guarantor of the insurance fund.

A close examination of it in some detail may interest. The following table
shows the detail--the five classes into which employees may enter:

                              1st      2nd     3rd     4th     5th
                             Class    Class   Class   Class   Class
  Monthly pay                 Any    $35 or  $55 or  $75 or  $95 or
                              rate    more    more    more    more

  Contributions per month:
  Class                       $0.75   $1.50   $2.25   $3.00   $3.75

  Additional Death Benefit,
    equal death benefits of
    class:
  Taken at not over 45 years
    of age                      .30     .60     .90    1.20    1.50
  Taken at over 45 years
    and not over 60 years
    of age                      .45     .90    1.35    1.80    2.25
  Taken at over 60 years of
    age                         .60    1.20    1.80    2.40    3.00

  Disablement benefits per
    day, including Sundays
    and holidays:
  Accident:
  First 52 weeks                .50    1.00    1.50    2.00    2.50
  After 52 weeks                .25     .50     .75    1.00    1.25

  Sickness:
  After first three days and
    not longer than 52
    weeks                       .40     .80    1.20    1.60    2.00
  After 52 weeks                .20     .40     .60     .80    1.00

  Death Benefits:
  For Class                  250.00  500.00  750.00 1000.00 1250.00
  Additional that may be
    taken                    250.00  500.00  750.00 1000.00 1250.00

An employee, however, who is under forty-five years of age, who has been
five years in the service and a member of the relief fund for one year,
may enter any higher class than that determined by his pay, upon passing
satisfactory physical examination.

Payments from the fund vary from forty cents per day for sickness and
fifty cents for accident in the service, for members in the first class,
to $2.00 per day for sickness and $2.50 for accident with a death benefit
of from $250.00 to $2,500.00, according to class of membership and death
benefit held.

Since the fund has been in operation, the following payments have been
made, to December 31, 1909, inclusive:--

  For Accident death benefits           $2,185,343.40
      Sickness death benefits            5,914,811.18
      Accident disablement benefits      4,076,636.89
      Sickness disablement benefits      7,855,069.73
      Superannuation allowances            415,367.55
      Operating expenses                 3,207,131.06
                                      ---------------
                            Total      $23,654,359.81

During the same period, the Pennsylvania has contributed to the fund in
operating expenses, gratuities, etc., exclusive of interest, the
following:

  For Operating expenses                $3,207,131.06
  Special payment, etc.                    424,571.91
  For deficiencies                         733,913.89
                                       --------------
                            Total       $4,365,616.86

In addition to what the Pennsylvania is doing in the payment of the
pensions and contributions for the maintenance of the relief fund, the
relief and pension departments have the use of the telegraph and the train
service free of charge; and in case of accident in the service to
employees, free surgical and hospital attendance is furnished, and, where
necessary, artificial limbs or other appliances, without cost to the
employee. No figures are available as to the cost of surgical attendance,
or the furnishing of artificial limbs, but it is conservatively estimated
by the Pennsylvania officers as equalling the amount paid for the
operation of the relief department.

The modern railroad does not wait, however, for a man to become injured or
to die before assuming any responsibility for his care. There may come a
day when the burden of years makes him a little less fit for the strenuous
service of railroading. It is Nature's way of telling man that he has
labored well and that he is entitled to a rest. In other days, the
railroad recognized this in a rather informal way. It took its veteran
employees, retired them into a comfortable ease, and had the paymaster
send them checks each month for a part of their old wages. Out of that
custom the railroad pension system was born, only with this sharp
distinction: In the old way the man was taught to believe his monthly
check a favor or gratuity on the part of the railroad; under the pension
system he comes to know it, not as an act of charity but as his right, a
right earned by long hard years of faithful service.

This idea has begun to be recognized as fundamental by railroad managers.
Directors and officers now realize that the pension fund and some of these
other features that we have just considered, are causes directly
contributing to the efficiency of the railroad. The policy is merely one
of good management. Again, let us see the way the Pennsylvania handles
this matter, not because the Pennsylvania is alone in this thing, but
rather because it is one of the largest and most distinctive of American
railroads, and almost a pioneer in this work. Before it began paying
pensions to retired employees, the Pennsylvania had already long conducted
a relief fund and a savings fund, and had contributed to libraries and
railroad branches of the Y. M. C. A.

The pensions are paid entirely by the company. In the year 1909, for
instance, $594,000 was paid out to the men who had retired between the
ages of 65 and 70. From the time the fund was established until the end of
1909, appropriations for it amounted to more than $4,000,000, now paid to
some 2,300 men annually.

Employees may retire for age at 70, or for physical incapacitation between
65 and 69. If they have been in the service as long as 30 years, they are
granted an allowance based on one per cent of the monthly wages for each
year of service. The percentage is based on the wages received for the ten
years preceding retirement.

Thus, if an engineer, or a brakeman, or a fireman, has served the
Pennsylvania 30 years, he may retire between 65 and 70 and receive not
less than 30 per cent of his monthly wages during the last 10 years of
work.

The other railroads using the pension scheme have followed these general
outlines for their work. It has become an established feature of railroad
operation, and recently a second vice-president was created on the
Baltimore & Ohio for the express purpose of handling the company's relief
work. Sometimes the railroad organizes savings-funds for employees, paying
from three and one-half to as high as five per cent on their deposits,
limiting these to something like a hundred dollars a month, and making
every agent on the system a depositary of the fund.

       *       *       *       *       *

The street railroad systems in the large cities, together with a few of
the larger interurban systems, have recently begun to adopt systematic
methods of keeping in touch with their employees. The Brooklyn Rapid
Transit Company, operating a great system in a part of metropolitan New
York, and employing more than 15,000 men, was a pioneer in this work. It
found that while the railroad Y. M. C. A. was efficient for the club-house
work on steam railroads, there were local conditions in Brooklyn that made
it best for the company to build and operate its own club-houses.

The first of these was remodelled from an old car-barn. It became a very
interesting club, with reading-rooms, baths, a barber-shop, a gymnasium,
class-rooms for evening study, and a theatre, seating some 1,200 folk. For
the theatre the railroad hires vaudeville actors, and gives its great
semi-official family free entertainments--followed by dancing and
refreshments. On very especial nights the talent is furnished entirely by
the trolley-men and very effective talent it is, too. On all nights the
music is furnished by the Brooklyn Rapid Transit band, made up entirely of
street-car men and men from the elevated roads of the system. The railroad
company has furnished the music, the uniforms, the instruments, and the
directors--all that the men have had to furnish is their time and
interest, and these they have furnished in such good measure that there is
a waiting-list now large enough to equip a second full brass band.

The Brooklyn system has also begun to establish model restaurants in its
outlying barns, where clean and good food is furnished to the men at cost.
The street railroad is, in some such cases as these, confronted with a
steam railroad problem. Many of the big car-barns are in sparsely settled
suburbs of the city where the only eating-places have been saloons or
their adjuncts. The street railroad can no more afford to have its men in
saloons, than its bigger brother. To take from them the one decent excuse
for being in such places it is establishing its restaurants, where the men
can have cleaner and better food than in the saloons, and without the risk
to the railroad.

The Brooklyn road and the other large systems have adopted the relief and
pension funds; the idea seems to spread as rapidly among the electric as
it did among the steam railroads. Some of them have added odd and
efficient "kinks" of their own. For instance, the Boston Elevated Railway
makes presents of gold at New Year's Day, ranging from $20 to $35 each, to
each of its men who has a clean record for courtesy to patrons, and Boston
gains a reputation through that for the uniform courtesy of her
trolley-men. The Boston Elevated has also inaugurated a policy of giving
free legal advice to each of its employees who may need it. It has always
been a perquisite of high railroad officers to avail themselves of the
road's legal department for their personal needs. Under the Boston plan
this perquisite is extended to every man on the road--the young motorman
who had foolishly gone to a loan shark, and who is now being harried by
him; the old conductor who wishes to convey a house or draw a will. The
road's legal department will advise him sincerely, in his own best
interest. It will draw up his legal papers, do anything for him except
take his case into court, and even then it will advise an honest and
capable attorney for him. As for that motorman who went to the loan shark
when he found an immediate need of fifty dollars, the road stands ready to
advance him the money upon good cause, and will charge him only a nominal
rate of interest until it has gradually repaid itself from his wages. His
division superintendent is empowered to hear his story with sympathetic
ear, and to arrange for the loan.

Employees' magazines have been decided factors in both bringing and
keeping the railroad in touch with its army of men. The Erie was a pioneer
in this work five years ago; the plan has since been adopted with signal
success by the Northwestern, the Illinois Central, the Santa Fe, the Pere
Marquette, and some other lines. These little magazines, made interesting
enough in a general way to catch and hold the attention of their readers,
are sent out each month to every man on the system with his pay-check.

They spread railroad interest and railroad enthusiasm among their readers.
On one page they tell of styles for the engineer's wife, and on the next
they show an economical use of coal for the engineer; and so they may help
to pay their way. They tell of errors and mistakes among the railroad's
employees, without mentioning names, so that men may profit by them and
act differently. But they print the names of the railroaders who do the
good things, the novel things, the practical things, the economical
things, the heroic things, out along the line. And this roll of honor is a
long one.

But it is not always in the big things that a railroad keeps in touch with
its men, sometimes it is in very small things. Some time ago, a division
superintendent on the Erie Railroad decided that for each of his engineers
who kept his engine in particularly good order for a given length of
time, he would have the number plate on the front of the boiler painted in
red. "We will have the Order of the Red Spot," laughed Superintendent
Parsons, of the Susquehanna Division, as he signed a bulletin announcing
the thing. Now that was a little thing. The cost of painting that red spot
on the breast of some proud locomotive was but nominal; but listen to the
result!

A big Erie officer was up the line a few months later, and was loafing in
a junction-town on the Susquehanna Division, waiting for a through train.
He walked down to the end of the station platform and there stood a
passenger locomotive waiting to take a train in the other direction. It
belonged to the proud Order of the Red Spot, an order of which this
particular officer had not heard; and the engineer was already about it
with his long-handled oil-can. The officer did not reveal his identity,
but said:

"Waiting to take out a special?"

The engineer did not look up, but said:

"We carry forty-six over the division."

"I didn't think that forty-six was due for two hours yet," said the
railroad officer.

"She is not," answered the engineer, "but I've been down here an hour and
a half already fussing with this baby to have her in shape. You may notice
that she belongs to the Order of the Red Spot."

Then that particular man came to know about the Red Spots. All the way
back to Jersey City he kept looking for Red Spots, and every time he saw
one, he saw an engine slick and clean, as if she had just come from the
shops. That set him to thinking; and after he was done thinking, Parsons
was promoted in service, and the Order of the Red Spot was established for
the system. There has been an exalted division made of that order
recently. When a man can be assigned to one engine and he brings her into
the Red-Spot class and keeps her there, the railroad dedicates that engine
to him for the rest of his lifetime upon the system. His name, in gilt
letters, goes upon the cab-panel of the engine, whereas in other days you
used to see those of statesmen and of railroad-owners; and there it stays
until the engine goes to the scrap-heap. The other day the first of these
engines, drawing a Waldwick local, pulled into the Jersey City passenger
terminal; on its cab was "Harvey Springstead" so large and clear that you
could read it across the yard; in the cab-window was Harvey Springstead,
prouder for that moment than any earthly prince or potentate.

Sometimes the competitive idea is the best to foster to accomplish results
from the men, and to bind them and the road a bit closer together. We have
seen how a fortnight of "T. B. M. F." repairs to a locomotive has been
quickened down under contest to 13 hours and 34 minutes. Many of the more
successful railroads began some years ago to institute annual contests
between their section-bosses. The section-boss who kept his stretch of the
right-of-way in cleanest, trimmest shape for a twelvemonth got a black and
gold sign at his hand-car house, so big that folk who rode in the fast
expresses could read the honor that it conferred upon him. Sometimes he
gets more--a trip pass for his wife and himself to some distant point, or
even a cash prize. Annually the superintendent of maintenance may run a
special train, with a specially devised observation grandstand at its rear
or pushed ahead of the engine. On that grandstand sit all the section
bosses and other track maintenance experts. They see the other fellow's
sections--and their own; and some time on that trip there is a little
dinner and the awarding of the prizes.

Do not even dare to think that these things count for little upon the
railroad. They are mighty factors in the maintenance of one of its very
greatest factors, the human one.




CHAPTER XXVII

THE COMING OF ELECTRICITY

    ELECTRIC STREET CARS--SUBURBAN CARS--ELECTRIC THIRD-RAIL FROM UTICA TO
    SYRACUSE--SOME RAILROADS PARTIALLY ADOPT ELECTRIC POWER--THE BENEFIT
    OF ELECTRIC POWER IN TUNNELS--ALSO AT TERMINAL STATIONS--CONDITIONS
    WHICH MAKE ELECTRIC TRACTION PRACTICAL AND ECONOMICAL--HOPEFUL OUTLOOK
    FOR ELECTRIC TRACTION--THE MONORAIL AND THE GYROSCOPE CAR, INVENTED BY
    LOUIS BRENNAN--A SIMILAR INVENTION BY AUGUST SCHERL.


It is barely more than a quarter of a century since electricity first
became practical for use as a motive power upon railroads. The early
experiments of Thomas A. Edison at Menlo Park, N. J., and upon the now
abandoned railroad up Mount McGregor, N. Y., soon gave way to real
electric street railroads in Montgomery, Ala., in Richmond, Va., and from
Brooklyn to Jamaica, N. Y. These, in turn, gave way to still better forms
of electric traction, until the trolley has not only all but entirely
driven the horse-car and the cable-car from city streets, but has
performed a notable new transportation function in giving quick
communication from one town to another in the well-settled portions of the
country. These enterprises are quite outside of the province of this book;
the cases where the electric locomotive and electric motor-car have
usurped the steam locomotive upon its own rails are pertinent.

As soon as the electric railroad had begun to reach out into the country
from the sharp confines of the towns, the steam railroad men began to take
interest. It would have been even better for them if some of them had
taken sharper interest at the beginning. But the few men who were
long-sighted enough a dozen years ago to see the development
possibilities of a form of traction that was comparatively inexpensive to
install and to operate have been repaid for their sagacity. These men
began a dozen years ago to wonder if electricity could not be brought to
the service of the long-established steam railroad.

In most cases the short suburban steam roads outside of large cities,
which were as apt to be operated by "dummy engines" as by standard
locomotives, were the first to be electrified, and in these cases they
usually became extensions of the then novel trolley lines. Folk no longer
had to come in upon a poky little "dummy train" of uncertain schedule and
decidedly uncertain habits, and then transfer at the edge of the crowded
portion of the city to horse-cars. They could go flying from outer country
to the heart of the town in half an hour, and upon frequent schedule, and
the business of building and booming suburbs was born. After these roads
had been developed, other steam lines began to study the situation. A
little steam road that had wandered off into the hills of Columbia County
from Hudson, N. Y., and had led a precarious existence, extended its rails
a few more miles and became the third-rail electric line from Albany to
Hudson, and a powerful competitor for passenger traffic of a large
trunk-line railroad. The New York, New Haven, & Hartford found the
electric third-rail of good service between two adjacent Connecticut
cities, Hartford and New Britain; the overhead trolley a good substitute
for the locomotive on a small branch that ran a few miles north from
Stamford, Conn.

But the problems of electric traction for regular railroads were somewhat
complicated, and the big steam roads rather avoided them until they were
forced upon their attention. The interurban roads had spread too rapidly
in many, many cases, where they were made the opportunities for such
precarious financing as once distinguished the history of steam roads--and
they had in most of these cases made havoc with thickly settled stretches
of branch lines and main lines. In a great many cases the steam roads
have had to dig deep into their pockets and buy at good stiff prices the
very roads the building of which they might have anticipated with just a
little forethought.

The New York Central & Hudson River took such forethought after some of
its profitable branches in western New York had been paralleled by
high-speed trolleys, and a very few years ago installed the electric
third-rail on its West Shore property from Utica to Syracuse, 44 miles.
The West Shore is one of the great tragedies in American railroading.
Built in the early eighties from Weehawken (opposite New York City) to
Buffalo, it had apparently no greater object than to parallel closely the
New York Central and to attempt to take away from the older road some of
the fine business it had held for many years. After bitter rate-war, the
New York Central, with all the resources and the ability of the
Vanderbilts behind it, won decisively, and bought its new rival for a
song. But a property so closely paralleling its own tracks has been
practically useless to it all the way from Albany to Buffalo, save as a
relief line for the overflow of through freight.

So the West Shore tracks for high-class high-speed through electric
service from Utica to Syracuse was a happy thought. Under steam conditions
only two passenger trains were run over that somewhat moribund property in
each direction daily, while the two trains of sleeping-cars passing over
the tracks at night were of practically no use to the residents of those
two cities. Under electric conditions, there is a fast limited service of
third-rail cars or trains, leaving each terminal hourly; making but two
stops and the run of over 44 miles in an hour and twenty minutes. There is
also high-speed local service, and the line has become immensely popular.
By laying stretches of third and fourth tracks at various points, the
movement of the New York Central's overflow through freight has not been
seriously incommoded. The electric passenger service is not operated by
the New York Central, but by the Oneida Railways Company, in which the
controlling interests of the steam road have large blocks of stock.

[Illustration: A HIGH-SPEED ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE ON THE PENNSYLVANIA
BRINGING A THROUGH TRAIN OUT OF THE TUNNEL UNDERNEATH THE HUDSON RIVER AND
INTO THE NEW YORK CITY TERMINAL]

[Illustration: HIGH-SPEED DIRECT-CURRENT LOCOMOTIVE BUILT BY THE
WESTINGHOUSE COMPANY FOR THE TERMINAL SERVICE OF THE PENNSYLVANIA
RAILROAD, IN NEW YORK]

[Illustration: TWO TRIPLE-PHASE LOCOMOTIVES OF THE GREAT NORTHERN RAILWAY
HELPING A DOUBLE-HEADER STEAM TRAIN UP THE GRADE INTO THE CASCADE TUNNEL]

[Illustration: THE OUTER SHELL OF THE NEW HAVEN'S FREIGHT LOCOMOTIVE
REMOVED, SHOWING THE WORKING PARTS OF THE MACHINE]

Similarly, the Erie Railroad disposed of a decaying branch of its system,
running from North Tonawanda to Lockport, to the Buffalo street railroad
system, although reserving for itself the freight traffic in and out of
Lockport. The Buffalo road installed the overhead trolley system, and now
operates an efficient and profitable trolley service upon that branch.

Perhaps it was because the Erie saw the application of these ideas, and
decided that it was better to take its own profits from electric passenger
service than to rent its branches again to an outside company; and perhaps
because it also foresaw the coming electrification of its network of
suburban lines around New York, and wished to test electric traction to
its own satisfaction; but five years ago it changed the suburban service
of its lines from the south up into Rochester from steam to electric.

It is now preparing to continue this work further. The Pennsylvania, while
its great new station in New York was still a matter of engineer's blue
prints, began practical experiments with electric traction in the flat
southern portion of New Jersey. It owned a section of line ideally
situated in every respect for such experiments, its original and rather
indirect route from Canada to Atlantic City, which had since been more or
less superseded by a shorter "air line" route. The third-rail was
installed, and the new line became at once popular for suburban traffic in
and out of Philadelphia and for the great press of local traffic between
Philadelphia and Atlantic City. Of the success of that move on the part of
the Pennsylvania there has never been the slightest question. Regular
trains have been operated for several years over this route at 60 miles
an hour, and not the slightest difficulty has been found in maintaining
the schedules.

But nowhere has the substitution of electric locomotive for the steam
worked greater comfort for the railroad passenger--to say nothing, of the
raising of that somewhat intangible factor of safety--than in long
tunnels. The Baltimore & Ohio, which was a pioneer among the steam
railroads in the use of electric locomotives, began to use them in 1896 in
its great tunnel that pierces the very foundations of the city of
Baltimore. That system, once adopted, became permanent. What was at one
time a fearful summer experience between Camden Station and Mount Royal
Station in that city has become merely a pleasant novelty upon the trip.

What could be done at Baltimore has been done under the Detroit River,
twice. The Grand Trunk pierced underneath that stream in 1890, by a
single-track tunnel 6,000 feet in length, in which for seventeen years
both freight and passenger trains were hauled by special locomotives,
fitted for the burning of anthracite coal. Although these engines rendered
rather satisfactory service, it was found desirable to substitute electric
locomotives for them in order to remove the limitations of haulage
capacity in the tunnel; for it is a known fact that electric trains can be
operated much more rapidly and also more closely together than steam. The
change obviated the danger and inconvenience due to locomotive gases in
the tunnel. The electric locomotives first went into service in February,
1908. The tunnel is now clean, well-lighted, and safe to work in; and
trains of much greater length than before can be hauled, thus relieving
the congestion in the freight-yards on both sides of the river.

Similarly, electric locomotives have become the tractive power in the
great new tunnel which the Michigan Central has just completed across the
Detroit River at Detroit, and upon the Cascade Tunnel where the Great
Northern Railroad pierces one of the great ranges of the Western Divide.
The Cascade Tunnel is interesting from the fact that it is entirely built
upon a heavy grade of 1.7 per cent for its length of more than three
miles. The steam locomotives are cut out from the service, while on the
heavy up-grade of the tunnels an electric locomotive, of tremendous
pulling power, will carry even the heaviest freights through the bore at
an average speed of fifteen miles an hour. These Cascade Tunnel
locomotives are the only ones in the country taking alternating current at
triple phase and at the tremendous voltage of 6,600 directly from an
overhead trolley wire. And that will bring us in a moment to another
consideration of this question of the development and the delivery of
power.

The most recent of tunnel installations has just been completed in the
greatest of all American mountain bores--the Hoosac Tunnel. This famous
tube, four and three-quarters miles in length, gave itself very readily to
the skill of the electric engineer, with the result that the Boston &
Maine system, its present owner, finds the greatest impediment to the
operation of its main line from Boston to the west entirely removed.

The earlier installations were all what is known as direct current; that
is, the power is brought directly from the dynamos in the power-houses and
by means of third-rail or overhead trolley it is delivered to the motors
of the locomotives of the cars. But some years ago the larger of the
distinctively electric railroads found that for great current demands over
a large distributing district, this system was expensive and
impracticable; that, for the chief thing, it required copper cables for
carrying long-distance current so large as to be of very great cost. So
some of these, with the aid of the electrical manufacturers, experimented
and developed the alternating current of high voltage and low amperage,
which is capable of being carried to distant transforming or sub-stations
and there reduced to low voltage and high amperage. This alternating
current system, because of its great operating economies, is rapidly
becoming the standard for the city railroad systems of metropolitan
communities, as well as for the great trunk-line interurban electric roads
that are beginning to gridiron the country. The New Haven Railroad, when
it first began to electrify its extensive suburban service into New York
City, was the first to bring it to the service of a standard steam road,
and by a clever adaptation of its locomotives was able to bring a
single-phase alternating-current directly to them at the enormously high
voltage of 11,000, without the use of transforming stations or
direct-current transmission. After some fearfully disappointing
experiments at the outset, the New Haven system has finally proved the
worth of its alternating-current, and the road is now engaged in erecting
its overhead transmission construction all the way from Stamford (the
present terminal of the electrical service) to New Haven, 72 miles distant
from New York. Within ten years its heavy New York and Boston traffic will
probably be entirely handled by electricity, and the run of 232 miles will
be made without difficulty in four hours or even less.

At present the steam locomotives of these trains and the other trains that
serve almost all of New England are detached from the inbound movement at
Stamford, and the remaining 33 miles of the run into the Grand Central
Station is made behind a powerful electric locomotive. The process is, of
course, reversed on outbound trains. For the 12 miles from Woodlawn into
the Grand Central the run is made over the tracks of the Harlem division
of the New York Central Railroad which uses direct current at a voltage of
650, and third-rail instead of overhead transmission. The wonderful
adaptability of the alternating current is shown, not in the fact that a
change must be made from overhead trolley to third-rail alone, for that is
merely a slight mechanical problem, but in the fact that a locomotive
hauling a heavy train can, without a great slacking of speed, change from
receiving an alternating current of 11,000 volts to a direct current of
650 volts. Outbound, it reverses the process.

The necessity of clearing out the smoke-filled Park Avenue Tunnel approach
to the Grand Central Station brought both the New York Central, its owner,
and the New Haven, its tenant, to electric traction for terminal and
suburban service at New York. The New York Central's system, as has
already been stated, is direct-current and it is supplied from two great
power-houses in the suburban district. Through trains are hauled in and
out of the station by electric locomotives, while suburban trains, which
make their round-trip runs entirely within the 25 or 30 miles of electric
zone, are run without locomotives, the steel suburban coaches having
motors set within their trucks, after the ordinary fashion of electric
cars across the land. The change from steam to electricity at the Grand
Central Station did more, however, than merely clear the long-approach
tunnel of smoke and foul gases, so that nowadays a man can ride on the
observation-platform over its entire length. The traffic in that
wonderfully busy station has for many years had sharp limitations because
of the four tracks in that tunnel, two tracks being used for the train
movement in each direction. The limited station-yard capacity at the
terminal has necessitated many trains being stored at Mott Haven yards;
and the drilling of these empty trains in and out of the station, combined
with the normally heavy movement of regular and special trains, has only
added to the great congestion. The minimum three-minute headway between
trains operated by steam through the tunnel, and its four-tracked viaduct
approach, fixed the maximum traffic at 40 trains an hour in each
direction. The capacity of the terminal with this limitation of service
was taxed to its utmost, and some relief for the constantly increasing
traffic was imperative. Now, owing to the improved conditions of electric
operation, trains may be run on a two-minute headway, or less--this one
measure thus increasing the station capacity by 50 per cent at the least.

The New Haven road has also adopted the practice of running some of its
suburban trains without locomotives, but by means of motors underneath
each coach--the multiple-unit system, as electrical engineers have come to
know it. This is the system, with some slight variations, upon which the
elevated and subway lines of New York, Brooklyn, Boston, Philadelphia, and
Chicago are operated; and it is quickly applicable, as we have just seen,
to some phases of terminal operation for the standard steam railroads. But
the steam locomotive is to hold its own for many years, in many, many
phases of railroad operation; electric traction is practical and
economical only when there are fairly congested traffic conditions. The
coaches that are standard for it, and which it must haul for many miles
across the land, must be handled in the electrically equipped terminals by
electric locomotives of one type or another. These locomotives are
generally equipped with coal-heaters for maintaining the steam in the
heating-pipes of the through equipment; and in these days, when the
electric lighting of through trains is all but universal, they may supply
current for this purpose also.

Electric locomotives have been completely successful where they have been
used, both alone and in connection with multiple-unit suburban trains, in
the Grand Central Station and the Pennsylvania Station in New York City as
the first complete installations. But what has been so successfully done
in New York will soon be repeated in other big cities in the land; Boston
is already insisting that the network of suburban lines that spreads over
her environs be electrified; Philadelphia is preparing for the
electrification of the Pennsylvania's fan-work of lines into Broad Street
Station; Baltimore is demanding that what has been done in one great
tunnel underneath her foundation hills be repeated in two others. Chicago
will see great installations of this service within the next few years.

Nor is the use of electricity upon the standard steam railroad to stop
bluntly with these terminal changes and improvements; many and many a
decaying branch is yet to be fanned into new life, new strength, new
activity, through a skilful transformation of its tractive powers. What
has been done at the Detroit River and the Cascade tunnels is to be done
elsewhere across the land--through the dozens of points where railroads
pierce the mountains and go under the rivers by tunnels. Electric tunnels
are yet to bring the Pennsylvania at lower grade at Gallitzin and the
Southern Pacific through the high crest of the Sierras. Electric traction
for the big steam roads is still in its infancy. Only 1,000 miles out of a
total of 220,000 miles of steam railroad in the land are as yet operated
by electricity. The other day a big traffic-man sat in his Chicago office
and said:

"The first railroad that electrifies for the thousand or less miles
between this town and New York is going to get all the rich passenger
business. Not a big portion of it, mind you, but every single blessed bit
of it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Consider for a final moment, in passing, the mono-rail, the gyroscope. If
you are a practical railroader you may laugh and say: "A toy." Perhaps it
is a toy to-day. But just remember history and you will recall that the
toy of to-day becomes the tool of to-morrow, and then give the mono-rail a
moment of sober thought. Less than 2,000 feet of this construction formed
a most interesting exhibit at the Jamestown Exposition of 1907. A railroad
man who rode on that experimental track said:

"If you had built more than 300 feet of track you could have given a
better demonstration of your system." To this the inventor smilingly
replied:

"You have gone over 1,800 feet."

The investigator had ridden faster than 45 miles an hour and had not
realized the speed. You never do in the mono-rail car. It rides more
gently over the roughest bit of track than the finest Limited moves over
heavy rail and stone ballast, the best track that men can maintain.

An actual railroad of the mono-rail type has been built and is being
developed in the suburbs of New York City. It supersedes a railroad of the
oldest type--horse-cars--from Bartow to City Island, in the Bronx. Balance
is kept for its cars by means of a light overhead metal construction,
hardly more conspicuous than that of the overhead trolley-work used in
city streets. This overhead work, like the trolley-wire, supplies electric
power to the cars; only in emergencies will it come into play to hold the
one-legged car erect. On this stretch of line speed and balance tests will
be made when passenger traffic is at low-tide. Upon the result of these
tests will be drawn the construction plans for a four-track rapid transit
railroad from New York to Newark, ten miles. This last plan has already
been financed by New York men who have made transportation their chief
problem for many years. It may be developed upon the rails of a
double-track railroad, more than doubling its capacity, without increasing
the width of the right-of-way.

All of these mono-rail roads will become applicable to the gyroscope when
that wondrous man-toy becomes a man-tool. And the gyroscope demands no
overhead construction of any sort. It simply asks a single rail upon which
to find a path and offers no objections either to the steepest of grades
or to the sharpest of curves. The first model of gyroscope car showed its
ability to navigate easily the full length of a piece of crooked gas-pipe,
laid in rough semblance of a track.

For there is a gyroscope car already--in fact, several of them. On May 8,
1907, Louis Brennan, a brilliant Irish inventor, living in England,
exhibited the first model of the gyroscope car, and the news was flashed
in detail all the way around the world. The little car he then showed was
enough to interest the keenest of scientists. It traversed every sort of
mono-rail track that could be devised, at varying rates of speed, it stood
still at the inventor's command and retained its balance perfectly. When a
man's hand was pushed against it as if to throw the car off its seemingly
slight balance, it pushed back, stanchly held that balance, and Brennan
laughingly said that there was something that compared with the velocity
of the wind. When he spoiled the even trim of his ship (it did look like a
boat as it sped around the lawn upon its narrow, guiding thread) and
placed the weights upon one side of the car, that side rose up to receive
them. The car still held its balance perfectly, and Brennan said that his
act represented forty or fifty persons moving suddenly across a full-sized
passenger coach. Finally, he placed his little daughter in the car and
sent it out over a deep gully where a single stout steel cable served as a
suspension bridge. The inventor's assistant swung that bridge like a
hammock but the car laughed at the old-fashioned domineering laws of
gravity, and the little girl waved her hand at her daddy.

Well might she wave her hand at him. His achievement was a real triumph.
From a top revolving in a frame at any angle he had evolved the gyroscope
car, the one thing required for the successful development of the
mono-rail. From that car he has been steadily developing better ones. On
the tenth of November, 1909, he built a full-sized car upon which twenty
men and boys rode in glee. On that self-same day, by strange coincidence,
a German inventor, August Scherl, exhibited in a large hall in Dresden, a
mono-rail car, held at perfect equilibrium by a gyroscope which he had
quietly built and perfected. The car was 18 feet long and 4 feet wide, and
mounted on two trucks. The net weight was 2-1/2 tons, while the gyroscope
itself, turning in a vacuum at the fearful rate of 8,000 revolutions a
minute, weighed but 5-1/2 per cent of the total weight of the car. It
carried eight persons, and when first shown in Berlin it caused a
tremendous sensation, 60,000 persons witnessing the trial during a period
of five days. Even royalty took its turn at riding in the novel
conveyance.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first question that the average man asks when he sees a gyroscope is:

"Well, this thing may be all right when it is in motion, but how the deuce
is it going to support itself when it is standing still?"

But it does support itself. The gyroscope wheels continue to revolve at
something close to 8,000 revolutions a minute, and they hold the car, so
that the fluctuation in the weight it carries, due to loading or
unloading, does not affect it, even in slight degree. The average man
remains unconvinced.

"Suppose the electric power that spins the gyroscope goes back on you?" he
demands. The inventor tells him that that is easy enough. The gyroscope,
revolving in a vacuum, will keep on turning at sufficient speed to balance
the car for nearly an hour. Long before that the side-stays, that make the
car a three-pronged structure while out of service, can be dropped.

When To-morrow finally comes and the gyroscope car is in its own,
provision will be made on all through mono-rail routes against just such
an emergency. At various points sidings will be constructed with low
walls, just high enough to receive the cars when their gyroscope
equilibrium ceases. These will be just as much a part of the equipment of
the mono-rail trunk line as wharves are a part of steamship service. It
will be a part that will receive less and less attention as folk begin to
realize how little dependent the gyroscope car is upon the old laws of
gravity.

"We will have billiard cars in our fastest trains," says Brennan. "A man
will be able to play that delicate game on a railroad train all the way
from New York to San Francisco, if he chooses."

Contemplate that, you railroaders and travelled folk of to-day. Those cars
will make the cars of to-day seem like pygmies. Each will be 200 feet in
length and 30 feet in width. No wonder that people can talk of billiard
tables. A train of six of these cars will be longer than the longest of
our transcontinental expresses of to-day. They will be fastened together
with vestibule connections, and the forward end of the first car will have
a sharp beak. The blunt front of an ordinary train begins to be a speed
obstacle at more than 50 miles an hour.

Speed? Do you think that 50 miles an hour is speed? Our locomotives do far
better than that every day in the United States. A train on a standard
railroad and hauled by steam as a motive power has gone faster than the
rate of 135 miles an hour. With the mono-rail and the gyroscope, with the
countless mountain brooks and rivers harnessed and grinding out
electricity, the inventors say calmly that they will begin at 200 miles an
hour.

Do you realize what 200 miles an hour means? It means that your grandson
or your grandson's son can leave New York in the morning, do half a dozen
errands in Cincinnati, and be back in his home in West Four Hundred and
Thirty-eighth Street in time for a late supper. It means that he can lunch
in Chicago, span half a dozen mighty States, threading the mountains,
through the towns and over the cities, skimming the broad expanses of fat
farms, and dine in New York the same night. It means that he can go from
one ocean across the continent to the other in twenty-four hours.

But To-morrow is not yet here. Yesterday was just here. In Yesterday men
were boasting of their ability to go from New York to Philadelphia by
coach in two nights and two days and were asking:

"What next?"




APPENDIX




APPENDIX

EFFICIENCY THROUGH ORGANIZATION


In a local freight-house in an inland manufacturing city of thirty
thousand inhabitants between forty and fifty freight-handlers had been
employed for a term running from twelve to fifteen years. The
freight-house boss was of the old school. When he thought that he needed
more help, he made a fearful noise, scared headquarters, and more help was
given him. The strong-armed gang reported at seven o'clock in the morning
and then held a two-hour _conversazione_, while the book-keeping force in
the dingy office at the end of the freight-shed arranged the way-bills and
the bills-of-lading for the day's work. Before ten o'clock, if all went
well, the freight-house gang was generally at work pushing its way through
a seeming chaos of less-than-carload freight.

After a time the old freight-agent died and a new one came in his place.
The new man was on his job less then three months before he arranged a new
schedule in that freight-house--and dropped twenty-five men from its
pay-roll. First he summoned the bookkeeping force together, and announced
that it would report at five o'clock in the morning, instead of seven; of
course, leaving two hours earlier each afternoon. The bookkeeping force
demurred. It was not pleasant getting up before daybreak in the winter
darkness of a chill northern town, and such a scheme interfered with the
social plans of one or two of the bookkeepers. But the new boss only
smiled and said, "Try it."

And after they had tried it, the way-bills and the bills-of-lading were
ready at seven o'clock when the handlers reported for work, and the
freight-house got to work upon the shriek of the roundhouse whistle. After
that, the pay-list was cut--you may be sure that a house-boss who could
scheme out such a plan could weed out the shirkers and the idlers among
his staff--and, better still, the consignees began to get their freight
sooner than ever before in the history of that town.

Eventually--and a wonderfully short "eventually" it really was--the
freight-agent climbed the ladder to the superintendent of that division
and under his bailiwick came a railroad which had recently become attached
to the parent system through the process of benevolent assimilation. The
ordinary less-than-carload business was moved out of the freight-house of
the smaller road and it was given over entirely to carriage and automobile
shipments--the inland city makes a specialty of manufacturing vehicles of
every sort. The division superintendent went over to the carriage
freight-house and saw that it took a dozen men to man it, although it was
not more than a six-car stand. Carriage bodies and automobile bodies
crated are both heavy and awkward, and the boss of that house was asking
for more help.

The superintendent went straight from that freight-house to a local
foundry, sat there for fifteen minutes with its draughtsman and then and
there evolved an overhead trolley-arrangement, very much the same as the
big packing-houses use for handling heavy carcasses. A requisition for the
thing went through a-flying, and now the carriage-house in that city is
handled with two trained men. The scheme is fast becoming standard in the
newer freight-houses and in St. Louis, the M. K. & T. has just adopted it
for its splendid new terminal, whole fleets of platforms hung close to the
floor and suspended from an overhead "trolley arrangement" entirely
supersede the brigades of hand trucks formerly in use.

That is the point of it. There must be dozens of other cities of thirty
thousand population, of sixty thousand, of ninety, of one or two or three,
of five hundred thousand, where a little such method would produce similar
results. In that first house, a saving of about $350 a week was made, when
the young freight-agent brought some system into the dusty place. A dozen
such savings or even greater, would be quite a help on the railroad's
balance sheet. At least that is the gospel which Louis Brandeis, of
Boston, preached, and which attracted world-wide attention when he made
the exact statement that he could save the railroads of the country a
million dollars a day in the operation of their lines.

The railroads made a perfectly good legal case before the Interstate
Commerce Commission--or let us assume that, at any rate, in the present
instance. But one such clarifying statement as that of Brandeis' produced
more effect both upon the land and the Commissioners than all the legal
briefs that together were filed in advocacy of the raises in the freight
tariffs. At no time did the railroads successfully controvert Brandeis'
sweeping statement, and so they lost their fight.

And yet the railroads are accomplishing some remarkable improvements in
their internal affairs--for which they are being given not an iota of
credit. And one of the most interesting of these is the promotion of
efficiency through organization, or better yet, through reorganization.

       *       *       *       *       *

Along in the fifties, Herman Haupt, who was afterwards a brigadier-general
of the United States army and brevetted major-general, devised the
wonderful organization scheme of the Pennsylvania system, which is still
in use to-day on that well-managed property. The scheme has been adopted
since then by practically all the large railroads in the country. Before
General Haupt evolved it, there was no real organization among the great
railroads. Like Topsy, they "just growed" from the little individual horse
and steam lines from which they were formed and they were even more like
Topsy in some other details. But Haupt's plan brought dignity to a great
business that needed dignity--and system. For fifty years it has been
accomplishing something more than merely serving its purpose. But railroad
terminals and railroad equipment of fifty years ago are long since
obsolete, and so within recent years the larger railroads have found their
organization schemes not up with the times. The growing complexity of
their work, the intricacy of their relations with the various city, state,
and national governing boards, the constant tendency to enlarge and to
consolidate these, have all proved fearful taxes upon the Haupt plan.
Great masses of correspondence have accumulated, the whole business of
conducting the railroad has been enmeshed in whole miles of red-tape--and
men like Brandeis, of Boston, have been permitted to make their challenges
and stand uncorrected.

Go back into the sixties for this last time, and pause for a moment at the
fighting of the American Rebellion. Men in the North were beginning to
hear that the Confederate army had something different, something better,
in its organization than the Union army. It was an intangible something,
but it seemed to make for efficiency, and, after all, that was the main
thing. So after the war was history, there were far-sighted Northerners
who said that it would be well to bring that intangible something into the
United States army. At such a time that thing was, however, tacitly
impossible, and it was dropped for more than thirty years.

But Von Moltke picked up the idea, and incorporated it in the intensely
modern army of modern Germany. It helped to win the great Franco-Prussian
War, and when the other nations of Europe began to examine it it had a
name; it was beginning to be a tangible something. Military men called it
the "staff idea," and when you asked them to explain it they told you
that officers who handled men were known as "line officers," and those who
handled things as "staff officers." In other words, men could be
lifted--as it were, in an aeroplane of scientific organization--away from
their commands and their narrow environments, up to a point where they
could have perspective, where they could handle men, regiments, small
arms, heavy ordnance on a large scale. The staff officers work in things
in the abstract, just as the line officers mould men in the concrete.

There then is the rough theory of staff organization which was picked up
and adapted to its use by the United States army at about the time of the
Spanish-American War. Of its value there can be no doubt; of its
efficiency no question.

       *       *       *       *       *

A young man--Major Charles Hine--who had seen the operation of modern
staff in the regular army, decided that it was a good thing for the great
railroad systems of the country. Hine knew railroads. In order that he
might know them thoroughly, he one day packed his uniforms and his saddle
away in his trunk and went quietly out and got a job as brakeman on a
freight train. He did not stay on the car roofs very long; he has served
in about every conceivable post in railroad divisional organization, and
he has had a good chance to study the weaknesses of those very
organizations.

"We have got to eliminate government by chief clerks," said Major Hine at
the very beginning. "We are growing too rapidly for the men higher up. We
are forced to delegate official authority to clerks and foremen, and then
we build up an autocracy around some person of official rank. It is
pernicious feudalism, this permitting the chief clerk, and a good many
times some other clerks, to sign the name of the officer whom they attempt
to represent."

A railroad is really so spread out that its officers live a double
official life; a part of the time they are at their desks, and another
part out upon the line. Yet the average railroad officer, be he of high or
low degree, flatters himself that by some subtle method of personal
superiority, he is enabled to act intelligently in two places at the same
time.

Major Hine saw how that worked at the very beginning of a special service
with the Southern Pacific Railroad. He was down in the Yaqui River country
in Mexico, where heavy construction work was under way. In company with
the division engineer, he was riding the line mule-back. The division
engineer had several parties under him, each in charge of a resident
engineer, and all engaged in laying out and checking the contractor's
work. The headquarters of the division engineer were presided over by a
ninety-dollar-a-month chief clerk, who was dealing in the absence of his
superior with one hundred and twenty-five dollar resident engineers. The
division engineer assured his guest that the telephone permitted close
personal contact with headquarters, that every hour questions were
referred to him. The vice-president of the company, desiring to change the
assembling point for luncheon, sought for two hours from engineering
headquarters to locate the division engineer, who was on the grade all the
time.

The condition mentioned necessitates the chief clerk's signing the name of
his superior to heads of departments lower down, which heads are receiving
lower salaries, and are presumably of wider experience than the chief
clerk who essays to be their monitor. This is done in the name of routine
business. Unfortunately no two men often agree upon what constitutes
routine business. Almost every railroad officer will tell you that "my
chief clerk handles only routine business and never assumes too much
authority." When closely questioned, the same officer will reveal in the
utmost confidence the fact that the same condition does not obtain with
the chief clerk of the officer who is over the informant. Strangely
enough, if the complaining witness is promoted to his boss's job, the same
condition still exists, showing that the system is at fault, rather than
its individual members. Worst of all, the chief clerk has to break in all
the new bosses and thus has only limited promotion himself.

Major Hine has said that the bigness of things on the Harriman lines, the
breadth of the policies of Napoleon Harriman and Von Moltke Julius
Kruttschnitt, the vice-president in the change of the operation of that
far-reaching group of railroads, strengthened his nerve to advocate
radical departure from preconceived notions of railway organization. Hine,
at his home in Virginia, had once acted as receiver of a suburban trolley
system, where he had introduced a simplified organization. He found, at
that time, that the underlying principle of that organization would apply
to a thousand times as many men on the great Harriman lines. Incidentally,
after the receivership was lifted, the new owners of the property
discontinued the organization which Major Hine had created, for they took
the ground that no other electric road had such a system, and that
therefore there could be nothing in it.

Kruttschnitt decided to let Major Hine begin on the Harriman lines with
the reorganization of the divisions. He declined to order any changes, but
placed the burden of missionary work and conversions among his
subordinates on the shoulders of his special representative. There are not
a dozen letters bearing on this subject in Kruttschnitt's office. The work
was done by personal contact, which in two years involved over one hundred
thousand miles of travel by Hine. Major Hine states that, notwithstanding
the splendid spirit of the officers of the Harriman lines, little would
have been accomplished without the tactful support of Kruttschnitt, the
man whose supremacy and whose brilliant abilities are unquestioned in the
railway world. On the other hand, Kruttschnitt has been heard to say that
the credit lies with the enthusiastic younger man whom he attached to his
staff.

Most of the divisions of the Harriman lines had an assistant
superintendent, engaged mainly in outside duties, with an office near the
superintendent's, presided over by a chief clerk. Both the superintendent
and the assistant superintendent had his own chief clerk, who consumed
reams of paper annually in intercommunications over their respective
superior's signatures. The new system provides, as a first step, that if
the division has no assistant superintendent, one shall be appointed. The
next step is to order the assistant superintendent to remain at
headquarters in charge of the office, in effect, but not in name, the
chief-of-staff idea, so successfully applied by the Germans through Von
Moltke. When necessary, an additional trainmaster is appointed for the
previous outside duties of the assistant superintendent. The old chief
clerk is placed in line of promotion by appointing him, when possible, to
a position with outside duties on the road.

Next, the division shop is raided, the division master mechanic and the
travelling engineer (road foreman of engines) are moved bodily to the same
building with the division superintendent, where are usually already
located, the division engineer, the trainmaster, and the chief despatcher.
The old theory has been that the master mechanic should be at his shop to
supervise the shop force. The new conception is that the master mechanic
has passed the stage of a shop foreman; that, located at one shop, he
unconsciously comes to underestimate the importance of roundhouses and car
repair plants at outlying points on the division. He is brought to
division headquarters to get the atmosphere of transportation, to be in
touch with the train sheet, and to realize that motive power is one of the
component elements of transportation; that the shop is incident to the
railroad, not the railroad to the shop.

The official family, now being gathered under the parental roof of the
superintendent, are politely requested to deposit the official
shooting-iron, the typewriter, in one official arsenal, from which all
shooting will be done in the future. The office files are consolidated in
one office of record. This idea is borrowed from the courts of justice,
where one clerk of the court, with as many deputies as necessary, records
all transactions regardless of the number of judges and other officers.

You must have worked in a railroad office to appreciate the fearful
condition of official files in this year of grace, nineteen hundred
eleven. You ask for the file on that culvert at Jones' farm on the
Martinsburgh branch, and an anaemic office-boy staggers toward you with
enough manuscript to be the making of a novel. There are the contract
arrangements and the correspondence with the J. B. & G. concerning the
union station privileges that are enjoyed with it at Blissville; why,
there was a whole chapter given over to that episode of July, three
summers ago, when the leaders had to be renewed on that magnificent
structure, and its roof re-shingled. Here is the contract for handling
milk on a single side-line division--and the accompanying symposium of
thought from chief clerks and minor officers in the form of
miscellaneous--and entirely useless--correspondence. This is the agreement
with the bridge-builders' union--four inches thick. No wonder the shelves
of the record room sag, and that the clerks are hollow-eyed. Tons of
unprotected paper have been scrawled upon, perfect rivers of helpless
black ink have done the work--and all for that!

The heaviest file in the office of the Harriman system to-day is half an
inch in thickness, and there is no one to deny that the property is being
run at a high stage of efficiency--particularly in comparison with some
other railroad systems of the land. As the result of a single record
system at any division headquarters, the astounding saving has been to
that group of railroads, of five hundred thousand letters a year, and it
now goes without saying that they were unnecessary letters. In a year or
two, that figure will cross the million mark--and you must take second
breath to imagine the time and thought that goes into the making of a
million letters in a twelvemonth. The material saving in stationery is
considerable--although trifling in the operation of a system that spends
about $225,000,000 a year, but the logical claim is made that the five
hundred thousand letters eliminated retarded rather than helped
administration, that they produced more harm than good. Deeper than all
this is the dwarfing effect upon the individual initiative of the man
below, for whom the letter attempts to think.

Elimination of red tape is not the sole object of the new system. Mr.
Kruttschnitt regards this as incidental. What has appealed to him is the
final step in the organization which is to confer the uniform title of
"assistant superintendent" upon the former division engineer, master
mechanic, trainmaster, travelling engineer, roadmaster, and chief
despatcher. These officers retain their former duties and
responsibilities, but they broaden authority to meet emergencies on the
spot. This means increased supervision of employees, more scientific
management of men. The officials of the Harriman lines faced here a
ticklish problem. The attitude of organized labor was in doubt. Would the
men object to too many bosses? Would confusion result from several men
issuing orders that might possibly conflict? The results have been a
splendid vindication of the intelligence of the men who are close to
things. The men were often quicker to catch the idea than were the
officers. What appealed to them most of all was the dictum that no man
could sign another man's name or initials.

"We old men do our work, no matter how many bosses there are; we realize
that younger men need more instruction than supervision," said a veteran
conductor on the Union Pacific, when the matter was brought to his
attention. "We used to make one report to the master mechanic and another
to the superintendent. Now one report addressed simply 'assistant
superintendent' is enough. It means less red tape. But what we like best
of all is that some smart Aleck of a clerk can no longer jack us up."

That veteran ticket-puncher recalled that in older days conductors had
been dismissed for allowing operators to sign their names to telegraphic
train orders; perhaps the letter of dismissal was signed by the
superintendent's chief clerk. There was railroad system for you!

After a year and a half of what the local officers called trial--for Mr.
Kruttschnitt and Major Hine have always regarded that period as
demonstration rather than as experiment--the system was broadened. It was
applied to some of the higher units. For nearly a year, the U. P. general
officers at Omaha have had five assistant general managers. In other days
there were a general superintendent, a superintendent of motive power, a
chief engineer, a superintendent of transportation, and an assistant to
the general manager. The new million dollar general office building of the
U. P. at Omaha will have its office space arranged according to the new
conception. Until it is completed, the consolidation of office records
will not be practicable, because the various general offices are now
scattered over town. But a start has been made, and plans laid for full
development.

What is good at the east end of a railroad is generally as good at the
west end, and so the plan, working handily in general offices at Omaha,
has been transplanted to the general offices of another Harriman
road--the newly combined Oregon-Washington Railroad & Navigation Company
at Portland, Ore., and at Seattle, Wash. Other general headquarters of the
Harriman roads are only awaiting the construction of new and modern office
buildings, before they will be asked to fall in line with the plan.
Kruttschnitt does not order these things. He is far too wise a railroader
for that. He directs by suggestion and the family circle talks of Major
Hine. And yet twenty-three out of the thirty-three divisions of the
Harriman railroad group have fallen into the new groove within two short
years.

"Consider for an instant the overwhelming importance of a title to some
railroaders," says a high officer of one of that group as he sits at his
desk. He is one of the men to whom a title is as hollow as a brass
cylinder. "I have known a man to almost froth at the mouth because some
stupid underling wrote a letter and addressed him as 'assistant to the
general manager' instead of 'assistant general manager.' We have gone
title crazy on some of our railroads. Take that overworked word
'superintendent.' We have more superintendents on this system to-day than
there used to be track hands on a good sized road, and we have what is
even worse, a superintendent of motive power, and a superintendent of
transportation ranking the division superintendent who is the head of an
important subordinate unit, and entitled to respect among the rank and
file of our men as such. Under the new plan, the superintendent of
transportation together with the superintendent of motive power, as you
have already seen, become assistant general managers.

"Right there is an impersonality that is delightful--and efficient; it has
proved most efficient in division organization. Out on our ---- division
we had several washouts simultaneously last year. We sent at once an
assistant superintendent to each point of interruption and so we had at
each vital place, a man with sufficient brains and authority to use the
forces on the ground to the best advantage. Isn't that good railroading?"

       *       *       *       *       *

It is good railroading all along the line. It is good railroading to
handle as big a question as the reorganization of a system employing a
quarter of a million men and women, without writing a whole library of
rules and regulations for its enforcement. Ask Major Hine, himself, how he
handles that problem.

"Easily enough," will be his reply to you. "We have a constitution--also
unwritten like that splendid old bulwark of English liberties--and any
superintendent, any general manager, can make his own rules for his
division or his stretch of railroad as long as they will stand the tests
of that constitution. And the railroad's bulwark consists of but three
very simple principles:

"The first of these is that no man may sign the name or the initial of
another. That is rank feudalism, and out of place in the twentieth century
sort of railroading. Our second clause is that there must be at all times
an assistant superintendent in charge of the office. Normally, this
assistant, in effect chief-of-staff, is the senior or No. 1 on the list.
Here again, elasticity is introduced. The unwritten law provides that
whatever assistant may be assigned to the office is the senior of the
others for the time being. The chief-of-staff reviews the incoming and
outgoing correspondence and reduces it to its lowest terms. Each assistant
superintendent signs his own communications, but they pass through the
focus of the administrative hour-glass on the desk of the watchful
chief-of-staff.

"In the third place, correspondence must be addressed impersonally; from
below, 'assistant superintendent,' from above, 'superintendent.' This
requirement is based upon the idea that authority, as in the courts, is
abstract and impersonal, that the exercise of authority is highly
concrete and personal. The court exists if the judge is dead; the court is
silent until the judge speaks."

Already there is noted a greater willingness to take responsibility. More
and more is heard about "this division" and "the company" and less and
less about "my department." The mathematical axiom that "the whole is
greater than any of its parts" is sometimes violated in corporate
administration, because there is no chief-of-staff to balance the
specialization of some department head.

This system of playing trumps in the new science of railroads
incidentally, but not essentially, provides for rotation in the position
of senior assistant or chief-of-staff. Some conservative divisions have
not availed themselves of this feature. On one division the superintendent
in the first year of the new organization had four of his five assistant
superintendents, each occupy the senior chair at headquarters for three
months each. Finally, it came the turn of the old master mechanic.

"I am sweating blood," he said, "but I never knew before how much there is
about a railroad."

When that master mechanic returned to his shop interests, his vision had
been broadened, and he was more alert to protect the company's interests
when riding over the road. The sponsors for the new system deny that this
may lead to the neglect of an official's own special responsibility. They
point to the superintendent as a balance wheel to maintain proper
equilibrium. Over two years' experience has led the high officials of the
Harriman lines to lay some stress upon urging the assistant
superintendents forward rather than holding them back. The tendency has
been to settle back in former grooves. As long as no harm is done, those
who avail themselves of their new opportunities are becoming more valuable
assets both for themselves and for the company.

When a division is reorganized, the persons concerned are assembled to
listen to a lecture by Major Hine. To their great astonishment, he usually
leaves town the same evening. He takes the position that the system which
depends for its success upon the presence of any individual is a system
which the company has no business to adopt. He says, "We have pushed you
off the bank. Now swim ashore." They all do. On the next visit of his
grand rounds, the instructor often finds his pupils beating him at his own
game. Dropping in one day at the headquarters of a large division on the
coast, he found the senior assistant superintendent and the old master
mechanic in frequent conference. The senior assistant tossed a letter over
the desk, and asked, "Did Jim here need to write this letter?" "It looks
good to me," said the instructor; "what is the matter with it?" "You told
us," said the interlocutor, "that one record in this office is enough. I
handled a letter this morning from the mechanical assistant telling the
foreman to repair this outfit car. Now I get another letter this afternoon
about the same thing." "You are dead right," said the major; "you fellows
will soon have me worked out of a job."

The old master mechanic caught the spirit of the occasion and said: "Yes,
Jack, you caught that one, but there were two just like it this morning
that you didn't catch. Next time I won't have to dictate them."

       *       *       *       *       *

There then is efficiency through organization--the playing of trumps in
the developing science of railroading. Other railroads have been watching
the reorganization plan upon the Harriman system with critical eyes, and
can find nothing but success in its workings. It is paving its own way,
and shouldering itself abreast of a railroad generation that figures not
in lines of from five hundred to a thousand miles each, but giant systems
of grouped lines that may easily stretch their steel cobwebs for fifteen
thousand miles--over whole sovereign States, from ocean to
ocean--properties whose management calls for a degree of skill not yet
demanded in the very greatest of our industrial or manufacturing
corporations.

The old order changeth and giveth way to the new.




INDEX


  Acworth, the English economist, 330, 331.

  Adams, Alvin, 371, 372.

  Adams, Maude, 293, 294.

  Adams Express Company, 371-373.

  Adams & Company, 372.

  Ade, George, 303.

  Advertising, railroad, 276;
    bill for newspaper, 288;
    open territory, 356.

  Agricultural schools maintained by the railroads, 360, 361, 363.

  Air-brake, 42, 125, 134, 249, 250.

  Albany, bridge at, 14.

  Albany & Syracuse Railroad, 371.

  Algomah Central, 417.

  _Algomah_, ferry, 415.

  Alleghany Portage Railroad, 11, 12, 48, 149.

  Allen, Horatio, 5, 6, 7, 8, 119.

  Altoona shops of Pennsylvania Railroad, 12, 61, 154, 394, 395-398.

  American bridge-builders do work of world, 74.

  American Express Company, 372, 373.

  American Locomotive Company, 126, 127.

  "American Notes," Dickens, quoted, 11.

  Anchor Line, the, _see_ Erie & Western Transportation Company.

  Ann Arbor railway, 416.

  _Arabian_, locomotive, 120.

  Armstrong, Col. G. B., 377.

  Ashtabula, Ohio, bridge disaster, 61.

  Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railroad, 2, 32, 126, 127, 358, 386, 429.

  Atlantic City, 367, 368.

  Atlantic City Railroad, 127.

  Atlantic Coast Line, 127.

  Atlantic type of locomotive, 127.


  Baggage, handling of, 93;
    duties of baggagemen, 251, 252;
    use of baggage-car, 322, 323.

  Baldwin, Matthias, 122, 123.

  Baltimore, railroad connections of, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19;
    tunnels in, 49;
    stations in, 96, 436.

  Baltimore & Ohio Railroad, 2, 9, 15-23, 41, 49, 58-60, 64, 65, 77, 96,
        120, 126, 132, 139, 144, 376, 377, 394, 421, 427, 436.

  Baltimore & Potomac R. R., 20.

  Bangs, Col. George S., 377, 378.

  "Bends," cause and treatment of, 68, 70.

  Bergen Tunnel, 318.

  Bessemer, Sir Henry, 61.

  _Best Friend of Charleston_, locomotive, 8, 120.

  Big Muddy River, Illinois Central's bridge over, 78.

  Big Four, 27, 418.

  Binghampton, N. Y., 81.

  Black Diamond Express (Lehigh Valley Railroad), 286.

  Black River Road, 217.

  Blair, Postmaster General Montgomery, 377.

  Blizzards, fighting of, 268-275.

  Boards of directors of railroads, 156-158.

  Bollman, --, designer of bridges, 61, 63.

  Bonds, railroad, 36, 37.

  Boston Elevated Railway, 428.

  Boston, in 1831, 9;
    railroad connections of, 10;
    Josiah Perham's excursions to, 29;
    stations in, 88, 95-99, 313, 319, 320, 384;
    suburban traffic of, 98, 99, 319.

  "Boston Special" (New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad), 384.

  Boston & Albany Railroad, 60, 77, 98, 106, 136, 370.

  Boston & Lowell Railroad, 9, 10, 96, 98.

  Boston & Maine Railroad, 1, 98, 319, 320, 333, 384, 437.

  Boston & Providence Railroad, 95, 370.

  Boston & Worcester line, 10, 124, 370.

  Brakeman, duties of, 248-250.

  Brandeis, Louis, 451, 452.

  Brandywine Viaduct, 77.

  Brennan, Louis, 442, 443.

  Bridge-builders, personality and nationality of, 72-74.

  Bridges--
    at Albany, across Hudson, 14.
    first across Mississippi, 28.
    building of, 42, 56-79.
    at Trenton, across Delaware, 57, 77.
    at Springfield, across Connecticut River, 57.
    of timber, 57-60, 62-64.
    at Waterford, across Hudson River, 57.
    Permanent Bridge, across Schuylkill River, 58.
    of stone, 58, 59, 76, 77.
    Starucca Viaduct, 58.
    Thomas Viaduct, 58, 59, 76.
    of iron, 60, 61.
    of Rider design, 60.
    B. & O. Monongahela River, 60.
    Ashtabula, 61.
    of steel, 61, 62, 76, 77.
    at Portage, over Genesee River, 62.
    forms of, 62-64.
    through span, 64.
    deck span, 64.
    over Susquehanna River, between Havre-de-Grace and Aiken, 64, 65.
    at Cincinnati, over Ohio River, 65.
    suspension, 65.
    cantilever, 65, 66.
    over Kentucky River, 66.
    Minnehaha, at St. Paul, 66.
    over Niagara River, 66.
    over Frazer River, 66.
    at Poughkeepsie, 66.
    personality of builders of, 72-74.
    over Pend Oreille River, 73.
    on line of Rio Grande & Western, 74.
    replacing of, 75, 76.
    Roebling's, at Niagara Falls, 75.
    at Steubenville, Ohio, 75, 76.
    over Hackensack River, 76, 206, 207.
    of concrete, 76-79.
    Brandywine Viaduct, 77.
    Pennsylvania, over Susquehanna River, 77.
    New Brunswick, over Raritan River, 77.
    over Florida Keys, 78.
    at Slateford, Pa., 78.
    over Big Muddy River, 78.
    at Washington, D. C., 78.
    Moodna Valley, steel trestle over, 143.
    at Towanda, Pa., 144.
    first steel bridge in America, 144.
    across the Delaware, 367.

  Brilliant cut-off (Pennsylvania Railroad), 148, 149.

  Britton, H. M., 269.

  Broad Street Station, Philadelphia, 88, 96, 97, 154, 320, 440.

  Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company, its care for employees, 427, 428.

  Brooks plant, Dunkirk, 127.

  Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, 423.

  Brown, George, 16.

  Brown, W. C., 167, 168, 362.

  "Brown system," _see_ Demerit plan.

  Bryant, Gridley, 6, 132.

  Buffalo & Attica Railroad, 27.

  Buffet sleepers, 307, 309.

  Burlington, _see_ Chicago, Burlington & Quincy R. R.

  Burr, Theodore, 57, 63.

  Burwick, J. M., 420.


  Cab, use of, 123.

  Caissons, their use in tunnel-construction, 52.
    in bridge-building, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 77.

  Calvert Station, Baltimore, 96.

  Camden Station, Baltimore, 96, 436.

  Camden & Amboy Railroad, 10, 121.

  Campbell, Henry R., 122.

  Canadian Pacific Railway, 2, 32, 141, 142, 406, 414, 417.

  Canals, 4, 5, 9, 13, 34, 35.

  Car-ferries, 416, 417.

  Car-inspectors, duties of, 402, 403.

  Cars, storage of, 89;
    cleaning of, 90;
    construction of, 132;
    platforms and vestibules of, 134, 135, 308;
    use of steel for, 135;
    "foreign cars," 389.

  Carroll, Charles, of Carrollton, 17.

  Carter, C. F., quoted, 24.

  Cascade Tunnel, 436, 437, 441.

  Cassatt, A. J., 160, 166.

  Cathedral Mountain, the spiral tunnel under, 142.

  Cattle, shipping of, on railroads, 328, 329.

  Central Pacific Railroad, 30, 31, 32, 45, 357.

  Central Railroad of New Jersey, 2, 313, 412.

  Central Vermont, 333.

  Charleston & Hamburg Railroad, 8, 123.

  Cheney, Benjamin F., 372.

  Chesapeake & Ohio Canal, 2, 10, 16, 18.

  Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad, 2, 127.

  Chicago City Railway Company, 177.

  Chicago Fast Mail, 189.

  Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Railroad, 3, 32, 300, 313, 356, 358.

  Chicago-Montreal flyer, 414.

  Chicago, railroad connections of, 27;
    Northwestern station at, 88, 101, 106, 321;
    La Salle Station at, 101.

  Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railroad, 3, 28, 364, 386.

  Chicago & Alton Railroad, 144, 300-304.

  Chicago & Northwestern Railway, 3, 27, 28, 313, 356, 386.

  Chicago & St. Louis Express (West Shore Railroad), 265-267.

  Chief clerk, duties of, 220.

  Civil War, railroad building during period of, 19, 20;
    might have been averted by railroad development, 35.

  Claim-agents, 174-179.

  Cleveland stations in, 96, 418, 419.

  Cleveland & Pittsburgh Railroad, 418.

  Coal, handling of, 13;
    as a freight business, 108, 109, 126, 339, 342;
    substituted for wood as a fuel, 124;
    mining of, 340.

  Collinwood, Ohio, the Lake Shore's plant at, 394.

  Columbia & Philadelphia Railroad, 12, 122, 401.

  Commuter, the, 311;
    his use of rapid transit, 313-324, 327, 384.

  Competition among railroads, 355.

  Complaints of public in regard to railroad service, 290, 291.

  Conductor, duties of, 250, 251.

  _Consolidation_, locomotive, 124, 125.

  Construction work of railroads, 454.

  Cooper, Peter, 17-19, 120.

  Cooperation of railroads, 328.

  Cornell University, agricultural school at, 360.

  "Corridor trains," 134.

  Cowan, John F., 22.

  Crede, the English railroad town, 393.

  _Credit mobilier_, 31.

  _Crescent City_, the, 299.

  Crocker brothers, 30.

  Crossings, railroad, 42.

  Cumberland, on the National Highway, 16, 19, 394.

  Cumberland Valley Railroad, 299.


  Daly, C. F., 284.

  Daniels, George H., 277.

  Davis, Phineas, 120-122.

  Davis, W. A., 377.

  Davis & Gartner Co., 120.

  _Decapod_, locomotive, 126.

  Dee, River, bridge, 60.

  Delaware, Lackawanna & Western Railroad, 2, 44, 78, 88, 102, 145,
        313, 315, 317, 385, 412.

  Delaware & Hudson Railroad, 1, 5, 119, 126.

  _Delmonico_, the, 304, 305.

  Demerit plan, 211, 212.

  Depew (New York), shops of the New York Central at, 394.

  Detroit River tunnel, 54, 55, 413, 436, 441.

  Devereux, John H., 418.

  _De Witt Clinton_, locomotive, 13, 120.

  Dexter, Judge, 29.

  Dickens's "American Notes," quoted, 11.

  Dining-cars, conveniences of, 134, 304-307.

  Division superintendent, duties of, 187-189, 202-219, 272-275.

  Dorsey, John M., 314.

  Dresden, Germany, train-sheds in, 103.

  Duluth & Iron Range Railroad, 420.


  Eagle Pass, 40.

  Edison, Thomas A., 432.

  Efficiency in railroad service, 449-464.

  Eighteen-hour trains, between New York and Chicago, 298.

  Electricity, its use in tunnel-construction, 51, 52.
    in bridge-building, 70.
    substituted for steam, 104, 105, 137, 432-441.
    used for lighting, 303, 315-321.

  Elevated and subway lines, 440.

  _El Gobernador_, locomotive, 126.

  Elkhart, Indiana, railroad shops of the Lake Shore Railroad at, 394.

  Embankment, construction of, 44;
    largest, 45.

  Emigration bureaus, 356, 358.

  Empire State Express (New York Central), 285, 286.

  Employees, protection of, 176-179, 422, 423.

  "Engine sheds," 390.

  Engine wheels, first turning of, in America, 7.

  Engineer, duties of, 90, 247, 248.

  Engines in yards and roundhouses, 89, 90.

  English roundhouse principle, 89.

  Enterprise line, the, 405.

  Erie Canal, New York State, 4, 13, 14, 15.

  Erie, Pa., transfer of passengers at, 14.

  Erie Railroad, 22-25, 59, 60, 124, 126, 142, 143, 164, 299, 313-315,
        317, 361, 392-394, 412, 417, 429, 430, 435.

  Erie & Western Transportation Company, 417.

  _Evening Star_, the, 299.

  Excursions, use of, 358.

  Express business, 369.

  Express messenger, duties of, 251, 252.


  Fargo, William G., 371, 372.

  "Farmers' special," 360, 361, 363.

  Felton, S. M., 124.

  Ferry fleets, 412-415.

  Fillmore, President, his trip on the Erie, 23.

  Finances of railroad, 179-186.

  Fireman, duties of, 90, 246, 391, 392.

  Fish, shipping of, 345, 346.

  Fisk, Jim, 299.

  Fitchburg, Railroad, 96, 98.

  Florida East Coast Railroad, 77, 78.

  Florida Keys, 78.

  Folders, bill for printing of, 288.

  Food, shipping of, to the city, 343, 344.

  Forbes, James M., 27.

  Forney, M. N., 125.

  Fort Wayne subsidiary, the, 147, 148.

  France, railroad in, 35.

  Frankfort, Germany, train-sheds in, 103.

  Franklin, Benjamin, 375.

  Frazer River bridge, 66.

  Freehold & Jamesburg Agricultural Railroad (Pennsylvania Railroad), 359.

  Freight claims, 183.

  Freight, railroads once prohibited from carrying, 9;
    Erie's profits from, 25;
    handling of, 34, 88, 107-118, 194;
    traffic, 318, 325-354;
    rate system for, 329-331;
    threefold classification of, 330-332;
    "back haul," 334;
    Australian system of, 334-336;
    "demurrage," 338;
    fast trains for, 343.

  Freight terminals, 107-115, 408.

  Freight traffic-manager, duties of, 326, 327.

  Fruit, shipping of California, 344, 345.

  Fullerton, H. B., 362.


  Galena & Chicago Union Railroad, 27.

  Gallitzin Tunnel, 12, 50, 149, 441.

  Garrett, John W., 20, 21.

  Garrett, Robert, 21, 22.

  Gasolene engine, use of, 137.

  Gauge, standard, 46.

  General attorney of the railroad, duties of, 170-174.

  General counsel of the railroad, duties of, 170-174.

  General manager, duties of, 187-201.

  General passenger agent, duties of, 276-291, 366.

  General superintendent, duties of, 190.

  Genesee Valley Road, 143.

  Geneva, N. Y., agricultural experimental school, 360.

  _George Washington_, locomotive, 122.

  Gould roads, 2, 3, 32.

  Government regulation of railroads, 329.

  _Governor Paine_, locomotive, 123.

  Grades, railroad, 40, 41, 48, 139-151.

  Grand Central Railroad, 316, 317, 420.

  Grand Canal (Erie), 4.

  Grand Central Station, New York, 88, 95, 96, 104, 315, 321, 384, 419,
        421, 438, 439, 440.

  Grand Rapids & Indiana Railroad, 416.

  Grand Trunk Pacific Railway, 3, 32, 42, 304, 333, 414, 416, 417, 436.

  "Grangers," 3.

  Grant, General, 302, 303.

  _Grasshopper_, locomotive, 120.

  Great Lakes, highway up the, 414.

  Great Northern Express Company, 373.

  Great Northern Railroad, 2, 32, 126, 147, 300, 358, 417, 437.

  Great Western Railway, _see_ Grand Trunk.

  Greenville, freight station at, 109, 110.

  Gyroscope, _see_ Mono-rail.


  Hackensack River Bridge, 76, 206, 207.

  Hadley, President, of Yale, 17.

  Hand-brakes, use of, 250.

  Hanson, Inga, 177.

  Harbor fleet, a, 406, 407, 408.

  Harlem River Branch (New Haven), 316, 317, 438.

  Harnden, William F., 370, 371, 372.

  Harriman, E. H., 139-141, 159, 166, 167, 358.

  Harriman lines, 2, 297, 358, 406, 455-458, 460-463.

  Harsemus Cove, 109, 110.

  _Harvard_, the, 405, 406.

  Haupt, Herman, 451, 452.

  Hazard, Ebenezer, 374.

  Headlight, first use of, 124.

  "Head-room," 42.

  Hill, J. J., his roads, 2, 147, 159, 166, 167, 358, 373, 406.

  Hinckley, --, a locomotive builder, 122.

  Hine, Charles, 453-455, 459-461, 463.

  Hoboken, Lackawanna Terminal at, 88, 102, 109.

  Honesdale, Pa., switchback at, 41.

  Hoosac Tunnel, 49, 437.

  Hopkins, Mark, 30.

  Hornellsville, Erie shops at, 392-394.

  Horse Shoe Curve, 12.

  Hotel-cars, _see_ Dining-cars.

  Howe, --, designer of bridges, 63.

  Hudson, Commodore, bronze statue of, 354.

  Hudson River Tunnel, 102, 412.

  Huntington, Collis P., 30, 32.


  Ice-floes, obstructions to the railroad marine, 416.

  Idaho & Washington Northern Railroad, 73.

  Illinois Central Railroad, 1, 28, 78, 313, 320, 321, 385, 429.

  Imperial Limited (Canadian Pacific Railway), 141.

  Inland Water Ways, 404-417.

  Insurance, for railroad employees, 423.

  Interstate Commerce Commission, 13, 329, 333, 335, 355, 374, 451.

  Interstate Commerce Law, 210.

  Interurban electric service, 432-434.

  Ithaca, N. Y., switchback at, 41.


  Jamaica, station at (Long Island), 318, 319.

  Jamestown Exposition of 1907, 441.

  _Jay Gould_, the, 299.

  Jersey City, 109.

  Jersey Heights Tunnel, 102.

  Jervis, John B., 121.

  Jewell, Postmaster General, 378.

  _John Bull_, locomotive, 121.

  Joy line, the, 405.

  Judah, Theodore D., 29, 30, 31.


  Kansas, boom in, 357.

  Kentucky River bridge, 66.

  Kicking Horse River, tunnel near, 142.

  Kingwood Tunnel, 41, 49, 122.

  Kirkwood, James P., 59, 77.

  Kruttschnitt, Julius, 298, 455, 456, 458-460.


  Lackawanna cut-off, 145.

  Lackawanna Railroad, _see_ Delaware, Lackawanna & Western Railroad.

  Lake Michigan, an obstruction to land traffic, 415.

  Lake Shore & Michigan Southern Railroad, 14, 27, 205, 378, 385, 394,
        418, 419, 421.

  Lane cut-off (Union Pacific), 44, 140.

  Lard, shipping of, 342.

  La Salle Street Station, Chicago, 101.

  Latrobe, B. H., 19, 41, 49, 58, 60, 63, 122.

  Lehigh Valley Railroad, 2, 144, 286, 361, 385.

  Leiper, Thomas, 6.

  Lewis, Isaac, Erie engineer, 25.

  Lickey plane, 122.

  Lights, code of, 86.

  Lincoln, Abraham, 300, 302.

  Link device, use of, 124.

  Liquor, prohibition of use of, 421.

  Livingston & Company, 372.

  Locomotives, 5, 7, 8, 18, 26, 119-131.

  Long Island commuters, 102, 103.

  Long Island Express Company, 373.

  Long Island Railroad, 1, 109, 313, 318, 320, 362, 412.

  Long Key Viaduct, 78.

  Loree, L. F., 22.

  Lowell, Mass., in 1831, 9.

  Lucin cut-off, The (Southern Pacific), 139, 140.


  M. K. & T., 450.

  McAdoo Tunnel, 317.

  McCrea, James, 167, 194, 195.

  McCrea, the engineer, 420, 421.

  McGraham, James, 331.

  McPherson, Logan G., quoted, 20.

  Mad River & Lake Erie Railroad, 26, 124.

  Magazines, railroad employees', 429.

  Mail clerks, duties of, 251, 252, 377-383.

  Mail-service, railway, 369-387.

  Maintenance Way Department, 388.

  Mallet articulated compound, 126, 127.

  Manchester & Liverpool line, 9.

  Mann, Col. W. D., 135.

  Manunka Chunk, tunnel at, 145.

  Marine, the railroad, 404-417.

  Market Street Station, Philadelphia, 88, 97.

  Martin, T. E., 363.

  _Maryland_, the, 413.

  Mason, a locomotive builder, 122.

  Master Car Builders, organization of, 136, 137, 390, 401.

  Master mechanic, duties of, 389, 400, 401.

  _Mastodon_, locomotive, 125, 126.

  Mauch Chunk, colliery railroad at, 9, 41, 136.

  Metropolitan Line, the, 405.

  Metropolitan Street Railway Company, New York City, 172.

  Meyers, George, 418, 419.

  Michigan Central Railroad, 27, 28, 54, 302, 385, 413, 414, 436.

  Michigan Southern Railroad, 27, 28.

  _Michigan_, the transport, 414.

  Middlesex Canal, traffic on, in 1829, 9.

  Milholland, James, 124.

  Military Academy at West Point, parade-ground of, 265.

  Milk, carrying of, to city, 347-351.

  Mills, James C., quoted, 415, 416.

  Minnehaha Bridge, at St. Paul, 66.

  Minot, Charles, 25.

  Missouri Pacific Railroad, 29.

  Missouri, steel bridge across the, 144.

  Moguls, locomotives, 124.

  Mohawk & Hudson Railroad, 13, 41, 121.

  Mono-rail, 441-445.

  Monon Railroad, 385.

  Monongahela River Bridge, 60.

  Moodna Valley, steel trestle over, 143.

  Morgan, J. P., 296, 328.

  _Morning Star_, the, 299.

  Morris Run, the, 133.

  Morse, William, 265-267.

  Mott Haven yards, 439.

  Mount Clare yards, Baltimore, 120, 132.

  Mount Royal station, Buffalo, 436.

  Murray, Oscar G., 22.


  National Express Company, 373.

  Naugatuck Railroad, 135.

  New Brunswick bridge, over Raritan River, 77.

  New England Navigation Company, 405.

  New Haven Railroad, 1, 109, 147, 300, 313, 315, 316, 413, 419, 438-440.

  New York Central, 2, 14, 22, 27, 41, 104, 126, 147, 151, 154, 155, 167,
        205, 268, 284, 285, 297, 298, 313, 315-317, 320, 361-363, 370,
        384, 394, 407-410, 419-421, 435, 438.

  New York Central & Hudson River Railroad, 14, 104, 353, 378, 417, 434.

  New York Connecting Railroad, 109.

  New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad, 98, 104, 315, 320, 404-406,
        412, 433.

  New York, railroad connections of, 10, 21;
    tunnels in, 49;
    stations at, 88, 95, 96, 102-104, 159-162, 315, 318, 319, 321, 412,
        419, 421, 438-440;
    harbor and commerce of, 409-412;
    ferries in, 413-415.

  New York & Harlem Railroad, 14, 60.

  New York & New England Railroad, 98.

  Newspapers, rapid delivery of, 382.

  Niagara River bridge, 66.

  Norfolk & Western Railroad, 144, 421.

  Norris, William, 122.

  North Station, Boston, 88, 97, 98, 313, 319, 320, 324, 384.

  Northern Central Railroad, 11, 96.

  Northern Cross Railroad, 26.

  Northern Pacific Railroad, 2, 29, 32, 50, 51.

  Northern Steamship Company, 417.

  Northwestern station, Chicago, 88, 101, 106, 321.

  Norwich, Conn., 10.


  Observation cars, 308, 309.

  Officials of railroads, 170-219.

  Ohio & Mississippi Railroad, 19.

  Old Colony Railroad, 98, 405.

  _Olympic_, the, 407.

  Oneida Railways Company, 435.

  Oregon-Washington Railroad & Navigation Company, 460.

  Organization, as a means to secure efficiency, 449-464.

  Osgood, Samuel, 375.

  "Our Inland Seas," quotation from, 416.

  Oxford Furnace, tunnel at, 145.


  Pacific coast, railroad connections of, 28-32.

  Pacific type of locomotive, 127.

  Paderewski at Vassar, 294, 295.

  Palmer, Timothy, 58.

  Panhandle subsidiary, The, 147, 148.

  Panic, of '37, 13;
    of '07, 162, 359, 360.

  Pape, Edward, 176, 177.

  Park Avenue Tunnel, 439.

  Park Square Station, Boston, 95, 96, 98.

  Parkersburg, W. Va., railroad connections of, 19;
    grade at, 41.

  Parsons, Superintendent, 430.

  Passenger coaches, 132-134, 398-400.

  Passenger service, first road to have regular, 8.

  Paterson works, 121, 122, 124.

  Pay-car, gradual disappearance of the, 180.

  Pend Oreille River bridge, 73.

  Pennsylvania Railroad, 2, 12, 49, 50, 61, 76, 77, 96, 109, 110, 123,
        135, 145, 146, 154, 159, 167, 170, 194, 297, 298, 300, 313, 317,
        320, 359, 379, 385, 386, 394, 401, 406, 412, 413, 417, 421,
        423-427, 435, 441, 451.

  Pennsylvania Station, New York, 88, 102-104, 159-162, 318, 319, 412,
        440.

  Pensions, granted to employees, 425, 426.

  People's line, 12.

  People's Pacific Railroad, 29.

  Pere Marquette Railway, 416, 429.

  Perham, Josiah, 29, 30.

  Permanent Bridge, across Schuylkill River at Philadelphia, 58.

  Philadelphia, Germantown, and Norristown Railroad, 123.

  Philadelphia, railroad connections of, 10, 11, 15, 21;
    stations at, 88, 96, 97, 154, 320, 440.

  Philadelphia, Wilmington & Baltimore Railroad, 20.

  Philadelphia & Columbia Railroad, 12.

  Philadelphia & Reading Railroad, 2, 97, 124.

  "Piano-box" system of switches, 84, 85, 86.

  Pig iron, handling of, 341, 342.

  _Pioneer_, locomotive, 27.

  _Pioneer_, sleeping-car, 301, 302, 303.

  Pittsburgh, railroad connections of, 11, 12, 15, 18, 19;
    suburban traffic of, 147, 148;
    Union Station at, 148.

  Planes, inclined, disuse of, 11, 12.

  Plumbe, John, 29.

  Pomeroy, George, 371.

  Pooling, objections to, 328, 331.

  Portage, N. Y., bridge at, 62.

  Portage Railroad, _see_ Alleghany Portage Railroad.

  Post-office Department, United States, 372-387.

  Poughkeepsie Bridge, 66.

  Prairie, type of locomotive, 127.

  Pratt, --, designer of bridges, 61.

  _President_, the, 304.

  President of the railroad, the, 152-169.

  Prince Rupert, on Grand Trunk Pacific Railroad, 32.

  Private car lines, 13, 293-298.

  Promotion in railroad service, 245, 255.

  Providence, R. I., railroad connections of, 10.

  "Public service stations," 287.

  Pullman, George M., 134, 299, 393.

  Pullman and its railroad shops, 393, 394.

  Pullman cars, construction of, 303.

  Pullman Palace Car Company, 303.


  _Queen City_, the, 299.

  Quincy Granite Railroad, 132.


  Railroad, The.
    history of, in United States, 3-33.
    English, 5, 7.
    first American, 6.
    horse-power, 6, 12, 17.
    communal nature of early, 12.
    paper of, 23.
    treatment of bankrupt, 23.
    telegraph first used by, 23.
    development and building of, 34-48.
    grants for, 35, 36.
    cost of, 36.
    financing of, 36, 37, 179-186.
    keeping open for winter traffic, 38, 268-275.
    water for use of, 41.
    crossings on, 42.
    tunnels, 48-55, 145-150, 436, 437.
    bridges, 42, 56-79.
    stations, 80-106.
    suburban service, 80, 81, 90, 311-324.
    roundhouses, 88-90.
    yards, 83-91, 115-118.
    freight terminals, 107-115, 408.
    locomotives and cars, 119-137, 388-404.
    building of the locomotive, 128-132.
    building of cars, 132-137.
    reconstruction of, 138.
    grades, 139-151.
    officials, 152-169, 187-219, 276-287.
    legal department, 170-179.
    financial department, 179-186.
    tickets, 181-183, 288-290.
    operating, 220-242.
    time table, 221-223.
    signals, 225-227, 236-238.
    use of telephone, 235.
    employees, 243-255, 418-431.
    wrecking trains, 256.
    rates, 282-287.
    special trains and private cars, 292-310.
    commuters' trains, 311-324.
    freight traffic, 325-355.
    freight rates, 327-337.
    scientific farming, 359-366.
    express service, 369-374.
    mail service, 374-387.
    marine, 404-418.
    ferries, 407-418.
    electricity, 432-445.
    mono-rail, 441-445.
    organization, 449-464.

  Rails laid on stone sleepers, 11.

  Reading Railroad, 123, 313, 320.

  Rebating, prohibition of, 328, 329.

  Reconstruction of railroads, 138-151.

  Red Line, All-British, 141.

  Red Spot, Order of the, 430, 431.

  Repair shops, locomotive and car, 400.

  "Residences," in railroad construction, 43.

  Richardson, the architect, 106.

  Rider, Nathaniel, 60.

  Rio Grande & Western Railroad, 74.

  Roadmaster, duties of, 239, 240.

  Roads as compared with canals, 5.

  Rochester, railroad connections of, 13, 14;
    depot, 96.

  Rock Island, _see_ Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific R. R.

  Rockaway section, Long Island, home of Lillian Russell, 294.

  Rockefeller, Mr., 296.

  Roebling's suspension at Niagara Falls, 75.

  Rogers, Grosvenor, and Ketchum, locomotive builders, of Paterson, N. J.,
        26;
    locomotive works, 121, 122, 124.

  Ronkonkoma, Long Island, home of Maude Adams, 293, 294.

  Roosevelt, Governor, 217, 218.

  Rotary plough, 271.

  Roundhouses, 88-90, 270, 388-402.

  Rural free delivery, development of, 376.

  Russell, Lillian, 294.

  Rutland Railroad, 417.


  Sacramento Valley Railroad, 30.

  Sails on cars, experiments with, 17.

  St. Albans, Vt., 333, 335.

  St. John's Church, New York, 354.

  St. John's Park, New York, 353, 354.

  St. Louis, railroad connections of, 19, 29;
    Union Station at, 88, 97, 99, 100, 106.

  St. Paul, _see_ Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul R. R.

  Salaries, paid to railroad presidents, 168, 169;
    to the general attorney, 171.

  "Sand-hogs," 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 73.

  _Sandusky_, first locomotive with whistle, 26, 124.

  Santa Fe, _see_ Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe R. R.

  Schedules, Train, _see_ Time Tables.

  Scherl, August, 443.

  Secret service, the railroad's, 177-179.

  Section-boss, duties of, 239, 240, 431.

  Seibert, Leonard, 301.

  Signal, bell-rope, 124, 225, 226, 227;
    along line of railroad, 236;
    interlocking, 236;
    block system of, 237;
    operation of, 236-239;
    maintenance of, 239.

  Signal towers, 82, 84-87.

  _Situation_, The, the official daily report, 196, 197.

  Slateford, Pa., bridge, 78.

  Sleeping-cars, introduction and use of, 299, 301, 302.

  Smith, A. H., 205.

  Smith, C. Shaler, 66.

  Smith, Reuben F., 418.

  Snow-belt of Great Lakes, 268.

  Snow ploughs, 38.

  Snow-sheds, 268.

  South Carolina Railroad, 8.

  South Station, Boston, 88, 97-99, 313, 319, 320, 384.

  Southern California, interurban electric line in, 297.

  Southern Express company, 373.

  Southern Pacific Railroad, 2, 32, 126, 139, 144, 159, 441, 454.

  Spearman, Frank H., 144.

  Spiral tunnels, 141, 142.

  Spokane case, the, 334, 335.

  Springfield, Mass., bridge, 57.

  Springfield, station at, 106.

  Springstead, Harvey, 431.

  Stage, Henry W., 418.

  Stampede Tunnel, 50, 51.

  Stanford, Leland, 30, 31.

  Starucca Viaduct, 58, 59, 77.

  Station-agent, multifarious duties of, 253-255.

  Stations, _see under_ Railroad.

  Statistics, making of railroad, 184-186.

  Steam brake, 125.

  Steamships, 352, 353, 404, 405.

  Steel, use of, 56, 61, 72, 125, 386, 397-400.

  Stephenson, George, inventor, 5, 121.

  Stephenson, George & Robert & Company, 121.

  Stephenson, Robert, 125.

  Steubenville, Ohio, bridge, 75, 76.

  Stonington, Conn., railroad connections of, 10.

  _Stourbridge Lion_, locomotive, 7, 8, 119.

  Street railroad systems, 427, 428.

  Stubbs, of the Union Pacific, 298.

  Suburban service, 80, 81, 90, 98, 99, 147, 148, 315-319, 440.

  Superintendent of bridges, 239, 240.

  Superintendents, 153-155, 187, 220, 221-242.

  Susquehanna Railroad, _see_ Northern Central Railroad.

  Susquehanna River, Pennsylvania R. R. bridge over, 77.

  Susquehanna River bridge, between Havre-de-Grace and Aiken, 64, 65.

  Susquehanna shop, 393, 394.

  Swindon, the English railroad town, 393.

  Switchback principle, 41.

  Switches and switchmen, 84-86, 111-118, 252, 253, 320.


  Tacony, Philadelphia trains stopped at, 10.

  Taylor, President Zachary, 123.

  Telegraph, Erie first railroad to use, 24;
    development of, in 1851, 24;
    introduction of, 25, 224;
    substitution of telephone for, 235, 236;
    crippling of service of, 267, 268.

  Telephone, use of, 235, 236.

  Terminal, keeper of the, 82;
    map of tracks and station of, 83, 84;
    guarded by interlocking switches, 84, 85.

  Terminals, _see_ Railroad stations;
    _also_ Freight terminals.

  Thomas, Philip E., 16, 19.

  Thomas Viaduct, 58, 59, 76.

  Thompson, A. W., 65.

  Thomson, J. Edgar, 6.

  Thomson, John, 6.

  "Throat" of station yard, 87, 88.

  Tickets and mileage-books, 182, 276-278, 286;
    bill for printing, 288;
    rate-sheet for, 289;
    redemption of, 289, 290.

  Time Tables, 221.

  Tioga Railroad, 133.

  _Tom Thumb_, locomotive, 18, 120.

  Towanda, Pa., bridge at, 144.

  Towermen, 82, 83, 85, 274.

  Townsend, Oscar, 418.

  Track-laying, world's record of, 45;
    profession of, 45, 46;
    machine for, 46.

  Track, on which _Stourbridge Lion_ locomotive ran, 7.

  Track-walker, responsibility of, 253.

  Traffic, making of freight and passenger, 355-368.

  Trailer, the, 128, 129.

  Train-despatcher, 221, 223, 224, 228-231, 233-235, 261.

  Trainman, _see_ Brakeman, duties of.

  Train-master, duties of, 221.

  Transcontinental railroads, 357, 358.

  Transfer-house, 111-116.

  Travelling passenger agents, duties of, 278.

  Trenton, bridge at, 57, 77.

  "Trolley arrangement" in freight-houses, 450.

  Trumbull, --, bridge-builder, 60.

  Tug, use of, 407, 409, 412.

  Tunnels, 41, 48-55, 102, 104, 122, 141, 142, 145, 160, 161, 317-319,
        412-414, 436, 437, 439, 441.

  Turner, John B., 28.

  Turn-tables, 89.


  Underwood, F. D., 23, 142, 143, 164.

  Union line, 13.

  Union Pacific Railroad, 2, 28, 31, 32, 44, 137, 139-141, 298, 357, 459.

  Union Station, Cleveland, 96, 418, 419.

  Union Station, Pittsburgh, 148.

  Union Station, St. Louis, 88, 97, 99, 100, 106.

  Union Station, Washington, 88, 100, 101, 106.

  United States Express Company, 372, 373.

  Utica, railroad connections of, 13, 14.


  Vanderbilt, Commodore, 14, 22, 378, 379.

  Vanderbilt, Cornelius, 419.

  Vanderbilt, William H., 378, 379.

  Vanderbilt family, the, 354, 419, 434.

  Vermont Central Railroad, 123.

  Vice-presidents of railroads, 156.

  Voluntary Relief Department, 423-425.

  Von Moltke, his reconstruction of the German army, 452.


  Wabash Railroad, 26, 51, 414.

  Wagner Palace Car Company, 300.

  Walcott, --, builder of Springfield, Mass., bridge, 57.

  Walsheart gears, 128.

  Washington, George, 375.

  "Washington cars," 132, 133.

  Washington, Connecticut Avenue Bridge at, 78;
    Union Station at, 88, 100, 101, 106.

  Water for use of railroad, 41.

  Water transportation, _see_ Inland Water Ways.

  Waterford bridge, over Hudson River, 57.

  Watertown, blizzard at, 268.

  Waverley, the interchange yard, 110.

  Webster, Daniel, and his trip on the Erie, 23, 25.

  Weehawken "bridge," 411.

  Wells, Henry, 371, 372.

  Wells, Fargo & Co., 372, 373.

  West Penn Road, 149.

  _West Point_, locomotive, 9.

  West Shore Railroad, 75, 151, 265, 412, 434, 435.

  Western Pacific Railroad, 29, 32.

  Western Railroad, 10.

  Westinghouse, George, 125.

  Wheeling, railroad connections of, 18, 19.

  Whipple, Squire, 61, 63.

  Whistle on locomotive, first use of, 26, 124.

  Whitney, Asa, 29, 30.

  Whitney, Silas, 6.

  Whyte's classification, 127, 128.

  Wiley, Dr., 397.

  Willard, Daniel, 22.

  Winans, Ross, 19, 122, 124, 132, 133.

  Winnipeg shops, 393.

  Women, conveniences for travelling, 309.

  Woodruff Company, 299, 300.

  Worcester, station at, 106.

  World's Fair of 1904, St. Louis, 99.

  Wrecks, railroad, 189, 194-196;
    wrecking-trains for, 257-265.


  _Yale_, the, 405, 406.

  Yardmaster, duties of, 189, 190, 193, 227-229.

  _York_, _see_ _Arabian_, locomotive.

  Young Men's Christian Association, 418, 419.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Modern Railroad, by Edward Hungerford

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MODERN RAILROAD ***

***** This file should be named 40242.txt or 40242.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/2/4/40242/

Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
