Project Gutenberg's The Secret of the Silver Car, by Wyndham Martyn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Secret of the Silver Car
       Further Adventures of Anthony Trent, Master Criminal

Author: Wyndham Martyn

Release Date: July 30, 2012 [EBook #40372]
[Last updated: August 23, 2012]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET OF THE SILVER CAR ***




Produced by Annie R. McGuire. This book was produced from
scanned images of public domain material from the Google
Print archive.









THE SECRET OF
THE SILVER CAR




WYNDHAM MARTYN
IS ALSO THE AUTHOR OF
"ANTHONY TRENT, MASTER CRIMINAL"
"ALL THE WORLD TO NOTHING"
"THE MAN OUTSIDE"




THE SECRET OF
THE SILVER CAR

FURTHER ADVENTURES OF ANTHONY
TRENT, MASTER CRIMINAL


BY
WYNDHAM MARTYN

AUTHOR OF
THE MAN OUTSIDE; ALL THE WORLD TO NOTHING;
ANTHONY TRENT, MASTER CRIMINAL; ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK
MOFFAT, YARD AND COMPANY
1920




COPYRIGHT, 1920
BY MOFFAT, YARD & COMPANY




THEIR FATHER
DEDICATES THESE FURTHER
ADVENTURES OF ANTHONY TRENT TO
PHYLLIS AND CYNTHIA
BUT NOT WITHOUT A GUILTY FEELING THAT THERE
MUST HAVE BEEN SOMETHING
LACKING
IN THE ETHICAL TRAINING OF THESE
ESTIMABLE CHILDREN
SINCE THEY TAKE SUCH INTEREST IN THE
CAREER
OF A MASTER CRIMINAL




CONTENTS

  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE
     I THE PUZZLING PASSENGER                                          1
    II THE MAN IN THE DARK                                            14
   III THE BEGINNING OF THE SEARCH                                    25
    IV A LADY INTERRUPTS                                              63
     V THE MAN WHO DENIED                                             80
    VI FRESH FIELDS                                                  101
   VII THE SENTENCE OF BANISHMENT                                    119
  VIII COUNT MICHAEL TEMESVAR                                         133
    IX PAULINE                                                       146
     X THE GREATER GAME                                              174
    XI ANTHONY PLAYS HIS HAND                                        186
   XII SAINT ANTHONY                                                 214
  XIII DOWN TO THE SEA                                               236
   XIV THE CABINET MEETING                                           266
    XV ANTHONY THE TRIUMPHANT                                        277




CHAPTER ONE

_THE PUZZLING PASSENGER_


"Stop him," the second officer yelled, "he's going to jump overboard!"

The man who dashed past him and through a group of passengers waving
hands at friends on the deck below, was too quick for those who sought
to stay him. He balanced himself for a moment on the rail and then
jumped ten feet down to the pier.

The gangplanks had already been withdrawn and the great liner bound for
New York was too mighty a piece of momentum to pause now. Furthermore
her commander was going down the river on a favoring tide and nothing
short of a signal from the port authorities would have made him put back
for a passenger who had chosen such a singular moment for a leap into
the dark.

An hour or so later in the smoking room the disappearance was discussed
with fervor. A collar manufacturer of Troy, named Colliver, was holding
his group for the reason he had been standing by the rail when the young
man jumped and had even sought to restrain him.

"He was too quick for me," Colliver declared. "I surely thought he'd
hurt himself jumping ten feet down."

"What did he do after he jumped?" a man demanded.

"Picked himself up and looked around as if he expected to see someone.
The last I saw of him was going from group to group of people asking
something I couldn't hear."

"Very mysterious," another passenger commented. "I don't believe he was
crazy. I believe he jumped off just at the right moment--for him. I
believe we shall find he took some loot with him. The purser is making
an investigation now."

"I've got a theory," another smoker asserted. "I was just going to ask
him for a light when he began that run down the deck to the rail and
believe me he can sprint. Just as I was about to open my mouth I saw his
face suddenly change. Evidently he had seen or heard something that
frightened him."

"So he ran away from danger?" Colliver added. "That might be. I tell you
on a big boat like this we are surrounded by crooks, male and female,
and they look on us as their lawful prey. He might have been a gambler
who spotted a victim he was afraid of."

"Or a murderer," a Harvard theologian replied nervously. "I never feel
really safe on a great liner like this. We all have to take one another
on trust. I have been introduced to you gentlemen as a professor of
pastoral theology. I may be a professional murderer for all you know.
Mr. Colliver here isn't known to me personally and he may be a really
high class bank robber for all I can tell."

Mr. Colliver took the suggestion sourly.

"Everybody in Troy knows me," he replied with dignity.

"Exactly," the theologian answered. "But Troy is not on the ship's
passenger lists to any such extent as to corroborate your statement.
There may be Harvard men on board who know me by name but for all they
know I may be made up to represent Professor Sedgely so as to gain your
confidence and rob you."

"My collars encircle the necks of more men than those of any other
maker," said Colliver quoting one of his advertisements. "My name is
known everywhere. No man is perfectly dressed without my collars. I
presented a swimming pool to Troy and there isn't a man or woman in the
city but would resent any slur on me."

"My dear sir," said the professor smiling, "I am not attacking your good
name or your city's fame. I am only saying that if you were crossing
with the idea of making a killing at games of chance I should not
benefit because you assumed the name of one who ornaments the cervical
vertebrae of perfectly dressed men. I only meant that anything can take
place on a ship such as this is and that this man who escaped tonight
may have done so to avoid capture and possible imprisonment or even
death."

"The purser had a wireless sent to the company's office and no doubt
has a reply by this time," another passenger broke in.

"He is probably in prison now," Professor Sedgely remarked.

"You certainly have a cheerful mind," Colliver commented.

"I read for mental relaxation the lightest forms of fiction," the
professor answered, "and I am prepared for anything. I maintain that
every passenger on a fast ship like this is regarded as a possible
victim by the cleverest criminals in existence. For myself I have
nothing of value, being poorly paid, but our friend there who has so
finely benefitted his home city wears a diamond pin of great value.
Furthermore there is a sapphire set in platinum on his finger which
might well tempt the professional robber."

"Say," said Colliver a little uneasily, "you're observant all right.
Anything else you saw?"

"That you have a gold cigar case with initials in emeralds. I have," the
professor said modestly, "trained my powers of observation. I do it to
protect myself."

He rose from his chair and bowed a courteous goodnight to the immediate
group and then went on deck.

"I don't trust that man," said the manufacturer. "I never trust any man
on a ship who wears smoked glasses. He wanted to conceal his eyes. I'll
bet he never saw Harvard except on a picture postal. Damn it!" Colliver
cried peevishly, "Why can't a man wear a passable ring and stickpin
without it attracting the attention of other people?"

The Harvard theologian had sown seeds of suspicion. Colliver, as amiable
a manufacturer of collars as any in Troy, looked over at Myers Irving
who ran an advertising agency in New York and suspected him of being a
confidence man.

"It's a pretty good looking ring," Irving said heartily. He wished he
had one like it. Now that he knew who Colliver was he thirsted after his
account. His overtures were accepted with marked reserve and a gloom
fell upon the party until the entrance of the genial purser.

"Who was the mysterious man?" Colliver asked.

"His name was Anthony Trent," said the purser.

A man in the uniform of a captain in the United States army who had been
playing solitaire and had taken no part in this talk, looked up with
such sudden interest at the name that the purser turned to him.

"Do you know Anthony Trent?" he demanded.

"Yes," said Captain Sutton, "I do."

"Can you think of any reason why he should jump ashore just as we were
starting for the Hudson River?"

"He might have been saying goodbye to his best girl and taken no heed of
the warning to go ashore."

"That won't do," the purser declared. "All his kit is in his stateroom
and he had already seen his table steward and arranged about his seat.
He went off on the impulse of the moment and I'd like to know what that
impulse was."

"Has anyone missed anything?" Colliver asked.

"Don't know," the purser said. "Haven't heard of anything so far. I
wirelessed the office and the pier superintendent and they have lost all
trace of him. The last they heard of him was that he was seen offering a
taxicab driver double fare to drive fast."

"He saw someone on the ship he was afraid of," Colliver said with the
air of one called upon to solve a deep mystery.

The purser was determined not to let Captain Sutton get back to his
solitaire.

"I'm afraid I'll have to ask you more about your friend," he said
smiling, "the whole thing is so unusual that the old man wants a
thorough investigation. In confidence, is there anything fishy about
this Anthony Trent?"

"In confidence, I may tell you," Captain Sutton answered, "but my
confidence will be in the captain's cabin and not here."

"Do you think we'd say anything to anyone about it?" Colliver demanded.
He feared he was to be robbed of interesting details.

"I'm a lawyer by profession," Captain Sutton returned, "and I know how
people talk even when they mean to be silent. Anthony Trent is a friend
of mine and I shall constitute myself his counsel. He served under me in
the war, was recommended for a commission, and won the _Croix de
Guerre_. He is an American with enough money to play golf and flyfish
for trout all he wants to. He was in a hospital in the Isle of Wight for
three months after being wounded and I had a letter from him saying he
would come over on this ship. I came by Liverpool just because I wanted
to see him; and when I didn't see him at dinner I thought he had changed
his plans. I can give no reason why he should have left the boat in the
manner he did but as a lawyer I can assure the company that it is his
affair and not theirs."

The purser was skilled in the ways of human beings. He had not
straightened out difficulties for his company on half a thousand trips
across the Atlantic for nothing. He could see plainly enough that
Captain Sutton knew something about Anthony Trent that he would not tell
the captain or anyone else unless process of law compelled. There had
been a quick look of fear on his face when he realized Trent was the man
of whom the group about him had been speaking. Whether Captain Sutton
knew the reason why his friend had leapt from the ship's rail was
doubtful; but that the act had conjured up sudden fear gave the purser
food for thought.

"The company certainly does not want to bring suit against a passenger
who has paid for a high priced state room and a number of excellent
meals and refuses to benefit by them. The old man was annoyed that
everyone was talking about it at his table and he wasn't able to get off
his little crop of chestnuts as usual. He'd appreciate it if you would
tell him what you know about Mr. Trent."

"If I see him it will be as Mr. Trent's lawyer," Sutton retorted.

The purser looked at him keenly.

"So you admit," he said genially, "that this mysterious Anthony Trent
needs a defender?"

"I admit nothing of the sort," Sutton replied quickly. But he felt he
had not conducted the affair with his usual skill. "There's been a lot
of hot air talked about crimes on board ship and I'm not going to have
my friend's name linked with that sort of thing."

"Of course not," the purser agreed. "I can understand why you come to
the rescue; still there is bound to be some misunderstanding about a man
who leaves all his baggage behind and takes a desperate jump as he did."

"He saw someone on this ship he was afraid of," Colliver insisted. "It
might have been you for all I know."

"What do you mean by that?" Sutton demanded and flushed dusky red.

Colliver was amazed at the sudden heat. The purser was more interested
than ever. He would have been even more amazed if he had known that
Captain Sutton honestly believed that it was because Anthony Trent had
seen him face to face that he had escaped. The letter of which he had
spoken was non-existent. He had lied because of the man whom he had, for
the first time, claimed as his friend.

Sutton had been the officer; Trent the enlisted man and the discipline
of the service prevented a friendship that would have been possible in
other days and, now war was finished, might again become practicable.
The space of an hour was the time the officer had been with the man and
yet he was determined to fight for his interests. And he suddenly
realized that he had begun his fight by antagonizing a very shrewd
purser.

"My dear sir," the purser said gently, "I am sure you are taking this
too much to heart. Nobody is accusing your client of anything more
serious than risking a broken leg which, after all, is more his affair
than even his counsel's. Captain Kingscote will ask you a few questions
which you must understand, as a lawyer, a ship's commander ought to ask.
There is such a thing as a log and it has to be written correctly.
Tomorrow morning perhaps? You will be offered an excellent cigar and a
drink that you can't get in all the length and breadth of your native
land."

"Any time at all," Sutton answered with an effort to be as genial as the
purser. "I only resented the idle chatter that centred around a man who
fought very gallantly."

"If you mean me by that reference," Colliver said angrily, "I'd like to
say that I have as much right to talk as anyone on board."

"Certainly," said Myers Irving, "and I can't see why anyone wants to get
excited about it. It was that professor who began it. Mr. Colliver what
do you say to a little smile?"

Colliver looked at the card Irving handed to him. He did not like
advertising men as a rule but he felt this debonair head of a big agency
was an exception. He had come to the aid of big business.

"It must be the salt in the air," he confessed, "I don't mind if I do."

Left to himself Sutton closed his eyes and lived over again those
moments in France when Anthony Trent had been brought before him as
adjutant on extraordinary charges.

Once or twice he had seen Private Trent and had been vaguely reminded of
a forgotten face. It was only when Anthony Trent had been recommended
for promotion and had declined it that he remembered the name. Trent had
been the Dartmouth football captain in that historic year when Harvard
was humbled. Sutton, a graduate of ten years previously, had shouted
himself hoarse at the great run by which Trent had passed the crimson
score.

Private Trent had been chosen on very dangerous business and the
adjutant had no chance to speak to him as he had determined to do.
Anthony Trent was one of those who volunteered to clean up machine gun
nests left behind to harass the advancing troops of the Allies. He had
done so well that Captain Sutton was proud of him for the sake of the
old college in Hanover.

He remembered the shock he had when Lieutenant Devlin, a former
detective in New York and a man to whom he was not drawn, declared that
this same Anthony Trent was the most famous criminal of the day, a
master craftsman who had never been in police toils.

Sutton laughed at the very suggestion. It was absurd. Devlin's answer to
this made the soldier-lawyer less confident. Devlin said that Dr. Trent
had left his son but a few hundred dollars and a rambling mortgaged home
among New Hampshire hills. Young Trent had come to New York and settled
down to writing detective and criminal stories for the lesser magazines.
Then, suddenly, an Australian relative had died and left him a fortune.
This was a lie, Devlin declared. There was no such relation. It was done
to explain his sudden giving up of writing and living in a far better
style.

Trent owned, so the detective asserted, a beautiful camp on Kennebago
Lake in Maine, two automobiles and sundry other aids to a comfortable
existence which his writings would never have gained for him.

Still disbelieving, Captain Sutton was shown the dying depositions of an
English soldier who had been butler to a New York millionaire whose
house had been robbed. Austin, the butler, had seen Trent and assumed
him to be a friend of his employer. He had recognized him when British
and American troops were brigaded side by side and had told only Devlin
a detective who had worked on the case.

Evidence at last seemed conclusive. Devlin, dying in hospital wished for
the downfall of a man who had beaten him in three big cases. The
adjutant remembered well one case when the Dangerfield ruby worth almost
two hundred thousand dollars was taken.

Private Trent seemed quite calm. He assured his officer that these
charges were preposterous. "What else could they be?" he had asked.

"They might be the truth," Sutton had said gravely.

He remembered the visit to the hospital where Devlin lay dying but eager
to sign the testimony he had woven about his enemy. The ending of the
incident was very curious. It made him like Devlin after all. When
Devlin knew his end was come and the last rites of his church had been
administered he had given up his plans for revenge. He had looked into
the fearless eyes of the master criminal and he had seen there an
unconquerable spirit which he admired. And so, with his last effort he
had torn up the written evidence and declared that Anthony Trent was not
the man; that it was all a mistake.

Sutton remembered the relief with which he had put his hand on the
shoulder of the younger man and that he had said, "Trent, you were in
luck this time. Don't take a chance again."

After the signing of peace he had determined to look up the old athlete
and see if he could not offer him such opportunities that he could go
straight. Sutton was a man of immense wealth and had mining properties
in South America which needed supervision.

And now to find that Trent was aboard the ship and at the last moment
had risked a broken limb in order to escape. It was not likely that a
man who feared detection so much dare rely on the generosity of a man
who knew his secret. There were probably rewards for his capture which,
in the aggregate, offered immense inducement to deliver Anthony Trent
to justice. How was Trent to know that Sutton the adjutant was
financially secure enough to make the sacrifice? Undoubtedly he had seen
Sutton and made the desperate leap.

Sutton determined to safeguard his interests. The baggage for instance,
that should not be searched. There might be in it evidence as damaging
as that which the brothers of Joseph put into the younger's sack. It
would be far better to see the captain and make a friend of him. Why had
not Trent been a better reader of character and recognized that in
Captain Sutton he had a friend?

Sutton did not know that long ago Trent had seen that in the rich lawyer
there was one whom he need not fear. Few were more skilled than the
master criminal in the reading of those signs by which men reveal for a
second or so the depths of their natures.

Anthony Trent had not jumped from the rails of the big ship because he
had seen Sutton. He had no idea his old adjutant was on board. He had
not jumped ashore because of any person on the liner. He took his
reckless leap because among those who waited on the pier he heard the
voice of the one man he feared, the man he had been trying to find since
that day in France when death seemed at last to have claimed him.




CHAPTER TWO

_THE MAN IN THE DARK_


One day late in October when the Allies were moving with such speed
against the enemy Private Trent had been struck with a piece of
shrapnel. There was the recognized noise of the flying fragments and
then a sudden flaming pain in his left arm followed by black
unconsciousness.

He came back very slowly to the realization that he was not seriously
hurt. His wounded arm was bandaged. He was still rather weak and lay
back for some moments before opening his eyes. Then he opened them to
meet only a wall of unrelieved night. "I'm blind!" he thought.

Groping about him he felt dank earth, the earth he had been accustomed
to in the trenches, slimy, sweating clay. With his undamaged hand he
felt the bandages that were about his head. There was no wound near his
eyes; but that would not be necessary, for he had seen so many cases of
blindness due to the bursting of high explosives. It might be temporary
blindness or it might be permanent.

There was a great silence about him. Gone were the myriad sounds of war
that had enveloped him before his injury. Perhaps he was deaf, too. "My
God!" he groaned thinking of this new infliction and then grew a little
less miserable when he recognized the sound of his own voice. Well,
blindness was enough! Never again to see the green earth or the morning
sun stealing down the lake where his home was. At a little past thirty
to see only through the eyes of others. No more golf, no more hunting
and fishing trips, and of course no more of those taut-nerved nights
when he, a single human being, pitted his strength and intelligence
against the forces of organized society--and won. There was small
consolation in thinking that now, at all events, Anthony Trent, master
criminal would not be caught. He would go down in police history as the
most mysterious of those criminals who have set the detectives by the
heels.

A little later he told himself he would rather be caught, sentenced to a
term of life imprisonment if only he might see a tiny ribbon of blue sky
from his cell window, than condemned to this eternal blackness.

Then the miracle happened. A few yards from him came a scratching sound
and then a sudden flame. And in that moment he could see the profile of
a man bending over a cigarette. He was not blind!

"Who are you?" Anthony Trent cried not yet able to comprehend this
lifting of what he felt was a sentence imposed. "Where am I?"

The man who answered spoke with one of those cultivated English voices
which Trent had once believed to be the mark of decadence or
effeminacy, a belief the bloody fields of France had swept from him.

"Well," said the man slowly, "I really don't see that it matters much
now to anyone what my name may be."

"The only thing that matters to me," Trent cried with almost hysterical
fervor, "is that I'm not blind as I thought I was."

The answer of the unknown man was singular; but Trent, who was not far
from hysteria on account of bodily pain and the mental anguish through
which he had been, did not take note of it.

"I don't think that matters much either," the voice of the man in the
dark commented.

"Then where are we?" Trent demanded.

"There again I can't help you much," the unknown answered. "This _was_ a
common or garden dug-out."

"_Was_," Trent repeated, "What is it now?"

"A tomb," the stranger told him puffing at his cigarette. "I found you
bleeding to death and I bandaged your arm. I was knocked out myself and
your men and mine had gone on and there was never a Red Cross man or
anyone else in sight so I carried you into this dug-out. All of a sudden
some damned H. E. blocked up the opening. When the dust settled I
explored with my few matches. Our tomb is sealed up--absolutely. I've
often heard of it happening before. It looks as if a house had been
lifted up and planted right on this dug-out."

"So that's why you said it didn't matter much if I could see or not?"

"Does it?" the man asked shortly.

"Have you another match?" Trent asked presently. "I'd like to explore."

"No good," the other retorted. "I've been all round the damned place and
there isn't a chance, except that the thing may collapse and bury us."

"Then we are to starve to death without an effort?"

"We shall asphyxiate, we shan't starve. Don't you notice how heavy the
air is? Presently we shall get drowsy. Already I feel light headed and
inclined to talk."

"Then talk," Trent said, "Anything is better than sitting here and
waiting. The air is heavy; I notice it now. I suppose I'm going to be
delirious. Talk, damn you, talk. Why not tell me your name? What
difference can it make to you now? Are you afraid? Have you done things
you're ashamed of? Why let that worry you since it only proves you're
human."

"I'm not ashamed of what I've done," the other drawled, "it's my family
which persists in saying I've disgraced it."

Anthony Trent was in a strange mood. Ordinarily secretive to a degree
and fearful always of dropping a hint that might draw suspicion to his
ways of life, he found himself laughing in a good humored way that this
English soldier should imagine he must conceal his name for fear of
disgrace. Why the man was a child, a pigmy compared with Anthony Trent.
He had perhaps disobeyed an autocrat father or possibly married a chorus
girl instead of a blue blooded maiden.

"You've probably done nothing," said Trent. "It may be you were expelled
from school or university and that makes you think you are a desperate
character."

There was silence for a moment or so.

"As it happens," the unknown said, "I was expelled from Harrow and
kicked out of Trinity but it isn't for that. I'm known in the army as
Private William Smith of the 78th Battalion, City of London Regiment."

"I thought you were an officer," Trent said. Private Smith had the kind
of voice which Trent associated with the aristocracy.

"I'm just a plain private like you," Smith said, "although the lowly
rank is mine for probably far different reasons."

"I'm not so sure of that," Trent said, a trifle nettled. "I could have
had a commission if I wanted it."

"I did have one," Smith returned, "but I didn't mean what I said
offensively. I meant only that I dare not accept a commission."

Anthony Trent waited a moment before he answered.

"I'm not so sure of that," he said again.

The reasons for which Trent declined his commission and thereby endured
certain hardships not unconnected with sleeping quarters and noisy
companionship were entirely to his credit. Always with the fear of
exposure before his eyes he did not want to place odium on the status of
the American officer as he would have done had screaming headlines in
the papers spoken of the capture by police authorities of Lieutenant
Anthony Trent the cleverest of modern crooks. But he could not bring
himself to speak of this even in his present unusual mood.

"It doesn't matter now very much," Smith said laughing a little, "we
shall both be called missing and the prison camps will be searched for
us. In the end my family may revere my memory and yours call you its
chief glory."

"I haven't a family," Trent said. "I used to be sorry for it. I'm glad
now." He stopped suddenly. "Do you know," he said later, "you were
laughing just now. You're either crazy or else you must have your nerve
with you still."

"I may be crazy," returned Private Smith, "but I usually make my living
by having my nerve with me as you call it. It has been my downfall. If I
had been a good, moral child, amenable to discipline I might have
commanded a regiment instead of being a 'tommy' and I might be repenting
now. By the way you don't seem as depressed as one might expect. Why?"

"After a year of this war one doesn't easily lose the habit of laughing
at death."

"I've had four years of it," Smith said. "I was a ranker when it broke
out and saw the whole show from August 1914. On the whole what is
coming will be a rest. I don't know how they manage these things in
your country but in England when a man has been, well call it unwise,
there is always a chance of feeling a heavy hand on one's shoulder and
hearing a voice saying in one's ear, 'I arrest you in the King's name!'
Very dramatic and impressive and all that sort of thing, but wearing on
the nerves--very." Private Smith laughed gently, "I'm afraid you are
dying in rather bad company."

"We have something in common perhaps," Trent said. He grinned to himself
in the covering blackness as he said it. "Tell me, did you ever hear of
Anthony Trent?"

"Never," Private Smith returned quickly. "Sorry! I suppose I ought to
know all about him. What has he done?"

"He wrote stories of super-crookdom for one thing."

"That explains it," Smith asserted, "You see those stories rather bore
me. I read them when I was young and innocent but now I know how
extremely fictional they are; written for the greater part, I'm
informed, by blameless women in boarding houses. I like reading the real
thing."

"What do you mean by that?"

"Reports of actual crimes as set forth in the newspapers.
Cross-examinations of witnesses and all that, summing up of the judges
and coroners' inquests. Was this Trent person really good?"

"You shall judge," said the American. "He wrote of crimes and criminals
from what such actual practitioners had told him. He was for a time a
police reporter on a big New York paper and had to hang around Mulberry
Street. After that he tried the magazines but as editors are so remote
as a rule from actual knowledge of the world's play and work, he didn't
make much money at it. Finally his pet editor--a man with some human
attributes--said in effect, 'I can't raise your rates; the publisher
won't stand for it. If I paid decent prices he couldn't buy champagne
and entertain his favorites.' This was in the era before prohibition.
The human editor went on giving advice and wound up by saying, 'Why
don't you do what your super-crook character does and relieve the
dishonest rich of their stolen bonds? Conway Parker gets away with it,
why shouldn't you?'"

"Of course he was rotting?" Private Smith asked.

"Yes," the American said, "He didn't really mean it but the thought
germs fell into the right sort of broth. Anthony Trent wasn't naturally
a crook but he hated having to live in a cheap boarding house and eat
badly cooked meals and play on a hard-mouthed, hired, upright piano.
Some ancestor had dowered him with a love of beautiful things, rugs,
pictures, pottery, bronzes, music and a rather secluded life. Also he
had dreams about being a great composer. He was a queer mixture. On the
whole rather unbalanced I suppose. His father died and left him almost
nothing. All he could do was newspaper work at first."

"You mean he actually followed the editor's advice?"

"Yes. He had certain natural gifts to aid him. He was a first rate
mimic. It's a sort of gift I suppose. He had gone in for amateur
theatricals at his college and done rather well. He pulled off his first
job successfully but the butler saw him and did not forget. That was the
trouble the butler remembered. It wasn't a big affair. It didn't make
any such stir as for example as when he took the Mount Aubyn Ruby."

"I read of that," Smith returned eagerly. "He knocked out a millionaire
surrounded with detectives and got away in an airplane."

"He got away but not in an airplane," replied Anthony Trent. "On the
whole the unknown aviator was rather useful to him but was absolutely
blameless. Then there was the case of the Apthorpe emerald. Did you hear
of that?"

"Haven't I told you," Smith returned impatiently, "that I read all about
things of that sort? How could I have missed that even though I was in
the trenches when it happened. It was the delight of my hospital life to
read about it in Reynolds Journal. It was said a woman murdered old
Apthorpe for it."

"She did," Trent admitted, "and she took the emerald but Anthony Trent
got it from her and fooled them all. His last big job before the United
States got into the war was getting the blue-white diamond that was
known as the Nizam's Diamond."

"A hundred carat stone," Smith said reverently. "By Jove, what a master!
As I never heard of him of course he was never caught. They are all
caught in the end, though. His day will come."

For a moment the thought that Anthony Trent's life was coming to an end
before many hours had passed took the narrator from his mood of triumph
into a state of depression. To have to give up everything and die in the
darkness. Exit Anthony Trent for all time! And as he thought of his
enemies the police toiling for the rich rewards that they would never
get for apprehending him his black mood passed and Smith heard him
chuckle.

"They all get caught in the end," Smith repeated, "the best of them. The
doctrine of averages is against them. Your Anthony Trent is one lone man
fighting against so many. He may have the luck with him so far but
there's only one end to it. They got Captain Despard and he was a
top-hole marauder. They got our estimable Charles Peace and they
electrocuted Regan in your own country only last month and he was
clever, God knows. I think I'd back your Trent man against any single
opponent, but the odds are too great. The pack will pull him down and
break him up some day."

Again Private Smith of the City of London regiment heard the man he had
rescued from danger to present him with death, laugh a curious
triumphant laugh. He had seen so much of war's terror that he supposed
the man was going mad. It would perhaps be a more merciful end.

"No," said the American. "Anthony Trent will never be discovered. He
will be the one great criminal who will escape to the confusion of the
detectives of New York and London. _I am Anthony Trent._"




CHAPTER THREE

_THE BEGINNING OF THE SEARCH_


"You?" cried Private Smith. "Ye Gods! And I haven't even a match left so
I can see you before we go. I die in better company than I know." Trent
could hear that he raised himself slowly and painfully to his feet. Then
he heard the soldier's heels click smartly together. "Ave Caesar--" he
began. But the immortal speech of those gladiators being about to die
was not finished.

There broke on Trent's astonished gaze a flash of sunlight that made him
blink painfully. And the terrifying noise of high explosive hurt his
ears and that swift dreadful sucking of the air that followed such
explosions was about him again in its intensity. He had been dug out of
his tomb for what?

The doctors thought him a very bad case. Of course he was delirious. He
stuck to a ridiculous story that he was imprisoned in a tomb with one
William Smith, a private in the 78th Battalion of the City of London
Regiment and that H. E. had mysteriously disinterred him. H. E. did
perform marvels that were seemingly against known natural laws but
Private Trent was obviously suffering from shell shock.

When he was better and had been removed to a hospital far from the area
of fighting he still kept to his story. One of the doctors who liked him
explained that the delusion must be banished. He spoke very
convincingly. He explained by latest methods that the unreal becomes
real unless the patient gets a grip on himself. He said that Trent was
likely to go through life trying to find a non-existent friend and
ruining his prospects in the doing of it. "I'll admit," he said at the
end of his harangue, "that you choose your friend's name well."

"Why do you say that?" Trent asked.

"Because the muster roll of the 78th shows no fewer than twenty-seven
William Smiths and they're all of 'em dead. That battalion got into the
thick of every scrap that started."

Trent said no more but made investigations on his own behalf.
Unfortunately there was none to help him. The ambulance that picked him
up was shelled and he had been taken from its bloody interior the only
living soul of the crew and passengers. None lived who could tell him
what became of his companion, the man to whom he had revealed his
identity, the man who possessed his secret to the full.

When he was discharged from the service and was convalescing in
Bournemouth he satisfied himself that the unknown Smith had died. Again
luck was with Anthony Trent. The one man--with the exception of Sutton
whose lips he was sure were sealed--who could make a clear hundred
thousand dollars reward for his capture was removed from the chance of
doing it even as the knowledge was offered him. The words that he would
have spoken, "Hail Caesar, I, being about to die, salute thee!" had come
true in that blinding flash that had brought Anthony Trent back to the
world.

But even with this last narrow escape to sober him Trent was not certain
whether the old excitement would call and send him out to pit himself
against society. He had no grievance against wealthy men as such. What
he had wanted of theirs he had taken. He was now well enough off to
indulge in the life, as a writer, he had wanted. He had taken his part
in the great war as a patriot should and was returning to his native
land decorated by two governments. Again and again as he sat at the
balcony of his room at the Royal Bath Hotel and looked over the bay to
the cliffs of Swanage he asked himself this question--was he through
with the old life or not? He could not answer. But he noticed that when
he boarded the giant Cunarder he looked about him with the old keenness,
the professional scrutiny, the eagerness of other days.

He tipped the head steward heavily and then consulted the passenger list
and elected to sit next to a Mrs. Colliver wife of a Troy millionaire.
She was a dull lady and one who lived to eat, but he had heard her
boasting to a friend on the boat train that her husband had purchased a
diamond tiara in Bond Street which would eclipse anything Troy had to
offer. Mrs. Colliver dreaded to think of the duty that would have to be
paid especially as during the war less collars were used than in normal
times.

It was with a feeling of content that Anthony Trent paced the deck as
the liner began her voyage home. Two years was a long time to be away
and he felt that a long lazy month in his Maine camp would be the
nearest thing to the perfect state that he could dream of when he heard,
distinctly, without a chance of being mistaken, the voice of Private
William Smith shouting a goodbye from the pier.

Trent had a curiously sensitive ear. He had never, for example, failed
to recognize a voice even distorted over telephone wires. William Smith
had one of those distinctive voices of the same timbre and inflection of
those of his caste but with a certain quality, that Trent could not now
stop to analyze, which stamped it as different.

All Trent's old caution returned to him. It was possible that the man
whom he had supposed dead had come to see the Cunarder off without
knowing Anthony Trent was aboard. But the passenger lists could be
inspected and even now the law might have been set in motion that would
take him handcuffed from the vessel at quarantine to be locked up in a
prison. He was worth a hundred thousand dollars to any informant and he
could not doubt that the so-called Smith had gone wrong because of the
lust for money to pay his extravagances. It was inevitably the reason in
men of the class of Smith and Despard.

He was obsessed with the determination to find out. He would track the
man he had known as Smith and find out without letting him be any the
wiser. A hundred ideas of disguise flashed across the quick-working
brain. He tried to tell himself that it was likely that the voice might
have proceeded from an utter stranger. But this was false comfort he
knew. It was Smith of the 78th City of London regiment who was on the
pier already growing inch by inch farther away.

The second officer tried to stop him and a passenger grasped him by the
arm as he climbed the rails but they tried vainly. He dropped as lightly
as he could and picked himself up a little dazed and looked around. He
could see a hundred faces peering down at him from the moving decks
overhead. He could see a crowd of people streaming down the pier to the
city. And among them was the man he sought.

"One moment, sir," said a policeman restraining him, "what's the meaning
of this?"

"Just come ashore," Trent smiled. The policeman loomed over him huge,
stolid, ominous. The man looked from Trent in evening dress and without
hat or overcoat, to the shadowy ship now on her thousand league voyage
and he shook his head. It was an irregular procedure, he told himself
and as such open to grave suspicion. But he was courteous. Trent was a
gentleman and no look of fear came to his face when the officer spoke.
The man remained close to Trent when he approached the few groups of
people still on the pier. To every man in the groups the stranger
contrived to ask a question. Of one he asked the time, of another the
best hotel in Liverpool.

"It may seem very strange," said Trent pleasantly to the perplexed
policeman, "but I did an unaccountable thing. I thought I saw a man who
was in the trenches with me in France during the war and saved my life
and I sprang over the side to find him and now he's gone."

The policeman waved a white gloved hand to the people who had already
left the landing stage.

"Your friend may be there, sir," he said.

"You don't want to detain me, then?" Trent cried.

"It's dark, sir," said the policeman, "and I could hardly be expected to
remember which way you went."

At the end of the short pier was a taxicab stand and a space where
private machines might park. Anthony Trent arrived in time to see a huge
limousine driven by a liveried chauffeur with a footman by his side
begin to climb the step grade to the street. As it passed him he could
swear he heard Smith's voice from within, saying, "It's the most rotten
luck that I should be a younger son and not get the chances Geoffrey
does."

Trent could not see the number plate of the big machine. He could note
only a coat of arms on the door surmounted by a coronet. He had no time
to ask if any of the dock laborers knew the occupants. He sprang into
the sole taxi that occupied the stand and commanded the driver to
overtake the larger car. So eager was the man to earn the double fare
that he was halted by a policeman outside the Atlantic Riverside
Station. The time taken up by explanations permitted the coronetted
limousine to escape.

In so big a city as Liverpool a car could be lost easily but the
sanguine taxi driver, certain at least of getting his fare, persisted in
driving all over the city and its suburbs until he landed his passenger
tired and disappointed at the Midland Hotel.

On the whole Anthony Trent had rarely spent such unprofitable hours. He
had paid a premium for his state room on a fast boat and was now
stranded in a strange city without baggage. And of course he was
worried. He had believed himself alone to have been rescued when the
high explosive had taken the roof from his tomb. Now it seemed probable
that the British soldier, Smith, had also made his escape.

Although it was quite possible Trent was following a stranger whose
voice was like that of Private Smith, he had yet to find that stranger
and make sure of it. Trent was not one to run away from danger.

As he sat in the easy chair before the window he told himself again and
again that it was probable the voice he identified with the unknown
Smith was like that of a thousand other men of his class. He had acted
stupidly in jumping from a ship's rails and risking his limbs. And how
much more unwisely had he acted in that black silence when he was led to
cast aside his habitual silence and talk freely to a stranger. In effect
he had put himself in the keeping of another man without receiving any
confidence in return. He blamed the wound, the shock and a thousand
physical causes for it but the fact was not to be banished by that.
Smith knew Anthony Trent as a master criminal while Anthony Trent only
knew that Smith has enlisted under another name because he had disgraced
his own. It might easily be that this unknown Smith was like a hundred
other "gentlemen rankers" who could only be accused of idleness and
instability. But Anthony Trent stirred uneasily when he recalled the
eagerness with which Smith spoke of some of those crimes Anthony Trent
had committed. Smith knew about them, admired the man who planned them.
Trent on thinking it over for the hundredth time believed Smith was
indeed a crook and as such dangerous to him.

Few men believe in intuition, guess work or "hunches" as do those who
work outside the law. Again and again Anthony Trent had found his
"hunches" were correct. Once or twice he had saved himself by implicitly
acting on them in apparent defiance of reason. At the end of many hours
during which he tried to tell himself he was mistaken and this voice
owned by someone else, he gave it up. He knew it was Smith.

To find out by what name the Smith of the dug-out went by in his own
country must be the first step. The second would be to shadow him,
observe his way of life and go through his papers. So far all he had to
go upon was a quick glance at an automobile of unknown make upon whose
panels a coat of arms was emblazoned surmounted by a crown. Had he
possessed a knowledge of heraldry he could have told at a glance whether
the coronet was that of a baron, viscount, earl, marquis or duke and so
narrowed down the search. And had he observed the coat of arms and motto
he could have made certain, for all armorial bearings are taxable and
registered.

To try to comb the counties of Lancashire and Cheshire for the occupants
of an unknown car would take time and might lead to police interest in
his activities.

Before he retired to his bed a courteous agent of the Cunard Company had
called upon him to inquire at what he was dissatisfied that he left the
ship so suddenly. To this agent he told the same story--the true
one--that he had told the policeman.

The purser was able to inform the group in the smoking room ere it
retired.

"I don't believe that for a moment," Colliver declared.

"Why not?" asked the Harvard professor, "don't you know that truth in
the mouth of an habitual liar is often a potent and confounding weapon?"

"Maybe," Colliver said dryly, "but I'm an honest man and I'd like to
know why you think that man Trent was an habitual liar."

"I don't know," the professor answered amiably. "I always think in terms
of crime on board ship."

"There's no need to on this ship," the purser said testily.

"I hope not," said the professor, "but coming back from the far East
last year on another line I made friends with a man much of the build of
Mr. Colliver here. I did not like him very much. He had only prejudices
and no opinions. A typical successful man of business I presume."

"Thank you," said Mr. Colliver finding one of his own neck adornments
growing tight.

"He was murdered," the theologian went on, "because he carried some
diamonds for his wife in a pocket. Some thieves found it out."

"What thieves?" Colliver demanded.

"It is one of the undiscovered murders on the high seas," the professor
said placidly.

"Mighty awkward for you," Colliver said, still angry.

"Fortunately I had an alibi," said the other, "I was violently ill of
_mal de mer_."

"Mighty convenient," Colliver commented.

Later he asked the purser's private opinion of the professor. Myers
Irving joined with Colliver in resenting the professor's attack on
business men.

"Ordinarily," Colliver said, "I don't like advertising men, but you're
different. They're like vultures after my account as a rule."

"You'd have to force your account on me," said Myers Irving seriously.
"I'm not an ordinary business or advertising man. Primarily I'm a
business builder. I leave nothing to underlings. I direct everything
personally. I take few accounts. If my clients don't make good on their
end of it I give them up. I make money for my clients. I have no other
ambition. I believe in advertising. It might be that fellow Trent jumped
ashore for some publicity stunt. Supposing he said he did it because he
forgot to order some special dish at the Adelphi or Midland? Such a dish
would get more publicity than you could shake a stick at. But I'm not
here to talk shop."

Colliver watched the trim advertising man saunter off.

"A bright boy," commented the Troy magnate, "maybe he'll be surprised
before this trip is over. Maybe he'll have to talk shop."

Captain Sutton listened to the purser's explanation as though they were
entirely reasonable. But all the time he said to himself, "why need he
have been afraid of me?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Anthony Trent bought himself a suit of clothes in the city and set out
for London on the ten o'clock train. An Army List showed him the names
of the officers of the City of London Regiment. He decided to call upon
the adjutant, a Captain Edgell. It took him little time to find out that
Edgell had resumed his former occupation of stock broker and was living
with his family at Banstead in Surrey.

Edgell was a golfer of distinction and before the war had been a scratch
man at the club on the Downs. Five years absence had sent his handicap
up a bit but he was engaged in pulling it down when a golfing stranger
from the United States giving the name of Trent who had the club's
privileges for the day asked him if he could introduce him to a member
for a round of golf. It so happened that most of the men waiting to play
were ruddy faced gentlemen with handicaps of from twelve up to
twenty-four. They did not excite Edgell.

"Glad to," he said heartily. He had been brigaded with Americans and
liked them. "Do you play a strong game?"

"I have a two handicap at Wykasol," Trent said.

"Good business," cried Edgell, "we'll play together."

They played. They became intimate during the game and Edgell learned
with regret that Trent was not one of the many American business men
engaged in their work in London. Trent beat the stockbroker on the
twenty-third hole.

"If I could only putt like that," said Edgell, "I'd have a chance for
the open championship."

"I wish I could drive a ball the length you do," Trent said not to be
outdone.

"Of course you'll have dinner with us," the stockbroker said. "We don't
dress for it any more since the war so you've no excuse. I learned to
make cocktails from some of your fellows in France so you ought to feel
at home."

"As home used to be," Trent corrected. "I'd love to come if I'm not
putting you out."

Edgell's home was a half-timbered house standing in an acre of lawn and
flower garden. It was thoroughly comfortable. There seemed to be a
number of children but they did not obtrude. Trent could see them
playing in different parts of the garden, the little ones with their
nurse and the elder playing clock golf on a perfect green in front of
the house. Always the quiet secure atmosphere of a home such as this
brought to Anthony Trent a vision of what he had lost or rather of what
he could never obtain.

Little six-year old Marjorie Edgell liked Trent on sight and liking him
announced it openly. She told him what a great man her father was and
how he had medals and things. Finally she asked the visitor whether he
would not like to have medals. It was the opportunity for which Trent
had been looking. Ordinarily averse to talking of himself, he wanted to
get on to the subject of the war with the late adjutant of the
seventy-eighth.

"I have," he told little Marjorie.

"Daddy," she shrieked in excitement, "Mr. Trent has medals too."

"So you were in the big thing?" Edgell asked. "Honestly wouldn't you
rather play golf? I can get all the excitement I want on the Stock
Exchange to last me the rest of my life. I enlisted in a city regiment
as a private and I left it as adjutant after four years and I'm all for
the piping ways of peace. My battalion was the 78th and we always had
the luck with us. Whenever we got anywhere something started."

"The seventy-eighth battalion," Trent commented, "I had a pal in your
battalion, a pal who saved my life. I'm going to look him up next week.
Curious that I should be talking to his adjutant. William Smith was his
name. I wonder if you knew him?"

"I wonder if you know how many William Smiths and John Smiths are lying
in France and Flanders with little wooden crosses over them?"

"This one came through all right," Trent said.

"At least ten William Smiths came through," Edgell asserted. "I think I
remember them all. Which was your man? Describe him."

Trent lighted his cigarette very deliberately. To be asked to describe a
man he had claimed as a pal and yet had never seen face to face was not
easy.

"I think you would recognize my William Smith," Trent answered, "if I
told you he was not really William Smith at all but a man who had
assumed that name as a disguise."

"I understand," Edgell exclaimed, "a slight blond man very erect and
rather supercilious with what the other men called a lah-de-dah voice. I
remember him well. I had him up before me for punishment many times.
Little infractions of discipline which he constantly committed. Used to
rile me by his superior airs. Quite a mysterious person. Saved your life
did he? Well, he had all the pluck a man need have."

"I want to thank him for it," Trent said, "but I've only known him as
William Smith. The War Office people tell me he was demobilized three
months back and they have no address. If you'll tell me, in confidence,
his real name I can find him out."

"But my dear chap," said Captain Edgell, "I don't know it. None of us
knew it. My sergeant-major swore he'd been a regular and an officer but
that's mere conjecture. He _was_ a regular now I come to think of it and
sent to us when his own regiment was wiped out in the Autumn of 1914."

"Who would be able to tell me?" Trent asked eagerly.

"The colonel knew," Edgell declared, "I sent him up to the old man for
punishment once. The colonel looked at him as if he could not believe
his eyes. 'You are down here as William Smith,' he said."

"'That is my name, sir,' said Smith."

"Then the colonel knew him?" Trent asked.

"Undoubtedly. I was told to leave them alone. I should like to have
asked Colonel Langley but he is one of those men it's hard to approach.
Doesn't mean to be standoffish but gives that impression. One of those
very tall men who seem to be looking through you and taking no interest
whatsoever in the proceeding."

"I want to find out," Trent said, "could you give me a letter of
introduction?"

"Glad to," Edgell replied, "but he's like that native song bird of
yours, the clam. He is a silent fighter. The men respected him and went
to their deaths for him but they would have felt it disrespectful to
love him. He lives at a place called Dereham Old Hall in Norfolk. A
great county swell with magnificent shooting. One of those places
royalty stays every year for a week at the partridges. Always thought
it a funny thing he was given the command of a lot of cockneys
considering he was Sandhurst and Tenth Hussars till he married and
chucked the service, but he made good as you fellows say."

While Captain Edgell was writing the letter Trent had leisure to reflect
that the identity of Private William Smith might remain permanently
veiled in obscurity if Colonel Langley refused to talk. If the colonel
was not to be lured to disclose what Trent needed to know, the American
would be left in a very unpleasant position. Until he knew whether his
"hunch" was right or wrong he could never again sleep in peace with the
name Anthony Trent as his own. He was in danger every minute. Smith
might have tracked him to the liner to have him arrested in America.
That he had left the boat might easily be known. Therefore in order to
win twenty thousand sovereigns English money, or a half million francs
in the coinage of the country where the two had spent weary months,
Smith had only to start the hue and cry in England. The ports would be
watched. In the end they would get him.

There was no escape over the borders to Mexico or dash to safety over
the Canadian frontier as he had planned to do under similar conditions
of peril in his own country. Here on an island they had got him. He was
weaving evidence that could be used against him by making this display
of interest in Private Smith. Captain Edgell could give testimony that
would not help his case.

"Here you are," said Edgell genially, "I've taken the liberty of calling
you an old golfing pal. I've done all I could but Colonel Langley is not
easy of approach. I'm not at all hopeful."

"It isn't really serious," Trent explained after thanking him, "but I'd
like to see him again. He did undoubtedly save my life and carried me
into safety. Quite a physical feat for one of his weight. What do you
suppose he weighs?"

"About ten stone seven," the other answered.

That was one hundred and forty-seven pounds. Trent was gradually
building up a portrait of the man he feared.

"And about five feet seven in height?" he hinted.

"That's the man," Edgell asserted. "Quite a good looking chap, too, if
you care for the type. Rather too effeminate for me although, God knows,
he is a man."

It was not easy to see Colonel Langley, D.S.O. Trent knew that county
magnates such as he was did not see everyone who desired an interview.
He stayed at a good hotel in Norwich and enclosed Captain Edgell's
letter in one of his own.

The answer came back in the third person. It was favorable and
punctiliously polite. Colonel Langley would be happy to see Mr. Anthony
Trent at eleven o'clock on a certain morning. Dereham Old Hall was a
dozen miles from Norwich, city of gardens, city of Norman cathedrals and
many quaintly named parish churches. Trent hired a motor car and drove
through the leafy Norfolk lanes.

Colonel Langley's residence was the work of Inigo Jones and a perfect
example of the Renaissance style. It stood at least a mile from the high
road. The lodge keeper telephoned to the house and Trent's driver was
permitted to drive through the deer park and pull up before the great
front doors.

The room in which Anthony Trent waited for the colonel was evidently a
sort of smoking room. Trophies of the chase adorned the walls. It was
evident Langley was a hunter of great game and had shot in all parts of
the globe from Alaska to Africa.

He was a man of six feet four in height, grizzled and wore a small
clipped military moustache. It was not a hard face, Trent noted, but
that of a man who had always been removed from pursuits or people who
wearied him. There was a sense of power in the face and that inevitable
keenness of eye which a man who commanded a regiment could not fail to
have acquired.

He bowed his visitor to a seat. He did not offer to shake hands.

"You have come," he said politely, "from my former adjutant to ask a
question concerning the regiment which he writes he could not tell you.
I can think of nothing to which this would apply. He had every thread of
the business in his hands."

"Captain Edgell could not tell me the real name of one of his men who
enlisted under the name of William Smith."

There was no change of expression on the rather cold face of the lord of
broad acres.

"And what made Captain Edgell assume I could help you, sir?"

"I don't know all the particulars but he was certain you knew his real
identity."

"If I do," Colonel Langley returned, "I shall keep that knowledge to
myself. I regret that you have had this trouble for nothing."

"William Smith," Trent told the other, "saved my life. I want to thank
him for it. Is there anything odd in that? You alone can help me so I
come to you. I want to help William Smith. I have money which I should
not have been able to enjoy but for him."

"You imagine, then, that William Smith is penniless, is that it?"

"He told me he was," Trent answered promptly. "I can offer him an
opportunity to make good money in New York."

He looked at Colonel Langley as he said it. If Smith was indeed of a
great family the idea of being offered money and a job must amuse the
one who knew his real name and estate. Sure enough a flicker of a smile
passed over the landowner's face.

"I am happy to inform you," he said, "that Mr. Smith is living at home
with his family financially secure enough not to need your aid."

"That," said Trent deliberately, "is more than you can say."

"I am not in the habit of hearing my word doubted," the older man said
acidly.

"I am not doubting it," Trent said suavely, "I mean merely to remind
you that he may need my aid although it may not be monetary aid. You
will remember that there have been passages in Mr. Smith's life which
have not been entirely creditable."

"Are you claiming to be friend or accomplice?" Langley snapped.

"Let us say friend and confidant," Trent smiled. "Perhaps he made
certain confessions to me--"

"To you also?" Langley cried.

In that moment he had said too much. During that hour when Edgell left
the private alone with his commanding officer the officer had obtained
his confidence and very likely a confession. He saw the soldier throw a
quick glance at one of those old safes which disguised themselves as
necessary articles of furniture. Trent's eyes dwelt on it no longer than
the owner's did, but he saw enough. Colonel Langley had told him plainly
that the confession was locked in the safe which looked like a black oak
sideboard on which decanters and a humidor were arranged.

"To me also," Trent repeated, "and it is because of it that I knew he
did what he did for the reason he needed more money than a younger son
could expect. Colonel Langley, I only want his real name. I want to help
him. That's why I spoke of offering him money."

"You will be glad to know," the colonel answered, "that Mr. Smith is at
present in no need of money."

"You mean," Trent said sharply, "that you will not give me his real name
and address?"

"I cannot tell you," Colonel Langley answered. "If you like I will write
and say you have called and give him the opportunity to do as he
pleases."

Trent reflected for a moment. If Smith were not already aware of his
presence in England it would be very unwise to advertise it. He was
beginning to see he had been less than cautious in calling upon Edgell
and Colonel Langley under his own name.

"I need not trouble you to do that," he said, "if you wish to conceal
his name it is no doubt your privilege and he will do well enough
without my thanks."

       *       *       *       *       *

He made his chauffeur drive home at a temperate speed. The man knew all
about the Langleys and was glad to tell the affable stranger. As they
passed through the gates several carriages laden with men and some
station carts filled with baggage passed into the gravelled drive.

"Gentlemen come for the shooting," the chauffeur volunteered. "Tomorrow
is September the first when partridge shooting commences. The colonel is
a great shot and the King comes here often and the German Emperor has
shot over those turnips in the old days. This is supposed to be the best
partridge shoot in the kingdom and the birds are fine and strong this
year--not too much rain in the Spring."

"I suppose there'll be a regular banquet tonight," said Trent.

"Tomorrow night's the night," said the chauffeur grinning, "tonight
they all go to bed early so as to be up to an early breakfast and have
their shooting eyes. The colonel's terrible man if any of the guns only
wound their birds. They've got to shoot well tomorrow if they want to
come here again. I know because my uncle is one of the keepers."

The man was surprised at the tip his American passenger handed him when
they reached the Maids' Head Hotel, and charmed with his affability. He
told his fellows that Trent was a real gentleman. He did not know that
his unsolicited confidence had given the American a hint upon which he
would be quick to act.

As Trent had been driven along the Dereham Road approach to Norwich he
had seen a little cycle shop where gasoline was sold and repairs made.
The war had sent English people of moderate circumstances back to the
bicycle again and only the wealthy could keep cars or buy petrol at
seventy-five cents a gallon. In his drive he had seen several people of
seemingly good position pedalling cheerfully through the lanes. The
chauffeur had touched his hat to one and spoken of him as rector of a
nearby parish. Cycles were to be hired everywhere and the prevailing
rate seemed to be sixpence an hour or three and six for the day.

After dinner Anthony Trent found his way back to the little shop in the
Dereham Road. "The Wensum Garage" it proudly called itself. Here he said
he wished to hire a bicycle for a day. As dusk fell he was pedalling
along to Dereham Old Hall. Few people were about and those he passed
evinced no curiosity. Avoiding the main road which passed in front of
the lodge and gates by which he had entered, he hid his wheel between
two hay stacks which almost touched. Then he made his way through the
kitchen gardens to the rear of the house. It was now ten o'clock and the
servants' part of the big house seemed deserted. Already the lights in
the upper stories were evidence that some guests were retiring to rest
well before the "glorious first."

From the shelter of the rose garden he could see a half score of men and
women on the great terrace in front of the splendid house. He could see
that they were all in evening dress. In a mosquitoless country this
habit of walking up and down the long stone terraces was a common
practice after dinner. Trent came so near to the guests that he could
hear them talking. The conversation was mainly about to-morrow's
prospects. He learned there was little disease among the birds, that
they were phenomenally strong on the wing and hadn't been shot over to
any extent since 1914. Some guests deplored the fact that dancing was
taboo on this night of nights but it was the Langley tradition and they
must bend to it.

"Think of it," he heard a woman say, laughing, "lights out at twelve!
How primitive and delightful." She yawned a little. "I'm looking forward
to it; we all stay up too late."

"Good night, Duchess," he heard the man say. "Sleep well and pray I may
be in form."

"Duchess!" In the old days Anthony Trent would have thrilled at the
title for it meant invariably jewels of price and the gathering of the
very rich. But he was waiting outside the masterpiece of Inigo Jones not
for any of those precious glittering stones for which he had sacrificed
all his prospects of fame and honor but for the documents which he
believed were hidden in the iron box, that ridiculous "pete" covered
with black English oak. It was another of the "hunches" which had come
to him. He had never been more excited about any of the many jobs he had
undertaken.

As he sat among the roses waiting for time to pass he reflected that the
few failures that had been his had not been attended by any danger. He
had lost the pearls that were wont to encircle the throat of a great
opera singer because her maid had chosen an awkward hour to prosecute
her amour with a chauffeur. The diamonds of the Mexican millionaire's
lady were lost to him because the house took fire while he was examining
the combination of the safe. But they would wait. He would yet have them
both. The booty for which he had come tonight was more precious than
anything he had ever tried for. It was probably the key to safety that
he sought. Trent did not doubt that there was a document in the safe
which would enable him to hold something over the head of Private
William Smith.

He waited until twelve had struck from the stable clock and the terrace
had been deserted a half-hour. To open the doors leading from the
terrace was simple. Anthony Trent always carried with him on business
bent two strips of tool steel with a key-blade at each end. With these
two "T" and "V" patterns he could open the world's locks. A nine inch
jimmy was easy to secrete. This was of the highest quality of steel and
looked to the uninitiated very much like a chisel. But it differed from
a chisel by having at its other end two brass plates set at right angles
to one another. These could be adjusted to what angles were needed by
turning countersunk screw bolts. It was the ideal tool for yale spring
locks.

He did not need it here. The doors opened at will with the "V" pattern
skeleton key. Great oriental rugs deadened sound and the boards of the
house were old, seasoned and silent. He found his way to the room in
which the colonel had received him with little difficulty. First of all
he opened the window and saw that he could spring clear out of it at a
bound and land in a bed of flowers only three feet below. Then he came
to the antiquated safe. The combinations were ridiculously easy. His
trained ear caught the faint sounds as he turned the lever easily. These
told him exactly the secret of the combination. It was not two minutes
work to open the doors. An inner sheeting of steel confronted him but
was opened by his jimmy. It was not safe to turn on the electric lights.
In so big an establishment with so many outdoor servants there might be
many to remark an unexpected illumination. His little torch showed him
all he wanted to know.

Colonel Langley had the soldiers' neatness. There were few valuables in
the safe. They would be presumably in his banker's strong boxes. There
were packets of letters tied up and one long envelope. On it was
inscribed, "Not to be Opened. In case of my death this must be destroyed
by my heir, Reginald Langley." On the envelope was the date, July 27,
1918, and the single word, "Ladigny."

Ladigny was a little village in France forever memorable by the heroic
stand of the City of London regiment when it lost so terribly and
refused to retreat. Trent opened the envelope in such a way that no
trace of the operation was seen. Then for ten minutes he read steadily.
Almost a half hour was expended in copying part of it in a note book.
Then the envelope was resealed and the safe closed. As he had worn
gloves there was no fear of incriminating finger prints. He did not
think anyone would notice that a jimmy had been used. Then he closed the
safe and its outer doors of black oak.

He permitted himself the luxury of a cigarette. He had done a good
night's work. If Private William Smith had sufficient evidence to place
Anthony Trent behind the bars the master criminal had sufficient certain
knowledge now to shut the mouth of the man he was tracking. Who would
have thought a man reared in such a family would have fallen so low! It
is a human failure to make comparisons whereby others invariably shine
with a very weak light, but Anthony Trent was saying no more than the
truth when he told himself that with Smith's opportunities he would
never have taken to his present calling.

With Smith's opportunities he would be sitting in a big room like this
and sitting in it without fear of interruption. The strain of the last
few days had not been agreeable and this strain must grow in intensity
as he grew older. It was always in such peaceful surroundings as these
that Trent felt the bitterness of crime even when successful.

He stopped suddenly short in his musing and crushed the bright tip of
his cigarette into blackness beneath his foot. Someone was fumbling with
the doorhandle, very quietly as though anxious not to disturb him. He
cursed the carelessness that had allowed him to leave it unlocked. He
had not behaved in a professional way at all. Very cautiously he rose to
his feet, meaning to leave by the open window when the door opened.
Trent sank back into the shadow of the big chair. To make a dash for the
window would mean certain detection. To stay motionless might mean he
could escape later. Similar immobility had saved him ere this.

The intruder closed the door and his sharp ears told him it was locked.
Then a soft-treading form moved slowly through the dim light and closed
the window, shut off his avenue of escape, and pulled across it two
curtains which shut out all light. There were two other high windows in
the room and across each one was pulled the light-excluding curtains.
Then there was a click and the room sprang into brilliance.

Anthony Trent saw the intruder at the same moment the intruder stared
into his face.

It was a girl in evening dress, a beautiful girl with chestnut hair and
a delicious profile. She wore an elaborate evening gown of a delicate
blue and carried in her hand a fan made of a single long ostrich plume.
Her hair was elaborately coiffured. She was, in fine, a woman of the
_beau monde_, a fitting guest in such a house as this. But what was she
doing in this room at one o'clock at night when the rest of the
household had long been abed?

The girl saw a slender but strongly built man of something over thirty
with a pale, clean-shaven face, shrewd almost hard eyes and a masterful
nose. He looked like a rising English barrister certain at some time to
be a judge or at the least a King's Counsel. He was dressed in a well
cut suit of dark blue with a pin stripe. He wore brown shoes and silk
socks. She noted he had long slender hands perfectly kept.

He rose to his feet and smiled at her a little quizzically.

"Really," he said, "you almost frightened me. I was sitting in the dark
making plans for the glorious 'first,' which has been here almost an
hour, when I heard you trying to open the door."

There was no doubt in her mind but that he was one of the guests who had
arrived from London on the late train and had not changed to evening
dress. There was a train due at Thorpe station at half past ten and the
motor trip would take forty minutes more.

"I had no idea anyone was here," she said truthfully, "or I shouldn't
have come. You see one can't sleep early even if one is sent to bed as
we all were tonight." She glanced at the clock. "I'm not shooting
tomorrow but if you are why don't you turn in? You know Colonel Langley
is a fearful martinet where the shooting is concerned and insists that
every bird is killed cleanly."

It was plain that she wished to get rid of him. Trent was frankly
puzzled. The girl had shown no fear or nervousness. Ordinarily the
conventions would have had their innings and she would have hesitated at
the possibility of being found alone with a good looking man at such an
hour. She would have excused herself and left him in the belief that he
was a guest she would meet tomorrow at dinner and dance with after it.
But she showed no such intention. He knew enough about women to see that
she had no intention of waiting for the pleasure of a friendly chat. She
had rather a haughty type of face and spoke with that quick imperious
manner which he had observed in British women of rank or social
importance.

"I have neuralgia," he said amiably, "and I prefer to sit here than go
to bed. Perhaps you left something here? Can I help you to find it?"

"I came for a book. Colonel Langley was talking about some African
hunting story your Mr. Roosevelt wrote."

So she knew him for an American. Well, she would find the American not
easily to be gulled. There came to him the memory of another night in
Fifth Avenue when a woman who seemed to be of fashion and position had
so completely fooled him and had been left in possession of a large sum
of currency.

He moved toward a bookcase in which were a collection of books on
fishing and shooting.

"'African Game Trails,'" he said, "here it is."

There was no doubt in his mind that the look she threw at him was not
one of complete amiability. She wanted him to go. He asked himself why.
It would have been easy for her to go and leave him, and the best way
out of the difficulty, unless she had come for one specific purpose. If
she had come for something concealed in the room and needed it badly
enough she would try and wait until he went. Trent was certain she had
no suspicion as to his own mission. In so big a house as Dereham Old
Hall fifty guests could be entertained easily and it was unlikely she
should know even half of them. He had observed that it was not the
fashion in England to introduce indiscriminately as in his own country.
Guests were introduced to their immediate neighbors; but that appalling
custom whereby one unfortunate is expected to memorize the names of all
present at a gulp was not popular. Because she did not know him would
not lead to suspicion. He was in no danger. Even a servant coming in
would see in him only a friend of his employer.

"Thank you," she said, taking the book with an appearance of interest.
"Do you know I never thought to see Americans at Dereham Old Hall with
the single exception of Reginald's old friend Conington Warren. Colonel
Langley is so conservative but the war has broadened everyone hasn't it
and stupid national prejudices are breaking down."

"Conington Warren here?" he asked.

"He lives in England now," she told him, "his physicians warned him that
prohibition would kill him so they simply prescribed a country where he
could still take this cocktail. You know him of course?"

"A little," he said; she wondered why he smiled so curiously. He
wondered what this beautiful girl would say if she knew it was at
Conington Warren's mansion in Fifth avenue that he had started his
career as a criminal. So that great sportsman, owner of thoroughbreds
and undeniable shot, was in this very house! After all it was not a
strange coincidence. The well known Americans who love horse and hound
with the passion of the true sportsman are to be seen in the great
houses of England more readily than the mushroom financier.

"What other people are there here you know?" she demanded.

"I can't tell you till tomorrow," he returned, "I only said a word or
two to the Duchess. She deplored having to go to bed so early and was
disappointed at not being able to dance."

"She is one of my dearest friends," the girl answered.

"Which means you see her every fault," he laughed.

"Isn't your neuralgia better?" she asked after a pause.

Anthony Trent shook his head.

"I shan't sleep all night," he said despondently. "Going to bed would
only make it worse."

She was obviously put out at this statement.

"Then you'll stop here all night?"

"At all events until it gets light. It's only two o'clock now. If you
are keen on big game hunting you won't sleep if you begin that book."

"You'll frighten the servants in the morning," she said later.

"I'll tip them into confidence," he assured her.

The girl was growing nervous. There were a hundred symptoms from the
tapping of her little feet on the rug to the fidgeting with the book and
the meaningless play with her fan. She started when a distant dog bayed
the moon and dropped her book. It rolled under a table and Trent picked
it up. But when he handed it back to her there was an air of excitement
about him, an atmosphere of triumph which puzzled her.

"You look as though you enjoyed hunting for books under tables."

"I enjoy any hunting when I get a reward for my trouble."

"And what did you find?" she asked "a little mouse under the chair?"

"I found a key," he said.

"Someone must have dropped it," she said idly.

"Not a door key," he returned, "but the key to a mystery. Being a woman
you are interested in mysteries that have a beautiful society girl as
their heroine of course?"

"I really must disappoint you," she said rather coldly, "and I don't
quite understand why you are not quick to take the many hints I have
dropped. Can't you see I want to sit here alone and think? Your own room
will be just as comfortably furnished. In a sense this is a sort of
second home to me. Mrs. Langley and I are related and this room is an
old and favorite haunt when I'm depressed. Is it asking very much that
you leave me here alone?"

"Under ordinary conditions no," he said suavely.

"These are ordinary conditions," she persisted.

"I'm not sure," he retorted. "Tell me this if you dare. Why have you the
combination to a safe written on a little piece of mauve paper and
concealed in the book on your lap?"

She turned very pale and the look she gave him turned his suspicion into
a desire to protect her. The woman of the world air dropped from her and
she looked a frightened pathetic and extraordinarily lovely child.

"What shall I do?" she cried helplessly. "You are a detective?"

"Not yet," he said smiling, "although later I intend to be. But I'm not
here even as a great amateur. Consider me merely a notoriously good shot
suffering equally from neuralgia and curiosity. You have the combination
of a safe concealed in this room and you want me to go to bed so that
you may take out wads of bank notes and pay your bridge debts. Is that
right so far?"

"You are absolutely wrong," she cried with spirit. "I need no money and
have no debts. There are no jewels in the safe."

"Letters of course," he said easily.

She did not speak for a moment. He could see she was wondering what she
dare tell him. She could not guess that he knew of the three packages of
letters each tied with green ribbon. It was, he supposed, the old story
of compromising letters. Innocent enough, but letters that would spell
evil tidings to the jealous fiance. They might have been written to
Colonel Langley. Men of that heroic stamp often appealed to sentimental
school girls and the colonel was undeniably handsome in his cold
superior way. His heart ached for her. She was suffering. What had
seemed so easy was now become a task of the greatest difficulty.

"Yes," she said deliberately, "letters. Letters I must have."

"Do you suppose I can stand by and see my host robbed?"

"If you have any generosity about you you can in this instance. I only
want to destroy one letter because if it should ever be discovered it
will hurt the man I love most in the world."

Anthony Trent groaned. He had guessed aright. There was some man of her
own class and station who did not love her well enough to overlook some
little silly affectionate note sent to the _beau sabreur_ Langley
perhaps a half dozen years before. It was a rotten thing to keep such
letters. He looked at the girl again and cursed his luck that she was
already engaged. Then he sighed and remembered that even were she free
it could never be his lot to marry unless he confessed all. And he knew
that to a woman of the type he wanted to marry this confession would
mean the end of confidence the beginning of despair.

"I shall not stop you," he said.

She looked at him eagerly.

"And you'll never tell?"

"Not if they put me through the third degree."

"But ... oughtn't you to tell?" she asked.

"Of course," he admitted, "but I won't. I can see you are wondering why.
I'll tell you. I've been in just such a position--and I did what you are
going to do."

Without another word she went swiftly to the concealed safe and began to
manipulate the lock. For five minutes she tried and then turned to him
miserably.

"It won't open," she wailed.

"I'll have a shot at it," he said gaily, and went down on his knees by
her side. He soon found out why it remained immovable. It was an old
combination. She did not understand his moves as he went through the
same procedure which had opened it before. She only saw that the doors
swung back. She did not see him pry the iron sheathing back with the
jimmy. It was miraculously easy.

Then he crossed the room to his chair and lighted another cigarette.
"Help yourself," he cried and picked up the book which had held the
combination.

The girl's back was to him and he could not see what she was doing. He
heard the scratch of a match being lighted and saw her stooping over the
stone fireplace. She was burning her past. Then he heard her sigh with
relief.

"I shall never forget what you have done for me," she said holding out
her hand.

"It was little enough," he said earnestly.

"You don't know just how much it was," the girl returned, "or how
grateful I shall always be to you. If I hadn't got that letter! I
shouldn't have got it but for you. And to think that tomorrow we shall
be introduced as one stranger to another. I'm rather glad I don't know
your name or you mine. It will be rather fun won't it, being introduced
and pretending we've never met before. If you are not very careful the
Duchess will suspect we share some dreadful secret."

"The Duchess is rather that way inclined, isn't she?" he said.

He held the hand she offered him almost uncomfortably long a time. She
would look for him tomorrow in vain. He supposed she would begin by
asking if there were any other Americans there except Conington Warren.
After a time she would find he was not a guest of the Langleys. She
would come at last to know what he was. And with this knowledge there
would come contempt and a deliberate wiping his image from her mind.
Anthony Trent had no sentimental excuses to offer. He had chosen his own
line of country.

He looked at her again. It would be the last time. Perhaps there was a
dangerously magnetic quality about his glance for the girl dropped her
eyes.

"Faustus," he said abruptly, "sold his soul for a future. I think I'd be
willing to barter mine for a past."

"_Au revoir_," she said softly.

When she had closed the door he walked across the room to shut the safe.
What secrets of hers, he wondered, had been shut up there so long. He
found himself in a new and strange frame of mind. Why should he be
jealous of what she might have written in the letter that was now ashes?
She had probably thought hero-worship was love. She had a splendid face
he told himself. High courage, loyalty and breeding were mirrored in it.
He wondered what sort of a man it was who had won her.

He looked at the neatly-tied bundle of letters. It seemed as though they
had hardly been touched. Suddenly he turned to the compartment where the
long letter had lain, the letter from which he had made so many
extracts, the letter it was imperative Colonel Langley should believe to
be intact.

It was gone. In the hearth there were still some burned pages. He could
recognize the watermark.

Anthony Trent had amiably assisted an unknown girl to destroy a letter
whose safety meant a great deal to him. If Colonel Langley were to
discover the loss it would be easy enough to put the blame upon the
bicycle-riding American who had pretended to be a friend of Private
William Smith.

As he thought it over Anthony Trent saw that the girl in blue had not
lied to him, had not sought to entrap him by gaining his sympathy as the
"Countess" had succeeded in doing before another open safe in New York.
He had assumed one thing and she had meant another.

What was William Smith to this unknown beauty? Trent gritted his teeth.
He was going to find out. At all events he now knew the real name of the
private soldier who had shared the dug-out with him. The next thing was
to find out where he lived.




CHAPTER FOUR

_A LADY INTERRUPTS_


Anthony Trent told the obliging manager of the Maids' Head Hotel that he
was interested mainly in the study of cathedral churches and since he
had now studied the magnificent Norwich cathedral would push on to Ely.

He found England an exceedingly easy place to shake off pursuers despite
its small size. There were always junctions where he could change from
one line to another without incurring suspicion. He started for Ely but
was soon lost among the summer crowds which thronged the university city
of Cambridge. The convenient system of merely claiming one's baggage and
ordering a porter to take it to car or taxi rendered the tracking of it
by baggage checks almost impossible.

While it was true he was not pursued, so far as he knew, he wanted to be
careful. It was not likely Langley would charge him with the theft of
the Ladigny confession but it was quite probable that the Colonel might
suspect the writer of the confession. He might think that Smith had
hired a clever American safe breaker to win for him what was very
necessary for his freedom of action. And Smith, if he did not already
know it, would find the man over whom he held many years in American
prisons almost within his clutches.

It was necessary that Anthony Trent should see Smith first and make a
bargain with him. It was imperative that he meet the man alone and where
he could place the cards on the table and talk freely.

In a room of the quaint half-timbered hostelry in Norwich Trent had come
across some useful books of reference. There were, for example, such
guides to knowledge as "Crockford's Clerical Directory"; "Hart's Army
List"; the "Court Directory of London" and "Lodge's Peerage and
Baronetage." The name for which Trent sought diligently was that of
Arthur Spencer Jerningham Grenvil. By these names Private William Smith
had the legal right to be known. By these names he had signed a
confession.

A. S. J. Grenvil had admitted forging a check for two hundred pounds.
The signature he had skilfully imitated was that of Reginald Langley of
Dereham Old Hall in the county of Norfolk.

There was a copy of a letter written by Colonel Langley to Grenvil dated
six years before. On the whole it was a letter which impressed Trent
favorably. It was written from rather a lofty altitude by a man to whom
family honor and the motto _noblesse oblige_ meant a whole code of
chivalry.

"Until you went to Sandhurst you were a credit to your name and the
great family from which you spring," he read. "Suddenly, without any
warning, your habits altered and you became a gambler. Well, many of
your race have gambled, but at least they played fair and paid what they
owed. You did not even do that. It was with great difficulty that your
father was able to get you your commission in my old regiment. We hoped
you would feel that in the presence of so many men of birth and breeding
that you must alter your habits and wear with credit your sovereign's
uniform. And now you are a common forger. Of course the signature you
forged will be honored. But I require this of you: that you will confess
to me your guilt; that you will leave the regiment; that you will do
some honest work and re-establish yourself in my eyes. I will see to it
that work of a not unpleasing kind is found for you in Australia. On my
part I will undertake to keep your secret so long as you keep away from
England. Remember, Arthur, there are other discreditable things I could
bring to your notice if I chose. I am anxious that my kinsman, your
father, should not suffer any more from your escapades. On receipt of
this letter proceed to my lawyers whose address you know. They have
instructions what to do."

It was plain that the father of the man he had known as William Smith
was of rank. The fact that he was a kinsman of Colonel Langley might be
explained by reference to the fifth book on the shelf at the Maids'
Head--"Debrett's Landed Gentry of Gt. Britain."

He turned to Langley of Dereham Old Hall. Langley's mother, it seemed,
was the Lady Dorothea Grenvil daughter of the ninth, and sister of the
present Earl of Rosecarrel. Grenvil, therefore, was the family name of
the Earls of Rosecarrel.

In the peerage all the particulars concerning the Grenvils were laid
bare. The tenth earl, who had been British Ambassador to Turkey, was a
Knight of the Garter, etc., etc., had married Elizabeth only daughter of
Admiral, Lord Arthur Jerningham and had issue:

First the heir, Viscount St. Just, major in the Royal Horse Guards,
V.C.G.C.B. Second and third, two sons killed in the great war. Fourth,
Arthur Spencer Jerningham Grenvil of whom no particulars were given.
Fifth came the Lady Rhona Elizabeth Onslow married to the Duke of
Ontarlier in the peerage of France and last the Lady Daphne Villiers
Grenvil, unmarried. Trent reckoned out that she would be a girl of
twenty-one. Private Smith would be twenty-six.

The town house of the Earls of Rosecarrel was in Grosvenor Place and
their country seats were Alderwood Hall in Cambridgeshire and Rosecarrel
Castle in Cornwall.

Alderwood Hall was six miles from the university city and the house
could be seen on one of the small hills to the west of the town. A guide
book informed Trent that the house was thrown open to visitors on
Thursdays at a small fee which went to the local hospital. There were to
be seen some notable examples of the "Norwich School" works by Crome,
Cotman, Vincent and Stark.

The butler was distressed by the heat of early September and dismissed
the visitors as soon as possible. But he regarded the American tourist
in a different light for Trent had slipped him a half sovereign.

"I want to take my time," said Trent, "I like pictures and I want to
examine these more closely."

"Certainly, sir," said the butler. "Anything I can do to help you I
shall be proud to do."

Anthony Trent, who had a wide knowledge of paintings of the outdoors and
possessed one of the world's missing masterpieces, none other than _The
Venetian Masque_ of Giorgione which he had taken from a vulgar and
unappreciative millionaire, looked at the fresh, simple landscapes with
joy.

"Is the family in residence?" he asked when he had finished.

"The Earl always spends the summer at Rosecarrel," the man answered. "He
keeps his yacht in Fowey Harbour. I'm afraid his lordship is failing.
You see the loss of Master Gervase and Master Bevil was a terrible
shock. We lost seven out of our twelve gardeners here and two of them
that came back won't ever be much good."

"What about Mr. Arthur Grenvil?" Trent asked idly. "I used to know him."

"He's back," the butler said. But the look of affection which the old
family servant had shown when he spoke of the two who had fallen was
gone. "I'll say this for Master Arthur, he fought too and got wounded.
There's none that can say aught against his pluck."

"He is cool enough," Trent said, and thought of the scene in the
dug-out when he and Arthur Grenvil waited for death and did not give way
to terror. "He's down in Cornwall with the Earl, I suppose?"

"And Lady Daphne," the butler added. "Since the death of the Countess
she looks after everything."

Trent visualized one of those managing domineering young women who rule
tenants relentlessly but after all exercise benevolent despotism in
bucolic matters.

"Was he badly hurt?" Trent asked before he left.

"I hardly knew him," the butler said. "I give you my word I was fair
shocked at the difference; isn't for the likes of me to question the
ways of Providence but why Mr. Arthur was left and the others taken I
don't understand."

Anthony Trent wondered, too. It would have saved him a great deal of
worry if things had been reversed. On the whole this _mauvais sujet_, of
an ancient family was a consistent trouble maker.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Bradshaw's time table showed Trent that as Lord Rosecarrel's yacht was
at Fowey he would be wise to make a trip to the Delectable Duchy, as a
Fowey author has termed Cornwall, and disguise himself as a tourist and
thus pave the way for a meeting with Private William Smith.

He purchased a large scale automobile map of Cornwall and when he
reached the quaint seaport had a fair idea of the locality. Rosecarrel
Castle lay some ten miles away on the moorland. The local guidebook
told him all about it. It was the great house of the neighbourhood, a
granite built fastness which had suffered siege many times. The Grenvils
were a Cornish family of distinction and happier in their own West
Countree than on the Cambridge estates.

Trent had always found the consultation of local newspapers a great help
toward knowledge of a community and he immediately solaced himself with
what Fowey had to offer. A perusal of the advertising columns gave him a
good idea of what he could do to pass his time in a manner that would
seem logical to the countryfolk. Since he was not a painter, and Fowey
had no golf links, his occupation in the absence of a sailing or power
boat was merely that of a sightseer and he felt out of his element in
this innocent guise.

The local paper showed him that there were several "rough shootings"
that he might rent for the season. These were tracts of farm and
moorland where partridges, hares, woodcock and an occasional pheasant
might be found. One in the parish of St. Breward on the moors
particularly attracted him. The local agent commended him on his wisdom.
He did not know Anthony Trent had selected this desolate tract of
granite strewn moor because Rosecarrel Castle was but a half dozen miles
distant.

Trent had been less than a week in Cornwall when he was installed in a
farmhouse, the owner of a spaniel of great local repute, and regarded
simply as one of those sportsmen who took the shooting every year and
as such was above suspicion. Mr. Nicholls, the loquacious agent who had
rented him the shooting and had driven him over to view it, talked a
great deal of the great Earl of Rosecarrel. He regretted that since the
death of the Countess few guests stayed within the castle. There had
been brave days a few years back when Lord St. Just the son and heir had
been master of the North Cornwall Foxhounds.

"But there's only the Honourable Arthur Grenvil there now," said
Nicholls, "and Lady Daphne. Lord St. Just is military attache at
Washington."

"Since when?" Trent demanded.

"Within a few weeks," said the agent.

That was the reason why the younger brother had been to see him off at
Liverpool. It was quite likely that Private Smith assumed Anthony Trent
to be dead. Or he might have thought him boasting of another's deeds.
But Trent was going to find out if possible. This time he had materials
for a compromise. Suddenly Nicholls pointed out a figure on horseback
fully a half mile distant.

"Like enough," said the agent, "that's the Honourable Arthur. He rides
about on the moors a lot. All this land as far as you can see belongs to
the Earl."

Trent could see that the rider was cantering along narrow paths
inaccessible to vehicles. Well, the meeting would wait. Some morning he
would rein in his horse beside that of Private Smith and see recognition
dawn in the eye of the man when the visitor announced himself as
Anthony Trent. Then covetousness would follow and the thought of rich
reward hearten the ex-private. Trent chuckled to himself as he thought
of how the man's face would fall when he outlined his past history and
showed him he was in possession of secrets which, once public, must
bring him into the clutches of the inexorable, passionless law of the
realm.

"Where can I get a horse?" he asked Nicholls.

"John Treleaven over to St. Kew has a good hunting horse he wants to
sell. It will be a bargain at sixty pounds Mr. Trent. I'll tell him to
ride it over tomorrow if you like."

"All right," Trent said, "and I want saddle and bridle and so on."

So Anthony Trent added Treleaven's stout horse to his possessions and
when he was not shooting, rode over the moorlands purple with Cornish
heather and yellow with gorse.

Nearly always he rode near the castle of Rosecarrel and was often
annoyed to find his pilgrimage shared by archaeologists and other
visitors. Rosecarrel Castle had begun as a fortress; when cannon
rendered masonry useless it had become a castellated mansion and now it
showed the slow changes of the long centuries and was a delightful
residence. The moat was a flower garden and the keeps were now green
with grass and bright with roses.

Admission was by presentation of a visiting card on a certain day. It
was no part of Trent's purpose to send the name in which might remind
Arthur Grenvil of that memorable talk in the dark. When he disclosed
himself it would be man to man and he was not able yet to satisfy his
curiosity about the great building.

He was gratified to find that the river Camel running through part of
the shooting he rented was a notable salmon and trout stream. The trout
were small but the sea-run salmon went as high as thirty pounds. In
Kennebago where his Maine camp was the land-locked variety seldom went
to more than seven pounds. Directly he had secured his license, and the
equipment he wired to London for had arrived, he clambered down the
steep hill side to the river. But he fished very little that afternoon
for as he climbed over one of the granite stiles he came face to face
with two other anglers, a man and girl.

The girl was none other than the mysterious lady in blue for whom he had
opened Colonel Langley's safe. She came forward hand outstretched when
she saw him.

That she was a little confused he was certain, and perhaps a trifle
fearful that he might make some allusion to the oddity of the
circumstances under which they had first met. The man was almost a
hundred feet from her. He was casting and too interested to look at
anything but the deep pool in which salmon were wont to lie.

"I was never able to thank you for that, that night at Dereham," she
began, "but my father had one of his attacks and I had to leave the very
next day just before luncheon. I hope you had good sport."

"Unusually good," he said. It was a great piece of luck that she still
assumed him to be of the house party. But what was she doing here? When
he asked she said, "We live near here." She looked around to see her
companion coming toward her and the stranger.

"This is my brother," she said, "Arthur Grenvil. Arthur this gentleman
was staying at Dereham Old Hall when I was there. Mr.?" She looked at
him pleadingly, "I'm so stupid about names."

The stranger seemed to be looking at her when he answered, but his eyes
were upon Arthur Grenvil.

"Anthony Trent," he said urbanely.

"How do you do," Grenvil said without betraying any emotion. "Had any
luck?"

"Not yet," Anthony Trent said still looking hard at him. Things were
happening rather more quickly than he liked. Too many discoveries were
disconcerting. First this girl was of course Lady Daphne Grenvil. And
she had not any other motive in view in abstracting the confession than
of helping her renegade brother. Anthony Trent felt himself absurdly
pleased to know that. He had thought of her constantly and pitied her
because he assumed her to be under the domination of a handsome
heartless scamp like the Honourable Arthur.

It was Grenvil's attitude which puzzled the American. The name had
apparently aroused no suspicion. It proved the man was more dangerous
than he supposed if he were able to master his emotions with such ease.
As they stood there chatting about flies and the size of the salmon
Anthony Trent had time to study Grenvil's appearance. Assuredly he
differed from the mental picture he had formed of him.

To begin with there seemed nothing vicious about him. He was a very
handsome man with small regular features, finely formed nose and
engaging blue eyes. Anthony Trent thought of the confession he had seen
and remembered the talk in the dug-out. He called to mind the hints that
the Alderbrook butler had let drop and the lack of enthusiasm the agent
Nicholls had shown in speaking of him. From all accounts Arthur Spencer
Jerningham Grenvil should be a very highly polished scoundrel but
coarsened somewhat from his experiences in the ranks for so many years.

And here he was with a sister he plainly adored, looking with a sort of
shy good nature at the stranger.

"It's so jolly to meet another keen fisherman," he said amiably, "I know
the Camel so well that I can show you the best pools if you'd care about
it."

"That would be very kind of you," Anthony Trent returned. He did not
know what to make of the man he had first known as Private Smith. There
might be a mistake and yet, if there had been, why should Lady Daphne
have risked disgrace in breaking open a safe for his sake. And the
voice, the unmistakable voice, was that of the man to whom he had
confided all his dangerous, deadly secrets. "I haven't fished the river
for almost seven years," the younger man went on.

"My brother has been in the army for more than five years," the girl
said, "and he hadn't much chance then. He was badly wounded and we are
making him well again."

"I'm being horribly spoiled, Mr. Trent," Grenvil smiled, "and I rather
like it. Did you get in the big show by any chance?"

"As long as I could be after my country declared war," Trent said
looking at him hard. "We must exchange experiences."

"Please don't," the girl begged, "Arthur's nerves can't stand it. The
doctors say he must live outdoors and forget everything."

"And are you able to forget--everything?" Trent asked him.

Arthur Grenvil frowned a little. It was as though the memory of
something unpleasing had lingered for a moment.

"Most things," said the other.

"Is it wise?" Trent demanded. This refusing even by a look or a smile to
acknowledge that he remembered the memorable talk was disturbing.

"Perhaps not," Grenvil admitted, "but wisdom and I never got on very
well together."

The sound of a motor horn broke the silence.

"The car," said Arthur Grenvil to his sister. "We have to run away
because people are coming over from the barracks to lunch. I hope I
shall meet you again Mr. Trent." He nodded pleasantly. "Come on
Daphne."

"Goodbye, Mr. Trent," she said brightly. "I hope you'll land a monster
fish."

Anthony Trent flung himself on the grass at the edge of the pool and
lighted his pipe. Lordly salmon were no temptation to him at the moment.
Private William Smith had beaten him so far. Private Smith had looked as
innocent as a babe. He had been polite and gracious but had refused to
acknowledge any former acquaintance. Again and again in the few minutes
Trent had telegraphed to him plainly, "Well, here I am, the master
criminal you were proud to know, what are you going to do?" And every
time Private Smith had said, "I do not know you. I never saw you
before." It was well enough to postpone the conversation until they were
alone, but Trent resented the utter indifference of the younger man to
his appeal. A man dare only do that who had no fear. That must be the
reason. Grenvil had made only general statements in his half confession,
statements which could not convict him. He felt he held the whip hand
over the master. There would be a different expression on his face when
Trent dropped a hint as to the dangers of forging.

At the farm house where he was living Trent had little difficulty in
getting side lights on the Grenvil family. He had never heard such
disapprobation showered on a single member of any family as was the case
with the farmer and his wife when they spoke of Arthur Grenvil.

They said his scandalous life had killed his mother. It was all bad
companionship and drink, Mrs. Bassett the farmer's wife contended. He
was all right till he left school to go into the army. He was cruel to
animals and false to his friends.

"He doesn't look it," Trent said slowly.

"The devil gives his own a mask to fool the righteous," Mrs. Bassett
contended. She was a pious soul. "I ought to know. I was a nursemaid at
the castle before I married John Bassett."

Never in all his career as a breaker of laws and an abstractor of the
valuable property of others had Trent been so apprehensive as he was in
quiet, beautiful Cornwall far from cities. In New York he had schooled
himself to look unconcerned at the police he met on every corner. Here
there seemed to be no police and yet he looked anxiously at every
stranger who passed by the moorland farm. He told himself it was the
effect of his war hardships, his wounds and shell shock. But he knew his
nerves were steady, his muscles strong as ever and his health
magnificent. He was forced to admit that he was on edge because of this
meeting with Arthur Grenvil.

"This has got to end," he said after breakfast next morning, "I've had
enough uncertainty."

A few minutes later he was on horseback and on his way to Rosecarrel
Castle. It might not be easy to see Grenvil in his home surrounded by
servants but he would make the attempt. He had no reasonable excuse for
infringing the etiquette of the occasion. He had not been invited to
call and he knew no common friends of the family. It would be a business
call. He would send in his card and say he desired to see Mr. Arthur
Grenvil on a matter of importance.

He was within two miles of the castle when he saw the man he had come to
see mounted on a chestnut polo pony cantering along and driving a white
polo ball over the stretch of firm turf.

Grenvil pulled up as he saw the American.

"Trying to get my eye back," he said smiling. "Corking game, polo, ever
play it, Mr. Trent?"

"I've had to work too hard," Trent snapped.

"Much better for you I've no doubt," said Grenvil idly, "If one may ask
it, what sort of work did you do?"

"You've no idea I suppose?"

Grenvil looked at him mildly.

"How can I have any idea?" he asked.

Anthony Trent from his bigger horse looked down at the man on the polo
pony sourly. There was that bland look of irritating innocence that
would have convinced any judge and jury. But it did not sway him.

In just such a pleasantly modulated voice, and with no doubt just such
an ingratiating smile Private Smith had feared Anthony Trent was dying
in very bad company.

"You said you were not able to forget everything. I supposed that my
work might be one of the things you still remembered."

At length Trent was able to observe that Arthur Grenvil looked less
confident.

"I'm afraid I don't quite understand what you mean, Mr. Trent."

"The name Anthony Trent calls nothing to mind?"

"Sorry," Grenvil retorted, "I suppose I ought to know all about you."

"That's what you said before!" Trent exclaimed.

"Before?" There was no doubt now as to Grenvil's perturbation.

"Cut that out," Trent commanded angrily. "You did it very well, but I'm
sick and tired of fencing. What are you going to do about it?"

He was sure now that the other was frightened. That the emotion of fear
did not bring anger in its train amazed Trent.

"Leave you to realize your mistake," Grenvil said after a pause. Then
with a sharp stroke he sent the willow root ball spinning in the
direction of the castle, and followed it on his swift mount.

The horse that Trent had bought from John Treleaven the farmer was a
half bred, a good, weight-carrying nag, a fine jumper, but not equal to
the task of overtaking the chestnut thoroughbred. There was nothing to
do but pursue Grenvil into the castle grounds or give up the chase.
Angry because he could not judge in what degree of peril if any, he
stood, Anthony Trent rode back to the farm.




CHAPTER FIVE

_THE MAN WHO DENIED_


Thinking things over that night as he walked along the Camel banks and
disturbed the otters at play, Anthony Trent determined to call upon
Arthur Grenvil and force him to acknowledge that he had not forgotten
the conversation, the confidence that was so fully given, in the
dug-out.

Footmen and a butler barred his ingress. They were polite and filled
with regrets but the facts remained that Mr. Arthur Grenvil by doctor's
orders saw none. The Lady Daphne was engaged. The men-servants could
offer him no hope. He was able to see at close range some advantages of
the many servants the rich were able to employ to hedge them about with
privacy. The Rosecarrel butler was less urbane than his brother at
Alderwood and the opportunity for private conversation was lacking.
Trent saw in this rebuff another move in the subtle game Private Arthur
Smith was playing.

The next two days were spent in riding over the moors but not a glimpse
of Lady Daphne or her brother did he get. He was certain they were
avoiding him deliberately. The idea possessed Trent that Arthur Grenvil
was not satisfied to obtain merely the rewards that were offered for his
apprehension. If he followed the great thefts of the world he would
know that four of its most famous stones were still missing. And from
Trent's confession he would guess the master criminal still held them.
They were even now in Trent's Maine camp ornamenting a brass Benares
lamp as though they were merely the original pieces of glass that had
occupied the spaces when Trent purchased it. Trent could sell through
discreet sources the loot that was hidden in Kennebago for not less than
half a million dollars. If Arthur Grenvil chose to command him to do so
and share the proceeds what could he do? The hold he had on the other
man was slight. Langley might have extorted the confession more as a
warning than an instrument to use against a relative. In the two other
cases to which Arthur Grenvil had confessed his creditors were those who
had been his friends. He had embezzled the mess funds of his regiment.
It was unlikely that a cavalry regiment which had fought from Dettingen
to Mons would like a story of that sort to get abroad.

On the morning of the third day after his rebuff at the hands of the
footmen Trent made up his mind. He would see Arthur Grenvil and see him
at once. "If he thinks he can keep me out," said Trent his mouth
tightening to a narrow line, "he holds me too cheap."

       *       *       *       *       *

It happened that Arthur Grenvil knew nothing of the attempt of Anthony
Trent to see him. The doctors had indeed ordered him rest. Lady Daphne
when she heard of Trent's insistence said nothing but wondered why it
was that he should make the attempt. She still thought uneasily of that
night at Dereham when he had discovered her with the combination to her
host's safe. There was such a thing as blackmail and, after all what did
she know of the American except that he had been a guest of the
Langleys. In itself this should have been enough to vouch for his
position in life.

She found herself more interested in Anthony Trent than in any man she
had ever met. And it was because of this concern that in a letter to
Alicia Langley she asked about him.

Alicia's letter was astonishing. "I can't imagine, my dear Daphne to
whom you refer. There was no Anthony Trent here on the first. The only
American was Mr. Conington Warren who was wafted to our shores
permanently on the waves of prohibition. I think you knew personally
every other man except the Duke of Valladolida. He is, of course, a
grandee of Spain, short, slight and bald, but a first rate shot,
Reginald says, and plays polo for the Madrid team. Certainly there was
no tall, clean-shaven, good-looking man here whom you don't know quite
well." Alicia Langley invariably added postscripts. This time it
interested the reader more than the letter. "I showed your letter to
Reginald and he was almost excited. He said an Anthony Trent had motored
over from Norwich and wanted to learn particulars of a private in his
regiment. As the private in question was Arthur you may draw your own
inferences if you can. Reginald refused to speak so this Trent man of
yours doesn't know Arthur's _nom de guerre_ from anything he has learned
here. Reginald wants you to tell him where you met the man. Please do as
he seems to think it very serious."

While Lady Daphne read this communication, not without agitation, her
brother was dressing for dinner. Some people were coming over from
Pencarrow. He occupied two splendid rooms facing west and was looking
over the moorland to the sea when the handle of the room leading to a
large upper hall was opened noiselessly and admitted Anthony Trent. When
Grenvil remembered he had not long to make the change from flannels into
evening dress, he turned about to see the American sitting in a
comfortable chair.

"Please don't try and ring for the servants," Trent advised smoothly,
"because I am nearest to the bell and I shall not permit it."

If he expected an outbreak of anger he was disappointed. Instead there
was that puzzled expression which could only arise from innocence of
Trent's identity or the most finished art.

"Don't think I am a housebreaker," Trent went on equably, "I am not.
This is visitors day if you remember and after paying my shilling I
looked at the state rooms, pictures and autograph letters and fell
asleep. When I woke up I entered this room by mistake."

"And you want to find your way out?" Grenvil returned. "If you will
ring the bell I will have you shown."

"Not until I have had the opportunity of talking a little to you. In our
first conversation I was indiscreet. You will admit that, won't you?"

"Were you?" Grenvil answered vaguely. "I really don't remember Mr.
Trent."

"Then you deny ever having seen me until we met by the salmon pool a few
days ago?" Trent looked at him like a hawk.

"I do," Grenvil retorted.

"Then if you do, why don't you resent my butting in like this? Why don't
you call some men-servants and have me flung out for a damned nuisance?
Say I threatened you, say anything an innocent man could and would say.
Your attitude doesn't fool me in the least. You are playing a deep game
but I can play a deeper."

Grenvil shrugged his shoulders with a gesture of weariness. "There are
many things I cannot explain," he said.

"You are going to begin right now," Trent said. He was not in a mood to
be trifled with. He firmly believed that this man was planning to send
him to gaol for a period of years so long that he would come out a
whitehaired broken man.

He looked round frowning as steps sounded along the corridor and a tap
came on the door.

"Let me in Arthur," he heard Lady Daphne say, "I've had a most
extraordinary letter from Aunt Alicia. I must see you about it."

She rattled the locked door impatiently. Her brother walked over to it.
Trent could offer no objection. He was confused and annoyed that at a
moment such as this the girl must interrupt. To Anthony Trent she was as
one above and apart. There was no use in concealing that he himself was
a crook no matter how differently he pursued the profession from the
lesser lights whom he despised. And Arthur Grenvil was as crooked as he
with less excuse for it.

Lady Daphne stopped short when she saw Trent rise from his chair and
bow. Her greeting was so wholly different from the friendly manner she
had shown ere this, that he was at loss to understand it. He did not
know that Mrs. Langley was the Aunt Alicia. He could only suppose her
brother had hinted that he was not what he seemed.

"I was not told you were here," she said.

"I'm glad you've come," Arthur Grenvil said. Trent could see that he
only spoke the truth. From what did he expect his sister to protect him.
"Mr. Trent here has an idea I'm deliberately pretending not to know who
he is."

"I assure Mr. Trent," she said haughtily, "that at all events I know
what _he_ is."

Trent looked at her a little quizzically.

"I wonder if you really do," he commented.

"I shall be very glad to prove it," she answered, "but I am not anxious
that my brother should have to listen. I hoped you understood that he is
under the doctors' orders and must not be worried. As dinner is almost
ready and I have several things to do will you be kind enough to put
this discussion off until tomorrow morning?"

"Just as you please," he said. "When and where?"

"You are staying at the Bassetts I think. Very well I will drive over
there tomorrow at half past ten."

He flushed. The inference was plain. He was not permitted to meet her
within the castle. The servant who showed him out seemed to feel
differently today. He felt outcast.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a little apple orchard behind the Bassetts' stone built barns
where each day Anthony Trent used to practise short approaches with a
favorite mashie. He held it as an axiom that if a golfer kept his hand
in with short mashie practise he would never be off his game. He was
industriously trying to approach over a tall spreading tree when he
heard the sound of wheels outside. It was not yet time for his
appointment with Lady Daphne but he could see from the higher ground of
the orchard that it was she. She was driving a dashing pair of chestnuts
to a mail phaeton. By her side sat a man with a powerful unscrupulous
face who was evidently amusing her by his conversation. Trent supposed
he was a guest at the castle, some man who had the right to meet her by
reason of being on the right side of the law.

Almost jealously Anthony Trent saw him help her to alight. He was a
heavily built man but not an ungraceful one and he was exceedingly well
dressed. Trent judged him to be five and forty and used to dominating
men. He had noticed often that men most ruthless with their fellows have
the most charming ways with women.

"I shan't be very long," Lady Daphne said laughing, "You will be able to
smoke just two cigarettes, Mr. Castoon."

Castoon. Of course it was Rudolph Castoon the banker, the English born
member of the great continental firm of bankers and financiers. One of
the brothers was a leader among New York capitalists. It was said that
each Castoon was loyal to the country where it had been arranged he
should be born.

It was in the sweet smelling sitting room of the Bassetts that Trent
found her. She was standing up and refused to be seated. Her enmity now
was hardly concealed.

"I find," she began, "that you have deceived me. You claimed to be one
of the guns at Colonel Langley's shoot."

"I permitted you to assume it," he corrected, "but that is not an
excuse."

"Colonel Langley is very anxious to know where it was I saw you and
under what circumstances."

"You will hardly inform him as to that," said Trent smiling.

"If it becomes necessary I shall," she replied. "At all events I was in
the house of a relative while you were there--"

"As a thief in the night. Thank you."

"You were there as a detective."

She had never seen him lose his calm before. He flushed red and a look
of hatred came over his face.

"A detective! I? If you knew how I loathed them you would never suspect
me of being that."

"If not why are you down here hounding my brother?"

"Hasn't he told you?"

"He says you persist in pretending to know him."

"Lady Daphne," Trent said earnestly. "Was your brother a Private William
Smith, a gentleman ranker in the seventy-eighth battalion of the City of
London Regiment?"

"Yes," she answered.

"And wasn't this same man under his own name expelled from Harrow School
and Trinity College, Cambridge."

"Then you are a detective!" she cried.

"On my honor, no," he exclaimed. "Lady Daphne, your brother saved my
life, and when I wanted to speak about the very terrible and unusual
experience he denied knowing me."

"You are not telling me everything," she said after a pause, "I am glad
you are not a detective even though you may be not what I thought you,
but is it reasonable you should try to force yourself on a man who quite
evidently wants to be alone with his thoughts just to thank him for
doing something every soldier was glad to do for any other allied
soldier?"

"There was something else," he admitted. "I may as well tell you what.
We were, as we had every reason to think, dying. We told each other part
of our past lives. Why I don't pretend to understand. Nerves I suppose
and the feeling that nothing mattered in the least. I told him part of
my past which in effect put a club in his hand to use over me. When I
got better I assumed he was killed. I found he wasn't and followed him
here to ask what he was going to do with his knowledge. You wondered
what errand I had at Dereham Old Hall. It was to read through the
confession which you burned. I had read it and replaced it before you
came in."

"Then you know all about him?" she gasped.

"I know what was written there," he answered. "I wanted to know so that
I could tell him I, too, had a weapon with which to fight. I am not his
enemy, far from it."

"You mean you don't want to threaten him or hold your knowledge of what
he did over us?"

He looked at her gloomily. To think that this was the impression she had
of him hurt.

"So that's what you think of me," he said slowly.

"Indeed it isn't," she answered quickly. "I didn't think it in the
beginning and I don't want to do so now, but what was one to think?"

"It was your brother's behaviour that puzzled me," he said, "and still
puzzles me. Don't you see I only want to be sure that he won't use what
I told him?"

Lady Daphne looked at him curiously. Here was a man whose manners were
perfect, who seemed to have the same sports and occupation of the kind
of men she knew hinting that he had done things of whose consequence he
was afraid. She supposed there were many temptations into which a man
might fall, lapses of which he might repent and still go in fear of
discovery.

"I don't wonder you were bewildered," she said presently, "and I
understand far better than you how it was. Mr. Trent you need never be
afraid that the man who was Private Smith will ever say a word to any
living souls of what you said to him."

"How can I be certain?" he demanded. "You don't know the rewards that a
man might gain for speaking the truth about me."

"Private William Smith and my brother Arthur are two different people."

He looked at her in astonishment. Was the weary chase, the long
uncertainty to begin again? There was never a doubt in his mind but that
what she told him was true even if it was hard to be believed.

"Then where is Private Smith?" he asked. "Where is the man who knows the
real me?"

"At the castle," she said.

He made a gesture of despair.

"It is incomprehensible."

"I am going to tell you about them--about the two utterly different
men." She said nothing for a full minute. Then she went to the door and
called Mrs. Bassett into the room. "Please tell Mr. Castoon I shall have
to keep him waiting rather longer than I thought."

"Certainly, my Lady," Mrs. Bassett said. Later she told her husband that
Mr. Castoon looked very black at the news. "He's not the kind to like
being kept waiting," she explained.

"Princes of the Blood ought to be glad to wait for Lady Daphne," the
tenant farmer cried.

"You learned somehow that Arthur was expelled from Harrow. It is true.
He managed to get into Trinity but lasted only a term. Then came
Sandhurst and a commission finally and black disgrace. Mr. Rudolph
Castoon who is a friend of my eldest brother took pity on him and made
him one of his secretaries--he's in Parliament you know--but even he
couldn't do anything. Then a little while in Australia and failure
there. The last thing he did was to enlist just before the war broke
out. Colonel Langley was given the command of a London regiment and
found Arthur under the name you knew."

"But you said he wasn't Private Smith," Trent broke in eagerly.

"You will see later what I mean. How did you meet him?"

Trent explained in a few words. But what confessions or boasts he had
been betrayed into making he said nothing about.

"My brother was expelled from Harrow when he was eighteen. Until he was
seventeen he was one of the sweetest natured boys you could imagine. He
was full of fun and mischief but all his tutors loved him and there
wasn't a particle of vice in him. Suddenly he seemed possessed of
devils. He drank, he gambled--and cheated--he was insolent to his
teachers. It broke my mother's heart. It helped to make my father the
silent broken man he is today. It was the same when he went up to
Trinity and the same when he was at Sandhurst...." There was a long
pause. Trent could see she was struggling against tears. There welled up
in him an almost divine pity. He wanted to soothe her, comfort her and
let her cry on his shoulder.

It was in this moment that Anthony Trent knew he loved her and would
always love her. Those passing affections of adolescence were pale, wan
emotions compared with this. And it was an hour of grief to him. He
realized that his ways of life had cut him off irremediably from
marriage with such a woman as this.

"What happened," she said at last, "when you came to after being blown
from that dug-out?"

"I was badly hurt," he answered, wonderingly, "those high explosives
play the strangest tricks with one."

"This is what happened to my brother. He was unconscious for a very long
time and his head was fearfully mangled. When he came out of ether he
said very distinctly. 'Oh Bingo, how rottenly clumsy of you.'"

"Who was Bingo?" Trent asked.

"At the time nobody knew. Arthur's uniform was torn off in the explosion
and his regiment unknown."

"He could have told them," Trent asserted.

She shook her head.

"You are mistaken. He could not tell them. They thought he was, what's
the word, malingering. They thought he wanted to be sent back and get
out of the fighting. Then he complained of the dreadful noise. By
degrees they found that he did not even know of the war. They thought of
course he was pretending. My father heard of the wound and although he
had disowned him he had him brought to our house in Grosvenor Place. We
had specialists, those new sorts of doctors who don't depend on
medicines. Arthur thought he was still at Harrow eight years or more
ago. Then I remembered a boy who shared a study with him there, a boy
who had stayed here, a son of Sir Willoughby Hosken who has a place near
Penzance. Bingo was somewhere in the Struma valley with his battery and
in answer to a letter said that the only act of clumsiness he could call
to mind was when he accidentally hit Arthur with an Indian club in the
gym at school.

"One of the doctors went over to Harrow and found Arthur had been hit
like this and was in the infirmary for three days. Mr. Trent, it was
after that accident he altered entirely."

"I've heard of such cases," Trent said quickly. "Pressure of some sort
on the brain they call it. There was quite an epidemic of such incidents
in America a few years ago. It was supposed to be a cure for bad boys.
Then you think--"

"I know," she said emphatically. "He is now exactly as he was when he
was a boy, gentle, thoughtful and clean. Our specialists saw the army
surgeons and they supposed that in dressing his dreadful wounds they
removed the portions of depressed bone and so made this extraordinary
cure. They say the war has proved this sort of thing again and again."

The news which spelled salvation to Anthony Trent seemed too tremendous
to believe. There was no miracle about it. It was a simple fact
demonstrated by surgery and accepted now by the laity. The years in
which Arthur Grenvil had sown wild oats and disrupted friendships and
relationships was wiped from his consciousness. Trent now understood the
half diffident, almost shy manner so inexplicable in a man of the type
William Smith had been.

"My father thinks," the girl went on, "that as he will have to find out
some of the things he did it will be as well to prepare him for it and
shield him against consequences."

"Consequences?" he hazarded.

"I'm afraid," she said gravely, "that it will not be easy. His creditors
for example have learned that my father has forgiven him and they are
coming down on him. Fortunately my father can afford to pay but there is
always the dread of some adventurer turning up and letting us into some
dreadful secrets."

"Men like me," he asked.

"You know I didn't mean that," she said. "I think it most wonderful that
you are here, because you will be able to tell him something about the
good part of his life you know. He is always hoping that his memory will
come back but the doctors say it won't." She hesitated a little. "Poor
Arthur is very much depressed at times. Could you try and remember as
much about him as possible?"

"Surely," said Anthony Trent. "As it happens I met a man out there who
knew him well and said he was a good soldier."

"I wish my father could know that," she said. "I'm going to ask you to
luncheon tomorrow and to meet a man whose life Arthur saved would cheer
him enormously. We shall be alone." She frowned. "I'd forgotten Mr.
Castoon who is probably furious at being kept waiting. I promised him
I'd be back in two cigarettes time. I was going to drive in to Camelford
but I don't think I will. I feel almost that I want to cry." She held
out her hand impulsively. "Forgive me for what I thought about you and
come to luncheon at one tomorrow."

"You don't know how I'd like to," he said wistfully, "but you have
forgotten about my past; and I had no such excuse as your brother."

"You are exaggerating it," she said more brightly. "Anyhow it's all
over."

Exaggerating! And even were it all over, which he doubted, a blacker
past remained than ever she dreamed of.

"I don't want Mr. Castoon to see that I've got tears in my eyes. Please
tell him to wait a little longer while I talk to Mrs. Bassett. _Au
revoir._"

Anthony Trent watched her go and then sighed. And he told himself that
had he met her ten years before he would have had the strength to win a
fortune honestly and not take the lower road.

He went outside to where Rudolph Castoon was sitting in the phaeton. The
two horses were champing at their bits, a little groom at their heads
trying to soothe their high tempers. He approached the financier with no
personal feeling of any sort. In the beginning he expected to admire the
man as he did all such forceful characters. He often suspected there was
more kinship between him and the ruthless financier type that Castoon
represented than the world comprehended.

Rudolph Castoon looked at him sourly.

"Well?" he snapped.

Anthony Trent looked at him and knew instantly that he would always
share the hate he saw in the capitalist's face. For a moment he was at a
loss to understand the reason. Then he saw that it was jealousy,
furious, dynamic jealousy. Lady Daphne had come to see Mrs. Bassett.
Instead Castoon found she had come to see a younger and better looking
man. Trent did not fall into the error of underrating Castoon. In the
event of a contest of any kind between them he would walk warily. But he
never expected to see the man again and his peremptory way of speaking
angered him.

"Well?" Castoon demanded again.

"Thank you," said Trent urbanely, "I find the air of these moorlands of
great benefit to me. Formerly I slept poorly but now I sleep as soon as
my head touches the pillow. And my appetite is better. I eat three eggs
for breakfast every morning. Do you sleep well?"

"I did not come here to sleep," Castoon frowned.

"But if you are here for long you must," Trent said pleasantly.

"I am not in the least interested in your health or how many eggs you
can eat for breakfast." Castoon's manner was frankly rude. "I want to
know where Lady Daphne Grenvil is."

"She said she had forgotten you," Trent answered, "she also said you
would probably be furious at being kept waiting."

"I am," Castoon asserted. "Would it be too much to ask the reason?"

"I expected you to," Trent said affably. The time he took to select a
cigarette from his case and the meticulous manner in which he lighted it
added to the other man's ill temper just as Anthony Trent intended it
should.

"If you are quite finished, sir," Castoon cried, "I should be glad to
hear."

"As an American," Trent began airily, "I like the old family servant
tradition. Lady Daphne is talking over her childhood days with Mrs.
Bassett. My mother was from the Southern states and I suppose I inherit
a liking for that sort of thing."

"Will you come to the point, sir?" Castoon exclaimed.

"I thought I told you that Lady Daphne was talking over nursery
reminisences with an old servant."

"She may be doing that now, but what was she doing before? I'll tell
you; she was talking to you. Do you deny it?"

"My dear man," Trent cried in apparent surprise, "Deny it? I boast about
it! It is the only thing I hope will be printed in my obituary notices."

"I'm not sure I should be desolated at reading your obituary notices,"
Castoon said keeping his temper back. He could say no more for Lady
Daphne came hurrying along the hydrangea-bordered path to the gate.

"I'm dreadfully sorry, Mr. Castoon," she cried.

"I can forget everything now that you are here," he returned gallantly,
"even the humour of this young man whose name I don't know."

"Mr. Anthony Trent of New York," she told him. "You'll meet him at
luncheon tomorrow."

"That will make it a very pleasant function," the financier said grimly.
He could say no more because the horses reared impatiently and for a
moment there was danger.

"That off horse nearly came over backward," Castoon said when the team
had settled down a little and the farm was a half mile behind.

"But it didn't," Lady Daphne said calmly, "so why worry?"

"It would have been his fault," Castoon said venomously.

"You don't seem to like him," she said smiling.

"I hate any man who looks at you as he does."

"How does he look?" she asked with an air of innocence.

"He looks at you as if he was in love with you, and I hate any man to do
that."

"You have no right to resent it Mr. Castoon," she said coldly. "I have
told you a hundred times that you concern yourself far too much with my
affairs."

"I'm going to marry you," he said doggedly. "I never fail. Look at my
life history and see where I have been beaten. I know you don't care for
me yet. You'll have to later."

"My father doesn't care for you either."

Rudolph Castoon sniffed impatiently.

"His type is dying out. He still remains ignorant that money has
displaced birth."

"It's the one thing money won't buy, though," she reminded him.

"Birth can't buy power," the financier said quickly, "and money means
power. Your father has had both. It would have been easier for me to
marry Daphne, daughter of the Earl of Rosecarrel, Viscount St. Just,
Baron Wadebridge, Knight of the Garter, and Ambassador to Turkey, and
all the rest of it, than it will be to marry you now your father has
abandoned his career."

"That sounds merely silly to me," she exclaimed.

"Someday I will explain to you how very sensible it is. You will
understand exactly."

"Do you mean you are so inordinately vain you would rather marry an
ambassador's daughter than the daughter of a man who isn't a power
politically any more?"

"At least I can say I don't mean that. I am vain, that's true, but I
wish you were one of the daughters of a tenant farmer on these purple
moors instead of being an earl's daughter." He sighed a little. Then the
recollection of Anthony Trent came back. "Who is this man Trent?" he
demanded.

"A delightful man," she said, "an American who knows how to behave. I
met him at a houseparty somewhere or other. He used to know Arthur."

Castoon could not keep back a sneer.

"That vouches for him of course."

"At least he wouldn't say anything as underbred as that," she cried
angrily, and touched one of her high-mettled chestnuts with a lash.
Castoon hung on to the seat as the pair tried to get away.

"You'll kill yourself some day driving such horses as these," he said
later. He was not a coward; but unnecessary risk always seemed a
childish thing to create and he believed himself heir to a great
destiny.




CHAPTER SIX

_FRESH FIELDS_


If Anthony Trent thought he was to be the guest at a small luncheon
party where he could meet Arthur under friendlier circumstances and talk
to Daphne intimately, he was mistaken.

Castoon was staying at the castle and a number of people motored over
from Falmouth as well as the owner of a big yacht lying for the time in
the Fowey river.

Lord Rosecarrel was very amiable. He seemed intensely grateful that
Trent gave up a morning's shooting to attend a luncheon. There was no
trace of suspicion about him. He had been told that Mr. Trent, an
American of means, had been a guest at Dereham Old Hall. His daughter
had not informed him of Alicia Langley's letter.

But he was most interested to know that his son had saved the visitor's
life. It was the one good act in the black years which had given him so
much sorrow.

Also Daphne had told him that Arthur liked Trent and would be a good
companion. The physicians who were watching Arthur's case recommended
that he should be kept interested. They desired that the apathy which
threatened to take hold on him should be banished. The Earl was growing
more and more to leave things to the girl. The death of his two sons had
been a terrible blow and he was beginning to find in solitary yachting
and fishing trips a certain refreshing solace.

From the deference that most of the people paid to Rudolph Castoon it
was evident that he was a man of great influence and promise.

Trent sat next to a rather pretty dark girl, a Miss Barham, who had come
over from her father's yacht.

"Everybody seems to hang on his words," he said. "Why?"

"He's phenomenally rich," she answered, "and he has a career. He'll
probably be Chancellor of the Exchequer in the next cabinet. Finance is
bred in the bone of his sort. Hasn't he a brother in your country?"

"A great power in Wall Street," Trent told her, "but we suspect a
capitalist; and while Rudolph may get a title and much honor, Alfred in
America couldn't get a job as dog catcher."

"Of course you've seen he's simply mad about Daphne?" Miss Barham said
later.

"I've seen his side of it," Trent said frowning a little, "but what
about Lady Daphne?"

"Power is always attractive," Miss Barham said wisely, "and we English
women love politics. One can never tell. I think the earl would be
furious but Daphne always gets her way and after all Mr. Castoon is a
great catch whichever way you look at it. There's nothing financially
shady about him and if Daphne should ever get bitten with the idea of
making a _salon_, he's the man to marry."

"What a brutal way to look at it," he said gloomily.

"Are you young enough to believe in those delightful love matches, Mr.
Trent?" the girl asked. "I did till I was almost fifteen."

Anthony Trent should have been amused to find himself on the side of the
angels. As a rule life had provoked cynicism in him and here he was
fighting for ideals.

"I talked like that until I was fifteen," he smiled, "and I meant it."

Ada Barham turned her dark brilliant eyes on him. She rather envied the
girl who had captured him. She felt it was a lover talking.

"Of course you are in love," she retorted. "I always meet the really
nice men too late. Dare you confess it?"

"I admit it," he said a little confused.

"American girls are very charming," Miss Barham declared. "I stayed at
Newport a month last year. Of course you know Newport?"

"Fairly well," he admitted.

Oddly enough the recollection of his Newport triumphs was not as
pleasing as usual. He had made some of his richest hauls in the Rhode
Island city.

What an amazing thing, he reflected, that he was here as a guests among
people on whom, as a class, he had looked as his lawful prey. Castoon
with his millions was the sort of man he would like to measure his wit
against. When Castoon looked across the table at him with a kind of
innocent stare he decided that it would be a delightful duel.

He knew English women wore little jewelry during the day so he could not
estimate the value of what they owned at a luncheon, but he was certain
Miss Barham's mother, who was addressed as Lady Harriet, had family
jewels worth the risk of seeking to get. A woman whose husband owned a
two-hundred feet steam yacht was distinctly among those whom in former
days he had been professionally eager to meet.

Before the luncheon Lady Daphne had explained that her brother would not
be at the table. The family was anxious that he should not be subjected
to the confusion of professing ignorance of some man or event which he
ought to know. By degrees he was getting his bearings and reading
through files of old newspapers the main events of the years that had
been wiped from his mind.

Anthony Trent was taken to the big room by a footman, the same room he
had entered unannounced.

"You must have thought me awfully rude," Arthur Grenvil said cordially,
"but my sister had told you the reason. She says I used to know you."
Grenvil looked at him wistfully, "I think she said I had saved your
life."

"You did," Trent answered promptly. And then, because he was sorry for
the ex-"Tommy" but more because he loved the other's sister, he plunged
into a stirring account of the incident omitting the part of the
exchange of confidences.

"Apparently," said Grenvil, "it was the only decent thing I did during
those dreadful forgotten years. If you knew the agony of not knowing
what I did and dreading every day to learn something more of my career
you'd pity me. I couldn't meet Castoon. They say I was a sort of
secretary to him for six months and he had to send me away. All I
remember of him is that he was my father's private secretary when I was
a small boy of ten and my father ambassador at Constantinople. I'm
afraid to see any of the people who come here."

"That will pass," Trent said reassuringly, "you'll get a grip on
yourself as your health improves."

"That's what Daphne says," Arthur answered, "Isn't she splendid?"

"Indeed she is," Trent said not daring to put the fervor in his voice
that he felt. There was almost an uncanny feeling in talking with this
new Arthur Grenvil. As a judge of men, and as a man who had met a great
number of criminals and could estimate them accurately, Trent had known
even in the darkness of the dug-out that Private William Smith was bad.

Despite the absence of coarseness from the speech of the unseen man
Trent had felt that he was evil and dangerous, a man to watch carefully.
And this same man stripped of his mantle of black deeds was now sitting
talking to him with the deferential air of the junior listening with
respect to his superior in years and his superior in knowledge.

What a _role_ for Anthony Trent, master criminal! But he played it as
well as any of the parts he had set himself to enact. He became the
elder brother, the sage counsellor, the arbiter, the physical trainer
and the constant companion. In the beginning he cheerfully set out to
play the part in order to win Daphne's approval. Later he really liked
Arthur. He taught him to drive the high powered Lion car that was seldom
used by the earl's chauffeurs and discovered in him an aptitude for
mechanics which delighted his father.

"You have done more for my son than I imagined could be done by anyone,"
Lord Rosecarrel said gratefully.

"I owe him no small debt," Anthony Trent retorted, "and it's a very
pleasant way of trying to pay it."

It was not often that he saw the earl. Occasionally they played a game
of billiards after dinner but the elder man was constantly occupied with
reading when he was not aboard his boat. Since he had come to Cornwall,
Trent had discovered what an important personage Lord Rosecarrel had
been in the political life of his country until his sudden resignation a
year before the war. Every now and then Trent would see regret expressed
in a London paper or weekly review that he would not place his vast
knowledge of the near East at his country's disposal.

There was still considerable trouble centering about the Balkans; and
since the earl had been minister or ambassador at Belgrade, Bucharest
and Constantinople he knew the country as few could hope to do without
his experience.

The prime minister himself, snatching a few days of golf at Newquay,
motored over to the castle to lunch and asked his host personally to
come from his retirement. It happened that Trent was lunching at the
castle and heard the earl's decision not to leave private life. There
was an incident in connection with this which made a curious impression
on the American.

When he had declined to represent his country finally, Lord Rosecarrel
looked over the table at his son who was talking gaily and did not
observe the glance. It was a look almost of hate that the earl flashed
at him. Then it passed and was succeeded by the melancholy which the old
aristocrat's face habitually wore. Trent was certain none had seen but
he and he had never seen an evidence of it before.

He reflected that Arthur was never wholly at ease in his father's
company. Again and again he had caught a certain shamed look when the
earl was speaking. Of course it was the knowledge of how in the
forgotten years he had disgraced an honored name. That was
understandable. But why should the father who knew all and had forgiven
suddenly throw this look of hate over the table at the unconscious son?

"Arthur," said Trent one day to Lady Daphne, "looks as if he were still
begging forgiveness. Why?"

"It must be fancy on your part," she said and changed the subject
instantly.

He supposed it was some other skeleton, from that full closet, whose
rattling bones had not been buried yet. There was something which still
rankled in the earl's memory. He knew he would never find its origin
from Daphne.

His intimacy with the Grenvils began to alarm him. It was a fellowship
which must sooner or later come to an end. He was utterly without vanity
when it came to his relationship with Lady Daphne; but his love for her
gave him such an insight and sympathy with her that he could not but be
conscious that of late a softer mood had come to her when they were
alone together.

He knew that she looked for his presence where before she had been
indifferent. Sometimes when they touched hands at parting there was the
faint, lingering hold which said more than looks or spoken words. It
distressed him to hear that she had defended him valiantly when the wife
of a nearby landowner had referred to him as an American adventurer and
fortune hunter. Daphne had sprung to his rescue in a flash. Half the
country gossiped about it. It was very loyal of her, he felt, but also
very unwise.

The earl had heard of it and was displeased. But he trusted his daughter
and Trent was working amazing changes with Arthur. It was only when the
prime minister spoke of the American that Lord Rosecarrel knew he must
not ignore the thing any longer.

"And who is the good looking lad upon whose words your daughter hangs?"

"A delightful fellow," the earl said, "I don't know what Arthur would
have done without him. He is reconstructing the poor boy."

And indeed the earl was fond of the stranger. But his daughter must
marry into her own station in life. His other girl's home was in France
and he wanted Daphne to remain in England. It occurred to him as very
strange that he had made so few inquiries into Trent's antecedents. He
supposed it was the man's personal charm and the fact that he was
himself not in good health that had allowed him to be careless. One day
at a dinner that came in the week after the prime minister's visit, a
dinner to which Trent alone was bidden, he said:

"We shall miss you very much when you have to go, Mr. Trent, but I
suppose your affairs in America call you imperatively."

Anthony Trent made no answer for the moment. It was as though sentence
of death had been passed upon him. He could only admit that this was the
logical if long-delayed end to the pleasantest days of his life. He had
brought it on himself by his own weakness. For all his strength he was
in some ways deplorably weak. He had been weak to leave the ways of
honest men. Primarily he had none of those grudges against organized
society which drive some men to crime. He had fallen because he was
tired of narrow ways of life and a toil which offered few high rewards.

And, more than all, he had been weak in that he had encouraged an
intimacy with a family of this type. The Lady Daphne was not for him. He
called to mind a phrase that Miss Barham had said about Castoon at this
very table. She had said there was nothing financially shady about him
which might prevent marriage between him and Daphne. No matter how much
Anthony Trent sought to deceive himself about his way of crime and
comfort himself with the reflection he never despoiled the poor or
worthy but inevitably set himself against the rich and undeserving, he
knew he stood condemned in the eyes of decent men and women. He was
aware that Daphne and Arthur were listening for his answer. Daphne's
face was white.

"I shall miss you all, sir," he said, "more than I can say."

"You are not really going?" Arthur cried.

"I must," he said. "My affairs at home need looking after and I have
lingered on here forgetting everything."

Lady Daphne said nothing. He did not dare to look at her. He knew she
was thinking that but for her father's mention of his leaving she might
not have known until he chose to tell; and he had told another first.

Because he was grateful that Trent had been quick to take the hint the
Earl of Rosecarrel was particularly gracious to his guest and proposed
a game of billiards.

It was while the old nobleman was making a break that Daphne dropped
into a chair at Trent's side.

"Are you really going?" she asked.

"I ought never to have stayed so long," he answered.

"Do you want to go?"

"You know I don't," he said passionately.

"And is your business so important?"

"Wait," he said rising to his feet when his opponent had finished a
break of fifty-three. "It's my turn."

"I have never," said the earl, chalking his cue, "seen you miss that
particular shot before."

Anthony Trent came to the girl's side.

"We can't talk here," he whispered. "The hounds meet at Michaelstowe
tomorrow and draw the Trenewth covers. Will you be out?"

"Yes," she said, "but what chance shall we have to talk there?"

"We can lose the field," he said, "and ride back over the moors alone."

       *       *       *       *       *

Arthur Grenvil had taken the mastership of the North Cornwall Foxhounds
and persuaded Trent to follow them. The American had added a couple of
better-bred faster horses to his hack and now enjoyed the gallop after a
fox as much as any hardened foxhunter of them all.

A fox was discovered almost immediately when the Trenewth covers were
drawn and got well away making in a westerly direction for the
Wadebridge road. Daphne and Trent made a pretense of following but soon
drew apart from the rest. The music of hounds became fainter and they
turned back to the moors.

"You might have told me," she said reproachfully.

"I didn't know," he answered, "I only realized when your father spoke
that it was more or less a command."

"My father may be the lord-lieutenant of the county," she said, "but he
has no power to send a man away if the man doesn't want to go."

"Can you think I want to go?" he demanded.

"I only know you are not going to stay."

She touched her horse lightly on the shoulder and put him to a canter.
Trent saw that she was heading for Rough Tor, one of the two mountains
guarding the moorlands. Once or twice they had ridden to its rocky top
and looked at the hamlets through whose chimneys the peat smoke rose,
and those strange hut circles of a prehistoric people. The path along
which she went was too narrow to permit him to ride by her side and he
was forced to ride in silence for almost an hour.

When she dismounted at Rough Tor and he tethered the horses to a short
wind shorn tree he could see she was not the same cheerful girl of
yesterday.

"Why did you stay here so long?" she asked presently.

"Because I love you," he answered.

"Why do you go away?"

"Because I love you better than I knew."

She looked at him with a faint smile.

"That is very hard to understand, Tony."

It was the first time she had ever called him by the name her brother
used. He took one of her gauntleted hands and kissed it.

"My dear," he said tenderly, "it is crucifixion for me."

She looked at him still with the little wistful smile on her face.

"And are you the only one to suffer?"

The knowledge that she cared as much as he did brought a look of misery
to his face where only triumph should have reigned.

"Ada Barham told me about the girl in America," she continued. "Of
course I imagined there would be a girl somewhere whom you cared for but
I think you might have confided in me. Weren't we good friends enough
for that?"

"There is no girl anywhere," he said. "I told Miss Barham that because I
didn't want her to suspect it was you."

"Then why must you go away?" There was almost a wail in her voice.

"I have told you," he answered, trying desperately to keep his voice
even, "I must go because I love you better than anything else in life."

She laughed a little bitterly.

"And so that is how men behave when they are in love!"

"When a man really loves a girl he should think first of her happiness."

She looked at him simply. There was none of the false shame that lesser
natures might feel in avowing love.

"Don't you understand," she said in a low voice, "that you are my
happiness?"

For a moment the devil tempted him even as the Son of Man had been
tempted upon a mountain top. Why should he think of the future when
today was so sweet? In the big Lion car in the castle garage he could
make Southampton in time enough for the White Star liner which went out
tomorrow. They could be married on board or at any rate directly they
reached America. Then with the money he had saved they could be happy.
She was the woman he wanted, the woman he worshipped.

Then the other side of the picture presented itself. He saw them married
on board and radiantly happy as they approached the land that was to be
her home. Then the hard-faced men who showed official badges and
informed him he was wanted for a series of crimes which would keep him
away from wife and home and liberty until she was an old woman. One
ending to the trip was just as likely as the other. Situated as he was
he could never be certain of safety. This period in quiet Cornwall was
the first time since he had taken to crime that he had become almost
careless. He would break Daphne's heart for she was of the kind who
would never love another man. And the disgrace he would bring upon this
kindly family of hers which had suffered enough already. The screeching
headlines in the press of the earl's daughter who married a crook. It
was not to be thought of.

"Dear," he said softly, "if there were any obstacles which could be
removed by human effort I should not say goodbye like this. Please don't
ask me to tell you anything more."

"You said at Dereham that you felt you could sell your soul for a past.
Is that it?"

"That is the irrevocable thing," he told her.

"Pasts can be lived down," she whispered.

"Not mine," he said dismally. "Daphne I have not been here all this time
without knowing you and the sort of people from whom you spring. It is
because of your tradition of honor that you felt Arthur's misfortunes so
much. I can bring upon you and yours a greater disgrace than he could."

"I won't believe it," she cried.

"I don't want you to," he said gratefully. "I remember the thing said
about your family, 'the Grenvils for Loyalty' and I love you for it, but
Lady Polruan was right when she called me an unknown adventurer from
America. The other countrymen of mine you meet here, like Conington
Warren for instance, have their place at home. I haven't. I am without
the pale. They don't know me and I can't know them. There is that great
gulf fixed which you can never understand. I want to go away leaving you
still my friend. If you ask me questions about myself and I answer them
truly I may have to carry away with me the picture of your scorn. Be
kind, Daphne and don't ask any more."

"I should never scorn you," she cried.

He put his arms about her and kissed her.

"My dear," he whispered, "my sweet, believe always that there is
something God himself could not alter or I would never give you up like
this."

"It is very hard," she said presently, "to have found love and then to
know it must only be a little dream that passes."

"It is my just punishment," he answered.

"When do you go?"

"Tomorrow."

She put her arms about his neck and looked him full in the eyes.

"Darling," she said, "I shall never love anybody but you. Girls always
say that, I know, but I have always been a little afraid of love and its
exactions and the sorrow it brings. You see I was right in being afraid
for directly I find you I must lose you." She leaned forward, one elbow
on her knee, and looked at the countryside spread out at her feet. "I
shall probably live here to be an old woman and look after other old
women and see they have tea and warm wraps for the bad weather, and give
the old men tobacco. That's all I look forward to. Tony, Tony, why is it
one can't die on the day when one is killed?"

He sat in silence. Bitterly as he regretted his past which had risen to
prevent happiness, he regretted his staying here in Cornwall even more.
If he alone had suffered it were well enough, part indeed of the
punishment he merited. But to have dragged this girl into it and to have
made her love a man who could never marry her was the blackest of all.
Perhaps she suspected it for she turned to him and put her hand on his.

"Poor Tony," she said caressingly, "it's no good blaming yourself. It
had to be. I think I've always loved you. Before it is too late and you
are gone away, are you sure this thing that stands between us cannot be
banished or atoned or paid for in money? You know I have a large fortune
of my own and it is all yours if you need it. Don't let any little thing
stand between us. Where one loves wholly one can forgive all. I shall
not ask you again; but, my dear, if any human agency can give you to me
let me know."

Anthony Trent thought of the view he once had of a great penitentiary in
which a man he used to know was serving a life sentence. The prison was
set among arid country in sandy plains. Along the top of the stone walls
sentries were placed at intervals, men with sawed-off shot guns waiting
the opportunity to kill such as sought to escape the dreary days and
dreadful nights. His friend made the desperate attempt and died as
warders crowded about him and congratulated the guard on his
markmanship. It was this place which might at any moment receive the
person of Anthony Trent.

He could not think of the law as a human agency. That was one of the
differences between the Anthony Trent, writer and Anthony Trent, crook.
The writer regarded the law and its officers with a certain meed of
respect but the criminal hated them.

"There is nothing that can help me," he said.

There was silence for a little; then she rose to her feet and pointed
out scarlet coated men in the distance and galloping horses. Arthur's
hounds had lost their fox in Tregenna woods and had found another stout
dog fox headed for his earth on the moors.

"We can follow after all," she said, with an attempt to be cheerful.

They kissed silently and then remounted the impatient hunters. By
devious ways they joined the field again. The moorland was a dangerous
country to ride. Great stone walls divided small fields and there were
sunken roads and paths by which, thousands of years before, the
Phoenicians had taken their way.

It was observed with what recklessness the American rode.

"He'll break his neck if he isn't careful," said a rosy faced old
"hunting parson," as Trent set his horse at a great granite barrier.

He was not to know that Anthony Trent would have welcomed just such an
end.




CHAPTER SEVEN

_THE SENTENCE OF BANISHMENT_


Lord Rosecarrel who was out with the hounds that day was riding ahead of
his daughter when she and her escort joined the field. He was a finely
built man and looked exceedingly well in hunting costume. He wore a
closely trimmed beard, now almost white, and seemed, so Trent thought,
more than his sixty-five years. It was a fine, sensitive face, and the
earl had all his days until this strange retirement mixed with the great
of the earth and taken part in the councils of nations. This mystery
connected with his withdrawal from public affairs intrigued the
American. He believed Daphne knew. He was wondering what it was when the
earl reined in his horse.

"I am told you leave no later than tomorrow, Mr. Trent, I hope you will
dine with us tonight."

Anthony Trent hesitated a moment before answering.

"Thank you," he said, "I should like to."

He knew it would only reopen old wounds but the temptation to see Daphne
again was not to be resisted.

It would have been a dull dinner but for the earl. Whether or not he saw
Daphne's depression, the disappointment of his son and the
disinclination of the visitor to talk, he was entertaining and witty. He
asked a number of questions about the United States where his son and
heir was. While he played billiards with Arthur, Trent and the girl
watched them. In truth they paid little attention to the scores or
strokes.

It was not easy to get back to the intimacy of the morning. There was a
certain reserve in the girl's manner, and a look of sadness that
immeasurably distressed Trent.

"Ours is a tragic family," she said, when he tried to bring her to a
brighter mood. "We used to be so happy. My mother was wonderful. She is
gone, my two brothers are dead, St. Just is away and my father simply
pining away of a dreadful thing that wasn't his fault."

"I wish you would tell me what it is," he said.

"Impossible," she said decisively. "It poisons his whole life."

"It was Arthur's fault, wasn't it?" he demanded.

"What makes you say that?" she returned.

"I know it," he said emphatically, "and whatever he did can be undone
and if it's humanly possible I can do it. Is someone blackmailing him?"

He could see she was startled. He must have hit on something not far
removed from the truth.

"Not that," she said, looking at where her father was standing
apprehensively. "And I'm sure you could do nothing."

"I can try," he said earnestly. "Listen to me, Daphne. I feel that
there is nothing in life for me but the memory of you. I want more than
anything else to do something for you to prove my love. I have nothing
in all life to lose. I have no relations, no friends to speak of. My
life has been made up of," he hesitated, "of adventures where I pitted
myself against the world and won."

She thought of that night in Dereham. Was that one of his adventures?
Certainly he had given her the impression of great strength and
resolution. Of all the men she met Rudolph Castoon and Anthony Trent
most radiated this uncommon quality.

She looked across the big room to her father. Arthur was making a big
break and the earl was not watching him; she knew he was not thinking of
the game. He was thinking of that insuperable obstacle which barred him
from the work he loved, the work in which he was needed. He looked a
sad, broken man and reminded Trent of the portrait of Julius the second,
by Raphael, which he had seen in Florence.

"I dare not tell," she said. "It touches big things and would involve
many names and would lead you into great peril."

"It would not be the peril for me that you think," he insisted. "I shall
know when my hour is to strike. Darling, let me try to do something for
the woman I love, for the family where I found such happiness and such
sorrow. I have brought so much trouble on you that I want to feel I did
something to atone."

He felt for a fleeting moment the warm clasp of her hand.

"You have often been in danger?" she asked.

"It has been my life," he said simply.

"I am afraid to tell my father," she confessed.

"Must he know?" Trent asked.

"Yes. I know the whole hideous thing only in the barest outline."

"I shall broach the subject," he said confidently, "after all I have
nothing to lose. I go tomorrow anyway."

She hesitated a moment.

"My father may think you are doing it at a price."

"Instead of which I am offering to help you as atonement."

The light died from her eyes and the hope left her heart. Nothing could
alter his decision, nothing apparently blot out the past that held them
asunder.

The Earl of Rosecarrel heard Anthony Trent's request for a private
interview with a rather troubled mind. He had no doubt it had to do with
his daughter. He told himself he had been very careless.

"By all means my dear fellow," he said cordially, "come to my library
where we shall be quite alone."

Never had Trent been bidden to this great book lined chamber. It was
open neither to those who came on visitors' day nor to the casual guest.
It was here the earl and the prime minister were closeted for several
hours.

"My lord," Trent began, "I am going to say something that will first of
all astonish you and then probably make you angry at what seems
presumption."

"I hardly think you will do that," the other said urbanely. He was sure
now it had to do with Lady Daphne.

"You have said," Trent went on, "that you are grateful to me for my help
to your son, Arthur."

"I am profoundly grateful," the earl said quickly, "you have made a new
man of him."

"Then promise me you will not interrupt me by ringing for a servant to
show me out."

"I will promise that blindly," smiled the nobleman.

"I owe a debt to your family. Arthur saved my life and I am still a
debtor. Since I have been here I have found out a great deal about your
life work. I found out also that at a moment when the Empire most needed
you you retired. I know at the present moment your name is being
mentioned everywhere as the most suitable for one of the highest offices
under the crown. I know the prime minister made a golfing trip to
Newquay the excuse to call on you personally. I know that in this very
room you refused a request from your sovereign."

There was no doubting the agitation this statement produced in the
ex-ambassador. But he was mindful of his promise.

"I know," the inexorable Trent went on, "that your refusal has something
to do with what your son did when he was irresponsible. I saw you throw
a terrible glance at him during the prime minister's talk over the
luncheon table. It told me plainly that remotely or not it was because
of something he did that you remain here eating your heart out.
Afterwards you were especially kind to him. It was as though you
repented your momentary anger. My lord, am I right so far?"

"I do not pretend to understand how you have learned these facts," the
earl said slowly, "but you have made no error. What happened is over,
dead and done with."

"I'm not so sure," Trent cried. "Perhaps because there was a day when I
wrote stories of a rather lurid type I can think of half a hundred
things that might seem final to you but which would yield to my type of
mind. Nothing is final to us Americans."

Lord Rosecarrel looked at him shrewdly.

"What you say is preposterous, Mr. Trent, but nevertheless it interests
me. What causes could this fertile mind of yours suggest?"

"Blackmail first of all," Trent said. Lord Rosecarrel did not give any
indication whether the shot told or not. "Blackmail can be sub-divided
into many heads."

"And is there a remedy for blackmail, then?" the earl asked blandly.

"A remedy can always be found for things," Trent said confidently.

"It amounts to this," the diplomat continued calmly as though he were
discussing an interesting phase in another man's life, "that you suppose
I am held inactive here because of the hold some man or government has
on me. Admitting for a moment that this is true, do you not suppose that
I should have strained every nerve, called upon my every resource to
remove the obstacle which you admit has a remedy?"

"I think you have tried and failed," Trent said.

"It is curious," said the earl still impersonally, "how fiction of the
type you used to write has taken possession of the public mind."

"I should not fail," Trent said steadily.

"You still persist in making the imaginary real," the earl said good
humouredly.

"Why do you fence with me at a time like this?" Trent said making a
gesture of despair. "Can't you see I am in earnest?"

"You rate your powers so highly then?"

"You employed amateurs, my lord, I am a professional adventurer."

"What are you doing in my house?"

"Living honest hours and learning that a past can't be undone. I know
very well that you thought I wanted to see you because I love your
daughter. It is true. I do love her. And it is because I love her that I
am going. And it is because I want to prove that I am only truthful when
I say that, I offer to undertake anything that may help you."

"But the reward?"

"To have done something for her is the reward."

The earl was silent for a minute. Then he paced the room. Trent watched
his tall, bent form wondering what was to be the outcome.

"Mr. Trent," said the earl pausing before him, "you are either a
scoundrel or else the most chivalrous gentleman I have ever known. For
the moment I hardly know what to think, or say, or do. If I give you my
confidence and you abuse it the public will share the knowledge of a
disgrace which now only my enemy knows. If you set me free from my
bondage you put me under an obligation that I can never pay. If I let
you make the attempt in which two men have given their lives and you
fail I shall never forgive myself."

"But my lord," Trent reminded him, "I am a professional. I have never
failed. I detest a brawl but I love danger, and life means less to me
than you might suppose. If I fail you will never be compromised. I shall
want no help nor send any plea for assistance. I work alone--always."

The earl did not answer him directly.

"The hounds met at Michaelstowe this morning," he said, "and I took the
opportunity of sending off a wire in reply to this post card which came
last night."

Trent looked at it. It was in a language unknown to him.

"It is in Hungarian," Lord Rosecarrel told him, "and it says, 'Please
let me know that the report in today's Times that you have accepted
office is incorrect.' The telegram I sent to the writer said: 'The
report is wrong. I have refused.' There you have my secret. The man who
sent the post card, in effect, threatened me with exposure if I came out
of retirement."

"Then it is blackmail," Trent breathed.

"I am going to trust you," the earl said suddenly. "I am going to think
of you as the chivalrous gentleman. The man who wrote the post card is a
very big figure in the politics of what used to be called _mittel
Europa_. Our interests clashed. He was on one side and I on the other.
It happened that I was usually able to out manoeuvre him because my
training had been such that no man in public life knew the Balkans as I
did, and do still, the wheels within wheels, the inner hidden things
that make national sentiment so dangerous at times or so valuable as the
case may be. In time he came to think me the one man who could
comprehend his activities and check them. He set out to ruin me. He
believed his ends justified other methods than I used. I was shot at on
the _Ferencz Jozsef rakpart_ for example and a companion killed."

"Do you still seem a menace to him?" Trent asked.

"More than ever if I take the position offered me in the near East. You
see the rumour in the Times brings instant recognition. I knew he was in
London."

Trent looked at the speaker and wondered what it could be which kept him
from the work his country demanded of him. Assuredly it was not lack of
courage.

"He was in London when he obtained the hold over me that keeps me buried
here. Arthur was at the moment a secretary of Rudolph Castoon. One
night he opened a strong box of mine and took some bank notes to pay a
racing debt. It was a terrible blow to think he had fallen so low, but I
was more alarmed to find a tentative draft of a treaty which was never
made effective, a document in my own writing, had disappeared. At the
time it might have incensed a country since allied with us almost to the
point of a declaration of war. Arthur told me it was gibberish to him
and he had thrown it on the fire. A month later I was summoned to a
cabinet meeting. A friend told me I was to be asked to produce the
treaty draft. I called Arthur to see me. I told him my honor was
involved and that if he had not destroyed it or was holding it to sell
another power I must know. He gave me his solemn word of honor, uttered
in the most convincing manner, that he had thrown it into the open fire.

"When the prime minister asked for the draft I told him I had destroyed
it thinking its value gone and fearful of the danger of having it at my
house in Grosvenor Place. At the moment I was absolutely convinced that
my son had been honest with me. It was obvious I could not tell the
cabinet I had caught him stealing money or that he had torn up the
draft. I gave the cabinet my word of honor that it was destroyed and I
allowed them to assume that I did it. It was a lie and I do not justify
its use, but first and foremost my son's protection seemed necessary. It
was less than three months later that I received a visit from the man
who wrote that post card.

"It was in Paris where I was staying with my daughter. He said that at
last he had a weapon which would wound me. Arthur had sold him the
draft. He had it concealed where none could get it. Unless I retired
from public life and activities he would show it to the same cabinet
which had heard me swear I had destroyed it with my own hands. The
inference would be that I had sold it. It was known that I had lost
money through the failure of a London bank. No matter what the cabinet
thought my honor was smirched and I should rightly be considered unfit
for high office. There, Mr. Trent, is the real reason."

"Do you know where the draft of the treaty is hidden?"

"In his almost inaccessible castle in Croatia."

"You are certain?"

"Two men have died so that the knowledge might be mine."

"I should imagine he would keep it in the deposit box of a bank where he
could get at it quickly."

"Banks can be broken into easier far than his strong room. He lives,
despite the changes wrought by the war, in a style almost feudal. He
owns and controls twenty square miles of the country where his home is.
What chance, I ask you, has a stranger of getting near without incurring
suspicion. There are many men who can speak German or French like
natives but Hungarian is a different matter, a non-Aryan tongue."

"It should be done from the inside," Trent mused.

"One of them was," the earl told him, "the man who tried was skillful,
adroit and courageous. He had flirted with death a hundred times, just
as you have done Mr. Trent, but they set a trap for him there which a
fool would have passed by; a trap so skillfully baited that only a
clever man would have tried to use it to further his cause. Yet he
failed. You have no idea of the household at that fantastic castle in
the mountains. You have no idea of the imperious temper and power of the
man who owns it, the multitude of servitors who would kill did he but
suggest it, the motley company he entertains there."

This mention of many visitors interested Trent.

"He entertains a great deal then?"

"Only those he knows, men and women. The life there as reported to me
reads like a chronicle of medieval days."

"The other man who failed--what did he go as?"

"A steeple chase jockey. The count kept a great stud and raced all over
Continental Europe. He owned Daliborka the great horse which won the
_Grand Prix_."

"The horse that was stolen?"

"Exactly. Daliborka and three other thoroughbreds were missing from the
stables. The man who pretended to be a jockey and was instead a man of
lineage and wealth secreted the horses at intervals along the forest
road that runs from the castle to the coast. It was his idea when he had
obtained the draft to make his way by relays to the nearest harbour.
The poor fellows never had the opportunity to throw a leg across any of
them. You see, Mr. Trent, there is no chance at all."

"I will make one," the American said confidently, "I am going to enjoy
this."

"After what I have said you still persist?"

"Because of it," laughed Anthony Trent. He had forgotten everything but
the prospect of coming danger, the duel that was to be fought between
him and this fabulous magnate. It was characteristic of Trent that he
swept aside all other possible inmates of the lonely castle as beneath
his notice. His business was with the superior.

"How do you know he is still in London?" Trent demanded.

"I keep myself informed," the earl said. "A newspaper clipping concern
sends me every notice of him."

"I want them," the younger man observed, "I want everything that will
help me."

He read through the brief notices eagerly and wished English papers
discussed personalities with the detail American periodicals employed.
The only item that interested him deeply was a notice that Count Michael
Temesvar had visited the automobile show at the Crystal Palace and
seemed interested in the new twelve cylinder Lion car.

"Rather humorous in its way," the earl said smiling, "since I own a
great deal of stock in that company. That's why I have that
inordinately high powered car in the garage which you and Arthur seem
to like."

"Humorous!" Trent repeated, "I don't know that it isn't more humorous
than you know. Do you think he has any idea you are interested in the
company?"

"Few know it," the earl said, "and I don't see why he should when even
my friends are ignorant."

"How much of it do you own?" Trent asked eagerly.

"More probably than any one stockholder."

"And a letter from you to the manager would make me solid." He explained
the slang, "I mean if you wrote a letter to the manager asking that I be
given certain powers would he honor it?"

"Most certainly," the earl answered. "There can be no doubt about it."




CHAPTER EIGHT

_COUNT MICHAEL TEMESVAR_


Count Michael Temesvar, when he left behind him the great estate where he
ruled as absolute and tyrannical master and came to the fashionable,
pleasure-loving London, was a different man.

In London he paid due regard to the conventions and was entertained at
great houses and in return offered very splendid receptions to his
hosts. Meanwhile he kept a skilled finger on the hardening arteries of
new international affairs.

He knew very well that he was suspected of intriguing for monarchial
restoration and the confusion of the country where he was so pleasantly
entertained, by such men as the Earl of Rosecarrel. But for the main
part England still clung to her habit of disbelieving that a man who
could be so charming in society would commit the _betise_ of plotting
where he had played.

He was particularly interested in the Spring Automobile Show at the
Crystal Palace. He had heard a great deal of late of the Lion motor and
he wanted one. On his first visit to the show he told the manager that
the silver model there exhibited was the one that he would buy. He was
annoyed that the firm's representative would not allow it to be taken
away until the show finished.

On his second visit he was irritated to find that the manager raised
objections about selling it at all.

"You see, sir," said the manager, "a car like this demands careful
driving and constant attention. Our ordinary model would suit you
better."

"I want this because it is said to be the fastest car in the world,"
Count Michael returned. "To me the price is nothing."

"It isn't that at all, sir," the manager said. "In confidence it
wouldn't do us any good if your own mechanics got it in such a condition
it couldn't do its best work. Bad advertisement you understand."

"You think I should have a special chauffeur then? Good. Send me one.
Send three if necessary but send me a man who has the nerve to drive
along my mountain roads by day or night at any speed I choose."

"That's a tall order, sir," the manager returned.

"But I pay. I always pay better than others because I want better work."

Count Michael Temesvar beheld a blue-clad mechanic working under a car.
He struck him a sharp blow on the leg with his cane. A grimy-faced man
emerged rubbing the bruised limb.

"You," said the count peremptorily, "can you drive a car like this
Lion?"

The man grinned. The idea seemed to tickle him. He spoke with the
cockney accent of his kind.

"Me drive a Lion?" he said. "Ask Mr. King 'ere what I can do."

"I couldn't let him go," said Mr. King quickly. "He is my best
demonstrator and a wonder at tuning up an engine."

Count Michael ignored the protesting manager.

"What is your wage?"

"I get five pound a week."

"I give you ten. You are my man. You leave for my place in Croatia when
the show is over. My secretary will see you are looked after. Serve me
well and you will never regret it. I am generous, when I am pleased." He
turned to his companion. "See that all arrangements are made. If he has
a wife and children bring them if he desires it. If he will be happier
without them let them remain here. I must have him. He has intelligence
and industry. Look you, he has gone back to his work. He loves his
engine as a good groom does his horse."

The mechanic had indeed crawled again under the huge car. The count
could have added that he was cautious for he drew his legs well into
cover.

The count and the secretary went off. The secretary was to call at the
office next day and arrange things. The manager was deferential, but
when they had left the glass-roofed hall he permitted himself to laugh.
Then he crossed to the car and bent down.

"It's all right, Mr. Trent," he said, "they've gone now; you can come
out."

Anthony Trent looked up at him and grinned.

"You can always get a job as an actor," he said.

"Your accent is a bit of all right," the manager returned, gratified.

"If it's etiquette for a manager to have a drink with a mere oil-stained
mechanic as I am, lead on to the nearest place."

"Well," said the manager later, "what do you think of him?"

Anthony Trent rubbed his leg.

"He struck me," said Trent in a curious, musing way. There was something
in his tone which made the manager look at him quickly. Anthony Trent's
face was grim and set.

"I don't think he meant it that way," Mr. King replied. He had visions
of assault and battery.

"Some day I shall give him the opportunity to apologize," said the
American.

Mr. King had received personal instructions from the chairman of the
Lion Motor, Ltd., to obey Mr. Anthony Trent in every particular. Mr.
Trent was to be allowed to have the run of the shops and the most expert
mechanics in the firm were to put all they knew at his disposal.

Anthony Trent started by giving the manager the best dinner he had ever
eaten. Then he coached him in the _role_ of a manager anxious not to
lose his best demonstrator. King was delighted that Count Michael walked
into the trap set for him eagerly. He liked Trent but thought poorly of
his chances in a tussle with this big girthed foreigner.

"Must be fifty inches round the chest," he observed, sipping his drink
delicately, "and most of it muscle. One of the most powerful men I've
ever laid eyes on, Mr. Trent. Built like a wrestler. About five feet
ten I judge, a couple of inches less than you but five stone heavier."

"What was the big car on the aisle opposite us at the show?" Trent
asked, as King thought, irrelevantly.

"The 'Amazon,'" King answered scornfully. "All varnish and silver plate
and upholstery with a motor that isn't worth a tinker's dam."

"That's like the count," Trent smiled, "champagne, high living and
general dissipation have made a shell of him. He looks well enough to
the eye, like that Amazon car, but call on the motor and you'll see 'em
both hang out distress signals."

"Maybe," King conceded, "I'll put my bet on the Lion," he smiled in a
friendly fashion at the other, "and the Eagle."

They fell to talking technicalities and kept it up till the hour when
Michael, Count Temesvar went to dine at a house in Bruton street. He told
his host that as a compliment to this country, his second home, he had
just bought an English car and engaged an English chauffeur. The other
guests thought it so broad-minded of him. He further endeared himself to
his company by deploring the retirement of his old adversary, that
eminent diplomat, the Earl of Rosecarrel.

His old adversary's occupation at the moment would have surprised him.
The earl was devising an ingenious cipher code having, it would seem to
the uninitiated, the various parts of a Lion motor which might need
replacing by telegram to the London factory. Anthony Trent would take a
copy with him, carefully concealed, and any telegram sent by him to the
works would instantly be forwarded to the code's inventor.

"What makes you so cheerful?" his daughter asked as she bade him
goodnight.

"That amazing American of yours," he answered.

"'Of mine,'" she repeated. But even in the grip of her unhappiness she
was not sure that the dim future did not hold some alleviation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Few people were more careful of appearances than Anthony Trent. He was
always dressed with quiet distinction. In the early days of a profession
where it is not well to be too prominent, he chafed at this restraint.
Later he saw that it was the sign of sartorial eminence.

On assuming the name and characteristics of Alfred Anthony he also had
to dress the part and talk the part. From the men in the Lion shop he
had, with his mimic's cleverness, taken on their peculiar intonations
and slang until he certainly could deceive a foreigner. And since he was
thorough he forced himself to smoke the part.

He accompanied his great silver car across the channel to Ostend dressed
as the men in the shop dressed. And he moved with their brisk, perky
quickness and he alternated between shag in a bull-dog pipe and Woodbine
cigarettes. He was glad that Mr. Hentzi, the count's secretary observed
his altercation at the Belgian port with a customs official who made
him pay duty on an excess number of cigarettes.

"Ah," said Mr. Hentzi with condescension, "the cigarette of the Briteesh
Tommee!"

At Ostend, Trent superintended the despatch of his charge by fast
freight and then took the trans-continental express to Budapest. He was
to wait for the car and drive it to its new home. During the few days he
was forced to idle in the Hungarian capital he deplored the fact that
new status prevented him from going to the Bristol or the Grand Hotel
Royal. He stayed, instead, at an hotel of the second class and
encountered little friendliness. English or Americans, it seemed, were
still regarded as enemies.

He was saved from any violence by Hentzi's announcement that he must be
fitted for the Temesvar livery. It was no use to rebel. With incredible
swiftness the tailor turned it out. Trent looked at himself in the glass
with the utmost distaste. The color scheme was maroon and canary yellow.
He likened himself to those who stood before the fashionable stores on
Fifth avenue and opened limousine doors.

"With that livery," Hentzi said impressively, "you will be safe; you
will be respected."

Anthony Trent was too much overwhelmed to answer him. Certainly the
Anthony Trent who stared back at him from the mirror was a stranger. He
was wearing his hair longer than usual and a small moustache was already
sprouting. The hawklike look was not evident. He wore, instead, an air
of innocence that was Chaplinesque. Hentzi took this look of scrutiny to
be one of pride.

"You must have your photograph taken and send it to your best girl," he
laughed, "she will make all the other ones jealous."

"Yes," said the man who suddenly remembered he was Alfred Anthony of
Vauxhall Bridge Road, "she'll be fair crazy about it. Just like me."

But he did not wear it much. He preferred the chance of a row with the
populace to his unwished for splendor. The days of delay gave him
leisure to think over coming difficulties. He conceded he had been led
away by emotion and enthusiasm when he was betrayed into boasting of his
prowess. The two men who had failed had been good men no doubt and they
were dead.

Such a man as Temesvar must know that the brain who originated the
attempt at recovery of the draft was still scheming. The count must
constantly be on the watch. And if so, why had he engaged Alfred Anthony
with so little investigation? Like most high grade criminals, Anthony
Trent was apt to suspect simple actions when performed by men of the
Temesvar type and impute to them subtle motives. He wished he had been
able to take a longer look at the count instead of his momentary talk.

He reminded Trent very much of the celebrated painting of Francis the
First, that sensual monarch who was devoted to the chase, masquerades,
jewelry and the pursuit of the fair. But Francis, for all his
accomplishments, was weak and frivolous while Temesvar was ruthless and
a power, if Lord Rosecarrel was to be believed.

Before he left London Trent had secured what road maps he could of
Hungary and particularly the Adriatic coast of Dalmatia and Croatia. At
his hotel he spread them out on the table and spent hours poring over
them.

He ventured to ask Mr. Hentzi some particulars of the place, and why
Count Michael had gone to the expense of importing the chauffeur and the
car when he had many machines in his garage and so many men at his
command.

Hentzi told him the count needed a clear-eyed, temperate man who could
make great speed and make it safely.

"Most of our men," Hentzi declared, "drink _shlivovitza_, a brandy made
of plums, and there are people who visit the count whose lives must not
be imperilled by recklessness."

"What about the roads?" Trent asked thinking of the weight of the Lion
and its tremendous wheel-base.

"From Karlstadt to Fiume runs the Maria Louise road which is superb. It
is one over which you will pass many times. Then there is the Josephina
road from Zengg and many fine highways built not for the Croatian
peasants but for strategic purposes. You have seen in this war which is
passed what good roads mean, eh?"

"You 'it it on the 'ed, Guv'ner," Trent said cheerfully. "What do I go
down to Fiume for?"

"To meet passengers from the steamers or from the count's yacht. It is
one hundred and twenty miles from Fiume to Radna Castle. What could you
do that distance in? The road down the mountain to Karlstadt is good but
narrow."

Alfred Anthony spat meditatively.

"The old girl will do it in three hours," he said, "she'll shake 'em up
a bit inside but if there aren't no traffic cops or big towns I can do
it in three hours or bit more."

"No. No," Hentzi cried nervously, "that is suicide. We have been
satisfied to take six hours."

"With 'orses?" Alfred Anthony demanded, "pretty good time with 'orses,
but this is a Lion."

Hentzi sat on the front seat during the long drive and pointed out the
path. On the whole he was a good natured man but he did not permit the
count's chauffeur to forget that he was talking to the count's
secretary. Hentzi had formerly been a clerk in the estate office of the
Temesvar family and had been promoted to his present position because he
was faithful and a good linguist.

He was afraid of the count. Trent could detect a fear of him whenever
the name was mentioned. When Hentzi warned the new chauffeur to be
careful if his employer was in an angry mood the American demanded the
reason.

"If I do my duty," said the pseudo mechanic, "he can't hurt me."

"You talk as a child talks," Hentzi laughed. "He will do as he likes and
as the devils that are in him at the moment. He fears neither God, man,
nor devil. Pauline only may mock when he rages."

"Who is Pauline?" Trent asked, "the missus?"

"The Countess," Hentzi said with dignity, "is in perpetual retreat with
the Ursuline sisters near Vienna."

"Is Pauline the daughter?"

"His daughters are married." Hentzi laughed, "Castle Radna is not a
place where it is wise to ask questions. You think because his
excellency was cheerful when you last saw him he is like that always? I
tell you if Pauline has been unkind he may visit it on you. I prefer
that he does. I am tired of his humours and you are younger and
stronger."

"You don't mean he might hit me?" Trent cried.

Hentzi seemed to find Trent's anxious manner amusing.

"Most certainly he will," the secretary assured him, "but you need not
be alarmed. He will fling you gold when his temper has spent itself."

"I'm not going to let any man strike me," Trent said doggedly. "It would
raise the devil in me and I might be sorry for it."

"You would," Hentzi said thinking that the chauffeur meant he might lose
his job.

Anthony Trent, instead, was thinking that he might, in order to succeed
in his venture, have to submit to indignities that would be torture to
one of his temperament. It would not be wise to let the secretary know
this so he turned the subject to the woman who dare laugh when the count
was angry.

"Who is Pauline?" he asked.

"She was a skater from the Winter Palace in Berlin. She is beautiful or
she would not be at Castle Radna; she is clever or she could not control
Count Michael who has broken many women's hearts. She is bad or she would
not have driven the countess from her home. For myself I hate her and
the men and women with whom she fills the place."

"So they keep a lot of company up there?"

"Company!" Hentzi replied, "there is no such castle in Europe. I have
seen life in Buda and Vienna but up there! You may be sure when the
master drinks champagne the servants will drink _shlivovitza_. But do
not think they are all Pauline's friends. No. No. The great of the world
come there too and Pauline's friends are banished. You will drive great
personages up from Fiume and you will not know who they are or what
their errand."

"Is the count a politician?"

Hentzi laughed with good natured contempt at such a naive query. Not to
know Michael, Count Temesvar's reputation in the field of world politics
was to admit ignorance of all the troubled currents which worried kings
and presidents.

He was rudely brought back from his lofty attitude by the sudden
stopping of the car. He was almost thrown from his seat.

"Look!" Trent cried, pointing to a piece of close cropped turf, "a golf
green as I live."

"What of it?" Hentzi snapped, "what do you know of golf?"

"I used to be a caddie," Trent lied glibly. "Who plays there?"

"The count because his doctor tells him to. I because I hate it, and
Pauline that her figure may remain seductive. Thank God there are but
nine holes! It encourages our master to have one man who always plays
worse than he. Look, that is the castle."

Almost under the shadows of Mount Sljeme the rugged building lay. Around
it, nestling at its gates were many other lesser stone buildings which
Hentzi told him were stables, dwellings and out-houses. It was situated
in the _Zagorje_ or land beyond the hills and had, despite its fine
gardens and the green turf of the links a forbidding air.

When the Lion was run into its garage Hentzi introduced the new
chauffeur to the man with whom he was to live, a man who with his wife
had one of the cottages outside the castle wall. Peter Sissek, the man,
was unfriendly from the start. He resented the importation of a
chauffeur with the new car as a slight to his own skill. But as he spoke
only Croatian and Hungarian, and Trent understood neither tongue, his
grievances were not voluble.




CHAPTER NINE

_PAULINE_


Anthony Trent met Pauline in rather a curious way. He had been a week at
Castle Radna and had not been commanded to drive the count. Then Hentzi
had informed him Count Michael was sick of a bad cold. Sissek by virtue
of being senior in the Temesvar service tried to get the new man to help
him with his own cars but Trent absolutely declined.

He had assumed a certain post in order to carry out a design but his
duties lay with the Lion car and he left the Croatian grumbling and set
out for a tour of inspection. Naturally his steps led him to the little
golf course a mile distant. There were no long holes and the course was
hardly trapped at all. It was just the kind of place elderly men, who
played a weak game, would revel in.

By the first tee was a little rustic pavilion. Through the windows Trent
could see three or four golf bags. The temptation was too strong to
resist. He picked the locks with the blade of a pocket knife and found
himself in a comfortable room. The count's golf bag contained excellent
clubs and plenty of balls. He looked at the balls and knew the count's
game instantly. They were bitten into by the irons of a strong man.
Trent shuddered at the gashes and then, selecting a new ball and a
putter and driver went out on the nearby green. It was sheltered from
all observation and he putted for a few minutes.

In the distance he could see the first green. It looked to be a little
under three hundred yards distant; and it lay beneath, sweetly tempting
to a long driver.

Anthony Trent had for some years now lived a life in which he denied
himself nothing. He had reached out for such treasures as only a
millionaire may buy. The question of right or wrong in the matter of
using his employer's clubs bothered him little. He did not want to be
observed in case the privilege were denied him.

He teed up his ball, made a few preliminary swings and then struck the
white sphere with perfectly timed strength. He watched it rise, fall and
roll almost to the edge of the green. He would certainly make it in
three.

Then he turned round to look into the astonished face of a very
beautiful woman. There was something in the general effect, quickly
seen, which reminded him of Lady Daphne; but as he looked he saw this
girl was older. He doubted the genuineness of the golden hair and he saw
that art had aided nature in the facial make-up. But she was no more
than eight and twenty and her figure differed from Daphne's slim, almost
boyish slightness. She was dressed in a curious shade of green. It was a
tint he thought he had never seen before until he looked into her eyes
and saw it there reflected.

Pauline had known the count had engaged a chauffeur from London but she
assumed him to be of the usual type. She had no idea that the man who
had just made such a superb drive was he. Pauline had been used to much
social enjoyment of a sort and while Count Michael had been away she had
to behave circumspectly. She was dull and she was bored; and now, as
though an answer to prayer, Fate had sent her a handsome young man who
stood like a bronze statue as he followed the flight of the ball.

Since the count had given permission for the families of the
neighbouring landowners to use his course she imagined it to be one of
these or perhaps a guest at some local mansion.

Anthony Trent was never one who made a habit of the pursuit of the fair.
His profession had taught him caution. Almost always the feminine
element had brought the great criminals to peril. There had been one or
two harmless flirtations but his love for Daphne was the great affair of
his life. He groaned when he looked into Pauline's bold eyes and saw
admiration looking from them. Other women had looked at him like that.
Pauline was absolute at Castle Radna. Her enmity might be very harmful.
Her friendship might be ruinous.

He assumed the bearing of Alfred Anthony which he had abandoned
unconsciously. He even touched his cap to the lady as a servant who
habitually wears livery should do. She frowned as he did so.

"Who are you?" she said in German.

"I'm the new chauffeur, miss," he returned in English.

"What are you doing here, then?"

"Having a bit of a game," he said with an air of timidity. "I hope you
won't tell the guv'nor."

"The guv'nor?" she repeated.

"The count," he said, "the old toff with the beard."

Trent produced a Woodbine and lighted it luxuriously. He had all the
quick nervous gestures of the cockney.

"Where did you learn to play golf like that?" she asked, looking at the
white speck almost three hundred yards distant.

"Anyone can make a fluky drive," he said, "one drive doesn't make a
golfer, Miss. I used to be a caddie at the Royal Surrey Club."

"Then you can carry my clubs," she said. She looked at him with a frown.
"How is it the door is open?"

"Someone must have forgot to shut it," Trent said simply. "I just walked
in."

All his excuses to get back to his garage were ineffectual.

"You will understand later," she said imperiously, "that if I order a
servant to obey me he must do so. I wish you to teach me to play better
golf. I shall pay you."

"I'll be glad to have a little extra money to send the mis'sus," said
Trent cheerfully.

"That means you are married, eh?" she said.

"You've 'it it," he smiled.

He misjudged Pauline if he thought this would have any effect upon her.
She was a specialist in husbands, an expert in emotional reactions.

Pauline played a very fair game. She had not been properly taught. But
she was strong and lithe and although she had begun the game in order to
keep her figure she played it now because she liked it. When she had
performed professionally in London and big provincial cities she had
seen that efficiency in some sport or another was _de rigueur_ among
women of importance and she hankered after the social recognition that
unusual skill at sports often brought with it.

"Make another such drive," she commanded after she had driven only a
hundred yards. "Not like mine, but like your first."

Trent having committed himself to a term of caddiedom at a great club
where caddies have risen to the heights as professionals, he was not
compelled to play a bad game. Pauline had never seen such golf and she
worshipped bodily skill at games or sports more than any mental
attainments. His short approaches amazed her. The skill with which at a
hundred yards he could drop on a green and remain there with the back
spin on the ball seemed miraculous.

"I shall play every day," she decided, "and you shall tell me how to
become a great player."

"What about me and my motor?" he objected, "I came to drive a car and
not a golf ball."

"I shall arrange it," she said, "Peter Sissek can drive."

"Not my car," he cried, "I'm not going to have no blooming mucker like
him drive my Lion."

Her green eyes were narrowed when she looked at him.

"There are a hundred men who would give all they had for such an
opportunity," she said slowly.

"Let 'em," he said quickly, "I'm a chauffeur and mechanic."

At the last hole she made a poor topped drive and the ball landed in a
bad lie. It was an awkward stroke and he corrected her stance and even
showed her how to grip the club when suddenly he was struck a tremendous
blow on the back of the head. He was thrown off his balance but was up
like a cat, dazed a little but anxious to see what had hit him. He
thought it was a golf ball. It was Count Michael instead. He looked more
like Francis the First than ever. His eyes were blazing with anger. He
had stolen upon them unaware at a moment when Trent's hand was holding
the white hand of Pauline as he tried to explain the grip.

The count was too angry to understand the look that Trent threw at him
or to realize how nearly the pseudo-chauffeur lost control of himself.
But Trent pulled himself together, dissembled his wrath, remembered his
mission, and even presented a rueful but free from resentment
appearance.

"'Ere guv'nor," he cried, "steady on! I 'aven't done anythink."

"It is you I blame," the count said to Pauline. He spoke in German and
ignored Alfred Anthony. "Why is it unknown to me you bring my servant to
play with you?"

Certainly Pauline had no fear of the magnate.

"Because he has been a professional caddie and plays so well I can learn
the game. Since your game is contemptible with whom can I play here?"

"I beat Hentzi every time," stormed the Count.

"Hentzi," she laughed, "he is afraid of you. I am not. This man is
useful. I have told him he is to carry my clubs when I play. Do you
object to that?"

"By no means," the count said becoming more amiable. "I see no
objection; but as he has two arms he can carry mine also. He is a _beau
garcon_ Pauline and I do not permit his filthy fingers to touch the hand
I kiss." He turned to Trent. "How is it you are here and not at your
work?"

"I took a bit of a walk," Trent answered.

"And finding him near the pavilion I told him to carry my clubs,"
Pauline added in English. "What is strange in that?"

Sissek with a Fiat car was waiting by the pavilion. He had driven his
master down and took Pauline back as well. He did not understand why the
new man was carrying golf clubs. He brightened when the count spoke to
him in rapid Croatian.

"I am telling him," the count said, "that there is plenty of work for
you to do. He will find it if you cannot. And as Peter is very strong
and as short tempered as his lord I bid you be careful."

Trent's temper was not sufficiently under control to keep a sneer from
his face.

His grin was superbly insolent. He forgot his cockney accent and his
acquired vocabulary.

"I'm afraid," he said, "you are not as good a judge of men as you are of
women."

"What is this you say?" the count demanded frowning.

"I mean that if your fool-faced Peter there can make me do anything
against my will he shall have _my_ salary as well as his own. You came
behind me when I wasn't looking and hit me. I can't resent that--yet,
but warn him if he tries anything on me like that I'll--" He paused
conscious of having said too much and aware that Pauline was gazing at
him with vivid interest. "I'll make him sorry." Trent felt it was a weak
ending.

"He is funny, this new chauffeur from London is he not Pauline?"

But Pauline had a mischievous idea. She spoke to Peter Sissek, that
powerful and jealous servant, and he flashed a look of hatred at Trent.
He thoroughly believed that the new man had indeed made the insulting
remarks Pauline ascribed to him.

"Michael," said Pauline caressingly, "let us see what this bold man would
do if Peter threatened him. We will not let Peter hurt him but it will
be a lesson." Pauline knew men and she saw in Trent one who could not
easily be forced to do anything.

Poor Peter Sissek urged by his master to avenge himself upon this hated
alien rushed to his fate. In a way Trent was sorry. He had no real
grievance against the man. But Peter was immensely strong and spurred on
by a lively hatred. It was his idea to get his long arms about the
slenderer man and throw him to the ground and there beat his sneering
face in. He was stopped in his rush by a stinging left jab which caught
him square on an eye. While he stood still in amazement another blow
fell, this time on his nose.

The big man paused in angry amazement that one built so much more
slenderly than he could hit with this terrific force. Pauline leaned
forward her lips parted and the red flush of excitement victor over
art's rouge. She was a woman of violent loves and hates and had urged
many a love sick swain into unequal contest for amusement's sake.
Although Trent had attracted her she was not sure that she did not want
to see Sissek punish him. He had paid as little attention to her charms
as though he thought she was old and ugly.

As she looked at the foreigner she noted that his face had changed. He
looked keen, hawklike, dangerous. It would have been wiser for Anthony
Trent had he allowed Peter Sissek to triumph.

Then, suddenly, Peter made a rush. He put down his bullet head and
jumped at his man. Anthony Trent saw the opportunity for as pretty an
upper-cut as one might need. For Peter Sissek it was the whole starry
firmament in its splendor that showed itself, and then the night came
down.

"He has killed Peter!" the count roared.

"That is not death," Pauline said clapping her hands.

For an uneasy moment the count remembered that not many minutes earlier
he had buffetted this quiet, grim fighter, this same man who hit his
opponent at will and evaded his enemy's blows with practised ease. These
English speaking peoples with their odd notions of independence and
their skill with their brutal fists were dangerous. It might well be
that even he, Michael Temesvar had best remember his new chauffeur was
not docile like Peter Sissek and the others.

"This is murder!" the count said still angrily.

"He'll come to," Trent said carelessly. "Shall I drive you back?"

"No," said the count. He looked coldly at the man who had charge of the
Lion. But Trent knew very well that the anger in his face was not from
any sympathy with Peter Sissek. It was the thought that Pauline had
deceived him and that this young man was too skillful in too many ways
that annoyed the aristocrat.

"I will send a car back," Count Michael asserted, "meanwhile stay with
the man you have so cruelly assaulted."

Peter Sissek awoke to consciousness a few seconds later and looked with
difficulty on the world. His nose was cut, an eye was closed and his car
was gone. He made strange outcries and became so excited that Trent with
a black look bade him be silent. Sissek knew what was meant and started
at a run along the road.

Trent was not so sure he had done well that morning. He had angered the
count. Well, such anger would probably pass under ordinary conditions.
He had interested that magnificent animal Pauline, reigning favorite,
and autocrat, and Pauline was not discreet. Sooner or later the count
would see the way she looked at his chauffeur and then the game would be
up. He would be sent back to London his mission a failure. To get
Pauline's enmity would be fatal, too. She would not hesitate to ruin a
man she hated and the count would always believe her word against that
of Alfred Anthony. The American sat on the edge of the first tee and
cursed all irregularly run establishments. He looked up presently to see
the car returning. It was driven by Hentzi.

"What is this I hear?" Hentzi said severely.

"I don't give a damn what you have heard," Trent said crossly.

"What? You talk like this to me?"

"To you or anyone else," Trent retorted. "Look here, my little man, I
came here to look after a high powered car and risk my neck on mountain
passes. All right. I'm agreeable. But if you or anyone else thinks I'm a
golf caddie or a footman or a servile beast like Sissek you're all
mistaken. I'm a good mechanic and I can drive a car against almost
anyone but I'm not going to stand for oppression. The count hit me."
Anthony Trent patted himself on the chest as the enormity of the offence
grew larger, "he hit _me_!"

"You talk as though you were a gentleman," Hentzi said coldly. "My
friend you are of the people and you have read too much. You probably
think you are my equal. It is an honor to serve a Temesvar but if you
are anxious to go to your own country I have no doubt your company can
send another man."

"There's no need for that," Trent said less irascibly, "but what makes
Pauline think I'm going to carry her clubs around when I've got my own
work to do?"

"So that was it," Hentzi commented. "That was why Count Michael stormed
at me so. My good Alfred, you are young and life is sweet. I counsel you
to remember that always while you are at Radna. The Temesvars have
always been hot headed. You see that steep cliff yonder?"

Trent looked above him to where the side of a mountain was cut so
sharply that a drop of four hundred feet would be the lot of one
stepping from the edge.

"That has been the scene of many tragedies," Hentzi said, "many men have
stepped into space."

"Murdered?" Trent demanded.

"Accidents," Hentzi assured him, "unfortunate accidents. There was one
lamentable occurrence not many years ago and he was a fellow countryman
of yours by the way. A man of great personal distinction. But these are
not for you, these reminiscences of high life. What will interest you is
that the count says you can no longer live with the Sisseks. He does
not want two valuable servants to kill one another. Room will be made
for you at the Castle. That pleases you, eh?"

"Yes," Trent said, conscious that his look of triumph had puzzled
Hentzi. "I do not like Mrs. Sissek's cooking."

In reality he was delighted. Here he was to be taken into the Castle
without having to make an effort. It was the first step. It would be
strange if one as skilled and silent as he could not soon have every
detail of the house at his command. He knew the servants drank their
native spirits, brandies, made of cherries, apricots and plums. This
assured sound sleep and unlimited opportunities. The count was a great
drinker, too, and his guests feasted well.

As if in conspiracy against him the major domo, chief of the indoor
servants, put him in the least desirable of rooms, a rat-ridden chamber
away from the sleeping apartments of the rest of the help. In the heat
of summer it would be unbearable. There was fortunately a great bolt
which barred the door from intruders. The one long, deep window opened
inwards. An old square copper pipe used to drain the roof far above
passed his window. He took hold of it and found it immovable. It would
easily support his weight. The ground lay twenty feet below. It was the
windows that this copper pipe passed which most interested Trent. If
they had catches similar to his own he could open them with a hair pin.
He was eager for night to fall. And because he was now assured of action
he became much more docile. He allowed Hentzi to lecture him severely
on his brutal behaviour.

During the next week he was worked so hard that he had little
opportunity, apart from his long journeys to Fiume, to do aught else
than make a mental plan of the windows on his side of the castle. There
were four apertures similar to that which gave light and air to his
room. The heavy copper pipe passed by them all. To a gymnast with a
clear head they were all within reach. The climb was probably less
difficult than it would seem to an observer looking up from the ground.
There was risk, of course, but Anthony Trent was always ready to take
it.

In the daily life of the servants' hall he noticed that the place had an
enormous number of retainers, young and old, many more than seemed
necessary. They were with a few exceptions sons and daughters of the
Temesvar family, servants proud of their caste and the man they served.
The major domo spoke German and French. He was a pompous person who
ruled absolutely below stairs. He did not like the stranger but he had
been commanded not to allow any brawls and he saw to it the chauffeur
was let alone. There was much to eat and to drink. Count Michael owned
herds of swine which grazed in the miles of oak and beech forests
surrounding Castle Radna and the heady drinks that abounded were made
from his own fruits by his own people.

As a rule the lower servants went early to bed. Those who remained up
later were the major domo and such of his men as waited upon the
count's table. There came a dark cloudy night when Anthony Trent
wearing black sneakers and a dark suit free from white collar or cuffs
crawled out of his dungeon-like window and up the twelve feet of piping
that intervened between his own and the next window above. He found
himself looking down into what he supposed was the great entrance hall
of the castle. Just below him was a great seat raised above the hall
level on a platform of stone at the base of the fine sweep of stairway.

It was the official seat of the major domo. He could see the portly
servant in a sort of antique evening dress, white gloves on podgy hands
and a gilt chain of office about his thick neck. Below were three or
four footmen in the maroon and canary of the Temesvars. They were
yawning as though weary of inactivity. Plainly Trent could not emerge a
few feet above the major domo's head and in full view of the footmen.

A climb to the next embrasure revealed what at first seemed a checkmate
to observation. He found on investigation that some great article of
furniture was backed against the window. It was immovable. Another climb
and he was able to step through the easily opened window to a dark
corridor. Anthony Trent in a great silent house where danger and
disgrace would attend his discovery was in his element. He moved
silently, surely, and seemed possessed of a seventh sense. He had never
before professionally worked in such a vast rambling place as Castle
Radna. It was not easy even for one trained as he to keep the plan of
the place in mind. He found himself on a floor of bedrooms few of which
were occupied.

He bent over one slumberer whose breath was strong with plum brandy and
found he had discovered Hentzi's bedroom. He, did not need to be very
quiet here. Underneath him was the floor where the main bedrooms would
be and he had an idea the count might keep his valuables there. It was
necessary that he should be able to enter from the outside since the
stairway leading down was brilliantly lighted from the main hall and
stone stairway where the men servants seemed permanently stationed.

Trent had the ability to snatch sleep when he desired it. It was now
only eleven o'clock. He crawled under Hentzi's bed and slumbered until
one. There was no danger of discovery. He did not snore and the man in
the upper berth would not wake till morning. Anthony Trent had made a
profound study of the value of snores in the determination of the
tenacity with which the snorer clung to sleep.

When he shut Hentzi's door and stepped out into the corridor he saw that
the lights had been extinguished below and he was free now to make his
way to the floor beneath. He tried no doors but went at once to the
aperture covered by the article of furniture. It was a huge ebony
_armoire_ inlaid with panels of tortoise-shell and ornamented by
intricate designs of brass and ormolu. It was probably put in this spot
for the purposes of decoration and he picked the lock to prove himself
right. It was empty and there was space enough to stand upright in.

He felt it vandalism to break the back panel and feared once the loud
cracking of wood might arouse the house. But there were few in Castle
Radna who went without a nightcap. It took him almost two hours to hack
an aperture that would admit him easily.

Then he slid down the pipe and went to bed. It was not easy to sleep. He
had done very well so far. He was free of the house. With luck he could
come and go at will during the still night hours. But the first step was
easy. Next to find where the count kept Lord Rosecarrel's treaty and
then to take it. And finally to get away with his treasure. He was not
so much inclined to belittle the abilities of those other two who had
planned and failed as he had been when he talked to the earl. He had
taken due notice of Hentzi's reference to the death of an Englishman a
few years ago who had met his fate at the base of the steep cliff-side.
He felt almost certain that this was one of the men the earl had spoken
of.

Lord Rosecarrel had said they set a trap for him into which none but a
clever man would fall. He wished now he had asked particulars of it. So
far Anthony Trent had escaped snares and the nets of hunters because he
had outguessed his opponents. Sometimes he told himself that in the end
the deadly law of averages would make him its victim. The pitcher would
go once too often to the well. These reflections while they made him
more than ever cautious did not lessen his zeal. Plainly it would be
easier to work a remote castle in Croatia than a New York mansion
protected by burglar alarms, night watchmen and detectives. Yet he had
always succeeded so far in the face of these obstacles. But the address
and nerve which had carried him through many a tight pinch in New York
would not avail him here.

More than once, clad in evening dress, he had joined excited groups of
guests and tried to capture himself. He had calmly taken his hat and
cane from a footman and been bowed out of a house he had pillaged and
once Inspector McWalsh had carried to the door some priceless antiques
he had taken from the very collection the Inspector and his men were
guarding.

Reflection showed him that Count Michael Temesvar was far too shrewd to
trust the document that meant so much to him to insecure shelter.
Despite the fact that the castle seemed filled with idle, drinking,
overfed lackeys and he himself was unwatched, there must be some
precaution taken which would defeat him unless he trod warily.

It was his experience that rich men knew little of the vulnerability of
the safes to which they entrusted their valuables. Again and again he
had been able to open such with ludicrous ease. Count Michael probably
had an antique which would send a "peteman" into ecstacies of mirth.
Trent's job was to locate it.

Next day he was commanded to accompany Pauline and the count to the golf
links. Pauline hardly looked at him but Count Michael watched him
continually. He was relieved at the girl's attitude. She was beaten by
her opponent and angry at it. The count was not a sportsman. He putted
over the easy bunkers and more than once he lifted his ball to a better
lie. The victory made him good humoured. His heavy bearded face was
wreathed with smiles. Trent had the opportunity to observe him more
closely than ever before. It was a bad, crafty face but it was not
merely the face of a pleasure loving fool. If rumor spoke rightly he
was, more than any other man, the prime mover in activities aimed
against the English speaking peoples. From this same Castle of Radna had
issued many plots and subtle schemes all directed by this man who moved
a golf ball with his foot when he thought none was looking.

Hentzi had told him that every European and American newspaper of note
was to be found in the count's library. It was odd that such a man would
not make some great city his home. He mentioned this once to Hentzi who
made the astonishing answer that the count dreaded assassination by
political enemies. Fearing perhaps he had said too much the secretary
added that Count Michael had long ago abandoned politics for the life of
a great landowner and that such a fear was without foundation.

"It wouldn't be easy for a stranger to get in here, would it?" Trent
demanded carelessly.

The question seemed a most provoking one.

"Let such a one try," he returned smiling, "and he will see how we
welcome him here in Radna. You who are of another world would not
understand."

"I suppose not," Trent said and talked of other things. But he was not
reassured. He set himself to master the roads that led to safety. There
might be the need to know them. He had not yet been down to Fiume alone.
He wanted to find several places in the big port. There might be a time
when he would have to send an order to the Lion works for spare parts.
His code was elaborate and framed to meet all contingencies.

When he asked Hentzi why so few people stayed at the castle the
secretary's reply amazed him. Hentzi rather liked to impress this
amiable cockney. He was not without a sense of the melodramatic.

"My friend," he said with condescension, "there are more who take their
dinner in the big dining hall than you know. If it were your lot to be
an indoor servant you would know what I mean. Castle Radna is at one
time a prison, a sanctuary and the abode of hospitality."

"I never understand what you're driving at Mr. Hentzi," Trent told him.
"I don't get your meaning half the time."

"I do not intend that you shall," Hentzi remarked. "And I do not advise
you to seem curious. As it is you have displeased your master."

"Sissek started it," Trent reminded him.

"Sissek is a clod, a peasant, a man of no importance. I am not thinking
of Peter Sissek. I am thinking of Madame Pauline."

"That blond woman," Trent said with assumed carelessness. "What about
her?"

"She has praised your face and figure before one who, when he is
jealous, kills."

"Me?" cried Trent with an air of astonishment, "why I only told her she
was a rotten golfer."

He groaned in spirit. His stay at Castle Radna was going to be very
difficult. Hentzi watching him closely only saw a face which expressed
little interest. He was used now to sudden questioning by this volatile
cockney.

"What do you mean by the castle being a prison?"

"I should have said that it has held many prisoners in bygone years, and
sheltered many of the great. This is not like your English castles where
the lord has no power. Look you, not a year ago we stayed, the count and
I, at such a place. The owner struck a careless servant and was obliged
to pay a fine before a judge. Think of it! An English lord haled into
court by his own footman and fined. There is nothing like that here so
when you are struck again do not think of an English policeman and a
fine. I wish you to stay. When Sissek drives down the mountain I am
always alarmed. You go twice as fast and I have no fear. Count Michael
desires you to stay."

"I haven't said anything about going have I?" Trent retorted. He
supposed Hentzi was trying to warn him not to look covetously at the
handsome Pauline. The warning troubled him. He was of a physical type to
which blonds of the Pauline type were invariably attracted.

"Many have died for her," Hentzi went on, "the young officers who
flocked to see her skate. There were scandals. She was sent away from
Berlin. She was in America, in England and Petrograd. She is cruel. I am
afraid of her."

"I'm only a blooming chauffeur," Trent said carelessly, "and I wish I
had never carried clubs at the Royal Surrey."

"You are also good looking," Hentzi said, "and of a superior type.
Furthermore you are young and she has seen you play better than any man
she has met and she has seen you fight. I warn you."

"I've got a girl of my own in London," Trent said confidentially, "who
is a fair knock out. My girl has the real gold on her sweet little head
and the roses on her cheeks owe nothing to a bottle and her eyes are
sometimes violet and sometimes dark blue and she is slim and has those
long white hands one wants to kiss."

"Love has made you a poet," Hentzi said affably. It was well that he did
not notice that the cockney accent was for the moment abandoned. Hentzi
was not a very close observer. He had only two profound emotions. The
one a fear of his employer, the other admiration for himself. He
considered Trent to be much impressed by his superior knowledge and,
here a little and there a little, imparted much valuable information as
to the castle, its inhabitants and their method of life. He
considerately pointed out the count's library, the room into which no
strangers had ever been bidden.

Anthony Trent, therefore, at one-thirty A.M. the next morning was better
equipped for exploration than on his previous venture. Hentzi had told
him that so long as the count remained up a servant waited to attend on
him, old Ferencz by name. Trent remembered him at the servants' table as
a surly old man who was silent and reserved and unpopular even among his
fellows. He was liable to meet this man at any time. Trent was glad the
Temesvar men servants had not the same silent ways of the Rosecarrel
men. The men at Castle Radna walked heavily, lacking the thin shoes of
the earl's servants, and talked loudly. There was little of the perfect
discipline and service of the great English houses. It was due no doubt
to the fact that the men were almost feudal retainers and not highly
trained servants going from country estate to town house with the
seasons.

Almost the moment he stepped from his tall ebony _armoire_ Trent heard
steps coming toward him. He was at the moment passing a door. His pass
key opened it instantly and he stepped into darkness and shut the door
carefully. But he knew he was not alone. There was a heavy unrhythmic
snoring of a man far gone in sleep. As his eyes grew accustomed to the
darkness Trent saw the outlines of a big bed.

He passed the foot of it on hands and knees. The professional always
takes this precaution. A man waked from sleep by hearing a stranger at
the foot of his bed invariably aims at a man supposed to be standing up.
Although the sounds Trent detected were genuine sleep induced snores he
could not be sure that another watchful occupant of the bed was not
listening breathlessly and even now reaching for a weapon.

When he assured himself everything was quiet he looked about the room
with the light of his electric torch. The sleeping man was a stranger to
him. He was a red faced man of middle age and on a chair nearby was the
undress uniform of an officer of high rank, a light blue uniform with
silver facings. Accustomed as he was to khaki uniform alone Trent had no
idea to what European service the sleeper belonged. He remembered
Hentzi's remark that there were more people at the dinner table than one
might suppose. Trent was certain he had never seen this officer about
the castle grounds and had never driven him.

From the bedroom a door led evidently to a room _en suite_. This was
unlocked and Trent entered noiselessly. It was a room twice the size of
the adjoining apartment and furnished magnificently. So vast and
splendid was the chamber he thought it must be that of Count Michael, the
room where perchance the treaty lay concealed for which he had risked so
much. But it was not Count Michael who lay stertorously slumbering. It
was instead a prince of a great and lately reigning family who had
strangely disappeared from the world a few months earlier and had been,
so report ran, drowned in escaping from exile.

Anthony Trent was looking at one, worthless in character and devoid of
ability but nevertheless a man who might by reason of his name rally
about him an army which could start again the dreadful struggle whose
scars were yet fresh. A great ceremony had been made of the funeral and
a society of his former officers had been organized to perpetuate his
memory by embarrassing his opponents. Trent remembered, dimly, reading
an article in a London paper which spoke of the prince as being as
dangerous dead as when leading his dissolute life.

Anthony Trent looked at the weak, passion-lined face of the man who had
sought Count Michael's shelter and smiled. He had long ago been intrigued
by the idea of mixing himself in high politics. Here, possibly, was an
excellent beginning. But the prince could wait a little while. The time
was not yet ripe for his resurrection.

Looking across the room Trent saw two long French windows lighting it.
One was open. Instead of the balcony upon which the intruder assumed
these windows opened, they led into a large courtyard some eighty feet
long and forty feet wide. He did not understand how it was this great
open space should have its being in the middle of the castle. There
seemed no reason why it existed in a building of this sort. He was to
find later that its origin was accidental. What was now a paved and
open courtyard had been the magazine of the castle during the Turkish
occupation of Croatia. The castle itself had never given in to the
Ottoman conqueror. It had been shelled in the Reformation uprising in
1607 and a ball shot had exploded the ammunition. The chamber had never
been rebuilt but a century later was turned into a pleasant garden.

Trent stepped through the open window and down three steps into the
courtyard. It was plainly much used. There were lounges and chairs and
tables. Pausing at one of them he saw London and New York papers which
he had brought up from Fiume earlier in the week. There were French
novels and bon-bons and a feather fan. Evidently the prince was not
without his feminine companionship. In one of these big chairs Trent sat
down and looked about him. The room from which he had come faced due
east. To the north and south were plain solid walls without windows.
Only to the West at the other end of the space could he see that the
walls were pierced with French windows. As he looked these were suddenly
illuminated. He made no motion. He felt reasonably certain that he was
in such a position as to be unobserved.

But he grew less calm when the count's unmistakable figure passed up and
down before the two windows and finally opening one stepped out into the
courtyard. Behind him came Hentzi who should have been in bed long ago.
The two passed so close he could have touched them. They were speaking
rapidly and in what he supposed must be the Croatian tongue. Twice he
heard his name mentioned. The count always called him by the assumed
name of Alfred pronouncing it "Arlfrit."

It was not pleasant hearing. They might be, for all he knew, discussing
his already discovered absence from his room. It was true he had bolted
the door but someone from the outside might have detected the dark-clad
climber making his unlawful ascent. Already a search might be in
progress which would eventually claim him as the third failure. Count
Michael was often so excited about trivial things that the listener was
not able to guess whether his present mood was the outcome of some small
irritation or of something far more sinister. There recurred frequently
the name of Pauline and once or twice the count pointed to the windows
where slept the man whom his people had mourned as dead.

There was one moment of dreadful anticipation for the American. He
noticed that Hentzi was permitting himself to argue with his master.
Suddenly as the twain passed by Trent's refuge the count buffetted his
secretary on the head. It was Count Michael's favorite expression of
annoyance. Trent himself had suffered thus on the golf links. Hentzi
ducked in time to receive merely a glancing blow but he gripped the arm
of Trent's chair to steady himself. If he had taken his eyes off the
count's still upraised hand he could not have failed to see the
intruder.

For a full half hour Anthony Trent sat quiet. Then the count and Hentzi
left him alone. Now that immediate risk of detection seemed past Trent
assured himself that his evening had been well spent. Undoubtedly Count
Michael's rooms, the rooms he wanted to investigate--were those through
whose windows the two had come and gone. He memorized as well as he
could the position in the corridors the doors would occupy. The
discovery of this courtyard three floors in depth helped him to
understand what had baffled him in his explorations of the corridors
many of which came to abrupt meaningless ends. In other days they had
continued across the space that had once been arsenal, magazine and
strong room.

He made his way through the open window and past the sleeping men
without mishap. In the corner of a panel in the _armoire_ he bored two
small holes and blew away the dust that fell from them. He descended the
copper pipe prepared to find his room invaded by vengeful servants. But
it was as he had left it. It was not for his arrest that the count had
dragged Arlfrit into his conversation.




CHAPTER TEN

_THE GREATER GAME_


Trent was annoyed next morning to learn from Hentzi that he was to
accompany Pauline and the count to the links. The only redeeming thing
about the expedition was that he himself could get a few strokes in the
demonstration.

The count was in high good spirits and gracious to them all.

"Ah, Arlfrit," he cried, "this is my last game for two weeks. Yes, I
shall be too busy playing another and a greater game. And you, too, will
be busy. Tell me you know the roads to Fiume, Zengg and Agram well?"

"I could set them to music," Trent said forgetting that it was Alfred
Anthony who was answering his august employer. He waited until the count
drove. He saw that the autocrat broke every rule of the many which go to
make a perfect drive yet sent his ball every inch of two hundred yards.
Never had Count Michael done such a thing before.

"Let us see you beat that," he said dramatically.

Trent pressed. He wanted to outdrive the other by fifty yards and
ordinarily would have done so. He took too much earth and sent a
rocketting ball skyward which dropped full fifty yards behind the
other.

"That was very tactful of you," Pauline whispered. "His Excellency will
be in a good temper the whole day."

"Do you think I tried to do that?" he asked.

"Why not?" she asked, "I only know you are of a timid disposition. I
hate timid men."

"I can't help being timid," he said grinning genially, "it's my nature."

So gratified was the count by his unusual showing at the game that he
did not notice how close Pauline kept to Alfred Anthony. It was nervous
work for Anthony and he answered the girl abruptly trying to keep her
attention on the game.

"You are two men," she said presently when Hentzi and his employer were
a little ahead of them. For a moment Trent was thoroughly alarmed. What
did she know?

He had always known that it was a fallacy to assume because he had seen
none on his midnight wanderings that he had been unobserved. In a vast
house such as Castle Radna there were nooks and crannies where
frightened servants or timid guests might hide from him momentarily only
to denounce him later.

"What do you mean?" he asked teeing up her ball. He had not answered her
immediately.

"That you are two men. There may be three of you but I have seen two
already. There is the timid, servile creature accepting a coin or a blow
and eating with the servants as among his equals. I hate that man. The
other is a creature that every now and then looks out of your eyes like
a bird of prey. It is the man who drives the great car over the mountain
passes as though it were on a smooth boulevard. It is the man who beat
big Peter Sissek to the earth with tight lips and eyes that flashed.
That is a man I could love."

He could feel her arm brush against his own. There was a caressing
tenderness in her voice.

"Tell me, which is the real you?"

Anthony Trent looked straight ahead of him.

"If you slice your ball," he said, "you'll get into the rough. Golf,
like other things is largely a matter of self control."

"I could kill you," she said, her eyes blazing.

"Think of my wife and children," he answered with a grin.

"That is why," she retorted. "The count is right. One should have only
contempt for lackeys. I honor you too much as it is."

"Fine!" Trent observed, "suits me all right. How many quarterings of
nobility have you Mademoiselle Pauline?"

"I at least am an _artiste_," she flung back at him. "To be the most
graceful skater in the world and to have earned more in a week than you
in a year is something which puts me as far above you as Count Michael
Temesvar."

"Absolutely," Trent agreed, "take your mashie here and go back slowly
and don't look up for three seconds after hitting the ball."

Pauline was certainly a splendidly athletic woman. She held herself
magnificently and was at her best this morning but merely to be with her
bored the pseudo-chauffeur who had thoughts only for Daphne. Daphne
could have given her two strokes a hole and a beating, he reflected.
Gloom seized on him as he wondered if ever again he would see her. He
was in peril in Castle Radna even as an honest worker. Peter Sissek had
sworn to pay him for the beating. Half of Trent's energies were consumed
in going over his car to make sure the bolts and nuts were tight and had
not been loosened maliciously.

And in his position as an emissary of the Earl of Rosecarrel he was in
danger of the most vivid kind. He was a spy in a house which sheltered a
princeling who might yet force Europe into war. If it were discovered he
possessed this secret nothing could save him. It was a sinister, dour
pile of stone, this Castle Radna utterly unlike the Cornish castle with
its rose gardens, its fountains and the charm of country life. He could
well believe that in his present dwelling tragedies has been enacted of
which no knowledge had filtered through to the larger world. Oddly
enough it was during the day when he was peacefully employed as Alfred
Anthony that he was most obsessed by despondency. When the servants were
long abed and asleep and the silences of the early hours hung about the
great corridors and halls Anthony Trent came into his own. His
rubbershod feet were noiseless in the stone passages and his two pass
keys opened every locked door. He was possessed of all secrets it seemed
to him. Here he was free to wander like a ghost in banquet hall and
corridor. None walked so silently as he.

Pauline did not talk to him any more that morning but the count was
affable.

"Ah, Arlfrit," he cried, "tomorrow your work commences. Yes. You leave
for Fiume at daybreak and meet the Ungarisch-Kroatische boat. This time
you will go alone as you will have a passenger beside you as you return.
You will wait at the _Hotel de l'Europe_. The boat gets to her dock at
eleven and my guests will drive immediately to the motor. Make speed
back for you must go to Agram and back before dinner."

"That will be going some!" Trent commented.

"For what reason do you suppose I buy a Lion car and a chauffeur if not
to do what my other automobiles and chauffeurs cannot do? Why do you
imagine I introduce a Londoner into my servants hall, a brawling man who
assaults good Peter Sissek if not because he must travel fast and
safely?"

But the count was not angry. He was in that good humor which comes to
all men who having been in the habit of taking seven for a last hole
make it in four. Pauline had taken six and he had not permitted his
record to be clouded by allowing Trent (as Pauline suggested) to see
what he could do it in.

Anthony Trent started on his trip when it was as yet hardly light. He
was singularly carefree. The repulsive Sissek was not at his side and
he was free to wander about the seaport town, locate the cable offices
and make certain arrangements that might contribute to future safety.
That he was invariably able to make such good time was due mainly to the
absence of traffic along the Maria Louisa road. Not yet had the old
prosperity come back to Europe and there were more automobiles in
Allenhurst, New Jersey, than all Croatia.

He was bound to admit that the group of people he took from the _Hotel
de l'Europe_ lived up to all the traditions of mysterious fiction. There
were two men, middle aged and plainly used to power, and a very pretty
vivacious dark woman of five and thirty to whom her escorts paid
profound attention. The seat beside Trent was occupied by the lady's
maid. The black morocco dressing case she held inexorably upon her knees
was marked with a coronet. The woman was hard-faced, elderly and
uncommunicative. Trent noticed that her mistress was in that deep
mourning which European women affect.

Trent tried the maid in English but she made no answer at all. He
strained his ears to catch what language was being talked behind him but
the Lion was a car of tremendous wheel base and the passengers were
removed too far from him.

Once or twice in the old days, particularly in the case of the Sinn Fein
plot Anthony Trent had found his lack of knowledge of German a handicap.
This linguistic failing was now remedied. He had studied the tongue
carefully; and as languages were easily acquired by him had some fair
proficiency in it.

He was not certain whether it was a trap or a genuine desire to know
that made the woman after a whispered talk with the lady in black say to
him suddenly, "_Wenn wir nur nicht unwerfen; die Strassen sind nicht
besonders hier zu Lande._"

It was his first impulse to tell her that she would not be upset and
that they would soon get on to the better roads. Then he remembered
Alfred Anthony knew but little of any tongue but his own. He smiled at
her and shrugged his shoulders.

"Try it in English," he commanded smiling. "No speak Dutch."

She did not take the trouble to answer. It was, he decided, a trap to
find if he understood. Perhaps it was counted in his favor, this
ignorance of continental tongues.

At Agram he fetched six other people. He found that Sissek and another
chauffeur had been busy also. Hentzi, always desirous of impressing
those beneath him in rank, told Trent he was to be guest tonight at a
table which would hold some of the great ones of the country.

"Will Pauline be among those present?" Trent asked.

"Pauline!" Hentzi sneered, "there will be gracious, high-born ladies at
the table and among these our Pauline has no part. She knows that."

"What time do you dine?" Trent asked. It was now seven o'clock and
Hentzi was not in evening dress.

"At half past eight. There is one among us who likes the late dinners of
the English and his likings must be obeyed even by Count Michael."

"An Englishman?" Trent queried.

"My friend," Hentzi said impressively, "if he could take all the British
and all the Americans and sink them in mid-ocean he would be entirely
happy. I do not think you understand world politics, eh?"

"I follow the racing and footer news," Trent confessed. "I'm not so much
on politics. A set of grafters if you ask me."

Trent spent an hour on his car. He filled the tanks with gasoline and
saw that his spare tires were ready and made the little adjustments that
only sensitive fingers may perform. As a rule he drove the car straight
into the garage and backed out. Tonight he backed into it. There might
be the sudden need to utilize every moment.

Hentzi's news was good. A dinner of state commencing at half past eight
would be continued long after dark. Of necessity the count would be
there and undoubtedly the officer and his royal master would grace the
board. Entrance could easily be made through their room and over the
courtyard to the Count Michael's apartment. There would be time for a
thorough search.

The kitchens were full of bustling maids assisting the cooks. There was
so much confusion that Trent helped himself amply to what food he
desired and strolled out to the garage to eat it. More than half was
stowed away in his car. If he were able to get away that night, as he
hoped, it might come in handily for breakfast.

His plan was to place the treaty draft in an envelope already addressed
and stamped and mail it at Fiume. After that he would take the car into
Italy if possible and make for Venice whence he could come easily to
England.

The servants saw him take a candle and walk wearily to his room. They
remembered he had been up before dawn broke. Not one of them had any
suspicions that he was aught but what he represented himself to be.

At half past ten Anthony Trent, looking through the carved oaken
musicians gallery twenty feet above the floor of the banqueting hall,
beheld a notable company assembled. When he saw that the prince had at
his side the vivacious dark lady, he remembered that the weekly
pictorial papers had often presented her to their readers. She was the
daughter of a royal house lately at war with his country. To her
diplomatic skill and love of intrigue was due many checks to allied
plans. It was said she ruled her husband absolutely and loved him
little.

Trent recognized the two men he had brought with him. They were in
evening dress as was Count Michael and decorated with many orders, of St.
Stephen of Hungary among others. The military attache bristled with
medals and there were others in brilliant uniforms.

No other woman was present but the princess. Her jewels made Trent's
mouth water. No doubt the maid had carried them at his side for several
hours and would, for all he had to do with it, carry them back. Not for
a moment dare he think of taking them. It was obvious that the count
would make no outcry about the loss of the draft if that alone were
taken. He would piece things together and understand the riddle of
Alfred Anthony. But were the valuables of his guests taken it might be a
police matter.

So great was the buzz of conversation that Trent could catch no
memorable phrase. Here and there was a name he had heard of but that was
all. He noticed that Hentzi was not a guest despite his boasting. This
in itself was awkward for the secretary might be even now in the big
room to which the master criminal was bound. He was relieved presently
to observe Hentzi hovering on the outskirts of the room directing the
servants, a sort of super-major-domo.

It was exactly eleven when he crossed the dark courtyard and opened one
of the long French windows of Count Michael's room. It was in darkness. A
little water driven power plant supplied some of the chief rooms of
Castle Radna with electric light and he was able, after screening the
windows to flood the room with light. It was an apartment the
counterpart in size and decoration of the one occupied by the prince,
across the courtyard.

Almost the first thing Anthony Trent saw was the safe. And as he looked
on it he knew his hopes were in vain and the draft of the treaty could
remain there indefinitely for all his skill availed or all the knowledge
of the greatest "petemen" would aid, had he possessed it.

Count Michael Temesvar was not one of those who entrusted precious things
to insecure keeping. It was a Chubbwood burglar proof safe of a type
Trent had heard of but never before seen. The double-dialled cannon ball
safe of the American maker was the nearest approach to this gleaming
mocking thing which faced him. There was no chance that any forcing
screw or wedge could damage the bolts. The locks were so protected that
drilling was impossible and no nitro-glycerine could be used. The
oxy-acetylene blowpipe, high explosives or electric arc were useless
here. It was the last word of a safemaking firm which had been in the
business for more than a century. Trent did not doubt, as he gazed at
it, that there would be developed by the need of it craftsmen who could
open even this. But the time was not yet.

Count Michael Temesvar had been wise in buying the only safe in the world
whose patent had been extended by the Privy Council of Great Britain.
With his gloved hands Trent touched the thing lightly. The millionth
chance that it might not be locked was against him. He was wasting his
time. Quickly he made a methodical search of the room but found nothing
that interested him.

On his own bed he sat for an hour wondering what to do. He had been so
certain when speaking to Lord Rosecarrel that his professional skill
would accomplish what others had failed to do that this disappointment
was bitter indeed.

He had wondered why the count had taken so little caution in permitting
a foreigner of the same supposed nationality as Lord Rosecarrel to live
in Castle Radna. It was, plainly, because the count knew perfectly well
that the Chubbwood safe preserved his treasures inviolate.

Probably no living crook could break into it even though he had a year
in which to work. It was undrillable, unscathed by fire and could repose
at the bottom of the sea without its contents becoming damaged.

Trent's first thought of compelling the count to give up the combination
by force promised an unhappy ending. Surrounded by servants and friends
he would assuredly be interrupted before he could be forced to give up
his secret.

Hentzi would never be entrusted with the combination. None would know it
but Count Michael. For a moment he wondered if Pauline might be dragged
into it to exercise her Delilah arts on her protector.

"There must be some way out of it," Trent murmured a hundred times as he
sat on his bed's edge.

Dawn was breaking as he closed his eyes. His expression was calm and
untroubled. He had found his solution.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

_ANTHONY PLAYS HIS HAND_


Lord Rosecarrel opened his town house in Grosvenor Place at the
beginning of May for the London season. Lady Daphne observed that he had
shaken off the gloom and apathy which had engulfed him for the last few
years. He began to take a more vivid interest in the international
situations which grew out of the Peace Conference. He began to talk to
the girl again about the aims of nations with respect to Persia and
indirectly with the future of India.

The earl was waiting impatiently for her one night when she came back
from an opera party given in her honor by Rudolph Castoon.

"Daphne," he began abruptly, "Do you believe absolutely in the _bona
fides_ of Anthony Trent?"

The girl felt herself coloring.

"Absolutely," she said steadily, "Why?"

"I have had a long cable from him," he returned. "A cable so
extraordinary that I can hardly believe he sent it. Here it is. It is
only partly in cipher for the reason the cipher code I made was not
intended for a message such as this. What you would not understand I
have decoded."

The girl took the slip of paper eagerly.

      "At once," she read, "allow papers to announce you have decided to
      come from retirement and accept public office. If Temesvar wires
      for confirmation persist in your statement. If he threatens tell
      him he has not got treaty. Tell him if he has it to bring it to
      the prime minister. Follow these instructions implicitly otherwise
      I can never succeed."

"And will you?" Daphne demanded breathlessly.

"I don't know," the earl said slowly. "It seems rather a desperate thing
to do. You must have heard rumors that I have been offered the
enormously important position of Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
in the cabinet that will be formed when the present government goes out
of office. There will be two men there who are my enemies. There is, for
instance, Rudolph Castoon whose guest you have been tonight and Buchanan
who will be Home Secretary. Castoon knows I do not trust him wholly.
There is always a danger in making a man of his kind Chancellor of the
Exchequer. He has a brother in every great country and some of them have
been our bitter enemies in the past. Buchanan, of course, exercises
enormous influence through his newspapers and seems to feel a personal
grievance against me."

"It was because you never would invite him here or to the castle," she
answered, "although he was forever spelling for an invitation. Those
_nouveaux riches_ are very sensitive."

"If I accepted office," the earl went on slowly, "I should have these
two men against me. And if by any ill chance it should become known that
I did not destroy the draft of a treaty which was entrusted to me
Buchanan would see his opportunity and use his wretched papers to the
full. I should be forced out of public life. I have always been
intolerant of breaches of faith and that would be remembered against me
as a mark of hypocrisy."

"But Mr. Trent says Count Michael Temesvar hasn't got the treaty," she
cried, "and that means _he_ has it."

Her father shook his head.

"That's just what it doesn't mean," he returned. "Mr. Trent says I am to
tell Count Michael he has not the treaty. If Trent had it he would have
told me so. I am to do this risky thing in order that he may ultimately
succeed. You see, Daphne, my statement to the press that I have decided
to take office is part of a move in the game that another man is
playing."

"But he's playing it for you," she cried.

The earl smiled.

"Is he?" he returned, "I'll admit at all events that I am the one most
to be benefited if he succeeds."

"But he will succeed," she persisted. "Does he look like the kind of man
to be beaten?"

"Did Captain Hardcastle look the kind of man either?" Lord Rosecarrel
asked. "And you remember poor Piers Edgcomb the best fencer in Europe,
a man with nerves of steel? I firmly believe some of the count's men
killed him."

It cost the girl an effort to say what she did.

"But, dad," she reminded him, "they had no experience at, at that sort
of thing."

"And this one has? That, alone, comforts me. But the odds are so
tremendously against him."

"He went there knowing it."

"I am not sure that it would not be safer for you for Arthur and for me
if I did go back permanently to private life. If Mr. Trent should
fail--"

"You won't be implicated," she reminded him. "He has gone just as a
cockney chauffeur."

"But don't you see," the earl said patiently, "that I am here invited to
throw down the gauntlet to the man who has in his power what can
disgrace me? Hardcastle and Sir Piers failed but their failure did not
drag me into it as this scheme will do."

"Who will be foreign secretary if you refuse it?" Daphne asked.

"That impossible nonconformist person Muir who has never been farther
afield than Paris and has no knowledge of Eastern affairs at all. He
will undo everything I have striven for. He will play into Count
Michael's hands as a child might."

"Then isn't the chance worth taking?" Daphne asked, pointing to the
cable.

"I've taken it already," the earl said, "I wanted you to reassure me. I
felt a confidence utterly without logical foundation as to the ability
of your Anthony Trent."

"That's splendid," she cried.

"I am not so sure," her father returned, "Daphne, you know what I mean
when I say I hope Arthur's action in saving his life was not like those
other actions of the poor lad which have brought dire trouble to us all.
You must know that there can be no attachment between you and him."

"You'd better know it," she said quietly, "but there is what you call an
attachment. As to marriage--he says like you it is impossible so I
suppose it is. That's all over." She patted his gray hair
affectionately. "I'm not going to marry anyone. I shall have my hands
full in looking after the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs."

"My dear," he said, "you are taking this wonderfully well. I'm grateful.
I ought never to have let the thing drift along as I did. I blame
myself."

"I'm glad," she whispered, "You couldn't possibly understand it, but
even if I never see him again I shall always be thankful to have known
him."

The earl looked at her and sighed. His daughter was one of the loveliest
girls in England, highly accomplished, allied to some of the great
families of her own land and continental Europe and had been sought
after since her coming out ball. He had hoped to see her married to some
honorable man of her own class and instead she had fallen in love with
an adventurer whose past--according to his own admission--made a
marriage impossible.

Of late he had suffered much. The death of his wife, the loss of two
sons, the many troubles Arthur's past had brought, his enforced
retirement and now Daphne's hopeless attachment. The only thing that
offered him any relaxation was the possibility of getting into harness
again. And that would only be attainable if Anthony Trent, that
mysterious American he had grown to like, succeeded in a forlorn hope.
At least he must do his part. A little wearily he took up the telephone
and called a number in Downing Street where was the official residence
of the prime minister, the man primarily in charge of the destinies of a
great empire.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no telephone in Castle Radna. Every morning some one of Count
Michael's men went to Agram and brought back letters and telegrams. It
fell to Anthony Trent to fetch the mail that came twenty-four hours
after the conversation over the telephone with the prime minister. Among
the many pieces which the postmaster placed in the double locked mail
bag was a trans-continental telegram. It was the function of this big
letter pouch to guard its contents from the inquisitive by locks to
which only the postmaster and Hentzi had keys.

When once Trent had established this he came by night to the room where
the secretary snored and made impressions of the keys and so was able to
open the pouch without any forcing of the locks.

Instead of going on to Radna direct Trent turned his car into a byroad
of the oak forest and steamed open the wire. It was as he feared, in
code which he might be able to decipher after long study. But if the
language should be Croatian or Hungarian he would still be in the dark.

It chanced that the count was near the garage as he drove in. It was a
frequent habit of Count Michael's to walk over to the great stables where
formerly his thoroughbreds had been housed and now only a few riding
horses remained. He greeted "Arlfrit" with the manner that proved him to
be in a good temper. Hentzi was at his side and opened the mail pouch.
Instantly he passed the telegram to his master. Tinkering at some
pretended indisposition of his engines Trent watched the count's face as
he read.

The man fell into a sudden and roaring rage. He gesticulated, he swore
and he pummelled the cringing Hentzi. His talk was in Croatian but his
meaning was plain. Suddenly he turned on Trent.

"Do not put your car away," he ordered him, "You must return to Agram."

No mail was ever entrusted to the Temesvar servants. Even what was sent
to Agram was sealed so that the post master alone or his assistant could
unlock the bag.

In the same secluded dell of the forest Trent opened the bag a second
time and read the message addressed to the Earl of Rosecarrel. "I am
informed," it said, "that you have accepted office. Deny this rumor
instantly. Affirmation means danger to you. Michael Temesvar."

Trent chuckled. Things were beginning to move. Of late he had found his
occupation boring. It seemed he was always acting as a mail carrier
chosen over Sissek because he made so much better time. He had no chance
at golf. Pauline was away. Hentzi told him so one day when he had driven
three ladies up from Fiume and learned they were all high-born and that
for a time the company at the castle was distinguished.

"You would not understand what I meant," Hentzi said, loftily, "if I
told you many important things are going on. When our guests have gone
there may be those of Pauline's sort you may drive from Fiume. Then the
air is different. For myself I prefer such company as we have at
present."

"The lords and ladies?" Trent said remembering that he had seen Hentzi
acting as a sort of upper servant at such a dinner.

"Exactly," Hentzi agreed. "Pauline had been ill advised enough to
disobey the count. There is a guest who admired her."

"Why didn't the guv'nor biff him one same as he does you when he's mad?"
Trent demanded.

"There are some to whom even Count Michael may offer no violence," Hentzi
returned in a shocked voice. "But you would not understand."

On the whole Anthony Trent was glad that the prince had been the cause
of the temporary removal of Pauline. She was a menace to him. Also he
rejoiced to think that the arbitrary Michael Temesvar had his own uneasy
moments.

Because Anthony Trent was more concerned in the successful outcome of
his present design than any other of his adventurous career he denied
himself the pleasure of those nocturnal wanderings in the castle
corridors and rooms. So that he might make Daphne happy by delivering
her father from bondage he decided to take no risks which might lead to
his capture. Particularly he wanted to secrete himself among the trees
in green tubs and flowers of the courtyard. Although it was not to his
immediate advantage to learn of the plotting which was going on under
the roof which sheltered him a knowledge of it promised some interesting
developments in the future.

But now that the exchange of telegrams commenced between the two old
adversaries he found excitement enough in going to Agram and opening the
wires. Lord Rosecarrel, he found, had acted on his instructions. He
affirmed his intention to take office and when he received another more
threatening telegram from Count Michael declared that he knew the treaty
was not in his possession.

Count Michael's anger was reflected in the face of each scurrying servant
of the many with whom Trent came into contact. Hentzi visited it
vicariously upon one Alfred Anthony until that bellicose chauffeur
reminded him that the fate of Peter Sissek was his for the asking. Later
Hentzi grew confidential. He had the impression that this humble member
of a dominant people looked up to him for his world knowledge and in
order to impress Alfred Anthony the more made indiscreet revelations
which were duly stored in the careful retentive memory of Anthony
Trent.

It was from Hentzi that Trent learned of the sudden trip of their common
employer to London.

"It is most inconvenient for us both," said the secretary. "For the
count that he should have to leave his guests and for me that I should
have to entertain them in his absence."

"I thought you liked the company of lords and ladies," Alfred Anthony
said in simple tribute to his companion's parts.

"There is responsibility you could not comprehend," Hentzi returned, and
left Trent to think over his plans.

So far things had travelled evenly. The test was now to come. He was
reasonably certain that when Count Michael set out for London he would
have in his possession the draft of the treaty. With this he would
confront a prime minister and possibly the entire cabinet. He knew well
of Buchanan's dislike of Lord Rosecarrel. Had Anthony Trent been in the
count's place he would never have committed the error of taking so
important a document with him. Trent invariably mailed what he had taken
to himself and breathed freer when the responsibility was on another's
shoulders. This, of course, only when a long journey was to be made.
When he had stolen the Mount Aubyn ruby in San Francisco he had mailed
it to his camp in Maine and thus confounded detectives who had searched
his apartment.

That Count Michael had not adopted this plan he knew because for the past
week he alone had fetched and carried mail matter. The time he had
taken in opening the mails had to be made up by faster travelling and
the Lion engine never failed him. The peasants used to point out the
racing car with pride and give him road room gladly. On those tablets of
memory he inscribed many interesting details that occurred in letters
written by other than the count. He could read in French, German,
Italian and Spanish and the letters which most interested him were in
German.

Sometimes in the lonely night he wondered whether or not this knowledge
might not be sufficiently important to at least three governments to win
him a pardon should he ever be found out for crimes of other days. And
if there should come a time when he were free from the ever haunting
fear of arrest might there not be the fulfilment of his dearest wishes?
He was sure Daphne would drop her title if he thought it best.

Then he put the thought from him resolutely. That was in the future and
he was immediately concerned with the success of this thing he had sworn
to accomplish.

Hentzi told him that Count Michael would travel by night to Fiume there
to board a Venice bound boat and catch the continental express for
Paris. As none but he drove the Lion and the count preferred it and its
driver the assumption was that Alfred Anthony would take him. It was on
this hypothesis that the success of Trent's scheme depended. He would
probably be alone. At most some servant or valet would be chosen to
travel with his master and he would of course sit next to the
chauffeur.

Trent had long ago picked out a suitable spot where such a luckless
person could be dumped. There was a steep grassy bank some twenty miles
along the road where a man hit sufficiently deftly would roll out of
reach with small possibility of injury. A little stream ran at the
bottom which would revive him if stunned or drown him as the fates saw
best. Stored in the Lion car was a change of apparel, some food and
other necessaries.

It was Hentzi who broke the bad news. The secretary came upon the eager
mechanic tuning up his engine lovingly. So engrossed was he that he
neither saw Hentzi nor noticed that Peter Sissek was polishing the brass
work on his Panhard.

"Getting things shipshape and Bristol fashion," Trent said, when he saw
Hentzi.

"It is Peter who takes the count," the secretary said idly, "You are to
go to Budapesth tomorrow. You see what it is to be considered so
skillful that Count Michael offers you to his guests and goes more slowly
himself."

Then Trent noticed the grinning and triumphant Sissek. It was a black
moment for him.

"Yes, Peter takes the count," Hentzi repeated.

"I think he'll have to," Trent said slowly, "for the second time."

This alteration in the schedule which for the moment promised utter
disruption to his plans might have been brought about by reasons other
than those suggested by Hentzi. It was curious that at just this
critical moment Sissek should be entrusted with his master's safety and
Trent given a mission which Peter Sissek with his wider knowledge of the
country could better have filled.

But it was time wasting to ponder on this now. In three hours Trent
would have started with his Lion. Sissek a slower driver and using an
older and less speedy car must get away earlier. Almost frightened out
of his accustomed calm Trent learned that the count was leaving in a
little over an hour, just as the darkness would set in. What plans he
could make must be made instantly. Failure was now almost at his side.

Failure! Anthony Trent groaned at thought of it; Lord Rosecarrel would
be publicly humiliated. Daphne would blame him for it. With what
assurance and headstrong confidence he had plunged into an adventure
which had brought death to those other men! He could never face her if
he failed and failure was in sight.

For a moment he thought of forcing a quarrel on Peter Sissek. Before
Hentzi or others could intervene he could with his boxer's skill most
certainly damage one eye if not two of a man who, to drive down dark and
dangerous roads, must possess unclouded vision.

But he hesitated. If Count Michael had chosen Sissek because Alfred
Anthony was under suspicion an assault on the Croatian at the present
moment might tend to confirm these doubts and he might find himself
overpowered and under guards he could not overwhelm. To put the car out
of commission was hardly possible with Sissek guarding it and another
man cleaning it. And these two, it seemed to Trent, were watching
suspiciously.

By some trick of fate it was Sissek himself who contributed to Trent's
success. Peter was arrogant now and motioned to Trent to aid him in
lifting some baggage to the top of the Panhard limousine. Like most of
the continental cars it had a deep luggage rail around the top on which
trunks or lesser baggage could be carried. There was a cabin trunk, a
bundle of rugs and a dressing bag. Peter Sissek was astonished when
Trent cheerfully obeyed him and even helped to strap the cabin trunk
securely.

Hentzi was amazed at the sudden change that had taken place in the
English chauffeur's attitude. He was now lively who had been gloomy, and
loquacious when he had been taciturn.

"Why do you laugh," he asked.

"At the idea of Peter taking the count," said Trent. "Someday you'll
know what that means."

"I know now," Hentzi insisted, "I speak perfectly and my English
vocabulary is wider than could be that of a man of your position."

       *       *       *       *       *

As Peter Sissek unaccompanied by valet or assistant drove down the hill,
after leaving the pavilion at the first tee on his left, he was
horrified to find a tree across his path. He dismounted, moved it aside
with difficulty and proceeded on his way.

But this time he carried two passengers.

The motor had come to an abrupt stop under a big oak tree whose
spreading arms reached across the mountain road.

Lying along one of those rigid oak limbs Anthony Trent, after nicely
adjusting the fallen tree so that Peter Sissek's eyes would see it at
the proper moment, had waited anxiously for the approach of the Panhard.

He was not sure that the powerful headlights would not pierce his leafy
shelter and discover him to the watchful driver. He could imagine
vividly the chauffeur warning his employer. And as Count Michael always
went armed and might even now be suspicious of his cockney servant he
would very likely have no hesitation in picking him off the boughs as
Anthony Trent, years before in his New Hampshire hills, had shot
squirrels. If by any chance he could get to the ground, only twelve feet
beneath, before he was aimed at he would have to trust to the moment's
inspiration for his next move. He knew almost certainly that Count
Michael carried the document he wanted in a flat leather case which
fitted into his breast pocket.

If by any chance the men did not see him and the car passed him on its
seaward way his errand would be unaccomplished, his boasts vain and the
humiliation of his friends certain. He had determined if this happened
to send a telegram to the earl admitting defeat, and warning of the
count's visit.

The Panhard came to a grinding stop a foot from the barrier. Sissek
removed it as quickly as he could but it was heavy enough to have taxed
Anthony Trent's superior strength! and the count grew so impatient at
the time taken that he sprang down to the road and urged his man to
greater activities.

The two were jabbering in Croatian when Anthony Trent lowered himself to
the top of the limousine and nestled down in the shadow of the baggage.

Trent had often been incensed in reading newspaper accounts of his
exploits to find that their success was so often ascribed to mere luck.
He supposed it would be so this time if it were known. People would say
that owing to two boulders in the side of the road Sissek pulled up so
that Trent could drop directly down on to the car. In most cases the
greatest luck comes to the best player and Anthony Trent had placed the
rocks on the road with the same care that he would play a stroke in golf
or cast along the edge of lily pads where the big trout lay in graceful
ease. There was only one place where Sissek could halt his machine.

It was while the car travelled along a poor and rough section of the
route before reaching the Marie Louise road that Trent unstrapped a
bundle and selected a dark travelling-rug to cover him from observant
eyes in the infrequent towns through which they must pass.

Half a hundred schemes raced through his quick, fertile brain only to be
rejected. He wondered, for instance, if it were possible to cut through
the top of the car and get at the count who was certain to be sleeping a
goodly portion of the journey. He decided that to lean over the rails
and try to peer through the oval glass window in the rear would also be
unwise. At most he would only catch a glimpse of the count and might
just as easily be seen himself. Then he wondered if it might not be
possible to drop down on Peter Sissek's shoulders and strangle him into
quietness.

But Peter Sissek was taking his car along at a steady rate of
twenty-five miles the hour and with his hands off the steering wheel--a
certain contingency if Trent's strong fingers closed around his
throat--a bad accident was inevitable. A precipice on one side and a
wall of rock on the other, he would be between the deep sea and the
devil.

He saw that Sissek must be eliminated at all costs. A match for either
of them singly Trent would certainly be overpowered in a tussle with
both; although they lacked the cat-like quickness of the American they
were both of uncommon strength. The immediate problem was to get rid of
Sissek and leave his master none the wiser.

There was a part of the road through which they must presently pass
which promised aid to the schemer. It was a gentle rise through a very
dense section of beech forest and Peter would go slowly fearing that the
uneven surface would jolt his lord into unwelcome anger.

Peter Sissek, straining his eyes to see that his way was clear, was
startled when one of the pieces of baggage on the top of the car was
jolted off. It fell on the Panhard's bonnet and then bounded into the
side of the road. He had run past it fifty yards before he brought his
machine to a stop.

When he backed up to the fallen bag Count Michael was aroused from
slumber and ascribed the accident to Peter's carelessness. In the
chauffeur's apology Anthony Trent heard his assumed name brought in.
Plainly Peter was making him the culprit. He had pitched the bundle from
the roof with some skill. It bounded far into the shadow. Finally Peter
Sissek stumbled over it. And as he stooped to retrieve it, Alfred
Anthony swung at him. For the second time Peter had taken the count. To
hit a defenceless, unsuspecting man was not a thing to give Trent any
pleasure, but it was not a moment in which to hesitate. With Peter's
livery cap and duster on, Trent took the bundle on his shoulder and
carried it at such an angle that in case of scrutiny his face would be
shielded from gaze.

A quick backward glance a few minutes later on showed the new driver
that the count had resumed his broken slumbers. So well indeed did the
lord of Castle Radna sleep that he did not know the Panhard had left the
main road or that any danger threatened him until he was suddenly hauled
from his springy seat to look into the clear, hard eyes of Alfred
Anthony.

Then he realized that his revolver was in the cockney's hand and the
precious wallet gone from his pocket. Count Michael was no coward and he
thought quickly with that intriguing, plotting brain of his. A great
diamond still sparkled upon his finger and the money in another pocket
was untouched.

"I should have been wiser," he commented. "I thought my lord Rosecarrel
had become suddenly mad. Now I see that he was saner than I. First
Captain the Honourable Oswald Hardcastle, then Sir Piers Edgcomb and now
you. May I ask your name and rank? You have been my servant and
succeeded so far where they failed?"

Anthony Trent was not expecting this attitude. He had been so used to
seeing the count fly into stupendous rages that this calm, collected
manner was disturbing. It might be the man's natural attitude in moments
of real peril or it might merely mean he knew he was ultimately to be
the victor.

It was a curious scene. The Panhard had come to rest in a clearing of
the woods and a brilliant moon gave the place almost the clarity of day.

Count Michael sat down on a log and lighted a cigarette. Almost he was
usurping Trent's _role_ under such circumstances.

"This interests me," said Count Michael, "let us discuss it."

"I've no time," Trent said smiling. "I am due at Fiume or Trieste or
Zara as the case may be at a certain hour and as I haven't the Lion here
I must push on."

"Have you thought that I shall certainly pursue you and assuredly
capture you?"

"You may pursue later when you are found but by that time I shall be
gone."

"You can never escape me," the count said. "I have a long arm and I do
not forget. And my vengeance is a bad thing for those against whom it is
directed."

"It's not altogether healthy to have me for an enemy," Trent reminded
him. "I have my own likes and dislikes."

The count sneered.

"You," he cried, "Who are you? What have you done that men should fear
you? For a moment you have a little luck, the little luck that will
bring you blindly to greater danger."

"I'm strictly _incognito_," Trent answered. "Once I was unwise enough to
answer such a challenge, but you may believe me that I, too, have a
name. Now count, it won't help you a bit to put up a fight. It will save
you trouble if you'll back up against that tree and let me tie you up."

"You would put this outrage on me?" the other cried, his calm leaving
him, the veins standing out on an empurpled forehead like raised livid
ridges.

"Get up!" Anthony Trent snapped.

"It is because you have a pistol," the count said. "Put that down if you
are a man and then see what you can make me do."

"You may believe it or not," Trent retorted, "but it hurts me to have to
decline the offer. If I dared take time I would return several little
tendernesses of yours. As it is I can't, having a weapon, strike a man
who hasn't one. You are luckier than you know. Back up there and do it
damned quick."

Trent was certain that Count Temesvar could never unfasten his bonds.
And as he was gagged he could not cry for help. Some swineherd or
peasant would discover him later. Meanwhile the discipline would be
good.

"Good-by," said Trent genially, "Give my love to your guest the prince
and all his high born companions."

If Count Michael had looked angry before his face now was doubly hideous
with rage. His hold over Lord Rosecarrel was gone and he could not doubt
but this stranger who had posed as a chauffeur had learned somehow of
the presence of the prince. If it were known in the chancelleries of
Europe all his carefully matured plans would go for naught. Unless
Alfred Anthony were captured Michael, Count Temesvar could never again
make his pleasant little trips to the great houses of England, France
and Italy. There he was known as one who had abandoned all political
ambitions to become merely the country magnate interested in cattle and
crops. Never again could he gather useful information over friendly
dinner tables or hobnob with prime ministers over golf or auction bridge
if it were known he was giving sanctuary to one who threatened the world
peace.

When Anthony Trent had satisfied himself that the document he had taken
was the one Arthur stole from his father, he knew, in order to be
absolutely safe, it should be destroyed. Its destruction would give the
earl immunity. But Trent hesitated. Once already Lord Rosecarrel had
believed it was demolished and had suffered terribly for his trust.
Inevitably there would be a seed of suspicion if a comparative stranger,
confessedly one who had profited by unlawful operations, should ask him
to take as true that the treaty had again been destroyed.

A man in Trent's position was doubly sensitive in a matter of this sort.
He had no long and honorable record to back his assertions; and although
in the present instance he was actuated by no motives of
self-aggrandizement he was not sure others--Daphne alone excepted--would
believe him. He thanked God that with her it was different.

So he put the paper in an envelope already stamped and addressed and
placed it in his pocket. Then he started for a port of safety.

It seemed impossible that he should miss the way in the bright moonlight
but he realized a few minutes later that he was only circling around the
clearing where the count was tied to a tree. His headlights showed him
innumerable roads like those by which he had come but there was no
distinctive sign to guide him to the road to the coast. A group of
peasants going incredibly early to their work could not understand him.
He repeated the word Fiume but even that did not help. Their little life
was bounded by the confines of a few square miles; and the troop trains
which had taken them to the battle lines of a year or so back had only
confused them as to topography.

Among the big oaks and beeches Trent could not easily find one tall
enough to bear his weight on branches that would let him see over the
tops of the others. When dawn came he was in no better plight.

The position in which Anthony Trent found himself was by far the most
serious of his career. Hitherto he had faced imprisonment at most. Now
capture meant without doubt--death. He had, without thinking of the
folly of his utterance, told Count Michael that he knew of the presence
of the guests unsuspected by the great powers.

Count Michael had probably staged the supposed escape of the prince and
supplied a convenient corpse for his interment. Unrest was in every
portion of what had once been the dual monarchy. Beggars on horseback
were riding to a fall and the Balkan volcano was near eruption. And
Anthony Trent, alone of those opposed to Count Michael's party, knew
where was hidden the man whom the count was coaching for his big _role_.
His escape would mean disaster. By this time no doubt passing countrymen
had recognized their overlord and released him. But for lack of a
compass Anthony Trent should even now have been at a port where he could
escape to a friendly vessel.

He remembered what Lord Rosecarrel had told him of Count Michael's
character and autocratic power. Although theoretically shorn of his
former absolutism it was unlikely that peasants who worked on his lands
and still felt their dependence upon him should question Count Michael's
actions. World news which spreads rapidly among the herded workers in
factories crept slowly among these land tillers. They had enough to eat
and drink and were grateful for that after their years of fighting.

Now that capture was imminent Trent knew that the document must be
destroyed. But even in this he delayed hoping his usual luck might cling
to him and make the sacrifice unnecessary.

He abandoned the automobile. Its wheels were embedded in black viscid
mud and to extricate them the engine would have to run on low speed and
announce the car's position to such as might already be seeking him. If
he could pass the day uncaptured he might at night be able to free the
car of its imprisoning mud and make his escape. He had woodcraft enough
to be able to mark down the spot where the Panhard was hidden.

It was high noon when Anthony Trent came in sight of a farm. A big dog
came toward him with sharp, staccato inquiring barks. He had a way of
making dogs his friends and soon the animal was wagging a welcoming
tail. Trent satisfied his hunger and thirst with a meal of early plums
and lighted his last Woodbine. The Croatian farmers of the district in
which he found himself were horsebreeders to a man. It was an industry
which the government had always approved and encouraged. Without a doubt
in the distant barns there was some favorite animal which might bear
Trent to safety if his car had been discovered. The watch dog, now
satisfied that the stranger was one to be adored, would prove no
obstacle.

Trent nestled back in some drying hay, well out of sight, he supposed,
of observers and dropped into a profound sleep. It was the unusual
spectacle of the watch dog sitting by the mound of hay that attracted
the notice of the farmer. He supposed that the animal--part hound and
part draft dog--had run some animal to earth. When the farmer saw that
the stranger slept there for whom he had, under Count Michael's
direction, scoured the forest since dawn, he wisely brought assistance.
Thus it was that Anthony Trent, rudely brought back to an unsympathetic
earth, found himself seized, bruised and bound before he had time to
recover his senses or put up a fight.

Peter Sissek it was who carried him to the recovered Panhard and threw
him violently to the floor. And for every blow that Trent had struck
Sissek in fair fight the Croatian returned with interest now that his
conqueror was bound and hopeless. One of Peter's assistants sat on the
seat brandishing the revolver which had been the count's. He talked
incessantly, threatening no doubt and insulting the captive, and
punctuating his invective with kicks that bruised the American's ribs
sorely.

He was carried past a mob of jeering servants when the castle was
reached and put in a room which had been used as a dungeon for five
hundred years. As he looked about the stone walled cell with its narrow
windows through which his body could scarcely pass even though the heavy
bars were sawn through, he knew his professional skill would avail him
nothing.

There was one safeguard for gaolers which he sighed to see. Inside the
door was a cage of iron where a keeper might stand and be protected from
the sudden onslaught of a waiting prisoner. Thus the most usual form of
escape was taken from him.

Hentzi was his first visitor, poor rotund, posing Hentzi who had liked
Alfred Anthony largely because he supposed it was a semi-educated London
cockney who listened to his worldly wisdom. When he had learned from his
master that this pretended chauffeur was the third of the Rosecarrel
adherents who had made desperate attempts he supposed him to be of high
degree. With amusement Anthony Trent saw the change in his manner.
Although disgraced and in prison Hentzi paid the respect that he
invariably accorded to birth. He told himself that it was because he
noted the instincts of blue blood that he had found pleasure in talking
with Alfred Anthony. Trent's careless manner which had sometimes seemed
overbold in a chauffeur was now explained.

"I grieve very much to see the marks of violence inflicted upon you by a
clod like Peter Sissek," he began.

"I knocked the same clod out when he wasn't looking," Trent returned,
"so he had a kick coming. You didn't come to be merely polite Hentzi,
what is it? Torture? Boiling oil?"

"It will not be boiling oil," Hentzi answered seriously.

Anthony Trent looked at him searchingly. Of course Hentzi had his
purpose in coming here; and that he did not deny the possibility of a
Croatian third degree convinced the American that the danger he
anticipated was real and near. So far as Count Michael's power went in
his own castle of Radna his prisoner might be in medieval times. Trent
was a danger to be nullified and a single life was hardly worthy of
consideration in the game the count was playing.

To lose his life was bitter enough; but to lose it after failing and so
be denied another chance to make good was agonizing. Hentzi gathered
nothing from his scrutiny of the other man's battered face. He saw that
the forced and rather vacuous grin which Anthony Trent had worn when he
lived another part was gone. Only the powerful, brooding, hawklike look
which he had occasionally seen for a flash now remained. He did not
doubt but that this was the true character of the man a great English
noble had chosen for a dangerous mission.

"You will remain here until the count returns," Hentzi announced.

"How long?" Trent snapped.

"A week certainly; more likely two."

"What will happen then?"

Hentzi sighed. His master's violence often frightened him. He came of a
peaceloving family.

"That I cannot say."

"I can't go without a daily shave," Trent said yawning. "And I need
cigarettes and the London papers. You can get them for me?"

"The razor I dare not," Hentzi said. "The rest you shall have."

"Afraid I shall commit suicide? You ought to be glad if I did. It would
save Count Michael a lot of trouble. That cage there prevents my slitting
the throat of a keeper. A child with a gun could poke the barrel through
the bars and put me out of business. Come Hentzi, be human. I will not
live with whiskers. I swear to do myself no damage or anyone else
either."

"You give me the word of a man of noble birth?" Hentzi inquired
anxiously. "You cannot conceal your origin from me. You may not wish it
known but I know."

Anthony Trent kept a straight face. Hentzi had always amused him.

"Hentzi," he said seriously, "I must preserve my _incognito_ at all
costs. That you appreciate, but if it will make you more comfortable I
will tell you that in my own country there is not a man who has the
right to call himself my superior or go in to dinner before me."

Hentzi's bow was most profound. He had known it all along. This was
assuredly the venturesome holder of an ancient title, a man of high
birth and born to great honor. Hentzi's own Sheffield blades were at his
disposal.




CHAPTER TWELVE

_SAINT ANTHONY_


Count Michael returned to his castle after Trent had been for fifteen
days a prisoner.

The prince and his suite were now safely hidden in a far Carpathian
retreat and there was no evidence in Castle Radna of their occupancy. It
had been a dreadful moment when Count Temesvar found himself tied to a
tree and his plans in danger of disclosure to his enemies. He had no
opportunity of knowing as yet to what use Alfred Anthony had put his
knowledge.

The London papers told him only that Lord Rosecarrel was the new
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and was already making friends
with the Balkans and cementing an ancient alliance with Greece. That was
bad enough in all conscience. But if it were known that he had hidden a
prince whose only use to him would be the furtherance of his political
ambitions he would be denounced by the government under which he lived.

The easy going, pleasure loving and almost amiable side of Count
Michael's nature was for the moment put aside. The man who took pride in
his swift travelling Lion and his occasional long drive at golf was
banished by the need of the moment for possessing certain and wholly
accurate knowledge of what Alfred Anthony was and what he had done.

Anthony Trent when he was brought before the count saw this at a glance.
He was Francis the First in his arbitrary moods, the mood that made that
versatile monarch sweep friends to destruction and visit wrath on them
who had offended.

He was led, manacled, between Peter Sissek and old Ferencz and brought
to the big room in which the Chubbwood safe was placed. Hentzi hovered
nervously in the background.

"I have sent for you," Count Michael said, "so that you may have the
opportunity of making a confession."

"It is thoughtful of you," Trent told him, "but I have no confession to
make. I have some complaints however. I dislike my present quarters.
They are verminous and draughty."

"Is it possible," the count said slowly, "that you fail to understand
your position?"

"What is my position?" Anthony Trent countered.

"You are a nameless prisoner absolutely in my power. There is none in
the outer world to help you. Those other two who came told me as much.
They were sworn not to ask mercy of me or help of my lord Rosecarrel."

"The cases are not parallel," Trent returned equably, "They asked no
mercy of you. I don't either. They did not expect help of--what was the
name you mentioned?"

"The man for whom you risk death is the Earl of Rosecarrel. He cannot
aid you."

Trent shook his head.

"Never heard of him. I wonder what put it into your brain that I had any
definite plans in coming here except to get a position which you forced
on me."

"Why did you take a certain document from my pocket and leave much
money? No, no. It is idle to fence. I have learnt from London that you
were only in the Lion factory a few days and that previously nothing was
known of you. You are not a mechanic; that is plain. You came for a
certain political document worth in money--nothing. You took it. Now,
sir, where is it?"

There was no doubting the count's eagerness or Anthony Trent's
astonishment. The count had not recovered the treaty. So far as Trent
remembered the envelope was in his coat pocket, the same coat he had
taken off among the hay and made a pillow for his head. He assumed,
naturally, that when he was roughly dragged from slumber his clothes
were searched. A light of triumph came into his eyes at the thought that
it did not repose behind those inviolate doors of steel. But it was
amazing that the heap of hay had not been disturbed. He supposed it was
because of the week of almost continuous rain.

"Where is it?" Count Michael repeated.

"When I saw it was of no value," Trent said, sticking to his chauffeur
role, "I burned it."

"For the moment we will assume that you speak the truth. Now, how is it
you made the mistake of supposing that I had here certain guests of high
degree?"

"Just a guess," Trent said calmly, "Wasn't I right? Remember I had to
bring them up from Fiume. I saw coronets on dressing cases and from the
way Hentzi bowed and scraped I imagined they were at least royalties in
disguise."

"You said," Count Michael insisted, "'Give my love to the prince.' You
could only have meant one particular personage. You did not speak in
generalities you particularized. You said 'The prince.' I warn you you
do not help yourself by denials. I am not a patient man. The world knows
that. Here in my castle of Radna I am supreme. I have not chosen my
servants idly. They are committed to me and my cause absolutely. Old
Ferencz there would die for me or mine. It is the tradition of loyalty
born in him. So with the others. You are surrounded here with those who
regard you as my enemy. How can I chide them if, knowing their lord is
in peril, they seek to remove it?"

"First and second murderers," Trent commented.

"Executioners," the count corrected.

"It makes no difference what you call them," Trent exclaimed.

"I am glad you look at it in that light," Count Michael said, "It does
not make any difference as you will see. I shall convince you of that by
relating the sad accident which befell your friend Captain the
Honourable Oswald Hardcastle, formerly of the Royal Dragoons."

"My friend?" Trent exclaimed.

"Certainly," the count returned, "Lord Rosecarrel's military attache at
Constantinople. Your innocence amuses me. You no doubt know that I owned
that great horse Daliborka a winner of the Grand Prix. I was
dissatisfied with my trainer and asked friends at the Jockey Club in
Paris to recommend me someone. Captain Hardcastle disguised himself much
as you have done. He was no longer an aristocrat, an officer of a great
regiment, but a trainer who was an ex-jockey. He was a good trainer and
a great horseman. Daliborka's time trials were marvelous. I entered him
for the great races in England. My new trainer was so jealous of his
horse he would have no strangers near and none was allowed to follow him
in his rides through the grass meadows." Count Michael laughed softly,
"Yes, I was deceived, made a fool of, as you have it but I can confess
it as I do in your case with the satisfaction that the last laugh, the
last trick will be mine. It was my laugh at the last with Captain
Hardcastle. You are interested?"

"I was in Paris when Daliborka won," Trent said. "I made money on him.
Most certainly I'm interested."

"Captain Hardcastle wished for the document which you say you have
destroyed. He obtained it. He did not seek to escape as you have done
down the main roads. No. No. He had studied the country profoundly with
all the topographical knowledge gained at the Staff College. He had such
complete charge of my large stables that none questioned his right to do
as he chose and I was too busy at the time even to see him. He planned
his route carefully. He found out a path to the sea where there would
wait him a yacht. It was, oddly enough, the same steam yacht in which my
lord Rosecarrel makes his cruises. At intervals he placed my horses,
horses he had trained for steeple chases. But the first stretch of the
journey, ten miles of velvet turf he had planned to ride Daliborka. It
is sufficient to tell you that we knew his plans in time. He was to
start at midnight. It happened that I passed his quarters at half past
eleven and detained him in talk, talk that gave him no uneasiness."

"Then, thinking I was safely here he rushed to the little outbuilding
where my great black horse was saddled. He sprang to its back quickly.
And as he did so we lit a torch so that he might see how we laughed
last. It was a black horse indeed, but a work horse, a slow placid beast
which we had substituted. I have never seen real despair seize on a
brave man as it did when he saw he had failed. I enjoyed it very much
Arlfrit.

"The stable hands who had always resented his iron discipline, the
discipline of the soldier, took their vengeance of him in my absence.
They are rough, these brave fellows of mine, and do not know their
strength."

"You mean," Trent snapped, "you let them murder a man who was probably
tied as I am tied now?"

Count Michael shrugged his shoulders.

"A man who puts his head in the lion's den must not complain if the lion
be hungry. This is my house and I do not welcome thieves. Then there was
Sir Piers Edgcomb. I was never sure of him. A big man, slow of movement
and who spoke German so well I believed him to be of Bavaria. He was my
butler. These country bred servants of mine do well enough in most
things but the niceties of table service as I see in your own country
are beyond them.

"A butler who has to take charge of much valuable plate and old,
precious glass should at least be able to clean them. This man--he
called himself Peters knew nothing of these things. So I set traps for
him. He had a wolf's cunning. But a wise hunter can snare a wolf and I
snared him. I did not bring you here to tell you of them so that you
might be entertained. I brought you here to tell you that they who
plotted, failed and died for their cause. You, who have succeeded and
have injured me are my captive just as they were."

"Well?" Anthony Trent said, "What of it?"

"Simply this. You say you have burned the document. That might be true
or untrue. It is possible you have concealed it in some place where I
could recover it only after long search. I shall give you a day to make
up your mind to speak the whole truth."

"And after that?"

"You will be glad to tell what you know," Count Michael said grimly.
"Your death will be but a poor triumph to me; that I am willing to
admit, but it is the greatest loss that can befall you."

"You are trying to make a bargain with me?"

"Perhaps. I will say at least that if the document is procured Alfred
Anthony would be free to return to London on one condition."

"Which is?"

"That he gave me his word of honor to forget every face and name he had
seen or heard in Castle Radna. Under the circumstances I could allow
myself to be so generous but I should require the most solemn of oaths."
The count leaned forward a little and spoke impressively. "Remember
again, that your death will be but poor consolation for me yet it is the
most terrible thing that can happen to you."

"I'm not so sure," Anthony Trent muttered.

In that moment there was stripped from him the cunning and audacity that
success in crime had brought. Often he had seen himself in a
melodramatic almost heroic light, laughing at the nice distinctions of
wrong and right, stretching out his hand to take what he wanted and
caring nothing for the judgments of men. With the egocentricity of the
successful criminal he had felt himself superior to all his opponents
and had seen himself in future performing such exploits as none had
dared to do.

His months at Castle Radna had been very dull. The plentiful food was
coarse; his companions boors; of music he had heard not a note. He was
anxious to be back again among people he liked. Such a chance was
offered him now. He believed if he gave his solemn word that the
count--in order to retain his hold on Lord Rosecarrel--would give him
safe conduct to Fiume.

Yet he was amazed to find that he would not accept Count Michael's offer.
Rather than tell him the truth about the document and so bring disaster
again on the family of the woman he loved he was content to give up his
life. Perhaps there was another reason which brought him to this way of
thinking also. Daphne was not for him. That, long ago, he had realized.
Life without Daphne! Dreary days that would hold no joy lengthening into
months and years of heart hunger and at last into dissatisfied old age.
He was brought back from his thoughts by the count's voice.

"Of what are you not sure? That I shall not keep my word?"

"I'm not sure that I shall give mine," Trent answered.

"You will have a day and a night to think it over. I shall find you in a
more reasonable mood when I see you again. But remember this. After
tomorrow there will be no other opportunity. I am not a patient man and
I am holding back my anger with difficulty. I do not relish being sick
of chagrin."

Anthony Trent held up his manacled hands.

"This is a sporting way of doing things, isn't it?" he exclaimed.

"Until tomorrow," Count Michael smiled.

It was dark when the prisoner reached his cell. An oil lamp lit the bare
room. It was hung on a nail in the little cage out of reach of any
occupant of the stone chamber.

Peter Sissek and old Ferencz had brought him to his prison. They offered
him no violence. Evidently they were acting under orders. The count had
made no comment on the bruises that still discoloured the American's
face.

He had been sitting an hour on the edge of his cot when the outer door
opened. Trent did not even look up. It was at this hour unappetizing
food was brought and thrust under the cage, food he could pick at
clumsily with his hands in iron bracelets.

Hearing no grating sound of heavy plate being pushed over the uneven
floor he looked up. Pauline stood in the cage with Hentzi. The latter
was obviously nervous and alarmed. He looked about him in dread and
listened unhappily for sounds that might indicate the coming of others
along the flagged passage.

"Open the gate," Pauline commanded, pointing to the steel barrier.

"If the count should hear of it!" he wailed.

"I will bear the blame," she said. "Be quick."

"You must be but five minutes," he insisted.

"I shall take ten," she retorted.

Wringing his hands Hentzi, the prey of many apprehensions, left her
alone with the prisoner. It chanced that Pauline was aware of some petty
thefts on the secretary's part, defalcations which would destroy Count
Michael's faith in his probity. It was a threat of exposure which forced
him to bring her here.

Trent rose when she came in and offered his visitor the single rush
bottomed chair the cell contained.

He looked at her warily as one antagonist gazes at another before a
struggle. Always she had called up in him this need for caution. Her
violent and passionate nature were graven on the face which had brought
so many men to folly and disgrace. Hentzi had told him many stories of
the life she had lived in great cities and the tragedies which had come
to those who had loved her.

She was dressed tonight very splendidly. Jewels that should have
belonged to the poor countess who was passing her days in retreat were
about her neck. An emerald necklace which in other days would have set
Anthony Trent's eyes glittering matched her strange almond eyes. There
was a certain tiger grace about the woman which would have attracted
men's notice and women's from wherever she might have gone. Did she, he
wondered, come in peace or in war? He was on his guard.

"You are surprised to see me?" she began.

"I cannot choose my visitors," he reminded her.

"You have never liked me," she returned, "Why?"

"You were a danger to my enterprise," he answered.

"A danger now removed," she said quickly. "What are those marks on your
face?" she cried as he turned his head from the shadow to where the dim
lamp light showed him more dearly. "Who has dared to strike you?"

"That is nothing," he cried impatiently. "Certainly the least of my
troubles. I am very weary; there may be very unpleasant hours before me
and I need sleep. It cannot be such a great triumph to see me in this
cell?"

"Why do you stay here?" she demanded. "I know what Count Michael has told
you. I know you have only to give him that piece of paper and your word
of honor as a gentleman and you are free to go. It is very fortunate for
you. Those two friends who also came are dead."

"Did he send you here?" Trent asked.

"He would be furious if he knew," she said quickly. "Certainly it would
do you no good if he learned of it. You know," and Pauline looked at him
through lowered lashes, "he has always been jealous of you."

"He has had no reason to be," Trent reminded her coldly.

"I know," she said, bitterness in her tone, "but he will not believe
that. And now he knows you are noble and were masquerading as a
chauffeur he will be all the more jealous."

"I'm not a nobleman," he said almost angrily. He resented her presence.

"You cannot deceive me," she said tenderly.

"If you did not come here to speak for Count Michael, may I ask then for
what purpose?"

"I want to warn you not to keep that paper from him."

"It was burned long ago," he answered. "If he can collect the ashes he
is welcome to them."

"At present he is trying to collect your coat," she told him and noted
with a smile his start of alarm. "When they took you you were coatless.
He thinks somewhere in the forest they will find it and when they find
it the paper will be there and perhaps other things of your own which
will be interesting."

"I fear he will be disappointed," Trent said calmly, "but if he will
return a favorite pipe in one of the pockets I shall be obliged."

She looked at him steadily. Hers was not always an easy face to read.

"I pray that they will find the coat," she said.

"Thank you," he exclaimed. "At least you make no pretence of wanting me
to win."

"You don't understand," she cried, "it is because they will force you to
tell if they cannot find it. I am speaking no more than the truth.
Cannot you see that you have mixed yourself in high matters and are a
menace to Count Michael? He must know and he will know."

She saw his mouth tighten.

"Men just as strong and brave as you have broken down and told all."

"That may be," he answered, "but I am not going to alter my story about
burning the paper and I am not going to weaken under any punishment they
think of trying on me."

He was not going to tell her that in a few days he would be able to make
his way out of this very cell if they kept handcuffs from him a little
longer. Kicked out of sight among the dust on the floor was one of his
most useful tools. It was a strip of highly tempered steel spring with a
saw edge--forty teeth to the inch--and could bite its way through the
barred window. When first he entered his prison he thought the opening
too small for exit but he had revised his calculations and was now
certain he could wriggle through it.

"It is for a woman you do this," Pauline said. "It is because of a woman
you are cold and ask no help of me."

"I can't prevent your wild guesses," he answered. There was no mistaking
his distaste of her meddling.

"I do not give up easily," he told her. "I used to think that in a duel
between love and duty love should always win. It doesn't seem to work
out that way always. And I used to think that a man who had not been
worthy of a woman should be given a chance to rebuild his life if he
really loved her." He shook his head. "It isn't the right idea.
Sentimental nonsense the world calls it. The wedding gift a man offers
his bride is his past." He shrugged his shoulders. "I didn't qualify."

Anthony Trent looked at the rough wall and saw only those dancing days
of happiness and love in another castle. And instead of Pauline with her
world weary face, her knowledge of every art to hold men, he saw his
slim and lovely Daphne. He knew that both of them loved him. Vaguely he
understood that Pauline had come to offer to save him but he had kept
her from telling him so yet. There might conceivably be a future with
her in which he would find eventually his old ambitions stirring and his
pride in his hazardous work revive. There might even be years that were
almost happy; reckless, passionate, quarrelling years. But the thought
of it was nauseating. He swept it aside. He remembered the phrase of
Private Smith in the dug-out that he was dying in better company than he
knew. Well, Anthony Trent if the worst came would die better than he had
lived.

To Pauline, who loved him, the idea of a violent ending to one of his
ability and address was tragic.

An Austrian by birth, Pauline had been taken to Berlin then blossoming
into extravagant and vulgar night life by a mother who was a dancer.
Vain, ambitious and jealous of the success of others, Pauline offered no
objection to anything whereby she might become widely known. Later, when
she had attained international fame as a skater she grew more selective
in her affairs. She was the rage for several years and but for the
suicide of a Serene Highness would never have been banished from Berlin.

Count Michael Temesvar was an old admirer. The war swept away Pauline's
possessions and there was no manager to engage her at a living wage.

At twenty-eight she had known many capitals, enjoyed great success and
never been really in love. Then she saw Anthony Trent on the golf links
and never passed a moment but was filled with thoughts of him. His
consistent repulsing of her threw her into moods of anger which she
visited mainly on her protector. And when she summoned scorn and anger
to her aid in dealing with this Alfred Anthony, she found them only
ministers to her infatuation.

She looked around as Hentzi came into the cell.

"It is ten minutes," he whispered.

"Another five," she said. "I shall come with you then."

Hentzi withdrew nervous and expostulating. Trent noticed that her manner
was different when she spoke. There was a certain timidity about her, an
air of unhappiness almost of hopelessness.

"Have you thought what difference it will make to me?" she asked.

Gone from her face were those meretricious smiles, those little ways
cultivated through intimate association with her world of warring sex.
The Pauline who looked at him now was a woman stripped of artifice, a
woman who suffered and loved.

There was an uncomfortable silence, the awkwardness of the man in the
avowed affection of the undesired woman.

"Let there be no deception between us," she said quietly. "I see that it
is someone else who claims your heart. I did not think there were men
like you who would be steadfast and loyal in a moment such as this. I
know only that we--you and I--are alike in one thing. We both love where
there is no hope. I came here to offer you freedom at a price most men
would be glad to pay. I will not insult you by saying what it was. I
have known few good men and I know you are good."

"No, no," he cried, embarrassed by her manner, "Indeed if you only
knew."

She would not listen.

"Love can redeem all," she said. "I pray the good God whom I have
neglected," she smiled a little ruefully, "to redeem me. I feel that my
life is over. I have had everything I wanted and am wearied of the
taste. Everything I wanted until now. There comes a time when one is no
longer so eager to live. It is so with me." She looked at him wistfully.
"Can you believe me when I tell you I want to help you?"

"I do believe it," he said gratefully. "I am glad enough to have a
friend in this dismal place."

"Then let me help you," she said eagerly. "Something tells me you have
hidden that paper. I warn you if it is still in existence, it will be
found. Can I get it for you?"

Anthony Trent did not answer for a moment. The thought that there yet
might be a way of getting the treaty draft to Lord Rosecarrel almost
made speech an effort. If that were done with what energy and hope might
he not bend his skill to means of escape!

"I should be putting my honor in your keeping," he said slowly.

Her face fell.

"And you dare not trust me?"

It was caution which had saved Anthony Trent a hundred times before and
he hesitated just a moment now. Then he looked at Pauline again and was
convinced of her sincerity. And, after all, no better way presented
itself.

"I will trust you," he said, "but can you find out the place where they
captured me?"

"I know it already," she said, "it is the farm of Zencsi and lies no
more than thirty miles away."

"Thirty!" he cried, "I thought it was twice that distance."

"You went miles out of your reckoning."

"Have you a pencil?" he cried. "I want to draw a plan of it."

"Alas, no," she exclaimed, "but Hentzi will be here and he shall get
one."

The five minutes were up and the count's secretary entered entreating
Pauline by fear of discovery to come with him.

"A pencil," she snapped, "and paper. A leaf from that little red
memorandum book where you keep account of what money you have saved by
cheating your master."

She waved him away.

"Three more minutes," she commanded.

"I hid in a mound of hay quite close to the farm house. It was the one
nearest a tree recently struck by lightning. It was a plum and the fruit
was still red and unwrinkled. I hid my coat there primarily with the
idea of it being a pillow. When they dragged me out I kicked it down and
out of sight. Three things may have happened. One, that owing to the
rain they have not canted the hay. Second, that a farm hand found the
coat and took the money in it and destroyed everything else. The third
contingency is that the document may have been undisturbed. In this case
it will be returned when the count inquires broadcast for stray
garments."

"Yes, yes," Pauline said, excitement in her voice, "but tell me exactly
what to do."

"Can you motor to this Zencsi farm without being found out?"

"It will not be easy but it shall be done."

Her air of assurance heartened him.

"You can only find the blasted tree by day light," he said thoughtfully,
"and in day light you may be seen. Can you be there at dawn before the
farmer himself is up."

"But that is easiest of all," she cried, "Listen to me. I shall wait
until everyone here is asleep. Then I shall take the Fiat and get to
Zencsi in a little more than an hour. I can hide the car in the forest
and make my search. If I find it I can be back here before any man or
maid is stirring." Her face fell. "But what am I to do with it? I dare
not give it to you who may be searched."

"It ought to be destroyed," he answered, "but I've sworn to give it to
the man who sent me here. I've got it. Put it in the tool box of the
Lion, among the cotton waste. Can you get into the garage?"

"Hentzi has all keys, as you should remember," she said. "What keys he
has are mine. And then?"

"You will find at the bottom of the big tool box a couple of keys. They
are punched out of two thin steel bars. Really there are four keys. It
is most important that you bring them to me. You will not forget?"

"When your life hangs on it? What else? We must be quick. I do not fear
Hentzi but his master must not find me here."

"If the coat has been removed you must go to the farm house. There is a
watch dog who barks but he pines for affection and you can win him
easily. Find out who has the coat. If it isn't in the hay someone on the
farm has it. If the document is handed to you look at it eagerly to make
sure it is what I want and if it is, tell them the thing is worthless
and not what the count wants. And if you find the paper in the breast
pocket do the same thing."

"Why?" she demanded.

"If you show them it is what you came for the count who will certainly
hear of it will want to get it. What would happen if he knew you had
given it to me?"

"Why think of that now?" she returned. But he noticed that a shade of
fear passed over her face at the thought of it.

"If you get it and put it in the tool box he will only think how well
you have served his interests in coat hunting while his lazy varlets
were abed. Of course if they don't hand it to you at the farm and it
isn't in the coat it may be destroyed. I'm afraid you'll have to do some
bullying and threatening to get at the truth but the truth I must have."

She rose from the rush bottomed chair with a sigh.

"You believe that there are those who can read fate?"

Anthony Trent hesitated. Men of his profession were usually
superstitious attaching unwarranted importance to fortuitous things,
watching for signs and portents and abandoning planned enterprises at
times because of some sign of misfortune which had met them.

"I don't believe it," he admitted, "but that sort of thing influences
me. Why?"

"There is a woman nearby who can tell," Pauline replied, "Yesterday I
gave her money. She said--can you think of it--that I should die happy."

"I hope you do," he said.

"But it is impossible," she cried. "None clings to life as I do. I am
tired of this life. I love the life of cities, the restaurants, the
crowds. I am city bred. In a year when conditions are better I shall go
back. I shall appear in Berlin again, Petrograd, perhaps and of course
in London and they want me in New York. I shall hate to die. But I did
not mean to speak of myself. She told me that the man I loved would be
successful. Fate makes no mistake. Keep up your courage for you will win
and I shall die happy. What more could we want?"

But there were tears in her eyes as she said it.

He took both her hands in his.

"What a splendid woman you are!" he said with conviction.

"My dear," she answered, her voice a little uneven, "do not tell that to
the woman you love. She would hate me and I want to live a little in
your heart without anyone else to share it. Promise me that?"

There was in his mind to tell her Daphne was different. That Daphne
would love her too, but he said nothing. Her intuition told her more
than his hope could foretell.

"I promise," he answered, "and I promise that I shall never forget."

Hentzi's agitated voice disturbed them.

"Not one moment longer," he whispered. "I dare not."




CHAPTER THIRTEEN

_DOWN TO THE SEA_


When Pauline had gone Trent was immeasurably happier in the hope she had
given him. Until her visit his only chance of escape had been centered
in the expectation that when once his hands were freed he might file the
bars. There was now a scheme in his head worth many of that.

Half an hour after she had left two men entered guided by the now
assured Hentzi.

"You have complained of the dirt here," the secretary explained, "and it
will be removed."

The tiny spring saw was swept up unobserved. Trent saw it disappear now
with a smile where before it would have been black tragedy to him.

He slept well that night and shaved himself next morning in high
spirits. It was not easy, shaving with handcuffs on, but it was
possible. Then he waited for some message from Pauline.

Hentzi came into the cell at five.

"Count Michael will see you at ten tonight. My friend, I warn you to be
wise and acknowledge defeat."

"That's not my idea of wisdom," Trent grinned so cheerfully that Hentzi
was vaguely disturbed.

"You are more foolish even than the others," Hentzi said, shaking his
head. "Brave men, all three. For my part I would be reasonable. I would
say, 'I have fought a good fight and the odds were against me. How much
can I save from the wreck?' That is the way to talk, my lord."

Suddenly he took a book from his pocket, a book tied with string and
sealed but not enveloped in paper. He handed it to the American.

"This is from a friend," he announced. "I bring danger on myself in
giving it to you but I can rely on your silence, eh?"

"Certainly," Trent said carelessly and betrayed no interest in the gift.
"At ten o'clock tonight? Is that it?"

"It is wise to acknowledge defeat," Hentzi said earnestly.

"We'll see when the time comes," Trent returned. "It's largely a matter
of holding trumps my good Hentzi."

       *       *       *       *       *

Anthony Trent tore the string from the book eagerly. In the middle,
placed carefully in a space hollowed among the leaves were the bar keys
which might, with luck, open the doors to safety. About them was wrapped
a half sheet of scented, green note paper. On it was scrawled very
faintly in pencil, "I have put it where you told me to."

"Thank God!" cried Anthony Trent.

Then with some difficulty he managed to put the two thin steel bars in a
special pocket long ago prepared for them.

The hours seemed very long until Hentzi, with Sissek and Ferencz, came
for him. The two servants carried their big service revolvers.

The anxious moment was at hand, the moment that was to tell Trent
whether he was to be utterly defeated or to stand a chance of escape.

"Take these off," he said holding out his manacled hands.

"No. No." Sissek and Ferencz cried together.

"The count said so," Trent frowned.

"I have had no orders," Hentzi assured him, "and that is one key I have
not got."

For one desperate moment Anthony Trent thought of bringing down his iron
ringed wrists on Sissek's head and attempting to escape. But he put the
thought from him as futile. There was still another trump to play.

They led him, as he hoped, to the great room where the safe was, the
room he had searched so carefully.

In a carved oak chair at the head of a table sat Count Michael. Pauline
was there sitting in a chaise longue smoking a cigarette in a very long
amber and gold holder. She did not turn her face from the count to the
prisoner until he had stood there silent for a full minute. Then she
looked at him coldly, sneeringly, and said something to Count Michael
which brought a peal of laughter from him.

It seemed to Trent that he had never seen the two on such wholly
affectionate terms.

There were two doors to the room. At one stood Peter Sissek, revolver
in hand. At the other old Ferencz watched in armed vigilance. On the
table before the count was a .38 automatic pistol. Shades were drawn
over the long narrow French windows. In a chair before one of them
Hentzi sat nervous as ever in the presence of his violent employer.
Before the other window was a big bronze statue of the dying Gaul. The
stage was set very comfortably for all but the manacled Anthony Trent.

"You said I could have these off," Trent began, "these damned steel
bangles that I've worn so long."

"It is for yourself to remove them," the count said suavely. "I am about
to give you the opportunity. You see I am generous. Others would blame
me for it."

"You are not generous," Trent snapped. "A coward never is."

The count's face lost some of its suavity.

"Who dares call me a coward?" he cried.

"I do," Trent returned promptly. "You are a coward. Here am I, an
unarmed man among three with guns. The doors are locked and yet you keep
me here handcuffed. Generous! Brave!" All his contempt was poured out as
he said it.

"If I take them off will you give me your _parole d'honneur_ to make no
effort to escape?"

Anthony Trent turned to Pauline.

"Madame," he said, as though to a stranger, "I cannot congratulate you
on the courage of your friend. So afraid is he of one single man that he
wishes me to give my word I will not try to escape. He forgets I am
unarmed, in a strange and vast house filled with his servants, with
death threatening me at any suspicious move. Are all your noblemen of
Croatia as cautious as he?"

Pauline did not reply to him. Instead she spoke to the count in German.

"Pay no attention to him," she counselled. "I know that you are brave,
my Michael. Let him laugh at you for a coward if he wishes. I would not
have him hurt you or frighten you for the world."

"Frighten _me_!" cried the count, "Hurt _me_!" He flung a little key
across the table to Hentzi. "Take them off," he commanded.

Trent examined his reddened wrists with a frown.

"This should never have been done," he declared. Then he turned to
Hentzi. "I need a cigarette."

"I did not bring you here to smoke," Count Michael said acidly. "I
brought you here to interrogate you. Remember that."

"I have been without a decent smoke for nearly two weeks," Trent
returned. "And I want one. Unless I have some I shall not answer any one
of your interrogations. Think it over, count."

Hentzi looked at the American reproachfully. He had supplied his
prisoner with the best of tobacco. That he had done so surreptitiously
robbed him of the privilege of recrimination. The two guards not
understanding a word of the conversation could not deny Trent's
statements.

Count Michael Temesvar looked closely at his former chauffeur. He was
standing on the rich red rug between the two windows. He was biting his
lips; his face twitched and his fingers worked nervously. It was plain
that he suffered as drug takers do when deprived of their poisons.

There was a cedar lined silver box of cigarettes on the little table by
Pauline's chair. This Hentzi was commanded to place before the prisoner.
Anthony Trent's symptoms were admirably assumed. He inhaled and exhaled
in silent delight and his face grew more peaceful. But he was still
unsettled and nervous. The count, remembering his iron-nerved driver,
attributed the change as much to imprisonment and fear as to lack of
tobacco. In a sense it was a tribute to his power over the man who had
thwarted him. He watched Trent stride up and down by the two windows and
ascribed it to a growing sense of the ordeal about to be undergone.

"I've got to keep moving," Trent said, "I've been tied up in a kennel
for two weeks."

"If you must I shall permit it," the other answered. "But I warn you
that the length of this table must be your limit. Otherwise my faithful
men may have to shoot. You understand?"

"Perfectly," Trent said growing more affable. "I even give you my
_parole d'honneur_ not to go near the doors. Why rush on certain death?"

"You are growing sensible," Count Michael said smiling. "I knew it would
come. As you say, why rush on certain death? It is foolish. More, it is
unnecessary and to do so wastes one's energy. I have not yet had time to
learn your name and rank but I am treating with you as an equal."

"Thank you!" Trent retorted. "If you call locking me up in a verminous,
rat-haunted cell treating me as an equal I'm hardly grateful."

"I dare take no risks," the count assured him. "You men who came here
for my lord Rosecarrel are different from others. I have not forgotten
that Sir Piers Edgcomb killed three of my honest lads before he died.
There are others who would have treated you less well than I. Now, where
is the paper you stole from me and say you burned?"

"What is the fate of ashes tossed to the four winds?"

"It was never burned," the other snapped. "Somewhere it exists in your
pocket where I saw you place it. Remember this before you answer. If by
your aid alone I find it you may leave this castle."

"How?" Trent demanded. "To walk into ambush outside?"

"There will be twenty square miles of country where none dare touch you.
Do you need more than that, you, who cast aspersions on the courage of
others? Is it possible you are afraid?"

"What is the other alternative?"

"To join your friends." The count laughed cordially. The idea seemed to
amuse him. "To make the third grave. First the trainer, then the butler
and last the chauffeur. I wonder what your chief will send me next."

"He will have no need to send anyone else," Trent said affably. By this
time his nervousness had disappeared and he was cool and calm as ever.

"You mean he will give up the attempt?"

"Why should there be another when I have already succeeded?"

"This is bravado," the count cried. It was his turn to be nervous now.
The importance he attached to the possession of the paper seemed out of
all proportion to its value. Trent knew little of the great eternal
European game of politics. For a few moments in Paris the New World had
its glance at the complicated working but forgot it when booming trade
held sway and salesmen took the place of diplomats. The elimination of
the new Foreign Secretary meant a great deal to Count Michael. The other
knowledge which Trent stored in his mind was equally dangerous but there
were others who could attend to that. No matter what part Anthony Trent
played the count had assigned him the role of the defeated.

"It happens to be the truth," Trent returned.

He could see that Pauline was now listening intently. Her pose of
antagonism to the stranger was swept away by her anxiety for his safety.
Her heart thrilled to see him standing there, debonair, smiling,
dominating. It seemed madness to her, this avowal of success.

"You are learning wisdom," Count Michael commented.

"We may define the term differently," Trent smiled. "I did not burn the
paper."

"Ah!" the count breathed excitedly. "Now we have it."

"I preferred to keep it so that I could assure the Right Honourable the
Earl of Rosecarrel, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, that I had
indeed succeeded. You will understand my feelings. Perhaps it was
bravado but none seems to believe that such papers ever do get burned.
You, count, seemed to doubt it."

"Where is it?" the count snapped. "Your life depends on your truth."

"I have put it in a safe place," Trent said, resuming his pacing of the
room.

The count's excitement banished the air of toleration he had with
difficulty affected toward one he hated.

"Where is it?" he bellowed.

Anthony Trent was smiling and his eyes were bright. It was one of his
moments.

"I am going to fetch it," he said urbanely.

Long ago he had made a careful survey of the possibilities of the room
in which he stood. He had thoroughly scrutinized windows and doors as
likely aids to future needs.

Every pair of eyes in that great room was turned on him. Sissek and
Ferencz understanding no word only saw that he was unmoved, unruffled,
almost joyous in the presence of the great Count Michael. They could not
understand it at all. They only hated him the more.

Hentzi was rather thrilled with the spectacle. Here was a young and
handsome man of a type he had longed to be, no doubt the bearer of an
historic title, who in the presence of great peril dared to laugh at
the head of all the Temesvars.

Count Michael felt the constricting collar that now almost choked him.
These other two who had preceded Alfred Anthony met death bravely but
they acknowledged failure. But this man was different. It was almost as
though he thought himself the victor. What else would have nerved him to
bandy words with his gaoler?

But of them all it was Pauline who watched him most eagerly, and most
feared for his safety. He seemed incredibly rash to antagonize the count
still further. Few guessed the cruelties to which he could sink when his
_amour propre_ was wounded. She had made up her mind that the man she
loved so wholly should not suffer. So far the count had no reason to
suspect her interest in the stranger. His first jealousy had passed when
she protested how needless it was. He trusted women with few of his
political secrets but she knew Trent was a marked man because he had
stumbled on the identity of the princely guest. Therefore he would
suffer unless her woman's wit could aid him. Knowing the count's vanity
so well she perceived that every moment of this unperturbed attitude
added to the severity of the punishment his prisoner would receive.

"You are going to fetch it!" Count Michael said thickly. "Is it permitted
to ask how and when?"

"By all means," Trent said graciously. "I am going to fetch it now and
thus."

He made a lightning quick leap toward the window where Hentzi was
sitting in a low chair and then a dive over the secretary's shoulder.
Through the small panes of glass he went like a hurled rock. The shade
torn from its roller wrapped itself about his head and shielded him from
flying glass and piercing splinters.

Two shots rang out and he heard Hentzi's voice raised in a shriek of
agony. There were other sounds which drowned even this. The count's
voice bellowed forth instructions. He could hear Peter Sissek and
Ferencz shouting and then, as another shot followed him into the
courtyard Pauline's cry rang high above all other sounds.

Trent landed on his shoulder, bruised but not seriously hurt. When he
pulled the enveloping window shade from his face he was amazed to see
that the room from which he had come was now in darkness. He could hear
the men thrashing about it in a fury of rage at being unable to find the
way of pursuit. Whether failure of the current was the cause or someone
had pressed the button, the delay was of incalculable value.

Trent raced across the paved courtyard and pried open the door of what
had been the prince's apartment. It was unoccupied as was that of the
adjoining room where the military aide had slept.

At the bedroom door leading to the corridor he listened carefully but
heard no sound. He opened it quietly to come upon a servant passing by.
It was an unmannerly fellow who had often jeered at him when they used
the common table, a tall, awkward, stooping creature with a malicious
face. His eyes opened wide when he saw it was the detested English
chauffeur. Visions of reward darted across his brain and he made a
movement as to apprehend the foreigner.

He was instantly gripped with a hold, which agonized him as he sought to
break it, and forced into the bedroom from which Trent had just come.
Then the door was locked and he was a prisoner. When, a minute later his
master and the others came bursting through he supposed them to be other
than they were and hid under a bed where the redoubtable Sissek pursued
him and beat him soundly until his identity was established.

Leaving him in the room Trent made his way carefully to the _armoire_,
that rock of refuge in a weary land, and entered it noiselessly.

It was established that no stranger could have left the castle by any of
its exits. Such as were not barred had servants near them. It was clear
that Alfred Anthony was concealed somewhere in the vast building. His
capture was only the matter of time, the result of careful searching.

This search was gone about systematically Count Michael directing his men
personally. It was the count's theory that one of his bullets, the first
shot at which Hentzi had screamed because of its nearness to his head,
had wounded the fleeing man, and that he would sooner or later be traced
by a trail of blood.

Hardly had plans been made for the disposition of the searchers than an
agitated footman reported Peter Sissek's wife with dire news. She was
brought before her employer trembling with excitement.

"Excellency," she cried, "He has escaped in the English car."

Pauline at the count's side clutched his arm.

"Thank God!" she breathed.

"They shall suffer who let him pass," the count roared, "Swine, children
of swine, spawn of the devil."

"Let me go after him Excellency," Peter Sissek pleaded. "I will bring
him back to you dead or alive as you command."

"Fool," the count shouted, "Who are you to do this, you who have not his
skill nor so fast a car! Get you to Agram. I will telegraph to Fiume and
Zara and Trieste and have him stopped for a thief."

"But," Pauline protested, "how dare you let it be known that it is the
paper he has stolen? Dare you invite notice of it?"

The count looked at her very oddly. Never had he looked so coldly.

"Is it also his car?" he asked. "Have I no right to that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Weeks before Anthony Trent had hidden a spare key to the garage in a
secret place. From the moment of closing the door of the _armoire_
behind him, climbing down the copper pipe and starting his engine,
Anthony Trent had not consumed more than four minutes. As he drove it
out of the yard he saw Mrs. Sissek running toward him. Soon they would
be on his track again. He did not care. He knew there was never a driver
in all Europe who could hope to catch him between Castle Radna and
Fiume.

A quick glance had assured him all was well with his Lion. Two extra
wheels were carried which could be put on in three minutes. There was
gasoline in his tanks and the purring hum of the motor was like a
Beethoven symphony to his ears. And he knew that somewhere in the
toolbox was concealed the little scrap of paper which had cost two lives
already and might take his own as toll were he not careful. He prayed
that the gods of chance might give him no less than an even break.

Down the mountain side he went singing. At night there was little or no
traffic. The peasants were early abed and the way would be deserted
until he struck the Marie Louise road.

Anthony Trent knew that not a car in the garage would pursue him with
any chance of success. They would probably send a telegram from Agram
but that contingency did not worry him very much. It had taken no more
than a minute of his time to do damage that would take a hundred times
as long to remedy. He smiled to think of the savage Sissek trying to
start his Panhard. Then they would attempt to get the Fiat going and
finally, the old and tricky Mercedes. And they would all balk because
that skilled mechanic Alfred Anthony had had his finger in the pie.

At the roar of his engines, magnified in the night silences, peasants
turned over and went to sleep again. It was their lord or one of his
exalted guests who passed. Sometimes one of them would hear, floating
out for a moment, the sound of his singing.

It was a night of triumph and hope for Anthony Trent. He had succeeded
where others had failed. The hours brought him nearer to a sight of the
woman he loved and he could not put away from him the hope that
somewhere happiness and content might wait for them.

There was not an untoward incident in his journey until he reached the
high land overlooking the harbor of Fiume. Day would break in less than
an hour. Stopping his motor he took the rain stained document from its
shelter. Pauline had not failed him. She showed her thoughtfulness by
placing sandwiches and a flask of wine in the tool box. He thought of
her with a flood of gratitude. Until this reminder he had forgotten her
very existence in the thought of the other woman.

Trent had not come idly to Fiume with the bare hope of being able to
make his escape. He knew that there were in port several British
destroyers that lay off a certain breakwater which he had observed on
many occasions. Tied up at this stone pier were a number of rowboats. It
would be an easy task to pull off to a destroyer and climb aboard. No
commander would deny him the privilege he sought and there was not a gun
in Fiume which dare be trained on a British or American vessel.

It was Anthony Trent's way to look for opposition in his ventures and be
a little uneasy if he met none. So far things had gone almost too
smoothly.

He had threaded his way through the narrow streets of Fiume without
other than a few laborers when he was suddenly halted by a policeman.
The policeman stood before the Lion and waved his sword. It was plain he
labored under stress of great excitement. Three others of his kind came
running from a side alley. It seemed to the policeman that the great
automobile made a vicious jump at him. He leapt aside with marvelous
agility as the accelerated Lion passed him on its way to the pier.

There was just sufficient light for Trent to see the destroyer lying at
her anchorage. Everything would have been comfortably done but for the
cries of the pursuing police.

A groom of Count Michael's had ridden a fast horse into Agram and the
Fiume authorities were bidden apprehend a thieving chauffeur driving a
blue and silver Lion. There was so liberal a reward that the police
force was almost disorganized in contemplating it. Pursuers among
civilian laborers and sailors joined in the chase.

Trent's heart sank to see the little cove where the boats were tied was
not empty at this early hour as he expected. There was a group of seven
or eight fishermen getting their nets ready. Their quick ears caught
sounds of the disturbance and saw that the man in the motor was to be
caught. They seized a two inch hawser and stood across the pier barring
the motor's way. Four men holding to one end and three, to another.

Trent took the situation in at a glance. Stupidly enough the fishermen
supposed themselves to be able to stop the car of their own strength.
Had they fastened the hawser around the cleats at their side Anthony
Trent would have gone down to defeat. It was plain that he could not
carry out his plan of rowing to the destroyer with these men at his
heels.

There was one last desperate thing to do.

The great car responded to the accelerator and by the time it had
reached the men holding the rope it was going at fifty miles an hour
over the smooth stone breakwater. Two of the men were jerked clear into
the water. They were all thrown down and one had an arm broken.
Fascinated they watched the great car racing down the pier straight to
destruction as they supposed. Then they looked, horrified, as it seemed
to hurl itself from the jetty, hurtle through the air and disappear in a
tomb of foam.

When police and fishermen strained their eyes and could see no trace of
the chauffeur they naturally assumed he had been caught in the car.

"He has killed himself!" the sergeant cried.

"He was mad!" said another.

Anthony Trent had no difficulty in freeing himself from the sinking
Lion. It was his wish to swim under water as far as possible and so
elude those who watched for him in the faint light.

There was a strong current running and the destroyer lay a couple of
cable lengths distant. It was a hard swim, clothes encumbered as he was,
and he dare not discard the garment that held the paper. There was a
despairing moment when he thought he could never make headway against
the tide which would take him back into the harbor.

It was an astonished marine who saw the dripping exhausted man clamber
aboard and fall to the deck.

"I must see your commander at once," Trent cried, when his breathing was
easier.

Lieutenant Maitland awaked from his sleep was not inclined to see him.

"What's he like and the devil is it all about?" he demanded crossly.

"He's about knocked out," the marine answered, "and he says he won't
tell his business to anyone but you."

Lieutenant Maitland put on a bath robe and interviewed the stranger. He
was instantly taken by the man's face and manner. He saw, too that he
was dealing with one of his own class.

"I have important despatches for Lord Rosecarrel the Foreign Secretary
which I must get to him at once."

"Yes?" Maitland said interrogatively.

"I want you to take them and me," Anthony Trent said.

"I'm afraid that's impossible," said the officer. "You see that is a
little out of my beat. Even if your papers were for the First Lord of
the Admiralty I could not proceed to a home port without instructions.
I am bound for Malta and weigh anchor in a little while."

Anthony Trent was silent for a moment. He knew that private matters
concerning Lord Rosecarrel and his son had nothing to do with the
government directly. He knew, too, that to commandeer a destroyer for a
private errand was inadmissable. But he was determined to get back and
had no appetite for Fiume. There was a trump card which he had yet to
play.

"Why does a squadron of destroyers stay so long in Fiume?" he asked.

"Admiralty orders," Lieutenant Maitland said briefly.

"They are here because trouble may break out at any moment. The
information I carry is necessary for the interests of your country and
my own. I'm an American as I supposed you guessed. You will be thanked
by the prime minister for taking me and my information back."

"Why not cable it?" Maitland suggested, "I'll wireless it for you in
code."

"I dare not trust it," Trent said emphatically, "and they wouldn't
believe it anyhow. Mine is a preposterous story but it's one that your
government needs to know. Can't Malta get on without you a little? It
won't take long. You fellows travel at forty miles an hour."

"Who is to judge of the importance of the information?" Maitland
demanded, "I have to think of that. If you are spoofing me I run the
certainty of court martial. Really I think I must beg you to be
decently careful in asking this of me."

"That's only fair," Trent agreed. "Does the name of William, Prince of
Misselbach, mean anything to you?"

"Only that I went to his funeral when he escaped from that island prison
of his and was drowned. I was on the port guard ship at the time. I
understand the allied powers breathed a sigh of relief that he had
chosen to drown himself."

Anthony Trent pointed to a group of boats at the end of the pier from
which he had taken his leap. They were growing distinct in the light.

"Those fellows," said Anthony Trent, accepting one of the officer's
cigarettes, "are grappling for my body. They believe I'm dead. Drowned
as deep as ever Prince William of Misselbach ever was. You have just as
much right to think the prince dead. I've seen him. I know where he's
been staying since his escape and I know who is behind the plot to put
him on the throne of Hungary. Now, Lieutenant, do we steam back to
England or shall I cable it?"

"I'll take a chance and slip back to Portsmouth. What you need is a hot
bath and some hotter coffee. By the time you've fed and got into some of
my togs we shall be on our way back to fame or court martial."

The lieutenant grinned cheerfully. He was still a boy for all the stern
years he had witnessed disaster by sea and land. Also he liked Trent.
It was rather a lark, he thought.

"By the way," said Trent suddenly, "if they wig-wagged you from shore
that you were harbouring a man supposed to have stolen a Lion automobile
from Count Michael Temesvar the man who is at the bottom of the plot
would you feel bound to deliver him up to justice? I ask because I think
some sort of police are on the way here now."

"My dear man," said Lieutenant Maitland, "you have the good fortune to
be aboard the fastest destroyer on God's wide waters. Also steam is up
and we shall have started before the harbour authorities can get aboard.
If they can overhaul my old dear you may ask me that question again."

       *       *       *       *       *

When it was certain that Trent had made good his escape the black rage
that took hold of Count Michael plunged his household into a distress
that showed itself on every troubled face except that of Pauline.

She was not easily able to conceal her joy in Anthony Trent's good
fortune. The prophecy of the gipsy that he would escape was fulfilled.

She knew that rage must be eating at the count's heart, a rage compared
with which all his other frenzied outbursts were as nothing. As a rule
he made Pauline his _confidante_, desiring only that she approve of his
behaviour. Twice she had tried to get Hentzi aside and learn what news,
if any, had come of the masquerader. Hentzi sullenly turned away from
her. She supposed he had been so upset over his master's temper that he
was nursing a grievance himself.

She was in her room that night, about to take a gorgeous necklace from
her firm white throat, when there was a knock upon the door.

"It is Mr. Hentzi," said her maid.

"Tell him I will not see him," Pauline yawned.

"He has an important message from Count Michael," said the girl.

"Which will wait until tomorrow," Pauline said lazily.

Hentzi's voice made itself heard through the partly opened door.

"I must beg you madame, to come at once. It is imperative. The count
must have your advice on matters of importance."

Pauline decided to go. After the silence of the day the count would tell
her everything, and she was anxious to be reassured of Anthony Trent's
safety.

"Where are you taking me?" she demanded as Hentzi guided her past the
big room where Trent had been arraigned, the room from which he had made
his escape.

"His Excellency cannot remain in a room with an entire window torn out.
It would but be to invite a flock of bats to enter."

Pauline climbed two little flights of steps which led to the topmost
floor of the castle.

"I have never been here before," she commented.

"Few strangers have," he said, locking it behind her.

"Strangers!" she repeated, "since when have I been a stranger?"

She found nothing strange in his silence. Hentzi was constantly a prey
to the fear he might by some over zealous action provoke the wrath of
the man he served. Probably he had not heard her question.

She found Count Michael in a big bare room, octagonal in shape and knew
it must be the tower which stood out boldly on the western corner of the
castle.

"Why bring me here?" she said petulantly.

She had no fear of the man who ruled his people as an autocrat. It is
not in the nature of such women as Pauline to eliminate a certain
feeling of contempt for the power of men whom they can sway by whim and
artifice. Michael, Count Temesvar, was terrible to such as he hated, and
a political force of sinister strength, but to the green eyed woman who
looked at him mockingly he was one of the weak and pliable pawns on
life's board.

"Sit down," he said suavely. There was no sudden look of affection as he
gazed at her. He spoke, she reflected, very much as he had done to
Anthony Trent. But the ex-chauffeur had been a prisoner. She looked
about her and saw that this was almost a prison.

"About this Alfred Anthony," he began. "I am told, although I do not
believe it, that you were much concerned for his safety."

"Who told you that?" she demanded.

"What matters that? It is untrue?"

"Naturally," she answered, trying to fathom what lay behind his smiling
face.

"Tell me this Pauline," he said leaning forward, "when the Sissek woman
informed us that he had escaped I thought I heard you say 'Thank God.'
Why did you thank God when my enemy escaped?"

Pauline was not so easily to be trapped. She remembered breathing her
prayer almost at his ear but she hoped in the excitement he had not
heard.

"You are dreaming Michael," she exclaimed. "Why should I say that?"

"Another thing," the count went on. "This man would hardly have escaped
if the electric lights had not gone out." Abruptly the count turned to
Hentzi. "Tell me, did you see the engineer about this?"

"Yes, Excellency," Hentzi assured him, "He tells me in technical terms
which I do not comprehend that sometimes the light goes off for a few
moments. It was the thunder storm or some atmospherical condition. I do
not remember."

"Heaven seems to fight for him," Count Michael commented. "First the
lights extinguished and then someone in this house of mine who gives him
keys and aids his escape. The garage door opens itself to him and lo, he
disappears."

"He has an accomplice you think, Excellency?" Hentzi stammered. He was
fearful that his master had learned of his carrying the book to the
prisoner. Out of this slender fact the wrathful count might be weaving
plot enough to engulf his faithful secretary. "I assure your
Excellency," Hentzi cried, "that I am entirely loyal."

Pauline was still not to be frightened by this changed mood of the count
and the agitation expressed on his secretary's face. She had been victor
over him in a hundred violent scenes and Pauline loved violence and the
raising of voices.

"A curious thing," said the count meditatively, "is that the lights went
out only in my room. A well trained thunder storm Hentzi, eh?"

"Your excellence means that someone turned them off. I was on guard at
the window as you remember."

"I know that you were. Ferencz was at the north door, Peter at the
other. The thief could not be suspected and I was a dozen feet distant
sitting in my chair. And yet, Hentzi, when I pressed the button light
again flooded the room."

"I suppose you are hinting that I did it?" Pauline said calmly.

When the count smiled, it was another man looking at her, a man to whom
she was a stranger. For the first time a thrill of uneasiness took hold
of her.

"Is hinting the right word?" Count Michael retorted.

"I might have done it," Pauline admitted, "I remember when I heard the
crash of the broken glass jumping up. I probably put my hand out to
steady myself and touched the knob without noticing it. How
unfortunate!"

"Again," said the count, "I must question your right use of words. You
said 'unfortunate,' did you not?"

"There is one other thing which has puzzled me," Count Michael went on.
"Peter Sissek's wife thinks she saw you come back to the garage two
mornings back soon after sunrise. She was wrong?"

"She was right," Pauline replied, "I could not sleep so I went out to
try and find the missing coat."

"What loyal helpers surround me," the count murmured. "Before you retire
to your well earned night's rest one other question."

"As many as you please," said Pauline, some of her burden of anxiety
lifted. "What is it?"

"This thief knew of the presence here of certain exalted personages. He
had never been anywhere but in the kitchen quarters and his own room. No
servant of mine would have told him anything. There were many hours when
I was busy and you played golf that you could have told him. I want your
word that the information did not come from you."

"You have it," she said lightly. "Now as that is all I shall go to my
room. This hideous place chills me."

"Pauline," Count Michael said sternly, "I have given you every chance to
tell the truth. You have lied. It is in your nature to lie but I thought
that one of your training would know when the time came to speak the
truth. Such an hour is at hand. The man was your lover. You helped him
to escape. That I am certain of. You have betrayed me and my cause--and
your cause too--because you are a light of love, a thing who will accept
a purchase price and then play false."

"My poor Michael," she said commiseratingly, "you drink too much of your
own plum brandy. Tonight you are crazy. Tomorrow I shall have you
begging for a smile from me. As it is I find you tedious. Hentzi, open
the door."

The secretary made no move to obey her.

She shrugged her shoulders. Neither of the men judged from her manner
the fear that began to enwrap her.

"Yours will be a cold smile tomorrow," Count Michael said, "and I, for
one, shall not envy it. You have betrayed me but in the end I have
triumphed. They have caught him Pauline. They are bringing him back to
you. Do you think you will be there to aid him when he is my prisoner
again?"

If Count Michael wished for tribute to his victory it was his now.

The confidence left her face. She was white and smileless. The courage
and bold carriage of her splendid body seemed taken from her. She leaned
heavily on the bare table. Hentzi, a prey always to emotion, could have
wept for her forgetting she was his master's enemy.

To Count Michael her attitude had the effect of whipping into white heat
his repressed and savage rage. He had tried to believe that he still
stood first in her affection. It was the vanity of the successful man
whose desire has outlived his fascination.

No woman could be stricken to the earth by news of the capture of a man
unless he were unutterably dear to her. It was clear confession of the
victory of Lord Rosecarrel's agent. What desire for mercy had been in
the count's heart died down. There came in its place the craving for
instant and brutal revenge.

"So you did help him?" he said in a low harsh voice.

"Yes," she answered. "I thought I had helped him to succeed."

"And you admit you told him of the presence here of the prince?"

"If you like," she said wearily, "If I denied it you would not believe
me."

"Take note of that, Hentzi," the count commanded him. "It is important,
this admission of guilt."

Pauline hardly heard him. The shock of learning that the man she adored
had been recaptured overwhelmed her. She tried to shut out the thought
of what punishment would be meted to him now.

"I will talk more tomorrow," she said brokenly.

"Do you not understand that for you there will be no tomorrow?" She
could see now that the count hated her. Jealousy had swept from him all
memory of past affection. He could only think of himself as one betrayed
by the man he hated. In vain she might look for mercy here.

"I am to be murdered?" she said looking from one to the other of the
two.

"You are to be executed," he said. "You took your oath to support this
movement and you have betrayed it. I have given you your chance to
confess and instead you perjured yourself." He raised a service revolver
from his table.

It was Hentzi who in this last black scene rose above his fears to plead
for her. The count waved his protests aside. The woman did not move.

"Madame," Hentzi cried almost hysterically. "You must not believe what
his excellency tells you."

"Silence," the count cried angrily.

But Hentzi would not be stayed. At heart he was generous and in a dumb,
hopeless fashion he had long cherished an affection for Pauline.

"He escaped," Hentzi continued, "We have just learned that they did not
capture him. Already he is on a fast war ship of his country far from
fear of pursuit."

It was as though a miracle had happened.

The color came again into Pauline's cheeks and the drooping, broken
figure grew tall, erect and commanding.

"So you lied to me, Michael," she said slowly. "You were ashamed to admit
that he had beaten you. But I should not have lost my faith in him so
easily." She turned to Hentzi. "Thank you my friend. You have made me
happy."

"Silence," the count cried. "Prepare yourself."

"You cannot hurt me now, Michael," she laughed. Hentzi thought she looked
like a young girl, splendid and triumphant with the wine of youth. "At
most you can take my life. As I can never have him whom I love I do not
mind. Perhaps I am a little grateful to you. Why does your hand tremble,
Michael?"

She held herself at this last moment with a brave insolence. Her head
was carried high and the count knew she was laughing at him for having
failed. He knew that her words were not idly spoken when she said she
would die happy because her lover had escaped.

She stood there flouting him, jeering at him, this woman through whose
actions his own safety was imperilled, the woman whose fascination had
so long enthralled him. And he realized that although it would be his
hands which would strike her to the dust yet she would be the victor.

Untrembling she looked into the black mouth of the revolver.

"Why do your hands shake?" she repeated. "Are you afraid he will come
back and rescue me?"

Hentzi covered his eyes as the spurt of flame jumped at her. It was his
shriek which rang out. Pauline met her death, triumphant, smiling,
unafraid.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN

_THE CABINET MEETING_


A fast destroyer is a wet and uncomfortable craft but Anthony Trent had
never enjoyed a voyage so much. Life in Castle Radna had been a greater
strain than he knew. He felt the need for relaxation. The trout stream
called him, the golf links tempted him. He felt very much as he had done
years before at Dartmouth when the rigors of the training period were
finished with. He was safe. He was free; and he was speeding northward
ho with the paper in his pocket which had seemed impossible of
attainment.

"I dare not run into Portsmouth," Maitland confided in him, "as I'd have
to report to the Admiral commanding and this news of yours is not for
his ears yet."

"Can't you get nearer London than Portsmouth?" Trent asked.

"We're headed for Sheerness at the mouth of the Thames. I can lie
quietly off Canvey Island and then train it to town. Later on when my
irregular proceedings are dilated upon I can get the First Lord of the
Admiralty to back me up. By the way," he said later, "Do you know the
Grenvils well?"

"Very well," Anthony Trent answered, "Why?"

"Then you probably know Rudolph Castoon. One of my sisters who knows
Lady Daphne says an engagement is rumoured between them."

"Nothing to it," Anthony Trent said confidently. "She doesn't even like
him as a friend. Does your sister know her well?"

"Next door neighbours in Cornwall," Maitland answered. "She married Lord
Polruan."

So it was Maitland's sister who had dubbed him an American adventurer
and indirectly warned the earl against the danger of having him on such
intimate terms! And this unassuming young naval officer was of course a
son of an earl, and would rightly be described as the Honourable
Willoughby Maitland. Anthony Trent smiled. He could not help thinking
how gratified his old housekeeper in Kennebago would be to think he
moved in such company.

The two men reached Liverpool Street station at ten o'clock at night and
taxied westward to Lord Rosecarrel's town house in Grosvenor Place.

The butler, that stern functionary who disapproved of democracy and the
ambitions of the new rich, beamed a welcome when he beheld Anthony
Trent. In a sense he felt the young American was one of the family. His
greeting to Trent's friend as the son of an earl was respectful, but to
Anthony he vouchsafed especial courtesy. It was very grateful to the
wanderer. It was like coming home to a man who has no abiding place.

"His Lordship is attending a cabinet meeting," he said. "Her Ladyship
is at an Albert Hall concert and Mr. Arthur is out of town."

It was plain from his manner that he expected Anthony Trent to make his
quarters in the Rosecarrel town house.

"I must see his lordship instantly," Trent said. "Tell one of your men
to whistle for a taxi."

"You seem to be very popular with old Barlow," Maitland said.

"I have spent the happiest hours of my life at Rosecarrel Castle,"
Anthony Trent said, Maitland thought with some little reserve.

At Downing Street the prime minister's butler could not conceive of such
a thing as an interrupted cabinet meeting.

"It is business of state," Anthony Trent said loftily. "If you feel you
have a right to dictate terms very well. But," he continued
impressively, "I will promise you one thing. From tomorrow on, you will
buttle for someone else."

It happened that the cabinet meeting, which had to do with domestic
finance, was already ended.

The prime minister glanced at the card sent in, and turned to the
private secretary of the Earl of Rosecarrel who had just entered the
room.

"That splendid young man Willoughby Maitland who did so well at
Zeebrugge is demanding an audience. I am rather tired. Do you mind
seeing if it is of importance?"

"Certainly not, sir," said Colonel Langley.

He stopped short when he saw who accompanied the naval officer, and
learned that it was Anthony Trent who had business with the premier.

"The last time I saw you," he said stiffly, "was under circumstances
which give you no right to expect me to plead your cause."

"That may be," Trent said equably, "but I am here not to converse with
you but your superiors. By the way who is prime minister now?"

"Llewellyn Morgan," Maitland said. "His third term."

It was Llewellyn Morgan Trent had met in Cornwall. Things looked
brighter. "The premier knows me," he said to Colonel Langley, "and you
are no doubt aware I am privileged to call Lord Rosecarrel my friend."

When the two reached the simply furnished room Lord Rosecarrel looked at
the American with wide open eyes.

"My dear boy," he said affectionately, gripping both his hands. "I do
not think you can believe how glad I am to see you."

"Isn't this the young man who had the presumption to outdrive me forty
yards every time we stepped to a tee?"

The Right Honourable Llewellyn Morgan greeted him in so friendly a
fashion that Colonel Langley was astounded. But there was another man,
of cabinet rank, who scowled when he beheld it. Rudolph Castoon had
attained his desire. He was now Chancellor of the Exchequer. And Castoon
knew in his heart that it was because of Anthony Trent Lady Daphne
Grenvil had refused him.

"Do I understand," he said, with a show of friendliness, "that you have
news of such importance that it justifies, shall I say breaking in upon
us here?"

"It is for the premier to decide," Trent said. Then he looked at Colonel
Langley and took his revenge. Trent addressed the pleasant and amiable
personage who sat at the head of the table. "Have I your word for it
that this gentleman is entirely to be trusted?"

"He is my private secretary," Lord Rosecarrel said quickly.

"By all means let him remain," the premier decided.

Lord Rosecarrel was vaguely disturbed. So far as he knew there was
nothing Trent could have learned at Castle Radna which justified this.
To tell the assembled members of the cabinet of his errand and its
success would spell disaster to the one who had sent him.

"Briefly it is this," Trent began, "Prince William, of Misselbach, was
not drowned although a real corpse was buried. He is at the present time
hiding and Count Michael Temesvar is planning to put him upon the throne
of Hungary. I have seen him with my own eyes a dozen times although he
was not aware of it. I had the luck to get a list of names of the prime
movers in it. I could not keep the paper so I memorized them and wrote
them down while on the destroyer which brought me from Fiume."

Trent passed it across the table to the prime minister.

"This is exceedingly important," he declared after reading it quickly.
"Mr. Trent you have performed a service to this government and your own
which entitles you to a reward of no mean character. Now have the
goodness to answer these questions."

They were fired at him quickly and embraced a variety of subjects. It
was only because of his retentive memory and trained powers of
observation that he was able to satisfy the premier.

"It is unfortunate," said Rudolph Castoon, "that Mr. Trent was not able
to bring us the original document. One's memory, even when one's
intentions are of the best, can play off tricks."

He said it so obviously to discredit the American that Trent flushed and
disclosed something that he had not meant publicly to announce.

"Do you know Baron Adolf Castoon?" he asked.

"Naturally," Castoon answered, "One does not easily forget to know one's
eldest brother."

"Then I have news of your eldest brother which will cause you infinite
concern," Trent said, with sympathy in his voice. "Baron Adolf is
financing this revolutionary movement. I brought him up from Fiume one
day and being assured I did not understand a word of German he was
indiscreet enough to talk about it."

"It is a lie," Rudolph Castoon cried. "Adolf is loyal to the interests
of the Allies. His public speeches are evidence of it."

"But I am speaking of private speeches," Trent said smiling.

"What were you doing that you came to drive him?"

"Acting as chauffeur," Trent replied. "I stored many interesting facts
in my brain during that four hour ride."

"Of course," Castoon said turning to his chief, "you do not believe this
sir?"

"I can only say that Baron Adolf's printed speeches, a copy of which you
sent me, did not interest me greatly. I am much more eager to hear what
he said in private."

"First of all," Castoon said, "may I ask why it was this young man went
to the trouble of acting as chauffeur. It may be, of course, that it is
his profession."

"That's interesting," Colonel Langley commented, "Why did he go there at
all?"

"I went," said Anthony Trent, "because Lord Rosecarrel, who knows Count
Michael and mistrusts him, asked me to go. He had an idea that I might be
useful. I went and I think I can assure him I have succeeded in what he
desired me to do."

Lord Rosecarrel breathed a sigh of relief. So, after all, this
mysterious American had freed him from bondage.

Mr. Llewellyn Morgan looked at his friend reproachfully.

"And to have kept it from me," he said.

"The credit belongs to Mr. Trent and not to me," said Lord Rosecarrel.
"To give merely a hint and have it followed to successful conclusion by
another is not the lot of many. For my part I can never cease to feel
under obligation to him."

"What we have heard," said the premier, "is under the seal of the most
absolute secrecy." He turned to Castoon. "I am sorry for the news you
have heard but it was not a matter of surprise to me. I have long heard
unpleasing rumours as to the baron's sympathies. You understand that he
must not be apprised in any way of this?"

"Certainly sir," Castoon returned stiffly. "I can hardly see the
necessity of reminding me of it."

When the meeting had broken up Anthony Trent was amazed to see Colonel
Langley's outstretched hand.

"I must apologize," he said frankly, "I did not know that you were
working for my chief or that he regarded you so highly. You shoot I
suppose?"

"Crazy over it," Anthony Trent admitted.

"I wish you would be one of the guns next September the first. My place
is at Dereham Old Hall in Norfolk. You have never been to that part of
the world I imagine?"

Anthony Trent looked at the tall colonel and understood.

"Never," he said, "but I shall be delighted to come."

       *       *       *       *       *

Maitland remained after the others left. It was necessary that the
premier should endorse his conduct with his own chief. British
destroyers are not designed as passenger boats.

"Of course you are going to make your headquarters with us?" Lord
Rosecarrel said and pointed to his waiting limousine.

"I think not," Trent returned. He had not forgotten that when he planned
to go to Castle Radna he gave his word that he would seek no reward. To
go back to Grosvenor Place would seem as though he had forgotten this.

"But I insist," the earl said.

"You are asking me to put myself in torment," he returned.

"Fiddlesticks!" the other cried, "How youth exaggerates."

Anthony Trent felt it was weak of him but he climbed into the car. The
thought of seeing Daphne again was intoxicating. He was grateful that
there was silence during the five minute ride.

The butler informed his master that Lady Daphne had come in and was now
in bed.

"Did she know I was here?" Trent asked him.

"No, sir," said the man, "I did not see her ladyship."

The earl pushed a silver cigarette box over the table of his library.

"I don't want to talk of politics," he said, "until tomorrow."

"Nor I," Trent answered and passed the draft of the treaty to the other.

The earl held it in his fingers until the flame reached them. The paper
was now ashes and a memory.

"Anthony Trent," said the earl, "No matter what you have done or what
things have conspired to make your life unfortunate, you are a
chivalrous gentleman. Let me smoke in silence for a little. My heart is
too full for speech."

"Now," he said later, "Let me tell you about Arthur. He is splendid. He
is my own lad again. The years that the locusts have eaten are still
blotted from him. He has confidence in himself. He is marrying one of
the dearest of girls next month. You are back in time. It is no secret
that you are to be his best man."

"That's good news indeed," Trent said heartily.

"It has made me very happy," the earl said slowly, "and incidentally
made me examine my conduct rather more severely than I had ever thought
of doing."

"I'm afraid I don't see what you mean sir," the younger man said during
the long pause.

"I will tell you. Here was the girl. Young, beautiful, of a great
family. She had everything to offer and my son loved her. Here was the
problem. Had I the right to let her marry him when there lay behind him
those misspent years? I wondered whether I was not bound to tell her
father of what he had done. It was true he was not responsible but
nevertheless he had done them. In the end I persuaded myself that where
love existed as it did between my son and the woman he is to marry,
pasts counted for little."

Anthony Trent looked at him for a long time in silence.

"Had you any especial reason for telling me this?" he asked.

Lord Rosecarrel smiled.

"I am tired and must sleep," he said, "and my wits may be
wool-gathering; but you know me well enough, I hope, to be sure that I
have my reasons for making confidences."

"I am afraid to say what I think," stammered Anthony Trent.

"Then put it off until tomorrow," the earl laughed, "Go and sleep, my
dear boy, even though it may be in torment. We breakfast rather later
here than in the country. I don't suppose Daphne will be down until ten.
We keep such late hours."




CHAPTER FIFTEEN

_ANTHONY THE TRIUMPHANT_


The butler tapped upon Trent's door before nine next morning.

"I've just taken a telephone message for you, Mr. Anthony, very
important if I may judge."

"Come in and tell me about it," the American said. He could not imagine
who knew his whereabouts. It must be Maitland, he supposed, who had
promised to see him before he joined his destroyer again if it were
possible.

"It's from the American Embassy," the butler informed him.

"What?" Trent demanded. "Are you sure?"

The American Embassy! What had he to do with that? Once behind the doors
he was on American soil and subject to her jurisdiction.

"It was a message saying that the ambassador must see you at once. I
took the liberty of saying I thought you could get there by half past
nine. A motor will be waiting when you have dressed."

Anthony Trent sat on the edge of his bed and saw all his high hopes
dashed to earth. Someone must have told the ambassador of this young
fellow countryman of his who was on intimate terms with a cabinet
minister. And the ambassador with the aid of his intelligence
department must have run him to earth.

For a moment he wondered whether it would not be wiser to make a run for
it. Maitland now assured of his _bona fides_ would not hesitate to take
him with him and land him at some lonely spot on the Italian coast by
night. He had money and his wits. It would be beginning life over again
but it would be better than disgrace here in London.

Then his fighting side asserted itself. He would not be frightened into
flight before he was convinced flight was necessary.

There was another visitor in the American ambassador's waiting room, a
man of middle age who smoked an excellent cigar. He turned as Trent
entered.

"Morning," said Trent morosely. He was annoyed to find that he had to
speak. It was the publisher of a chain of magazines for one of which
Trent used to write when engaged in the manufacture of light fiction. He
had often smoked one of the millionaire's celebrated cigars.

"Good morning," said the publisher graciously. "It's a long time since I
saw you."

"The ambassador keeps extraordinary hours," Trent commented.

"He's a business man," the other explained, "Not bred to the old time
diplomacy, just a plain, business man."

"What have you done that he sent for you?"

"You don't seem to understand," the publisher said mildly.

"I only understand," Trent said, still irritably, "that I'm being kept
waiting. He was to see me at nine thirty and it's now twenty minutes to
breakfast."

"He was on the minute," the other laughed, "Where have you been not to
know I'm the ambassador?"

"You!" said Trent in amazement.

"And I'm making a damned good one," the diplomat said, "even if I do get
up hours before the rest of 'em."

"What am I here for?" Trent demanded.

"Congratulations mainly," said the ambassador. "I was waked out of sleep
at after midnight by the prime minister. He wanted to know if I had
heard of an American called Anthony Trent. I said 'Sure. He used to
write for me. Anthony Trent is all right.' The way these Londoners keep
up half the night is something shocking."

"I still don't see why you've sent for me, Mr. Hill."

"I'll explain," said the ambassador. His manner was serious, so serious
indeed that Anthony Trent was infinitely perturbed. "You may not know it
but you've rendered your country a considerable service. Over here in
the Birthday or New Year honours list you'll find decorations awarded
men the public knows nothing about. Trent, sometimes they are given for
work like you have done. We don't give orders or decorations or grants
of money. If we did you'd have one coming to you. What you've done won't
even come before Congress. You'll be a mute inglorious Milton, but--if
the day comes when you need help, if you should ever be in a tight
place, remember you've got something to trade with. I'm not going to
mention this again but you bear it in mind."

"I certainly will," Trent said gratefully. Then he spoke a little
hesitatingly. "Be frank with me, Mr. Hill. I ask this as a personal
favor. Had you anything at the back of your mind when you spoke about my
being in a tight place or needing help?"

"No," the ambassador said after a mental reaction which could be
measured in seconds. "But you've made enemies here. Some of 'em have
sent in asking what you do for your livelihood. Of course I remembered
that Australian uncle. He certainly must have cut up rich."

"He did," Anthony Trent said sombrely. He had invented an Australian
uncle years before to account for possession of the large sums of money
his professional work netted him. Oddly enough the memory gave him
little pleasure now.

"I was able to assure the inquisitive," the diplomat declared, "that I
had known you for years."

Enemies! Castoon perhaps, who hated him on sight, and possibly the
Colonel Langley who was now his friend. What others unknown to him might
there not be! And there was Lady Polruan sister of Willoughby Maitland.
She probably would be influenced by her favorite brother and receive
him on a friendly footing if they met again. These people he knew. But
it was the unknowns who bothered him.

"Was Rudolph Castoon one of them?" he inquired.

"The Chancellor of the Exchequer?" Hill laughed. "My boy you have
certainly got right into the top-hole set here. The inquisitive ones
were your own countryfolk who were jealous that a man not even in the
Social Register got in on intimate terms with the great families. Maybe
they wanted to get your formula. Nothing serious. I've got a busy
morning. Lunch with me at one tomorrow?"

"Gladly," Anthony Trent returned, his manner brighter. Never had he
shaken hands so heartily with his old publisher.

"It's done me good to see you," he exclaimed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The friendly butler informed Trent in confidence that Lady Daphne was
not yet down. His lordship was already riding in the Row.

"Her ladyship has not been informed of your arrival," said the butler.
"She is expected down in a few minutes. I have ordered kidneys and bacon
_en brochette_ for you, sir."

"This feels like being really at home," the American said. "I have
wanted that for breakfast every morning I've been away and never once
had the luck to get it."

Below stairs the butler informed the housekeeper, who later retailed it
to maids, that Mr. Anthony seemed very nervous. A footman openly
rejoiced when he overheard the butler's conversation with the
housekeeper that his duties would enable him to witness the meeting of
his mistress and the American.

"There will be nobody in the breakfast room when her ladyship enters but
Mr. Anthony," his superior said firmly. "Haven't you got any romance in
you, Simpkins?"

"Yes," answered the footman simply, "that's why I want to see them."

Anthony Trent was sitting in a big winged chair by the fire when Daphne
entered. She walked to the table and picked up some letters without
seeing him. At every mail she expected to hear from him and now was
another of these continual disappointments. Invitations, letters from
friends and relatives, but never a one from the man she loved.

Watching her Anthony Trent was a victim to many emotions. The rumor
which he had confidently disputed that she was engaged to Rudolph
Castoon now assumed a guise of probability. Why not? He had left her
expecting never to see her again. He had convinced her of the
unsurmountable barrier between them, a barrier which still existed. What
a fool he had been to twist the earl's statement about Arthur into
something that spelled hope when none was intended.

That he was here was due to the feeling on Lord Rosecarrel's part that
he deserved courtesy at the hands of the Grenvils. Before leaving for
Croatia he had assured the elder man that he would not claim a reward.
And here he was within a few feet of Daphne. What he should have done
was to call and greet her in a friendly fashion, a fashion which would
have told her that he realized there could no longer be any pretence of
intimacy between them. Instead he was hiding in a deep chair and must
presently disclose himself.

He noticed anxiously that she was looking frail and tired. There was a
sadness on her face which he had not seen there before. It was, he
decided, a hopelessness, a lack of the vivacity which had always
distinguished her.

It was when the butler had decided time enough had elapsed for greeting
that Simpkins was allowed to bear in silver dishes of food.

It was the footman's entrance which made the girl look up from her
unopened collection of letters. She did not see Simpkins. She saw only
the man in the chair, the tall, slim man who rose almost awkwardly when
he met her wide-open eyes.

Ordinarily self possessed, never at a loss for a word or embarrassed,
Anthony Trent stood there dumb and looked at her.

"Oh Tony, Tony!" she cried.

Immensely gratified, Simpkins beheld the American gather her to him.
Honest Simpkins had tears in his eyes. He went from the room blindly,
his mission unaccomplished. He had seen Love so near to him that he was
dazzled.

It was in Daphne's own sitting room facing St. James' Park that they
were able to talk coherently. "Why do you suddenly look so grave on this
morning of all mornings in my life?" she asked tenderly.

"Darling," he said, "I can't keep on living in this doubt any longer.
You know what I said in Cornwall?"

"That's so long ago. I forget. Exactly what did my wise Tony say? I only
remember that he said he loved me."

"I shall always say that," he said softly. "Daphne, I must not go on
deluding myself any longer. I ought not to have seen you. It was only
because your father was courteous and I was weak that I came."

"You have seen father?" she cried.

"Last night," he told her. "I was with him for an hour. He was very
kind."

"Did he tell you about Arthur?"

"He said he was going to be married."

She looked at her Tony with a smile he could not understand. There was
certainty in it content, assurance. It was as though there were no
barriers that kept him from her.

"My wise Tony," she said, "there is much for you to learn. Let us leave
Grosvenor Place and go to Australia in the first place."

"Australia?" he cried uneasily. For the second time within a few hours
the island continent had arisen to confound him.

"Yes, Australia," she said. "You remember that my father bought a place
there for Arthur?"

He had often heard of it. It was a magnificent property of a hundred
thousand acres. Great flocks of sheep and cattle grazed on it and there
were hundreds of horses. There were lakes on it where the rainbow trout
grew to fifteen pounds in weight. He had seen photographs of the big
house with its tennis courts, its outside swimming pool, its walled
gardens. It was administered, he knew, by intelligent superintendents
and capable of even greater development.

"A wonderful place," he said. "Yes, I remember. Your father wanted to
sell it."

"He has given it away instead."

"Given away a place like that?"

"Perhaps I ought not to say given away," she smiled. "He has given it in
exchange for what business people call collateral. He has given it to
you, Tony, subject to certain conditions."

"Me?" he cried, "Oh no! Impossible. I couldn't take it."

"But you haven't even heard the conditions," she said. "I go with it. It
must be kept in the family."

Anthony Trent had a vision of the future. He saw himself a clean man
again, a man with hard work before him and great responsibilities. He
remembered his country's ambassador and the cryptic utterances which
might mean so much. The new life in the new country where none knew him.
The realization of those dreams of children who need never be ashamed of
their parentage. And all this was offered him.

Daphne looking at him saw that the eyes which she had sometimes thought
were hard were softened now. None but she had ever seen tears in the
eyes of Anthony Trent who had once been the Master Criminal.

"Oh Daphne," he said brokenly. "Daphne."

THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Secret of the Silver Car, by Wyndham Martyn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET OF THE SILVER CAR ***

***** This file should be named 40372.txt or 40372.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/3/7/40372/

Produced by Annie R. McGuire. This book was produced from
scanned images of public domain material from the Google
Print archive.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
