The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pedler of Dust Sticks, by Eliza Lee Follen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Pedler of Dust Sticks

Author: Eliza Lee Follen

Posting Date: June 11, 2009 [EBook #4040]
Release Date: May 2003,
First Posted: October 19, 2001

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEDLER OF DUST STICKS ***




Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.










THE PEDLER OF DUST STICKS


BY

MRS. FOLLEN



With illustrations by Billings



CONTENTS

  THE PEDLER OF DUST STICKS.
  "ON THE GRAVE OF THE GOOD, GREAT MAN."
  THE MIGHTY DEEDS OF ABC.
  WHAT DAY IS IT?
  THE CHILD AT HER MOTHER'S GRAVE.
  EVENING PRAYER.
  THE SABBATH IS HERE.
  TO A BUTTERFLY.




THE PEDLER OF DUST STICKS.


One day I went to visit a friend, a lady, who came from Hamburg, in
Germany. I was much pleased with a portrait which was hanging up in
her room, and I was particularly struck by the ornamental drawings
with which the picture was surrounded. They consisted of whip
handles, canes, piano keys, mouth-pieces for wind instruments, all
sorts of umbrellas, and many more things, of every sort, made of
cane and whalebone. The arrangement was so ingenious, the designs so
fanciful, and the execution so good, that nothing could be prettier.
But what of course was of the most importance, was the face and head
that they were meant to ornament. "What a benevolent, what a
beautiful face!" I said. "Who is it?"

"My father," the lady replied; "and he is more beautiful than the
picture, and he is still more kind than he looks there."

"What is the meaning of all these bits of bamboo and these little
canes, so fancifully arranged around the picture?" I asked.

"These little sticks," she replied, "tell the story of my father's
success, and of the beginning of his greatness. He began his noble
and honorable life as a little Pedler of Dust Sticks."

"Pedler of Dust Sticks?"

"Yes," she said; "if you would like to hear his history, I will
relate it."

I replied that nothing could please me better; that I considered the
life of a good, great man the most beautiful of all stories.

"I will tell it to you just as it was; and you may, if you please,
repeat it for the benefit of any one."

When I had returned home I wrote the story down, just as I
remembered it, as she had given me leave to do.

The Christian name of our hero was Henry, and so we will call him.
His parents lived in Hamburg, in Germany. They were very poor. His
father was a cabinet maker, with a very small business. Henry was
the second of eight children. As soon as he was eight years old, his
father, in order to raise a few more shillings to support his
family, sent him into the streets to sell little pieces of ratan,
which the people there use to beat the dust out of their clothes.

Henry got about a cent and a half apiece for the sticks. If he sold
a great number of these little sticks, he was allowed, as a reward,
to go to an evening school, where he could learn to read. This was a
great pleasure to him; but he wanted also to learn to write. For
this, however, something extra was to be paid, and Henry was very
anxious to earn more, that he might have this advantage.

There is a fine public walk in Hamburg, where the fashionable people
go, in good weather, to see and be seen; and where the young men go
to wait upon and see the ladies. These gentlemen were fond of having
little canes in their hands, to play with, to switch their boots
with, and to show the young ladies how gracefully they could move
their arms; and sometimes to write names in the sand. So little
Henry thought of making some very pretty canes, and selling them to
these young beaux.

He soaked his canes for a long time in warm water, and bent the tops
round for a handle, and then ornamented them with his penknife, and
made them really very pretty. Then he went to the public walk, and
when he saw a young man walking alone, he went up to him, and with a
sweet and pleasant voice, he would say, "Will you buy a pretty cane,
sir? Six cents apiece."

Almost every gentleman took one of the canes.

With the money he got for his canes he was able to pay for lessons
in writing. This made him very happy, for it was the reward of his
own industry and ingenuity.

As soon as Henry was old enough, his father employed him to carry
home the work to customers. The boy had such a beautiful
countenance, was so intelligent, and had such a pleasant manner,
that many of the customers wanted to have him come and live with
them, and promised to take good care of him; but Henry always said,
"No, I prefer staying with my father, and helping him."

Every day the little fellow would take his bundle of dust sticks and
little canes in a box he had for the purpose, and walk up and down
the streets, offering them to every one who he thought would buy
them. And happy enough was he when he sold them all and brought home
the money to his poor father, who found it so hard to support a
large family.

All the evenings when Henry was not so happy as to go to school, he
worked as long as he could keep his eyes open.

He was very skilful, and made his canes so pretty, and he was such a
good boy, that he made many friends, and almost always found a good
market for his sticks.

The poor fellow was very anxious to get money. Often his father's
customers gave him a few pence. Once he came near risking his life
to obtain a small sum. He was very strong and active, and excelled
in all the common exercises of boys; such as running, jumping, &c.
One day he got up on the top of a very high baggage wagon, and
called to the boys below, and asked them how many pence they would
give him if he would jump off of it to the ground. Some one offered
two.

"Two are too few to risk my life for," he replied.

They then promised to double the number; and he was upon the point
of jumping, when he felt a smart slap on his back.

"That's what you shall have for risking your life for a few pence,"
said his father, who, unobserved by Henry, had heard what had
passed, and climbed up the wagon just in time to save Henry from
perhaps breaking his neck, or at least some of his limbs.

Henry was very fond of skating, but he had no skates. One day, when
the weather and ice were fine, he went to see the skaters. He had
only a few pence in his pocket, and he offered them for the use of a
pair of skates for a little while; but the person who had skates to
let could get more for them, and so he refused poor Henry. There was
near by, at the time, a man whose profession was gambling; and he
said to Henry, "I will show you a way by which you can double and
triple your money, if you will come with me."

Henry followed him to a little booth, in which was a table and some
chairs; and there the man taught him a gambling game, by which, in a
few minutes, he won a dollar.

Henry was going away with his money, thinking with delight of the
pleasure he should have in skating, and also of the money that would
be left to carry home to his poor father, when the gambler said to
him, "You foolish boy, why won't you play longer, and double your
dollar? You may as well have two or three dollars as one."

Henry played again, and lost not only what he had won, but the few
pence he had when he came upon the ice.

Henry was fortunate enough that day, after this occurrence, to sell
a few pretty canes, and so had some money to carry to his father;
but still he went home with a heavy heart, for he knew that he had
done a very foolish thing.

He had learned, by this most fortunate ill luck, what gambling was;
and he made a resolution then, which he faithfully kept through his
whole after life, never to allow any poverty, any temptation
whatever, to induce him to gamble.

Henry continually improved in his manufacture of canes, and he often
succeeded in getting money enough to pay for his writing lessons.

There were Jews in the city, who sold canes as he did, and he would
often make an exchange with them; even if they insisted upon having
two or three of his for one of theirs; he would consent to the
bargain, when he could get from them a pretty cane; and then he
would carry it home, and imitate it, so that his canes were much
admired; and the little fellow gained customers and friends too
every day.

The bad boys in the city he would have nothing to do with; he
treated them civilly, but he did not play with them, nor have them
for his friends. He could not take pleasure in their society.

Henry was a great lover of nature. He spent much of his life out in
the open air, under the blue skies; and he did not fail to notice
what a grand and beautiful roof there was over his head. The clouds
by day, the stars by night, were a continued delight to him. The
warm sunshine in winter, and the cool shade of the trees in summer,
he enjoyed more than many a rich boy does the splendid furniture and
pictures in his father's house.

One beautiful summer afternoon he was going, with his canes on his
shoulder, through the public promenade on the banks of the little
bay around which was the public walk. The waves looked so blue, and
the air was so delicious, that he was resolved he would treat
himself to a row upon the sparkling waters; so he hired a little
boat, and then got some long branches from the trees on the shore,
and stuck them all around the edges of his boat, and tied them
together by their tops, so as to make an arbor in the boat, and got
in and rowed himself about, whistling all the tunes he knew for his
music, to his heart's content. He went alone, for he had no
companion that he liked; and he would have none other.

At last what should he see but his father, walking on the bank.

Henry knew that his father would be very angry with him, for he was
a severe man; but he determined to bear his punishment, let it be
what it would, patiently; for he knew, when he went, that his father
would not like it; and yet he said, in telling this story to a
friend, "I was so happy, and this pleasure was so innocent, that I
could not feel as sorry as I ought to feel."

Henry bore his punishment like a brave boy.

It was too bad for the poor fellow to have no pleasures; nothing but
work all the time. This was especially hard for him, for no one
loved amusement better than he.

He relished a piece of fun exceedingly. In the city of Hamburg there
was a place where young girls were always to be seen with flowers in
their hands to sell. He had observed that the Jews, of whom he
bought the pretty canes, were often rude to them, and he determined
to punish some of them. There was one who wore a wig, with a long
queue to it. The girls had their long hair braided and left hanging
down behind.

One day this man was sitting in this flower market, with his back to
one of these girls, and Henry took the opportunity, and before
either knew what he did, he tied the two queues together; the young
girl happened not to like her seat very well, and got up rather
suddenly to change it, and off she went with the Jew's wig dangling
behind her, much to the amusement of the spectators, and especially
of Henry, who saw and enjoyed it all highly, though pretending to be
very busy selling a cane to a gentleman, who joined in the general
laugh.

Lucky it was for Henry that the Jew did not discover who it was that
had played this roguish trick.

Henry saw how difficult it was for his father to support the family,
and was very earnest to get money in any honest way. One day the
managers of a theatre hired him to take part in a play, where they
wanted to make a crowd. He was pleased at the thought of making some
money to carry home; but when he went behind the scenes, and saw all
that the actors did, he ran away and left them, caring not for the
money, so he could but get away from such disgusting things.

Thus did Henry live, working from early morning till night, going to
school with a little of the money he had earned, when his father
would allow him to take it; keeping himself unstained by the
wickedness that he often saw and heard in his walks through the
city; observing every thing worth noticing, and making friends every
where by his honesty, purity, and kind-heartedness.

At this time the French were in Hamburg, provisions were dearer than
ever, and Henry's father, with all the help he received from his
son, could not support his family in the city.

One day he called Henry, and said, "Do you think you could support
your mother and younger sister and brother in some other place?"
Henry replied directly, "Yes, dear father, I can; at least, I will
try." So his father sent him with this part of his family to a
cheaper place, about fifty miles inland. He gave him five dollars
and his blessing, as they parted.

Here was our friend Henry in a strange town, a small place, with no
friends there, but just fifteen years old, and with his mother, and
brother, and sister depending upon him for their daily bread.

Henry was a brave boy; so he did not allow himself to fear. With his
five dollars he secured small, cheap rooms for a week, bought some
bread and milk for the family, and after a good night's sleep set
out, the next morning, to obtain work. He went into the street, and
after a while read upon a sign, "Furniture varnished." He went into
the shop and asked for work. The man asked him if he could varnish
well. Henry replied, "Yes, I can." He was very skilful, and he had
varnished his canes sometimes, and he felt sure he could.

"You came from Hamburg?"

"Yes, sir."

"Perhaps you know some new and better way than we have of
varnishing?"

"What method do you take?" asked Henry.

The man told him.

Here Henry's habit of observing was the means of his getting bread
for himself and family. He had noticed a new and better way that
varnishers employed in Hamburg, and though he had not tried it with
his own hands, he was sure he could imitate what he had seen. He
said that he knew a better way. The man engaged him for a week, and
was much pleased with his work; he did not want him long, but gave
him a recommendation when he parted with him.

After this Henry went to the baker of whom he had bought bread for
the family, and asked him for employment. The baker told him he
wanted his house painted, and asked him if he could do it.

"Yes," said Henry, "I can do it well, I know."

The baker liked him very much, and gave him the job without any
hesitation.

The baker's apprentices had noticed what a good fellow Henry was,
and would often give him, in addition to the loaf for the family,
some nice cakes to carry home. So he was, as you see, now working
among friends.

Henry had never painted before; but he had observed painters at
their work, and he did it well. He soon became known to all the
people of the town, and made many friends. He was never idle. He
made canes when he had no other work. He varnished, or painted, or
did anything that he could get to do, and supported the whole family
comfortably for two years.

At the end of this time, his father sent to him to bring the family
home to Hamburg. Henry left without a single debt, and in the place
of the five dollars carried home ten to his father.

I must tell you of a piece of Henry's economy and self-denial. He
grew very fast, and his boots became too small for him. While he was
getting every thing comfortable for others, he denied himself a pair
of new boots, and used to oil the old ones every time he put them
on, so as to be able to get his feet into them, and never complained
of the pain.

Our hero--for I am sure he was a true hero--was now seventeen. The
French had left Hamburg when he returned, but it was still necessary
to have a body of soldiers to protect it, and he joined a corps of
young men. They made him distributer of provisions. His office was
one given only to those known to be honest and worthy of confidence.
The citizens began even then to show their respect for the little
pedler of dust sticks and canes. We shall see what he was yet to be.

Henry returned to cane-making, to which he and his father soon added
work in whalebone. They were pretty successful, but, as they had
very little money to purchase stock and tools, could not make a
great business.

It was about this time that Henry became acquainted with one who was
to form the greatest happiness of his life. There was a poor girl in
Hamburg who was a seamstress, and who not only supported herself but
her mother by her needle. Her name was Agatha. She had a lovely face
and very engaging manners; her character was still more lovely than
her face; and she had only these to recommend her, for she was very
poor. Henry became strongly attached to her, and she soon returned
his love.

Henry's father and mother did not approve of this connection because
the girl was very poor; and as their son was so handsome and
agreeable, had now many friends, and was very capable, they thought
that he might marry the daughter of some rich man perhaps, and so
get some money. But, although Henry was ready to jump from a wagon
twenty feet high for a few pence, and would walk the streets of the
city twelve hours a day for money, he would not so disgrace himself
as to give that most precious of all things, his heart, for gold,
and so he told his parents.

"I shall," said he, "marry my dear Agatha, or I shall never marry
any one. She is good, and gentle, and beautiful; and if I live, she
shall have money enough too, for I can and will earn it for her. I
shall work harder and better now than I ever did before, because I
shall be working for one whom I love so dearly."

Henry's parents saw that it was in vain to oppose him, that it would
only drive him out of the house, and that they should thus lose him
and his work too; so they gave the matter up.

From this time Henry worked more industriously, if possible, than
ever. He did the same for his father as before; but he contrived
also to find some hours in which he might work for himself
exclusively. All that he earned at these times he devoted to his new
and dearest friend. He would purchase with the money he earned some
pretty or comfortable thing to wear that she wished and had denied
herself; or sometimes he would get some nice thing for her to eat;
for she had delicate health, and but little appetite.

After work was done in the shop, and the family had gone to bed,
Henry used to hasten to his dear Agatha, and pass two or three happy
hours with her. They both had fine voices, and many an hour they
would sing together, till they would forget the weariness of the
day, and the fact that they had nothing but their love for each
other to bless themselves with in this world. They worked harder,
they denied themselves more than ever, they were more careful to be
wise and good for the sake of each other; and so their love made
them better as well as happier.

At last, when Henry was nineteen, his parents consented to his
marrying and bringing his wife home to their house. As there was no
money to spare, they could only have a very quiet wedding. They were
married with-out any parade or expense, and never were two
excellent beings happier than they.

The young wife made herself very useful in her husband's family. She
worked very hard,--her husband thought harder than she ought to
work,--and he was anxious to be independent, and have a house of his
own, where he could take more care of her, and prevent her injuring
herself by labor.

There was some money due his father in Bremen; and, after living at
home a year or so, Henry took his wife with him, and went there to
collect the money.

There they lived two years, and there they suffered severely. They
were very poor, and they met with misfortunes. At last Henry's wife
and their two children took the small-pox; but they all lived and
got well, and their love for each other was only made more perfect
by suffering; for they learned patience and fortitude, and were
confirmed in what they both before believed, that they could bear
any trouble if they could share it together.

At the end of the two years, they returned to Hamburg. During their
absence, Henry's mother had died, and his father had married a woman
who had a little property.

Henry now felt no longer anxious about his family, and set up for
himself in the cane and whalebone business. He took a small house,
just big enough for his family, and they invited his wife's sister
to live with them and assist in the work.

Henry was very desirous of setting up a cane and whalebone factory,
and doing business upon a larger scale, but had not the means to
obtain suitable machinery. He wanted a large boiler, but it was too
expensive, and he knew not what to do. Here his excellent character
was the cause of his success. A gentleman who had known him from the
time when he used to carry about dust sticks to sell came forward
and offered him a large boiler, and told him that he might pay for
it whenever he could conveniently. Henry accepted the kind offer,
and commenced business directly.

His old customers all came to him, and in a short time he was able
to hire a man to help him. It was not long before he wanted another,
and then another man. Every thing prospered with him. He made money
fast. His business grew larger constantly. He did all sorts of work
in whalebone and cane; now he added ivory, umbrella sticks, keys for
pianos, canes, and whip handles, and made all sorts of things in
which these materials are used.

Henry was so well acquainted with his business, so industrious and
faithful, was known to be so honest and just in his dealings, and
was so kind in his treatment of his workmen, that all who wanted
what he could supply went to him, and his success was very great. He
grew rich. It was not a great while before he was able to build a
large factory in the neighborhood of the city.

The little pedler of dust sticks was now one of the richest men in
Hamburg. He had four hundred men in his employ, had a large house in
town, and another in the country. He was thus able to indulge his
love for nature. After a hard day's work, he could come home and
enjoy the beautiful sunset, and look at the moon and stars in the
evening, and hear the nightingale sing, and join with his Agatha in
the song of praise to the Giver of all good things.

Henry did not, because he was rich, lead a lazy and selfish life. He
still worked with his own hands, and thus taught his workmen
himself, and made their work more easy and agreeable by his presence
as well as by his instructions. He was continually making
improvements in his business, inventing new things, and so keeping
up his reputation. He exported large quantities of the articles made
in his factory. Every year his business grew larger, and he gained
still higher reputation.

Henry's fellow-citizens offered him some of the highest offices of
honor and profit which the city had to bestow; but he refused them.
The only ones he accepted were those that gave no pay. He was one of
the overseers of the poor, and was always one of the first to aid,
in any way he could, plans for the benefit of his suffering
fellow-beings. He gave money himself generously, but was very anxious
not to have his charities made public.

He was one of the directors of the first railroad from Hamburg.

He engaged all his workmen with reference to their character as well
as their capacity, and no one of them ever left him. He was their
best benefactor and friend.

So lived this excellent man, as happy as he was good and useful, for
sixteen years with his dear wife; they had seven living children;
but, as I before told you, she had very delicate health, and it was
the will of God that these two loving hearts should be separated in
this world, as we hope, to meet in heaven to part no more. After
sixteen years of perfect love and joy, he parted with his dear
Agatha.

Henry bore his sorrow meekly and patiently. He did not speak, he
could not weep; but life was never again the same thing to him; he
never parted for a moment with the memory of his loving and
dearly-beloved wife. He was then only thirty-five years old, but he
never married again; and when urged to take another wife, he always
replied, "I cannot marry again." He felt that he was married forever
to his dear Agatha.

I must relate to you some of the beautiful things Henry's daughter
told me about her mother. Agatha had such a refined and beautiful
taste and manner that though, from her parents' poverty, she had not
had the benefit of an education, yet it was a common saying of the
many who knew her, that she would have graced a court. She never
said or did any thing that was not delicate and beautiful. Her
dress, even when they were very poor, had never a hole nor a spot.
She never allowed any rude or vulgar thing to be said in her
presence without expressing her displeasure. She was one of nature's
nobility. She lived and moved in beauty as well as in goodness.

When she found she was dying, she asked her husband to leave the
room, and then asked a friend who was with her to pray silently, for
she would not distress her husband; and so she passed away without a
groan, calmly and sweetly, before he returned. An immense procession
of the people followed her to the grave, to express their admiration
of her character and their sorrow for her early death. There were in
Hamburg, at that time, two large churches, afterwards burned down at
the great fire, which had chimes of bells in their towers. These
bells played their solemn tones only when some person lamented by
the whole city died. These bells were rung at the funeral of Agatha.

Henry, ever after his separation from her, would go, at the
anniversary of her birth and death, and take all his children and
grand-children with him to her grave. They carried wreaths and
bouquets of flowers, and laid them there; and he would sit down with
them and relate some anecdote about their mother.

It is a custom with the people of Germany to strew flowers on the
graves of their friends. The burying ground was not far from the
street, and often unfeeling boys would steal these sacred flowers;
but not one was ever stolen from the grave of Agatha.

The sister of whom we have before spoken, whom we will call also by
her Christian name, Catharine, loved her sister with the most
devoted love, and when Agatha was dying, promised her that she would
be a mother to her children, and never leave them till they were
able to take care of themselves.

She kept her word. She refused many offers of marriage, which she
might have been disposed to accept, and was a true mother to her
sister's children, till they were all either married or old enough
not to want her care. Then, at the age of fifty, aunt Catharine
married a widower, who had three children, who wanted her care.

From the time Henry lost his dear wife, he devoted himself not only
more than ever to his children, but also to the good of his workmen.
He sought in duty, in good works, for strength to bear his heavy
sorrow; so that death might not divide him from her he loved, but
that he might be fitting himself for an eternal union with her in
heaven.

Henry never forgot that he had been obliged to work hard for a
living himself, and he also remembered what had been his greatest
trials in his days of poverty. He determined to save his workmen
from these sufferings as much as possible.

He recollected and still felt the evils of a want of education. He
could never forget how with longing eyes he had used to look at
books, and what a joy it had been to him to go to school; and he
resolved that his children should be well instructed. The garden of
knowledge, that was so tempting to him, and that he was not allowed
to enter, he resolved should be open to them. He gave them the best
instructors he could find, and took care that they should be taught
every thing that would be useful to them--the modern languages,
music, drawing, history, &c.

Henry had found the blessing of being able to labor skilfully with
his hands; so he insisted that all his children should learn how to
work with their own hands.

"My daughters," he said, "in order to be good housewives, must know
how every thing ought to be done, and be able to do it. If they are
poor, this will save them from much misery, and secure them comfort
and respectability."

He insisted that those of his sons who engaged in his business
should work with the workmen, wear the same dress, and do just as
they did; so that the boys might be independent of circumstances,
and have the security of a good living, come what would. Thus every
one of his children had the advantages which belong to poverty as
well as those of riches. Their father said to them, that if they
knew what work was, they would know what to require of those who
labored for them; that they would have more feeling for laborers,
and more respect for them.

Henry was truly the friend of his workmen. He gave them time enough
to go to school. He encouraged temperance; he had a weak kind of
beer, made of herbs, for them to drink, so that they might not
desire spirit. He gave them, once a year, a handsome dinner, at
which he presided himself. He encouraged them to read, and helped
them to obtain books. He had a singing master, and took care that
every one who had a voice should be taught to sing. He bought a
pianoforte for them, and had it put in a room in the factory, where
any one, who had time, and wished to play, could go and play upon
it; and he gave them a music teacher.

He did every thing he could to make their life beautiful and happy.
He induced them to save a small sum every week from their wages, as
a fund to be used when any one died, or was sick, or was married, or
wanted particular aid beyond what his wages afforded.

Henry's factory was the abode of industry, temperance, and
cheerfulness. The workmen all loved him like a brother. It was his
great object to show them that labor was an honorable thing, and to
make laborers as happy as he thought they ought to be.

Henry was much interested in all that related to the United States
of America; and he was very angry at our slavery. He felt that
slavery brought labor into discredit, and his heart ached for the
poor slaves, who are cut off from all knowledge, all improvement.
Nothing excited in him such a deep indignation, nothing awaked such
abhorrence in his heart, as the thought of a man's receiving the
services of another without making adequate compensation; or the
idea of any man exercising tyranny over his brother man.

Henry's workmen were the happiest and best in Hamburg. They loved
their employer with their whole hearts; there was nothing they would
not do for him. When his factory had been established twenty-five
years, the workmen determined to have a jubilee on the occasion, and
to hold it on his birthday. They kept their intention a secret from
him till the day arrived; but they were obliged to tell his
children, who, they knew, would wish to make arrangements for
receiving them in such a way as their father would approve of, if he
knew of it.

It was summer time; and on Henry's birthday, at seven o'clock in the
morning, (for they knew their friend was an early riser,) a strain
of grand and beautiful music broke the stillness of the early hour,
and a long procession of five hundred men was seen to wind around
the house.

The musicians, playing upon their fine wind instruments, and dressed
very gayly, came first. Then came those of his workmen who had been
with him twenty-five years; then his clerks and book-keepers; then
followed his other workmen, and then all the boys who were employed
in his factory. All wore black coats, with a green bow pinned on the
breast.

They drew up in a circle on the lawn before his house; and five old
men, who had been with him for twenty-five years, stood in the
centre, holding something which was wrapped up in the Hamburg flag.
Now all the musical instruments played a solemn, religious hymn.
Immediately after, the five hundred voices joined in singing it.
Never did a truer music rise to heaven than this; it was the music
of grateful, happy hearts.

When the hymn was sung, the book-keeper came forward and made an
address to his master, in the name of them all. In this address they
told Henry how happy he had made them; how much good he had done
them; how sensible they were of his kindness to them, and how full
of gratitude their hearts were towards him. They expressed the hope
that they should live with him all their lives.

Now the old men advanced, and uncovered what they bore in their
hands. It was a fine portrait of their benefactor, in a splendid
frame. The picture was surrounded on the margin by fine drawings,
arranged in a tasteful manner, of all the various articles which
were made in his factory, views of his warehouses in Hamburg, of the
factory in which they worked, of his house in town, of the one in
the country where they then were, and of the old exchange, where he
used to stand when he sold canes and dust sticks. Then the old men
presented to him the picture, saying only a few words of respectful
affection.

The good man shed tears. He could not speak at first. At last he
said, that this was the first time in his life that he regretted
that he could not speak in public; that if he had ever done any
thing for them, that day more than repaid him for all. They then
gave him three cheers. They now sang a German national tune, to
words which had been written for the occasion.

The children, who, as I told you, knew what was to happen, had
prepared a breakfast for these five hundred of their father's
friends. All the tables were spread in the garden behind the house,
and Henry desired that all the store rooms should be opened, and
that nothing should be spared.

After an excellent breakfast, at which the children of the good man
waited, the procession marched around to the fine music; and the
workmen, having enjoyed themselves all the morning to their hearts'
content, went to partake of a dinner which the family had provided
for them in a large farm house. Here they sang, and laughed, and
told stories till about eight o'clock in the evening, when they
returned by railway to Hamburg, in a special train which the
railroad directors ordered, free of expense, out of respect for
Henry. The railroad was behind Henry's house, and as the workmen
passed, they waved their hats and cheered him and the family till
they were out of hearing.

The picture I had so much admired was a copy of this very picture
which the workmen had presented. The original was hung up in Henry's
drawing room, as his most valuable possession. No wonder his
daughter felt proud of that picture, and loved to show her copy of
it to her friends. Near it hung a likeness of his dear Agatha. She
was very beautiful. It was a pleasant thing to hear the daughter
talk of her father and mother.

Thus did Henry live a useful, honorable, and happy life--the natural
result of his industry, perseverance, uprightness, and true
benevolence. Like Ben Adhem, he had shown his love to God by his
love to man.

One of Henry's sons had come to this country, to set up a cane and
whalebone factory in New York. The father had aided him as far as he
thought best, but urged him to depend as far as possible upon his
own industry and ability.

This son followed his father's example, and was very successful; but
was obliged, on account of the bad effects of our climate upon his
health, to return to his native land. The father, who was anxious to
visit the United States, and wished much to see his daughter again,
who was particularly dear to him, determined to come, for a while,
in his son's place. Henry thought also that his health, which began
to fail, might be benefited by a sea voyage.

One reason why he wished much to visit America was, that he might
see, with his own eyes, the position of the laboring classes in the
Free States. Of the Slave States he never could think with patience.
His daughter told me that the only time when she had seen her father
lose his self-command, was when a gentleman, just returned from the
West Indies, had defended slavery, and had said that the negroes
were only fit to be slaves. Henry's anger was irrepressible, and,
although it was at his own table, and he was remarkable for his
hospitality and politeness, he could not help showing his
indignation.

Nothing could exceed his delight at what he saw in this part of our
country. The appearance every where of prosperity and comfort; the
cheerful look of our mechanics and laborers; their activity; the
freedom and joyousness of their manners,--all spoke to him of a
free, prosperous, and happy people.

He was only, for any long time, in New York, where his son's factory
was, and in Massachusetts, where his daughter lived. Unhappily his
health did not improve. On the contrary, it failed almost daily.
Still he enjoyed himself much. While in this part of the country, he
took many drives around the environs of Boston with his daughter,
and expressed the greatest delight at the aspect of the country,
particularly at the appearance of the houses of the farmers and
mechanics.

He found, when in the city of New York, that attention to business
was too much for his strength; so he resolved to travel. "Nature,"
he said, "will cure me; I will go to Niagara."

He brought with him, as a companion and nurse, his youngest son, a
lad of fifteen years of age. The boy went every where with him. When
they arrived at Niagara, Henry would not go to the Falls with any
other visitors; he only allowed his son to accompany him. When he
first saw this glorious wonder of our western world, he fell on his
knees and wept; he could not contain his emotion. He was a true
worshipper of Nature, and he courted her healing influences; but he
only found still greater peace and health of mind; his bodily health
did not return.

His daughter, who, like all Germans, held a festival every
Christmas, wrote to urge him to pass his Christmas with her at her
Massachusetts home; he was then in New York. He replied that he was
too ill to bear the journey at that season. The pleasure of the
thought of her Christmas evening was gone; but she determined to
make it as pleasant as she could to her husband and children, though
her thoughts and her heart were with her sick father.

In the morning, however, a telegraphic message arrived from her
father, saying he would be with them at eight o'clock in the
evening.

With the Germans, the whole family make presents to each other, no
matter how trifling; but some little present every one receives.
Henry's little granddaughter was dressed in a style as fairy-like as
possible, and presented her grandfather with a basket of such fruits
as the season would allow of, as the most appropriate present for a
lover of Nature. A very happy evening the good man had with his
children.

He was forced to return to New York. It was not many months after
that his daughter heard that he was very ill at Oyster Bay, where he
had gone to a water cure establishment. She went immediately to him,
and remained with him, nursing him, and reading to him, till he was
better, though not well.

During this period, when he was able to bear the fatigue, his
daughter drove him in a gig round the neighboring country; and she
told me that such was his interest in the laborers, that he would
never pass one without stopping, and asking him questions about his
mode of working, &c. He could not speak English; but she was the
interpreter.

At last he insisted upon his daughter's returning to her family.
There was something so solemn, so repressed, in his manner, when he
took leave of her, that she was afterwards convinced that he knew he
should never see her again; but he said not a word of the kind.

His health grew worse; his strength failed daily; and he determined
to return to Germany, so as to die in his native land. He wrote to
his daughter, to ask her, as a proof of her love for him, not to
come to say farewell. She was ill at the time, and submitted with a
sad and aching heart.

She had seen her dear, excellent father for the last time. He lived
to arrive in Hamburg. His workmen, when they heard of his arrival,
went to the vessel, and bore him in their arms to his country house,
where he died eight days afterwards.

He showed his strong and deep love of nature in these his last
hours; for when he was so weak as to be apparently unconscious of
the presence of those he loved, he begged to be carried into his
garden, that he might hear the birds sing, and look upon his flowers
once more.

When he knew he was breathing his last, he said to his children who
were standing around his bed, "Be useful, and love one another."

His death was considered a public calamity in Hamburg. His workmen
felt that they had lost their benefactor and brother. His children
knew that life could never give them another such friend.

His body was placed in the great hall, in his country house, and
surrounded by orange trees in full bloom. Flowers he loved to the
very last; and flowers shed their perfume over the mortal garment of
his great and beautiful soul. One after another, his workmen and his
other friends came and looked at his sweet and noble countenance,
and took a last farewell.

In Germany, when a distinguished man dies, he is carried to the
grave on an elevated hearse decorated with black feathers and all
the trappings of woe; but Henry's workmen insisted upon carrying
their benefactor and friend to his last home in their arms. Their
sorrowing hearts were the truest mourning, the only pomp and
circumstance worthy of the occasion; and their streaming eyes were
the modest and unobtrusive, but most deeply affecting, pageant of
that day. All the inhabitants followed him, with mourning in their
hearts. Remembering Henry's love for flowers, his fellow-citizens
made arches of flowers in three places for his mortal remains to
pass under, as the most appropriate testimonial of their love. The
public officers all followed him to the grave, and the military paid
him appropriate honors. Three different addresses were delivered
over his body by distinguished speakers, and then hundreds and
hundreds of voices joined in singing a hymn to his praise written by
a friend.

Henry made such an arrangement of his business, and left such
directions about it, as to make sure that his workmen should, if
they wished it, have employment in his factory for ten years to
come. He divided his property equally amongst his children, and
bequeathed to them all his charities, which were not few, saying
that he knew that his children would do as he had done, and that
these duties would be sacred with them.

Such a life needs no comment. Its eloquence, its immortal power, is
its truth, its reality.

Among the many beautiful things that were written in honor of Henry,
I have translated these as peculiarly simple and just.



"ON THE GRAVE OF THE GOOD, GREAT MAN."

"Henry--, a MAN in the best sense of the term, strong in body and
soul, with a heart full of the noblest purposes, which he carried
out into action, without show and with a child-like mind."

"To the great Giver of all things thankful for the smallest gift. To
his family a devoted father. To his friends a faithful friend. To
the state a useful citizen. To the poor a benefactor. To the dying a
worthy example."

"Why was this power broken in the prime of life? Why were the wings
of this diligent spirit clipped? Why were stopped the beatings of
this heart, which beat for all created things? Sad questions, which
can only find an answer in the assurance that all which God wills
for us is good."

"Peace be with thee, friend and brother! We can never forget thee."

     Around their father's grave the children stand,
     And mourning friends are shedding bitter tears;
     With sorrowing faces men are standing here,
     Whose tender love did bear him in their arms
     In sickness once, and now once more in death,
     Him who protector, friend, and helper was;
     And many eyes whose tears he wiped away,
     Are weeping at his narrow house to-day.

     When the frail vestments of the soul
     Are hidden in the tomb, what then remains to man?
     The memory of his deeds is ours.
     O sacred death, then, like the flowers of spring,
     Many good deeds are brought to light.
     Blessed and full of love, good children
     And true friends stand at his grave,
     And there with truth loudly declare,
     "A noble soul has gone to heaven;
     Rich seed has borne celestial fruit;
     His whole day's work now in God is done."
     Thus speak we now over thy grave,
     Our friend, now glorified and living in our hearts.
     A lasting monument thou thyself hast built
     In every heart which thy great worth has known.

     Yes, more than marble or than brass, our love
     Shall honor thee, who dwellest in our hearts.
     These tears, which pure love consecrates to thee,
     Thou noble man, whom God has called away
     From work which He himself has blessed,--
     These grateful tears shall fall upon the tomb
     That hides the earthly garment of our friend.

     O, let us ne'er forget the firm and earnest mind
     Which bore him swiftly onward in his course;
     How from a slender twig he built a bridge
     O'er which he safely hastened to the work
     Which youthful hope and courage planned.
     Think how the circle of his love embraced
     His children and his children's children, all,
     His highest joy their happiness and good.

     Think how he labored for the good of all,
     Supporter, benefactor, faithful friend!
     How with his wise and powerful mind
     He served and blessed his native place!
     His works remain to speak his praise.
     How did his generous, noble spirit glow
     With joy at all the good and beautiful
     Which time and human skill brought forth!
     He ever did the standard gladly gain
     Which light, and truth, and justice raised;
     And when his noble efforts seemed to fail,
     Found ever in his pure and quiet breast a sweet repose.

     We give to-day thy dust to dust.
     Thy spirit, thy true being, is with us.
     Thou art not dead; thou art already risen.
     Loved friend, thou livest, and thou watchest o'er us still.
     Be dry our tears; be hushed our sighs;
     Victor o'er death, our friend still lives;
     Takes his reward from the Great Master's band.
     Deep night has passed away. On him
     Eternal morning breaks. He,
     From the dark chamber of the grave,
     Goes to the light of the All-holy One.

     Weep, weep no more! Look up with hope on high!
     There does he dwell. He liveth too on earth.
     The Master who has called him hence to higher work,
     To-morrow will call us--perhaps to-day.
     Then shall we see him once again. He, who went home
     From earth in weakness and in pain,
     Is risen there in everlasting joy and strength.
     Till then we here resolve to live like him,
     That we, like him, may die religious, true, and free.


When any little boy reads this true story of a good, great man, I
would have him remember that Henry began to be a good, great man
when only eight years old. Henry began by being industrious,
patient, and good humored, so that people liked to buy his sticks.
Then he was faithful and true to his father, and would not leave
him, not even for the sake of gaining some advantages. Henry used
all his faculties, and, by making his pretty canes, he got money,
not to buy sugar plums, but to pay for instruction. When he did
wrong, he took his punishment cheerfully, and did not commit the
same fault again. All the virtues which finally made him a good,
great man he began to practise when he was only eight years of age,
when he was really a little boy.

I would have every little boy and girl who reads this story try to
imitate him. If he is poor, let him learn to do something useful, so
to earn money that may help his father and mother, and perhaps be
the means of giving him a better education. If he is rich, let him
seek to get knowledge, and let him remember those who have not as
much as he has, like little Eva, who taught Uncle Tom. Let him
remember that the selfish and the lazy cannot be truly happy; that
selfishness is its own punishment in the end; that no children and
no men are truly happy or truly good who do not obey the words of
the noble-minded Henry on his death-bed--

     "Be useful, and love one another"




THE MIGHTY DEEDS OF ABC.

A LETTER TO A LITTLE BOY FROM HIS AUNT.


MY DEAR FRANK: I was much pleased with your writing me a letter. If
you were to take a piece of paper, and do up some sugar plums in it,
and send it to me, I should eat up the sugar plums, and then there
would be nothing left but the piece of white paper; but if you take
a piece of paper, and mark on it with a pen some crooked and some
straight, some round and some long strokes, they tell me, though
they make no noise, that you love me, and they seem just like little
messengers from you to me, all with something to tell me of my dear
little Frank.

Besides, after these messengers have spoken once, there they stand
ready to speak again as soon as I only look at them, and tell me the
same pleasant story the second time that they did the first.

If I were to put them away in a safe place for forty years, and then
look at them, when you were beginning to be an old man, these
crooked scratches of your pen would still talk to me of little
Frank, as he was when I held him in my lap, and we used to laugh,
and talk, and tell stories together.

Think, then, my dear Frank, how much better it is to be able to fill
a letter with these curious strokes to send to a friend than to have
bushels of sugar plums to send him.

Did you ever think what curious things these little letters are? You
know the great Bible that you love to look at so much, and to hear
father read from. All the wonderful things related in it are told by
twenty-six little letters.

It is they that tell you of the creation of the world, of the
beautiful garden called Eden in which Adam and Eve lived; they tell
you the sad story of their disobedience to God, and of their being
turned out of paradise.

Then they tell you all about the Israelites, or Jews, as we call
them. In the same book, these twenty-six letters place themselves a
little differently, and tell you the story of Joseph and his
brethren that you were so much pleased with when your father read it
to you, and that of David and Goliath, that you like so much.

Then these same wonderful story tellers relate to you the beautiful
history of Daniel; of that courageous, good man who chose rather to
be torn to pieces by wild beasts than not to pray every day to God,
and thank Him for His goodness; and how God preserved him in the
lion's den.

The wonderful story of Elijah they also tell you, and many others.

But last and most interesting and wonderful of all, my dear little
Frank, is the story of Jesus Christ and his friends called the
apostles.

These little letters have never told such a beautiful and affecting
story as they tell you of that pure and spotless Being who was sent
by God to teach us our duty, and to show us the way to be happy
forever.

No being ever existed on this earth who showed so much love and
tenderness, so much goodness and humility, so much wisdom and power
as did Jesus Christ.

There, in that best of books, stand these little messengers, as I
call them, still speaking the very words of the blessed Saviour;
ready to comfort the poor and sorrowful; to teach patience and hope
to the sick; to instruct the ignorant; to reprove the wicked; and
inviting little children to come to his arms and receive his
blessing.

Do you not want to know all that they can tell you of this great and
good Being?

I could write you, my dear Frank, a letter so long that I fear you
would be tired of reading it, about these same wonderful little
figures; but now I dare say that you will think more of them
yourself, and that the little book with the corners rolled up which
contains your ABC will be more respectable in your sight.

Perhaps you will, after thinking some time, ask who invented these
wonderful letters; and then, if you do really want to know, your
father will tell you all that is known about it, or, at least, all
that you can remember and understand. When you are old enough to
read about the history of letters, you will find books which will
make you laugh by telling you that there was a time when, if you
wanted to write "a man," you would have been obliged to draw the
picture of a man; and, as there was then no paper like ours, you
would have been obliged to take a piece of wood or bark to make the
drawing on; and so the same with every thing else.

So you see, if you and I had lived at that time, and you had written
to me about your dog, your pleasant ride and the other things that
were in your letter, you would perhaps have been obliged to get a
man to bring me the letter, it would have been so clumsy, instead of
bringing it yourself, folded neatly in your nice little pocket book;
and as for my letter, only think how much room it would have taken
up.

You will say, "Why, aunt, letters are not only better than sugar
plums, they are better than dollars."

Indeed they are, my dear Frank. The knowledge that they can give,
the blessing they can bestow, is better and more valuable than all
the silver and gold in the whole world; for they can teach us what
is wisdom and happiness; they can teach us the will of God.

I love to think, too, of what pleasant messages they can carry
backwards and forwards between friends, and that in a few hours
these curious, handy little things will appear before you, my dear
little Frank, and tell you what I have just been thinking about, and
that I always love you, and am ever

Your affectionate AUNT.




WHAT DAY IS IT?


It is so still that, although it is midday, one can hear the sound
of the soft spring shower as it falls on the young and tender
leaves.

The crowing of the cock pierces the ear with his shrill note, as in
the silent watches of the night. The song of the wren is so
undisturbed, it is so full, and is heard so distinctly that it only
reminds one, with its sweet music, how unusual is the silence; it
does indeed seem but the "echo of tranquillity."

There are many people in the streets, but they have a different
appearance from usual; they are all dressed in their holiday
garments; they look happy, but they are very calm and serious. The
gentle shower does not seem to disturb them; it only affords an
opportunity for reciprocal kindness.

I see a venerable-looking old lady who from infirmity is obliged to
walk very slowly. She is supported by a bright, rosy-cheeked girl
who holds up the umbrella, and keeps back her light and joyous step
to the slow time of her aged companion.

An elegant-looking woman is leading, with great care and tenderness,
a little girl through the mud. The lady puts her umbrella so low
that the rain is kept from the child, but it falls upon her own gay
clothes. The little girl must be that lady's daughter. But see! they
stop at the door of yonder miserable-looking house. The lady cannot
live there, surely. She gives the child a little book. The little
girl enters alone. I see her now in the house. She is the daughter
of the poor, sick woman who lives there.

There is a trembling old man tottering along: he looks a little like
Tipsy David, as the boys call him; but he has on a clean and
respectable suit of black, and a weed on his hat; he is quite sober,
but it is David; and one of the very boys that have laughed at and
abused him when intoxicated, now respectfully offers him an
umbrella.

A fashionable young man is gallanting a lady with the greatest care
and most delicate respect; she must be his sister, or the lady he is
engaged to marry, he is so careful to shelter her from every drop of
rain. No, I see her enter her door; it is my good neighbor, Miss--;
she is one of the excellent of the earth, but she is poor, old and
forsaken by all but the few who seek for those whom others forget.
She has no beauty, no celebrity; there is no eclat in noticing her;
there are those who will even laugh at him for his attention to her.

Stranger than all, there are two men, violent opponents in religion
and politics, walking arm in arm with each other. The Calvinist
extends to him whom he considers his erring brother a kindness as if
to a dear friend; for the Universalist is sick, and the Calvinist
tries to protect him from the shower while exposing himself; see, he
takes off his own cloak and puts it on him.

What does all this mean? Whence is this holy stillness? What day is
it?

It is the Lord's day! All these people are returning from the house
of prayer. It is this thought that makes the laughing girl restrain
her gayety, and teach her steps to keep time with her infirm old
friend.

The sinful old man abstains from his vicious habit out of reverence
for this holy day; he has lost his son too; and sorrow and the
weight of an evil conscience have driven him to the mercy seat; and
they who despised his drunkenness respect his misery.

The lady who led the little child so tenderly to its poor mother's
door is a teacher in the Sunday school; the book she gave tells of
the wisdom and goodness of God; she has awakened in her little
pupil's soul that princi-pie which shall never die, and taught her
to be a messenger of peace and joy to her poor, sick mother.

It is the influence of this blessed day that makes the usually
frivolous and thoughtless prefer a work of charity to the
gratification of vanity.

It is the Sabbath day, with its calm and elevated duties and holy
repose, that subdues animosity, lays the restless spirit of vanity,
checks habitual vice, and awakens all the charities and sweet
courtesies of life.

This is the true rest of the Sabbath; the rest from vanity, from
contention, from sin. This is the true preaching, the practice of
Christian duties, the performance of works of love, the exercise of
the holiest affections of our nature. This is the true service of
God; doing good to His human family. This is the true knowledge of
Him, "that we love one another."

Doubtless the instructions from the pulpit do, in many instances,
enlighten the ignorant, quicken the languid and the cold-hearted,
and alarm or persuade the sinful and the erring; and, on this
account alone, the day is a great good, and should be welcomed.
However, were any one doubtful of the blessing that attends it, I
would not reason with him, but I would, if it were possible, lead
him, when he knew not what day it was, where he could witness, as I
have, such a scene as I have just described; and when he exclaimed,
"What does it all mean? What day is it?" I would simply answer, "It
is the Sabbath day."




THE CHILD AT HER MOTHER'S GRAVE.

[TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN.]


    In that little room of thine
      Sweet sleep has come to thee.
    Ah, mother! dearest mother mine!
    O, call me to that room of thine;
      O, shut it not from me.


    I would so gladly be with thee,
      And be thy child again.
    'Tis cold and stormy here with me.
     Tis warm, and O, so still with thee.
      O, let me, let me in.


    Thou took'st me gladly once with thee,
      So gladly held'st my hand!
     O, see! thou hast forsaken me.
     Take me, this time, again with thee
      Into the heavenly land.




EVENING PRAYER.

    Thou, from whom we never part;
      Thou, whose love is every where;
     Thou, who seest every heart,
      Listen to our evening prayer.


    Father, fill our souls with love;
      Love unfailing, full, and free;
     Love no injury can move;
      Love that ever rests on thee.


    Heavenly Father, through the night
      Keep us safe from every ill.
     Cheerful as the morning light,
      May we wake to do thy will.




THE SABBATH IS HERE.

[FROM KRUMACHER.]

    The Sabbath is here. It is sent us from Heaven.
       Rest, rest, toilsome life.
       Be silent all strife.
       Let us stop on our way,
       And give thanks, and pray
       To Him who all things has given.


    The Sabbath is here. To the fields let us go.
       How fresh and how fair,
       In the still morning air,
       The bright golden grain
       Waves over the plain!
       It is God who doth all this bestow.


    The Sabbath is here. On this blessed morn,
       No tired ox moans,
       No creaking wheel groans.
       At rest is the plough.
       No noise is heard now,
       Save the sound of the rustling corn.


    The Sabbath is here. Our seed we have sown,
       In hope and in faith.
       The Father He saith
       Amen! Be it so!
       Behold the corn grow!
       Rejoicing his goodness we'll own.


    The Sabbath is here. His love we will sing,
       Who sendeth the rain
       Upon the young grain.
       Full soon all around
       The sickle will sound,
       And home the bright sheaves we will bring


    The Sabbath is here. In hope and in love,
       We sow in the dust,
       While humbly we trust,
       Up yonder, shall grow
       The seed which we sow,
       And bloom a bright garland above.




TO A BUTTERFLY.

[FREE TRANSLATION FROM HERDER.]

    Airy, lovely, heavenly thing!
     Butterfly with quivering wing!
     Hovering, in thy transient hour,
     Over every bush and flower,
     Feasting upon flowers and dew,
     Thyself a brilliant blossom too.


    Who, with rosy fingers fine,
     Purpled o'er those wings of thine?
     Was it some sylph whose tender care
     Spangled thy robes so fine and fair,
     And wove them of the morning air?
     I feel thy little throbbing heart.
     Thou fear'st, e'en now, death's bitter smart


    Fly little spirit, fly away!
     Be free and joyful, thy short day!
     Image, thou dost seem to me,
     Of that which I may, one day, be,
     When I shall drop this robe of earth,
     And wake into a spirit's birth.









End of Project Gutenberg's The Pedler of Dust Sticks, by Eliza Lee Follen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEDLER OF DUST STICKS ***

***** This file should be named 4040.txt or 4040.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/4/4040/

Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
