The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Day with the Poet Tennyson, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Day with the Poet Tennyson

Author: Anonymous

Illustrator: W. Hatherell
             Edmund Dulac
             William G. Simmonds
             William Heath Robinson

Release Date: August 8, 2012 [EBook #40442]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH THE POET TENNYSON ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







  [Illustration: A Day with Tennyson]

    "I murmur under moon and stars
        In brambly wildernesses;
    I linger by my shingly bars;
        I loiter round my cresses;

    "And out again I curve and flow
        To join the brimming river,
    For men may come and  men may go.
        But I go on for ever."


  [Illustration: _Painting by E. W. Haslehust._THE BROOK.]


  [Illustration: A DAY WITH THE POET TENNYSON .LONDON.
                 HODDER & STOUGHTON]


  _In the same Series._

  _Longfellow._
  _Keats._
  _Browning._
  _Wordsworth._
  _Burns._
  _Scott._
  _Byron._
  _Shelley._




A DAY WITH TENNYSON.


Tennyson was no recluse. He shunned society in the ordinary London
sense, but he welcomed kindred spirits to his beautiful home, with
large-hearted cordiality. To be acquainted with Farringford was in
itself a liberal education. Farringford was an ideal home for a great
poet. To begin with, it was somewhat secluded and remote from the
world's ways, especially in the early 'fifties, when the Isle of Wight
was much more of a _terra incognita_ than traffic now permits. One had
to travel down some hundred miles from town, cross from the quaint
little New Forest port of Lymington to the still quainter little
old-world Yarmouth--"a mediaeval Venice," the poet called it--and then
drive some miles to Freshwater, before one attained the stately
loveliness of Farringford embowered in trees.

    "Where, far from noise and smoke of town,
    I watch the twilight falling brown
        All around a careless-ordered garden,
    Close to the ridge of a noble down."

           *       *       *       *       *

    "Groves of pine on either hand,
    To break the blast of winter, stand;
        And further on, the hoary Channel
    Tumbles a billow on chalk and sand."

            _Lines to the Rev. F. D. Maurice._

The interior of the house--a very ancient one--was no less ideal than
its outward aspect, "it was like a charmed palace, with green walks
without and speaking walls within." And its occupants crowned all--the
ethereally lovely mistress with her "tender spiritual face," and the
master, tall, broad-shouldered, and massive, dark-eyed and
dark-browed, his voice full of deep organ-tones and delicate
inflections, his mind shaped to all fine issues. "The wisest man,"
said Thackeray, "that ever I knew."

       *       *       *       *       *

Farringford was the ideal home of the great poet. "A charmed palace
with green walks without,"

    "Where, far from noise and smoke of town,
    I watch the twilight falling brown
        All around a careless-ordered garden,
    Close to the ridge of a noble down."


[Illustration: _Painting by E. W. Haslehust._ FARRINGFORD. ]


Subject to slight inevitable variations, a certain method and routine
governed the day of Tennyson. He had definite working-times, indoors
and out, and accustomed habits of family life. The morning brought him
letters from all parts of England: there was hardly any great man who
did not desire to exchange salutations and discuss world-subjects with
a thinker so far above the rest. The poet, with the prophetic soul of
genius, had always been well in advance of his times.

    "For I dipt into the future, far as human eye could see,
    Saw the Vision of the world, and all the wonder that would be;
    Saw the heavens fill with commerce, argosies of magic sails,
    Pilots of the purple twilight, dropping down with costly bales;
    Heard the heavens fill with shouting, and there rained a ghastly dew
    From the nations' airy navies grappling in the central blue;
    Far along the world-wide whisper of the south-wind rushing warm,
    With the standards of the peoples plunging through the thunderstorm;
    Till the war-drum throbbed no longer, and the battle flags were
      furled
    In the Parliament of man, the Federation of the world.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Not in vain the distance beacons. Forward, forward, let us range,
    Let the great world spin for ever down the ringing grooves of
      change.
    Thro' the shadow of the globe we sweep into the younger day;
    Better fifty years of Europe than a cycle of Cathay."

                                                _Locksley Hall._

The daily papers are somewhat late in reaching the Isle of Wight: but
the poet could find inspiration even in a source so apparently prosaic
as a _Times_ column. He noted down some of those valiant and
soul-stirring episodes which go unrecorded save by a passing
paragraph: and the poem which, perhaps, has held the public fancy
longest, the _Charge of the Light Brigade_, was written a few minutes
after reading the _Times'_ description of the battle containing the
phrase "Someone had blundered."

    "Half a league, half a league,
        Half a league onward,
    All in the valley of Death
        Rode the six hundred.
    'Forward, the Light Brigade!
    Charge for the guns!' he said:
    Into the valley of Death
        Rode the six hundred.

    "'Forward, the Light Brigade!'
    Was there a man dismay'd?
    Not tho' the soldier knew
        Someone had blunder'd:
    Their's not to make reply,
    Their's not to reason why,
    Their's but to do and die:
    Into the valley of Death
        Rode the six hundred.

    "Cannon to right of them,
    Cannon to left of them,
    Cannon in front of them
        Volley'd and thunder'd;
    Storm'd at with shot and shell,
    Boldly they rode and well,
    Into the jaws of Death,
    Into the mouth of Hell
        Rode the six hundred.

    "Flash'd all their sabres bare,
    Flash'd as they turned in air
    Sabring the gunners there.
    Charging an army, while
        All the world wonder'd;
    Plunged in the battery-smoke
    Right thro' the line they broke;
    Cossack and Russian
    Reel'd from the sabre stroke
        Shatter'd and sunder'd.
    Then they rode back, but not,
        Not the six hundred.

    "Cannon to right of them,
    Cannon to left of them,
    Cannon behind them
        Volley'd and thunder'd;
    Storm'd at with shot and shell,
    While horse and hero fell,
    They that had fought so well
    Came thro' the jaws of Death,
    Back thro' the mouth of Hell,
    All that was left of them,
        Left of six hundred.

    "When can their glory fade?
    O, the wild charge they made!
        All the world wonder'd.
    Honour the charge they made!
    Honour the Light Brigade,
        Noble six hundred!"

            _The Charge of the Light Brigade._

A little while after breakfast, Tennyson would retire to his "den" on
the top storey, for that "sacred half-hour" devoted to poetical
composition, and assisted by his beloved pipe, during which nobody
dared disturb him. This den, or study, formed a setting worthy of its
inmate. Every inch of wall was covered with portrait, sketches,
drawings. Almost every distinguished name of the nineteenth century
was in some manner represented here: the poet literally worked
surrounded by his friends. And in this congenial atmosphere he devoted
himself to that life-long pursuit of his, as he has imaged it in the
"Gleam," which "flying onward, wed to the melody, sang through the
world."

       *       *       *       *       *

Whatever respective values a future generation may set upon Tennyson's
work, there can be little doubt that he himself considered the _Idylls
of the King_, with its inner spiritual meanings, as his greatest work.
"There is no single fact or incident in the Idylls," he said, "which
cannot be explained without any mystery or allegory whatever." Hence
their appeal to the least mystical reader, through sheer beauty of
language and superb pictorial effect. But at the same time he let it
be known that his whole story was inherently one of pure symbolism:
starting from the suggestion that Arthur represented conscience. This
idea is predominant, without undue insistence upon it, in _Guinevere_.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Yet think not that I come to urge thy crimes,
    I did not come to curse thee, Guinevere,
    I, whose vast pity almost makes me die
    To see thee laying there thy golden head,
    My pride in happier summers, at my feet.
    ... Let no man dream, but that I love thee still."


[Illustration: _Painting by W. H. Margetson._ GUINEVERE. ]


    "Queen Guinevere had fled the court, and sat
    There in the holy house at Almesbury,
    Weeping, none with her save a little maid,
    A novice: one low light betwixt them burned,
    Blurred by the creeping mist; for all abroad,
    Beneath a moon unseen albeit at full,
    The white mist, like a face-cloth to the face,
    Clung to the dead earth, and the land was still.

           *       *       *       *       *

    There rode an armed warrior to the doors,
    A murmuring whisper thro' the nunnery ran,
    Then on a sudden a cry, 'The King.' She sat
    Stiff-stricken, listening; but when armed feet
    Thro' the long gallery from the outer doors
    Rang, coming, prone from off her seat she fell
    And grovell'd with her face against the floor:
    There with her milk-white arms and shadowy hair
    She made her face a darkness from the King;
    And in the darkness heard his armed feet
    Pause by her; then came silence, then a voice,
    Monotonous and hollow like a ghost's,
    Denouncing judgment, but, tho' changed, the King's.

           *       *       *       *       *

    'Yet think not that I come to urge thy crimes,
    I did not come to curse thee, Guinevere,
    I, whose vast pity almost makes me die
    To see thee laying there thy golden head,
    My pride in happier summers, at my feet.
    ... Let no man dream, but that I love thee still,
    Perchance, and so thou purify thy soul,
    And so thou lean on our fair father Christ,
    Hereafter in that world where all are pure
    We two may meet before high God, and thou
    Wilt spring to me, and claim me thine, and know
    I am thine husband--not a smaller soul,
    Nor Lancelot, nor another. Leave me that,
    I charge thee, my last hope. Now must I hence.
    ... But hither shall I never come again,
    Never lie by thy side: see thee no more--
    Farewell!'
              And while she grovell'd at his feet,
    She felt the King's breath wander o'er her neck,
    And in the darkness o'er her fallen head
    Perceived the waving of his hands that blest.

    Then, listening till those armed steps were gone,
    Rose the pale Queen, and in her anguish found
    The casement: 'peradventure,' so she thought,
    'If I might see his face, and not be seen.'
    And lo, he sat on horseback at the door!
    And near him the sad nuns with each a light,
    Stood, and he gave them charge about the Queen,
    To guard and foster her for evermore."

                               _Idylls of the King._

In the course of the day the poet would devote considerable time and
energy to his favourite exercise of garden work. To plant trees and
shrubs, to roll the lawn, to dig the kitchen garden, and lovingly to
tend the simple flowers which he had set, was his constant delight as
long as his strength sufficed. He had a passionate love, and an
extraordinary knowledge of Nature: he rejoiced in watching the birds
in his great cedar, ilex and fir trees, and his mind was thoroughly
attuned to the sweet influences of colour and foliage. Few else could
have written that unsurpassable lyric, _Come into the Garden, Maud_.

    "Come into the garden, Maud,
        For the black bat, night, has flown,
    Come into the garden, Maud,
        I am here at the gate alone;
    And the woodbine spices are wafted abroad,
        And the musk of the rose is blown.
    For a breeze of morning moves,
        And the planet of Love is on high,
    Beginning to faint in the light that she loves
        On a bed of daffodil sky.
    To faint in the light of the sun she loves,
        To faint in his light, and to die....

    "And the soul of the rose went into my blood,
        As the music clash'd in the hall;
    And long by the garden lake I stood,
        For I heard your rivulet fall
    From the lake to the meadow and on to the wood,
        Our wood, that is dearer than all;

    "From the meadow your walks have left so sweet
        That whenever a March wind sighs
    He sets the jewel-print of your feet
        In violets blue as your eyes,
    To the woody hollows in which we meet
        And the valleys of Paradise.

    "The slender acacia would not shake
        One long milk-bloom on the tree;
    The white lake-blossom fell into the lake
        As the pimpernel dozed on the lea;
    But the rose was awake all night for your sake,
        Knowing your promise to me;
    The lilies and roses were all awake,
        They sighed for the dawn and thee.

    "Queen rose of the rosebud garden of girls,
        Come hither, the dances are done,
    In gloss of satin, and glimmer of pearls,
        Queen lily and rose in one;
    Shine out, little head, sunning over with curls,
        To the flowers and be their sun.

    "There has fallen a splendid tear
        From the passion-flower at the gate,
    She is coming, my dove, my dear;
        She is coming, my life, my fate;
    The red rose cries, 'She is near, she is near;'
        And the white rose weeps, 'She is late;'
    The larkspur listens, 'I hear, I hear;'
        And the lily whispers, 'I wait.'"

                                           _Maud._

The same love of Nature made his eye alert for every obscurest beauty,
when he put aside his gardening tools and started, as was his wont,
for a stroll with some friend along the glorious cliffs of Freshwater.
Those were favoured folk, who, like Mrs. Thackeray Ritchie, "walked
with Tennyson along High Down, treading the turf, listening to his
talk, while the gulls came sideways, flashing their white breasts
against the edge of the cliff, and the Poet's cloak flapped time to
the gusts of the west wind." This cloak and the Poet were practically
synonymous. It figures--a first edition of it--in all the early
sketches of him by Spedding, Fitzgerald, etc. (1830-40) and to the
last, one can hardly imagine him apart from it.

       *       *       *       *       *

During these quiet rambles he was wont to discuss with enthusiasm the
religious and social problems of the day; they weighed heavily upon
his thoughtful mind. His philosophy was a hopeful one, rooted in
Christian belief, yet constantly over-shadowed by fugitive misgivings
and by a sense of the impermanence of human existence. And while
voicing these misgivings in lines which might give pause to weaker
minds, he never lost his firm faith in right, in duty, and in ultimate
rectification of all apparent wrong.

    "Queen rose of the rosebud garden of girls,
        Come hither, the dances are done,
    In gloss of satin, and glimmer of pearls,
        Queen lily and rose in one;
    Shine out, little head, sunning over with curls,
        To the flowers and be their sun."


[Illustration: _Painting by W. H. Margetson._ MAUD.]


    "Oh, yet we trust that somehow good
        Will be the final goal of ill,
        To pangs of nature, sins of will,
    Defects of doubt, and taints of blood;

    "That nothing walks with aimless feet;
        That not one life shall be destroy'd,
        Or cast as rubbish to the void,
    When God hath made the pile complete;

    "That not a worm is cloven in vain;
        That not a moth with vain desire
        Is shrivell'd in a fruitless fire,
    Or but subserves another's gain.

    "Behold, we know not anything;
        I can but trust that good shall fall
        At last--far off--at last, to all,
    And every winter change to spring.

    "So runs my dream; but what am I?
        An infant crying in the night;
        An infant crying for the light:
    And with no language but a cry.

           *       *       *       *       *

    "Are God and Nature then at strife,
        That Nature lends such evil dreams?
        So careful of the type she seems,
    So careless of the single life;

    "That I, considering everywhere
        Her secret meaning in her deeds,
        And finding that of fifty seeds
    She often brings but one to bear,

    "I falter where I firmly trod,
        And falling with my weight of cares
        Upon the great world's altar-stairs
    That slope thro' darkness up to God,

    "I stretch lame hands of faith, and grope,
        And gather dust and chaff, and call
        To what I feel is Lord of all,
    And faintly trust the larger hope."

                                 _In Memoriam._

But these mysteries of life and death will not bear too persistent a
contemplation: and presently Tennyson, discarding them in favour of
less sombre subjects, would regale his hearers with marvellous
recitations. "The roll of his great voice acted sometimes almost like
an incantation." The old-world classical legends had always found in
him a noble exponent; and nowhere was his peculiar felicity of
diction and delicate sense of sound better exemplified than in
_OEnone_.

    "'O mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
    Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
    Hear me, O Earth, hear me, O Hills, O Caves
    That house the cold crown'd snake! O mountain brooks,
    I am the daughter of a River-God,
    Hear me, for I will speak, and build up all
    My sorrow with my song, as yonder walls
    Rose slowly to a music slowly breathed,
    A cloud that gather'd shape; for it may be
    That, while I speak of it, a little while
    My heart may wander from its deeper woe.

    "'O mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
    Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
    I waited underneath the dawning hills,
    Aloft the mountain lawn was dewy-dark,
    And dewy-dark aloft the mountain pine:
    Beautiful Paris, evil-hearted Paris,
    Leading a jet-black goat white-horn'd, white-hooved,
    Came up from reedy Simois all alone.

           *       *       *       *       *

    "Dear mother Ida, harken, ere I die.
    He smiled, and opening out his milk-white palm
    Disclosed a fruit of pure Hesperian gold,
    That smelt ambrosially, and while I look'd
    And listen'd, the full-flowing river of speech
    Came down upon my heart.
            'My own OEnone,
    Beautiful-brow'd OEnone, my own soul,
    Behold this fruit, whose gleaming rind ingrav'n,
    'For the most fair,' would seem to award it thine,
    As lovelier than whatever Oread haunt
    The knolls of Ida, loveliest in all grace
    Of movement, and the charm of married brows.'

    "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
    He prest the blossom of his lips to mine,
    And added, 'This was cast upon the board,
    When all the full-faced presence of the Gods
    Ranged in the halls of Peleus; whereupon
    Rose feud, with question unto whom 'twere due:

    "'But light-foot Iris brought it yester-eve,
    Delivering, that to me, by common voice
    Elected umpire, Here comes to-day,
    Pallas and Aphrodite, claiming each
    This meed of fairest. Thou, within the cave
    Behind yon whispering tuft of oldest pine,
    Mayst well behold them, unbeheld, unheard
    Hear all, and see thy Paris judge of Gods.'

    "'Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
    It was the deep mid-noon: one silvery cloud
    Had lost his way between the piney sides
    Of this long glen. Then to the bower they came,
    Naked they came to that smooth-swarded bower
    And at their feet the crocus brake like fire,
    Violet, amaracus, and asphodel,
    Lotus and lilies; and a wind arose,
    And overhead the wandering ivy and vine
    This way and that, in many a wild festoon
    Ran riot, garlanding the gnarled boughs
    With bunch and berry and flower thro' and thro'.

           *       *       *       *       *

    "O mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
    Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
    Idalian Aphrodite beautiful,
    Fresh as the foam, new-bathed in Paphian wells,
    With rosy slender fingers backward drew
    From her warm brows and bosom her deep hair
    Ambrosial, golden round her lucid throat
    And shoulder: from the violets her light feet
    Shone rosy-white, and o'er her rounded form
    Between the shadows of the vine-bunches
    Floated the glowing sunlights as she moved.

    "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
    She with a subtle smile in her mild eyes,
    The herald of her triumph, drawing nigh
    Half-whisper'd in his ear, 'I promise thee
    The fairest and most loving wife in Greece.'
    She spoke and laugh'd: I shut my sight for fear:
    But when I look'd, Paris had raised his arm,
    And I beheld great Here's angry eyes,
    As she withdrew into the golden cloud,
    And I was left alone within the bower;
    And from that time to this I am alone.
    And I shall be alone until I die."

                                        _OEnone._

The afternoon was spent, sometimes in further gardening pursuits,
sometimes in a drive around the peaceful Island lanes and
thatch-browed villages; frequently there were visitors to be met at
Yarmouth, where the Tennysons' carriage might often be seen in the
quaint cobbled streets. The soft and lovely colouring of the Solent
was one to attract the poet's fancy: and it was after coming freshly
one day into sight of the familiar waters of the estuary, and a tide,
"that moving seems too full for sound or foam," lapping the lichened
sea-walls of Yarmouth, that he composed, in his eighty-first year, the
verses that he devised to be placed at the end of his whole collected
poems:--"Crossing the Bar." The mystic simplicity of these lines
strikes the very key-note of his character.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Sleep and rest, sleep and rest,
        Father will come to thee soon;
    Rest, rest on mother's breast,
        Father will come to thee soon;
    Father will come to his babe in the nest,
    Silver sails all out of the west,
        Under the silver moon:
    Sleep my little one, sleep my pretty one, sleep!"


[Illustration: _Painting by W. H. Margetson._ SWEET AND LOW.]


Tea was served in the drawing-room, "its oriel window full of green
and golden lights, of the sounds of birds and of the distant sea." The
air of extreme and unstudied simplicity, which dominated the whole
Farringford household, was just as noticeable here. Tea was a happy
gathering of the family and friends, enlivened with talk on current
topics. The Laureate's sympathies were wide-reaching, and his
conversation, forcible and often racy, was characterised by the
strongest common-sense. He held firmly-defined views on all social
subjects; and had declared himself on the question of "Woman's
Rights"--then comparatively fresh--at considerable length in _The
Princess_.

    "The woman's cause is man's: they rise or sink
    Together, dwarf'd or god-like, bond or free.
    ... For woman is not undevelopt man,
    But diverse: could we make her as the man,
    Sweet Love were slain: his dearest bond is this,
    Not like to like, but like in difference.
    Yet in the long years liker must they grow;
    The man be more of woman, she of man;
    He gain in sweetness and in moral height,
    Nor lose the wrestling thews that throw the world;
    She mental breadth, nor fail in childward care,
    Nor lose the childlike in the larger mind;
    Till at last she set herself to man,
    Like perfect music unto noble words;
    And so these twain, upon the skirts of Time,
    Sit side by side, full-summ'd in all their powers.
    ... Let this proud watchword rest
    Of equal; seeing either sex alone
    Is half itself, and in the marriage ties
    Nor equal, nor unequal; each fulfils
    Defect in each, and always thought in thought,
    Purpose in purpose, will in will they grow,
    The single pure and perfect animal,
    The two-cell'd  heart  beating  with one full stroke
    Life."

                                 _The Princess._

The poet's ideal of woman was set very high: he held her to be far
above man, morally and spiritually: and an ideal as perfect as may
well be conceived was daily before his eyes, in the person of his
beautiful wife, with her pure and saintly face: who was yet

    "No angel, but a dearer being, all dipt
    In Angel instincts, breathing Paradise,
    Interpreter between the gods and men,
    Who looked all native to her place, and yet
    On tiptoe seem'd to touch upon a sphere
    Too gross to tread, and all male minds perforce
    Sway'd to her from their orbits as they moved,
    And girdled her with music."

                                 _The Princess._

Later on in the evening, came, perhaps, the sweetest hour of the day,
when, playing and romping with his little ones, the tall and stately
man became a very child for a while. A peculiar tenderness towards
children was a distinctive feature of Tennyson: and whether helping
his own boys build stone castles on the cliff, or frolicking with any
village school children whom he might meet, he was intent upon giving
that joy and laughter to the new generation which had been denied to
his own childhood. "Make the lives of children as beautiful and as
happy as possible," was a favourite saying with him. The "Children's
Hour," which Longfellow had sung, was a radiant hour for him: and most
of all he was enchanted by the sight of little drowsy heads, asleep in
cot or cradle. They inspired some of his loveliest lyrics, such as:

    "Sweet and low, sweet and low,
        Wind of the western sea,
    Low, low, breathe and blow,
        Wind of the western sea!
    Over the rolling waters go,
    Come from the dying moon, and blow,
        Blow him again to me;
    While my little one, while my pretty one sleeps.

    "Sleep and rest, sleep and rest,
        Father will come to thee soon;
    Rest, rest on mother's breast,
        Father will come to thee soon;
    Father will come to his babe in the nest,
    Silver sails all out of the west,
        Under the silver moon:
    Sleep my little one, sleep my pretty one, sleep!"

And the loss of his first-born infant had touched him with that
infinite poignancy of pathos, which breathes in other lines:

    "As thro' the land at eve we went
      And pluck'd the ripened ears,
    We fell out, my wife and I,
    O! we fell out, I know not why,
      And kiss'd again with tears.
    And blessings on the falling out
      That all the more endears,
    When we fall out with those we love
      And kiss again with tears!
    For when we came where lies the child
      We lost in other years,
    There above the little grave,
    O there above the little grave,
      We kissed again with tears."

The dinner-table was enlivened by Tennyson's boundless store of
anecdote, and keen sense of humour. It was a "feast of intellect," to
quote Mrs. Cameron; hour after hour of the most brilliant
conversation. The supernatural loomed largely. The poet had a
_penchant_ for well-authenticated ghost stories, a deep interest in
psychical phenomena, and an open mind towards the unknowable. And very
strange tales of dreams, clairvoyance, and occult happenings, were to
be heard at Farringford. A master of the romantic pervaded by
supernatural elements, he had long since drawn with deft touches the
mysterious confines of "faeery-lands forlorn," steeped in the very
atmosphere of dream.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "She left the web, she left the loom,
    She made three paces thro' the room,
    She saw the water-lily bloom,
    She saw the helmet and the plume,
        She look'd down to Camelot.
    Out flew the web and floated wide;
    The mirror crack'd from side to side,
    'The curse is come upon me,' cried
        The Lady of Shalott."


[Illustration: _Painting by W. H. Margetson._ THE LADY OF SHALOTT.]


    "Willows whiten, aspens quiver,
    Little breezes dusk and shiver
    Thro' the ways that runs for ever
    By the island in the river
        Flowing down to Camelot.
    Four gray walls, and four gray towers,
    Overlook a space of flowers.
    And the silent isle embowers
        The Lady of Shalott....

    "Only reapers, reaping early
    In among the bearded barley,
    Hear a song that echoes cheerly,
    From the river winding clearly,
        Down to tower'd Camelot:
    And by the moon the reaper weary,
    Piling sheaves in uplands airy,
    Listening, whispers, ''Tis the fairy
        Lady of Shalott.'

    "There she weaves by night and day
    A magic web with colours gay.
    She has heard a whisper say,
    A curse is on her if she stay
        To look down on Camelot.
    She knows not what the curse may be,
    And so she weaveth steadily,
    And little other care hath she,
        The Lady of Shalott.

    "And moving thro' a mirror clear
    That hangs before her all the year,
    Shadows of the world appear.
    There she sees the highway near,
        Winding down to Camelot:
    There the river eddy whirls,
    And there the surly village-churls,
    And the red cloaks of market girls,
        Pass onward from Shalott.

           *       *       *       *       *

    "A bow-shot from her bower eaves,
    He rode between the barley-sheaves,
    The sun came dazzling thro' the leaves,
    And flamed upon the brazen greaves
        Of bold Sir Lancelot.
    A red-cross knight for ever kneel'd
    To a lady in his shield,
    That sparkled on the yellow field,
        Beside remote Shalott.

    "All in the blue unclouded weather
    Thick-jewelled shone the saddle-leather,
    The helmet and the helmet feather,
        As he rode down to Camelot.
    As often thro' the purple night,
    Below the starry clusters bright,
    Some bearded meteor, trailing light,
        Moves over still Shalott.

    "His broad clear brow in sunlight glow'd;
    On burnish'd hooves his warhorse trode;
    From underneath his helmet flow'd
    His coal-black curls as on he rode,
        As he rode down to Camelot.
    From the bank and from the river
    He flashed into the crystal mirror,
    "Tirra lirra," by the river
        Sang Sir Lancelot.

    "She left the web, she left the loom,
    She made three paces thro' the room,
    She saw the water-lily bloom,
    She saw the helmet and the plume,
        She look'd down to Camelot.
    Out flew the web and floated wide;
    The mirror crack'd from side to side,
    'The curse is come upon me,' cried
        The Lady of Shalott."

                   _The Lady of Shalott._

Sitting in his old oak armchair in the drawing-room after dinner, the
Laureate "talked of all that was in his heart, or read some poem
aloud, with the landscape lying before us like a beautiful picture
framed by the dark-arched bow-window. His moods," says Mrs. Bradley,
"were so variable, his conversation so earnest, his knowledge of all
things so wide and minute!" Wide and minute above all, perhaps, was
his acquaintance with Nature. The long quiet years in Lincolnshire had
endowed him with an almost unrivalled power of detail: and, as the old
Farringford shepherd said in dying, "Master was a wonderful man for
nature and life." No one quotation could do justice to his powers: but
the lesser music of the countryside tinkles and ripples audibly
through _The Brook_ and all the exquisite details of its
landscape.

    "I come from haunts of coot and hern,
      I make a sudden sally,
    And sparkle out among the fern,
      To bicker down a valley.

           *       *       *       *       *

    "I chatter over stony ways,
      In little sharps and trebles,
    I bubble into eddying bays,
      I bubble on the pebbles.

    "With many a curve my banks I fret,
      By many a field and fallow,
    And many a fairy foreland set
      With willow-weed and mallow.

           *       *       *       *       *

    "I wind about, and in and out,
      With many a blossom sailing,
    And here and there a lusty trout,
      And here and there a grayling.

    "And here and there a foamy flake
      Upon me as I travel,
    With many a silvery waterbreak
      Above the golden gravel.

           *       *       *       *       *

    "I steal by lawns and grassy plots,
      I slide by hazel covers;
    I move the sweet forget-me-nots
      That grow for happy lovers.

    "I slide, I slide, I gloom, I glance,
      Among my skimming swallows;
    I make the netted sunbeam dance
      Against my sandy shallows.

    "I murmur under moon and stars
      In brambly wildernesses;
    I linger by my shingly bars;
      I loiter round my cresses;

    "And out again I curve and flow
      To join the brimming river,
    For men may come and men may go,
      But I go on for ever."

                     _The Brook._

In the course of the evening, the poet would retire to the "den" for a
second "sacred half-hour" of unbroken silence, into which we need not
follow him. Lastly, when slumber filled the house, and night hung
black above the trees, he ascended to a platform on the leads of the
house-top, to observe the march and majesty of the stars. Farringford,
it has been said, "seemed so remote and still, and as though the jar
of the outside world had never entered it." But in the throbbing
starlight, the sea purring in the distance, the seer on the roof
communing with the mysterious skies above him, it was more than ever a
House of Dream--a house whose roof touched heaven. Here and thus were
thrilling _nocturnes_ imagined.

    "Now sleeps the crimson petal, now the white;
    Nor waves the cypress in the palace walk;
    Nor winks the gold fin in the porphyry font:
        The firefly wakens: waken thou with me.

           *       *       *       *       *

    "Now lies the Earth all Danaee to the stars,
    And all thy heart lies open unto me.

    "Now slides the silent meteor on, and leaves
    A shining furrow, as thy thoughts in me.

    "Now folds the lily all her sweetness up,
    And slips into the bosom of the lake:
    So fold thyself, my dearest, thou, and slip
    Into my bosom and be lost in me."

                                 _The Princess._

And so we leave Alfred Tennyson, at the end of his day, gazing
"forward to the starry track glimmering up the height beyond," alone
with the Creator.

    "He lifts me to the golden doors:
       The flashes come and go;
     All heaven bursts her starry floors,
       And strews her lights below;"

while the discords of earth are hushed beneath the magic of the
spheral harmony, and "The Gleam" hovers upward into heaven.


_Printed by Percy Lund, Humphries & Co., Ltd., Bradford and London._





End of Project Gutenberg's A Day with the Poet Tennyson, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH THE POET TENNYSON ***

***** This file should be named 40442.txt or 40442.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/4/4/40442/

Produced by Delphine Lettau, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
