                    THE BLACK RIDERS AND OTHER LINES




This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Title: The Black Riders and Other Lines

Author: Stephen Crane

Release Date: September 17, 2012 [EBook #40786]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLACK RIDERS AND OTHER
LINES ***




Produced by Al Haines.




[Illustration: Cover]




                          THE BLACK RIDERS AND
                              OTHER LINES


                            BY STEPHEN CRANE




                          PRIVATELY REPRINTED
                         BY COURTESY OF SMALL,
                           MAYNARD & COMPANY




                   Copyright, 1905, by Copeland & Day




                                   I

    Black Riders came from the sea.
    There was clang and clang of spear and shield,
    And clash and clash of hoof and heel,
    Wild shouts and the wave of hair
    In the rush upon the wind:
    Thus the ride of Sin.



                                   II

    Three little birds in a row
    Sat musing.
    A man passed near that place.
    Then did the little birds nudge each other.
    They said, "He thinks he can sing."
    They threw back their heads to laugh,
    With quaint countenances
    They regarded him.
    They were very curious,
    Those three little birds in a row.



                                  III

    In the desert
    I saw a creature, naked, bestial,
    Who, squatting upon the ground,
    Held his heart in his hands,
    And ate of it.
    I said, "Is it good, friend?"
    "It is bitter--bitter," he answered;
    "But I like it
    Because it is bitter,
    And because it is my heart."



                                   IV

    Yes, I have a thousand tongues,
    And nine and ninety-nine lie.
    Though I strive to use the one,
    It will make no melody at my will,
    But is dead in my mouth.



                                   V

    Once there came a man
    Who said,
    "Range me all men of the world in rows."
    And instantly
    There was terrific clamor among the people
    Against being ranged in rows.
    There was a loud quarrel, world-wide.
    It endured for ages;
    And blood was shed
    By those who would not stand in rows,
    And by those who pined to stand in rows,
    Eventually, the man went to death, weeping.
    And those who staid in bloody scuffle
    Knew not the great simplicity.



                                   VI

    God fashioned the ship of the world carefully
    With the infinite skill of an All-Master
    Made He the hull and the sails,
    Held He the rudder
    Ready for adjustment.
    Erect stood He, scanning his work proudly.
    Then--at fateful time--a Wrong called,
    And God turned, heeding.
    Lo, the ship, at this opportunity, slipped slyly,
    Making cunning noiseless travel down the ways.
    So that, forever rudderless, it went upon the seas
    Going ridiculous voyages,
    Making quaint progress,
    Turning as with serious purpose
    Before stupid winds.
    And there were many in the sky
    Who laughed at this thing.



                                  VII

    Mystic Shadow, bending near me,
    Who art thou?
    Whence come ye?
    And--tell me--is it fair
    Or is the truth bitter as eaten fire?
    Tell me!
    Fear not that I should quaver,
    For I dare--I dare.
    Then, tell me!



                                  VIII

    I looked here;
    I looked there;
    Nowhere could I see my love.
    And--this time--
    She was in my heart.
    Truly, then, I have no complaint,
    For though she be fair and fairer,
    She is none so fair as she
    In my heart.



                                   IX

    I stood upon a high place,
    And saw, below, many devils
    Running, leaping,
    And carousing in sin.
    One looked up, grinning,
    And said, "Comrade!  Brother!"



                                   X

    Should the wide world roll away,
    Leaving black terror,
    Limitless night,
    Nor God, nor man, nor place to stand
    Would be to me essential,
    If thou and thy white arms were there,
    And the fall to doom a long way.



                                   XI

    In a lonely place,
    I encountered a sage
    Who sat, all still,
    Regarding a newspaper.
    He accosted me:
    "Sir, what is this?"
    Then I saw that I was greater,
    Aye, greater than this sage.
    I answered him at once,
    "Old, old man, it is the wisdom of the age."
    The sage looked upon me with admiration.



                                  XII

    "and the sins of the fathers shall be
    visited upon the heads of the children,
    even unto the third and fourth
    generation of them that hate me."

    Well, then, I hate thee, Unrighteous Picture;
    Wicked Image, I hate thee;
    So, strike with thy vengeance
    The heads of those little men
    Who come blindly.
    It will be a brave thing.



                                  XIII

    If there is a witness to my little life,
    To my tiny throes and struggles,
    He sees a fool;
    And it is not fine for gods to menace fools.



                                  XIV

    There was crimson clash of war.
    Lands turned black and bare;
    Women wept;
    Babes ran, wondering.
    There came one who understood not these things.
    He said, "Why is this?"
    Whereupon a million strove to answer him.
    There was such intricate clamor of tongues,
    That still the reason was not.



                                   XV

    "Tell brave deeds of war."

    Then they recounted tales,--
    "There were stern stands
    "And bitter runs for glory."

    Ah, I think there were braver deeds.



                                  XVI

    Chanty, thou art a lie,
    A toy of women,
    A pleasure of certain men.
    In the presence of justice,
    Lo, the walls of the temple
    Are visible
    Through thy form of sudden shadows.



                                  XVII

    There were many who went in huddled procession,
    They knew not whither;
    But, at any rate, success or calamity
    Would attend all in equality.

    There was one who sought a new road.
    He went into direful thickets,
    And ultimately he died thus, alone;
    But they said he had courage.



                                 XVIII

    In Heaven,
    Some little blades of grass
    Stood before God.
    "What did you do?"
    Then all save one of the little blades
    Began eagerly to relate
    The merits of their lives.
    This one stayed a small way behind,
    Ashamed.
    Presently, God said,
    "And what did you do?"
    The little blade answered, "Oh, my Lord,
    "Memory is bitter to me,
    "For, if I did good deeds,
    "I know not of them."
    Then God, in all His splendor,
    Arose from His throne.
    "Oh, best little blade of grass!" He said.



                                  XIX

    A god in wrath
    Was beating a man;
    He cuffed him loudly
    With thunderous blows
    That rang and rolled over the earth.
    All people came running.
    The man screamed and struggled,
    And bit madly at the feet of the god.
    The people cried,
    "Ah, what a wicked man!"
    And--
    "Ah, what a redoubtable god!"



                                   XX

    A learned man came to me once.
    He said, "I know the way,--come."
    And I was overjoyed at this.
    Together we hastened.
    Soon, too soon, were we
    Where my eyes were useless,
    And I knew not the ways of my feet
    I clung to the hand of my friend;
    But at last he cried, "I am lost."



                                  XXI

    There was, before me,
    Mile upon mile
    Of snow, ice, burning sand.
    And yet I could look beyond all this,
    To a place of infinite beauty;
    And I could see the loveliness of her
    Who walked in the shade of the trees.
    When I gazed,
    All was lost
    But this place of beauty and her.
    When I gazed,
    And in my gazing, desired,
    Then came again
    Mile upon mile,
    Of snow, ice, burning sand.



                                  XXII

    Once I saw Mountains angry,
    And ranged in battle-front.
    Against them stood a little man;
    Aye, he was no bigger than my finger.
    I laughed, and spoke to one near me,
    "Will he prevail?"
    "Surely," replied this other;
    "His grandfathers beat them many times."
    Then did I see much virtue in grandfathers,--
    At least, for the little man
    Who stood against the Mountains.



                                 XXIII

    Places among the stars,
    Soft gardens near the sun,
    Keep your distant beauty;
    Shed no beams upon my weak heart.
    Since she is here
    In a place of blackness,
    Not your golden days
    Nor your silver nights
    Can call me to you.
    Since she is here
    In a place of blackness,
    Here I stay and wait.



                                  XXIV

    I saw a man pursuing the horizon;
    Round and round they sped.
    I was disturbed at this;
    I accosted the man.
    "It is futile," I said,
    "You can never"--

    "You lie," he cried,
    And ran on.



                                  XXV

    Behold, the grave of a wicked man,
    And near it, a stern spirit.

    There came a drooping maid with violets,
    But the spirit grasped her arm.
    "No flowers for him," he said.
    The maid wept:
    "Ah, I loved him."
    But the spirit, grim and frowning:
    "No flowers for him."

    Now, this is it--
    If the spirit was just,
    Why did the maid weep?



                                  XXVI

    There was set before me a mighty hill,
    And long days I climbed
    Through regions of snow.
    When I had before me the summit-view,
    It seemed that my labor
    Had been to see gardens
    Lying at impossible distances.



                                 XXVII

    A youth in apparel that glittered
    Went to walk in a grim forest.
    There he met an assassin
    Attired all in garb of old days;
    He, scowling through the thickets,
    And dagger poised quivering,
    Rushed upon the youth.
    "Sir," said this latter,
    "I am enchanted, believe me,
    "To die, thus,
    "In this medieval fashion,
    "According to the best legends;
    "Ah, what joy!"
    Then took he the wound, smiling,
    And died, content.



                                 XXVIII

    "Truth," said a traveller,
    "Is a rock, a mighty fortress;
    "Often have I been to it,
    "Even to its highest tower,
    "From whence the world looks black."

    "Truth," said a traveller,
    "Is a breath, a wind,
    "A shadow, a phantom;
    "Long have I pursued it,
    "But never have I touched
    "The hem of its garment."

    And I believed the second traveller;
    For truth was to me
    A breath, a wind,
    A shadow, a phantom,
    And never had I touched
    The hem of its garment.



                                  XXIX

    Behold, from the land of the farther suns
    I returned.
    And I was in a reptile-swarming place,
    Peopled, otherwise, with grimaces,
    Shrouded above in black impenetrableness.
    I shrank, loathing,
    Sick with it.
    And I said to him,
    "What is this?"
    He made answer slowly,
    "Spirit, this is a world;
    "This was your home."



                                  XXX

    Supposing that I should have the courage
    To let a red sword of virtue
    Plunge into my heart,
    Letting to the weeds of the ground
    My sinful blood,
    What can you offer me?
    A gardened castle?
    A flowery kingdom?

    What?  A hope?
    Then hence with your red sword of virtue.



                                  XXXI

    Many workmen
    Built a huge ball of masonry
    Upon a mountain-top.
    Then they went to the valley below,
    And turned to behold their work.
    "It is grand," they said;
    They loved the thing.

    Of a sudden, it moved:
    It came upon them swiftly;
    It crushed them all to blood.
    But some had opportunity to squeal.



                                 XXXII

    Two or three angels
    Came near to the earth.
    They saw a fat church.
    Little black streams of people
    Came and went in continually.
    And the angels were puzzled
    To know why the people went thus,
    And why they stayed so long within.



                                 XXXIII

    There was one I met upon the road
    Who looked at me with kind eyes.
    He said, "Show me of your wares."
    And this I did,
    Holding forth one.
    He said, "It is a sin."
    Then held I forth another;
    He said, "It is a sin."
    Then held I forth another;
    He said, "It is a sin."
    And so to the end;
    Always he said, "It is a sin."
    And, finally, I cried out,
    "But I have none other."
    Then did he look at me
    With kinder eyes.
    "Poor soul!" he said.



                                 XXXIV

    I stood upon a highway,
    And, behold, there came
    Many strange pedlers.
    To me each one made gestures.
    Holding forth little images, saying,
    "This is my pattern of God.
    "Now this is the God I prefer."

    But I said, "Hence!
    "Leave me with mine own,
    "And take you yours away;
    "I can't buy of your patterns of God,
    "The little Gods you may rightly prefer."



                                  XXXV

    A man saw a ball of gold in the sky;
    He climbed for it,
    And eventually he achieved it--
    It was clay.

    Now this is the strange part:
    When the man went to the earth
    And looked again,
    Lo, there was the ball of gold.
    Now this is the strange part:
    It was a ball of gold.
    Aye, by the Heavens, it was a ball of gold.



                                 XXXVI

    I met a seer.
    He held in his hands
    The book of wisdom.
    "Sir," I addressed him,
    "Let me read."
    "Child--" he began.
    "Sir," I said,
    "Think not that I am a child,
    "For already I know much
    "Of that which you hold.
    "Aye, much."

    He smiled.
    Then he opened the book
    And held it before me.--
    Strange that I should have grown so suddenly blind.



                                 XXXVII

    On the horizon the peaks assembled;
    And as I looked,
    The march of the mountains began.
    As they marched, they sang,
    "Aye!  We come!  We come!"



                                XXXVIII

    The ocean said to me once,
    "Look!
    "Yonder on the shore
    "Is a woman, weeping.
    "I have watched her.
    "Go you and tell her this,--
    "Her lover I have laid
    "In cool green hall.
    "There is wealth of golden sand
    "And pillars, coral-red;
    "Two white fish stand guard at his bier.

    "Tell her this
    "And more,--
    "That the king of the seas
    "Weeps too, old, helpless man.
    "The bustling fates
    "Heap his hands with corpses
    "Until he stands like a child,
    "With surplus of toys."



                                 XXXIX

    The livid lightnings flashed in the clouds;
    The leaden thunders crashed.
    A worshipper raised his arm.
    "Hearken!  Hearken!  The voice of God!"

    "Not so," said a man.
    "The voice of God whispers in the heart
    "So softly
    "That the soul pauses,
    "Making no noise,
    "And strives for these melodies,
    "Distant, sighing, like faintest breath,
    "And all the being is still to hear."



                                   XL

    And you love me?

    I love you.

    You are, then, cold coward.

    Aye; but, beloved,
    When I strive to come to you,
    Man's opinions, a thousand thickets,
    My interwoven existence,
    My life,
    Caught in the stubble of the world
    Like a tender veil,--
    This stays me.
    No strange move can I make
    Without noise of tearing.
    I dare not.

    If love loves,
    There is no world
    Nor word.
    All is lost
    Save thought of love
    And place to dream.
    You love me?

    I love you.

    You are, then, cold coward.

    Aye; but beloved--



                                  XLI

    Love walked alone.
    The rocks cut her tender feet,
    And the brambles tore her fair limbs.
    There came a companion to her,
    But, alas, he was no help,
    For his name was Heart's Pain.



                                  XLII

    I walked in a desert.
    And I cried,
    "Ah, God, take me from this place!"
    A voice said, "It is no desert."
    I cried, "Well, but--
    "The sand, the heat, the vacant horizon."
    A voice said, "It is no desert."



                                 XLIII

    There came whisperings in the winds
    "Good bye!  Good bye!"
    Little voices called in the darkness:
    "Good bye!  Good bye!"
    Then I stretched forth my arms.
    "No--no--"
    There came whisperings in the wind:
    "Good bye!  Good bye!"
    Little voices called in the darkness:
    "Good bye!  Good bye!"



                                  XLIV

    I was in the darkness;
    I could not see my words
    Nor the wishes of my heart.
    Then suddenly there was a great light--
    "Let me into the darkness again."



                                  XLV

    Tradition, thou art for suckling children,
    Thou art the enlivening milk for babes;
    But no meat for men is in thee.
    Then--
    But, alas, we all are babes.



                                  XLVI

    Many red devils ran from my heart
    And out upon the page,
    They were so tiny
    The pen could mash them.
    And many struggled in the ink.
    It was strange
    To write in this red muck
    Of things from my heart.



                                 XLVII

    "Think as I think," said a man,
    "Or you are abominably wicked;
    "You are a toad."

    And after I had thought of it,
    I said, "I will, then, be a toad."



                                 XLVIII

    Once there was a man,--
    Oh, so wise!
    In all drink
    He detected the bitter,
    And in all touch
    He found the sting.
    At last he cried thus:
    "There is nothing,--
    "No life,
    "No joy,
    "No pain,--
    "There is nothing save opinion,
    "And opinion be damned."



                                  XLIX

    I stood musing in a black world,
    Not knowing where to direct my feet.
    And I saw the quick stream of men
    Pouring ceaselessly,
    Filled with eager faces,
    A torrent of desire.
    I called to them,
    "Where do you go?  What do you see?"
    A thousand voices called to me.
    A thousand fingers pointed.
    "Look!  Look!  There!"

    I know not of it.
    But, lo! in the far sky shone a radiance
    Ineffable, divine,--
    A vision painted upon a pall;
    And sometimes it was,
    And sometimes it was not.
    I hesitated.
    Then from the stream
    Came roaring voices,
    Impatient:
    "Look!  Look!  There!"

    So again I saw,
    And leaped, unhesitant,
    And struggled and fumed
    With outspread clutching fingers.
    The hard hills tore my flesh;
    The ways bit my feet.
    At last I looked again.
    No radiance in the far sky,
    Ineffable, divine;
    No vision painted upon a pall;
    And always my eyes ached for the light.
    Then I cried in despair,
    "I see nothing! Oh, where do I go?"
    The torrent turned again its faces:
    "Look!  Look!  There!"
    And at the blindness of my spirit
    They screamed,
    "Fool!  Fool!  Fool!"



                                   L

    You say you are holy,
    And that
    Because I have not seen you sin.
    Aye, but there are those
    Who see you sin, my friend.



                                   LI

    A man went before a strange god,--
    The god of many men, sadly wise.
    And the deity thundered loudly,
    Fat with rage, and puffing,
    "Kneel, mortal, and cringe
    "And grovel and do homage
    "To my particularly sublime majesty."

    The man fled.

    Then the man went to another god,--
    The god of his inner thoughts.
    And this one looked at him
    With soft eyes
    Lit with infinite comprehension,
    And said, "My poor child!"



                                  LII

    Why do you strive for greatness, fool?
    Go pluck a bough and wear it.
    It is as sufficing.

    My lord, there are certain barbarians
    Who tilt their noses
    As if the stars were flowers,
    And thy servant is lost among their shoe-buckles.
    Fain would I have mine eyes even with their eyes.

    Fool, go pluck a bough and wear it.



                                  LIII

                                   I

    Blustering god,
    Stamping across the sky
    With loud swagger,
    I fear you not.
    No, though from your highest heaven
    You plunge your spear at my heart,
    I fear you not.
    No, not if the blow
    Is as the lightning blasting a tree,
    I fear you not, puffing braggart.

                                   II

    If thou can see into my heart
    That I fear thee not,
    Thou wilt see why I fear thee not,
    And why it is right.
    So threaten not, thou, with thy bloody spears,
    Else thy sublime ears shall hear curses.


                                  III

    Withal, there is one whom I fear;
    I fear to see grief upon that face.
    Perchance, Friend, he is not your god;
    If so, spit upon him.
    By it you will do no profanity.
    But I--
    Ah, sooner would I die
    Than see tears in those eyes of my soul.



                                  LIV

    "It was wrong to do this," said the angel.
    "You should live like a flower,
    "Holding malice like a puppy,
    "Waging war like a lambkin."

    "Not so," quoth the man
    Who had no fear of spirits;
    "It is only wrong for angels
    "Who can live like the flowers,
    "Holding malice like the puppies,
    "Waging war like the lambkins."



                                   LV

    A man toiled on a burning road,
    Never resting.
    Once he saw a fat, stupid ass
    Grinning at him from a green place.
    The man cried out in rage,
    "Ah!  Do not deride me, fool!
    "I know you--
    "All day stuffing your belly,
    "Burying your heart
    "In grass and tender sprouts:
    "It will not suffice you."
    But the ass only grinned at him from the green place.



                                  LVI

    A man feared that he might find an assassin;
    Another that he might find a victim.
    One was more wise than the other.



                                  LVII

    With eye and with gesture
    You say you are holy.
    I say you lie;
    For I did see you
    Draw away your coats
    From the sin upon the hands
    Of a little child.
    Liar!



                                 LVIII

    The sage lectured brilliantly.
    Before him, two images:
    "Now this one is a devil,
    "And this one is me."
    He turned away.
    Then a cunning pupil
    Changed the positions.
    Turned the sage again:
    "Now this one is a devil,
    "And this one is me."
    The pupils sat, all grinning,
    And rejoiced in the game.
    But the sage was a sage.



                                  LIX

    Walking in the sky,
    A man in strange black garb
    Encountered a radiant form.
    Then his steps were eager;
    Bowed he devoutly.
    "My Lord," said he.
    But the spirit knew him not.



                                   LX

    Upon the road of my life,
    Passed me many fair creatures,
    Clothed all in white, and radiant.
    To one, finally, I made speech:
    "Who art thou?"
    But she, like the others,
    Kept cowled her face,
    And answered in haste, anxiously,
    "I am Good Deed, forsooth;
    "You have often seen me."
    "Not uncowled," I made reply.
    And with rash and strong hand,
    Though she resisted,
    I drew away the veil
    And gazed at the features of Vanity
    She, shamefaced, went on;
    And after I had mused a time,
    I said of myself,
      "Fool!"



                                  LXI

                                   I

    There was a man and a woman
    Who sinned.
    Then did the man heap the punishment
    All upon the head of her,
    And went away gayly.


                                   II

    There was a man and a woman
    Who sinned.
    And the man stood with her.
    As upon her head, so upon his,
    Fell blow and blow,
    And all people screaming, "Fool!"
    He was a brave heart.


                                  III

    He was a brave heart.
    Would you speak with him, friend?
    Well, he is dead,
    And there went your opportunity.
    Let it be your grief
    That he is dead
    And your opportunity gone;
    For, in that, you were a coward.



                                  LXII

    There was a man who lived a life of fire.
    Even upon the fabric of time,
    Where purple becomes orange
    And orange purple,
    This life glowed,
    A dire red stain, indelible;
    Yet when he was dead,
    He saw that he had not lived.



                                 LXIII

    There was a great cathedral.
    To solemn songs,
    A white procession
    Moved toward the altar.
    The chief man there
    Was erect, and bore himself proudly.
    Yet some could see him cringe,
    As in a place of danger,
    Throwing frightened glances into the air,
    A-start at threatening faces of the past.



                                  LXIV

    Friend, your white beard sweeps the ground,
    Why do you stand, expectant?
    Do you hope to see it
    In one of your withered days?
    With your old eyes
    Do you hope to see
    The triumphal march of Justice?
    Do not wait, friend
    Take your white beard
    And your old eyes
    To more tender lands.



                                  LXV

    Once, I knew a fine song,
    --It is true, believe me,--
    It was all of birds,
    And I held them in a basket;
    When I opened the wicket,
    Heavens!  They all flew away.
    I cried, "Come back, little thoughts!"
    But they only laughed.
    They flew on
    Until they were as sand
    Thrown between me and the sky.



                                  LXVI

    If I should cast off this tattered coat,
    And go free into the mighty sky;
    If I should find nothing there
    But a vast blue,
    Echoless, ignorant,--
    What then?



                                 LXVII

    God lay dead in Heaven;
    Angels sang the hymn of the end;
    Purple winds went moaning,
    Their wings drip-dripping
    With blood
    That fell upon the earth.
    It, groaning thing,
    Turned black and sank.
    Then from the far caverns
    Of dead sins
    Came monsters, livid with desire.
    They fought,
    Wrangled over the world,
    A morsel.
    But of all sadness this was sad,--
    A woman's arms tried to shield
    The head of a sleeping man
    From the jaws of the final beast.



                                 LXVIII

    A spirit sped
    Through spaces of night;
    And as he sped, he called,
    "God!  God!"
    He went through valleys
    Of black death-slime,
    Ever calling,
    "God!  God!"
    Their echoes
    From crevice and cavern
    Mocked him:
    "God!  God!  God!"
    Fleetly into the plains of space
    He went, ever calling,
    "God!  God!"
    Eventually, then, he screamed,
    Mad in denial,
    "Ah, there is no God!"

    A swift hand,
    A sword from the sky,
    Smote him,
    And he was dead.






*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLACK RIDERS AND OTHER LINES
***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/40786

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works to protect the
Project Gutenberg(tm) concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away - you may do practically _anything_ with public
domain eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works. Nearly all the individual works
in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg(tm) works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg(tm) name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg(tm) License when you share it without charge with
others.

*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg(tm) work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
derived from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating
that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can
be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying
any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on
the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs
1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and
distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg(tm) License for all works posted
with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of
this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License terms from this work, or any files containing a
part of this work or any other work associated with Project
Gutenberg(tm).

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg(tm) web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg(tm) works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works
provided that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg(tm) works calculated using the method
    you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
    to the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark, but he has
    agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
    within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
    legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
    payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
    Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation."

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg(tm)
    License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
    copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
    all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg(tm)
    works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark. Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg(tm)
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg(tm) work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg(tm)


Project Gutenberg(tm) is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg(tm)'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg(tm) and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg(tm) depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg(tm)
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg(tm) eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg(tm) eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg(tm),
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
