The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April 1659/1660
by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April 1659/1660

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 29, 2004 [EBook #4120]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.   F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A.  LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                              MARCH & APRIL
                                1659-60

March 1st.  In the morning went to my Lord's lodgings, thinking to have
spoke with Mr. Sheply, having not been to visit him since my coming to
town.  But he being not within I went up, and out of the box where my
Lord's pamphlets lay, I chose as many as I had a mind to have for my own
use and left the rest.  Then to my office, where little to do, abut Mr.
Sheply comes to me, so at dinner time he and I went to Mr. Crew's, whither
Mr. Thomas was newly come to town, being sent with Sir H. Yelverton, a my
old school-fellow at Paul's School, to bring the thanks of the county to
General Monk for the return of the Parliament.  But old Mr. Crew and my
Lord not coming home to dinner, we tarried late before we went to dinner,
it being the day that John, Mr. John Crew's coachman, was to be buried in
the afternoon, he being a day or two before killed with a blow of one of
his horses that struck his skull into his brain.  From thence Mr. Sheply
and I went into London to Mr. Laxton's; my Lord's apothecary, and so by
water to Westminster, where at the Sun [tavern] he and I spent two or
three hours in a pint or two of wine, discoursing of matters in the
country, among other things telling me that my uncle did to him make a
very kind mention of me, and what he would do for me. Thence I went home,
and went to bed betimes.  This day the Parliament did vote that they would
not sit longer than the 15th day of this month.

2d.  This morning I went early to my Lord at Mr. Crew's, where I spoke to
him.  Here were a great many come to see him, as Secretary Thurlow who is
now by this Parliament chosen again Secretary of State.  There were also
General Monk's trumpeters to give my Lord a sound of their trumpets this
morning.  Thence I went to my office, and wrote a letter to Mr. Downing
about the business of his house.  Then going home, I met with Mr. Eglin,
Chetwind, and Thomas, who took me to the Leg [another tavern] in King's
street, where we had two brave dishes of meat, one of fish, a carp and
some other fishes, as well done as ever I ate any.  After that to the Swan
tavern, where we drank a quart or two of wine, and so parted.  So I to
Mrs. Jem and took Mr. Moore with me (who I met in the street), and there I
met W. Howe and Sheply.  After that to Westminster Hall, where I saw Sir
G. Booth at liberty.  This day I hear the City militia is put into good
posture, and it is thought that Monk will not be able to do any great
matter against them now, if he have a mind.  I understand that my Lord
Lambert did yesterday send a letter to the Council, and that to-night he
is to come and appear to the Council in person.  Sir Arthur Haselrigge do
not yet appear in the House.  Great is the talk of a single person, and
that it would now be Charles, George, or Richard again.--[Charles II., or
George Monk, or Richard Cromwell.]--For the last of which, my Lord St.
John is said to speak high.  Great also is the dispute now in the House,
in whose name the writs shall run for the next Parliament; and it is said
that Mr. Prin, in open House, said, "In King Charles's."  From Westminster
Hall home.  Spent the evening in my study, and so after some talk with my
wife, then to bed.

3d.  To Westminster Hall, where I found that my Lord was last night voted
one of the Generals at Sea, and Monk the other.  I met my Lord in the
Hall, who bid me come to him at noon.  I met with Mr. Pierce the purser,
Lieut. Lambert, Mr. Creed, and Will. Howe, and went with them to the Swan
tavern.  Up to my office, but did nothing.  At noon home to dinner to a
sheep's head.  My brother Tom came and dined with me, and told me that my
mother was not very well, and that my Aunt Fenner was very ill too. After
dinner I to Warwick House, in Holborn, to my Lord, where he dined with my
Lord of Manchester, Sir Dudley North, my Lord Fiennes, and my Lord Barkly.
I staid in the great hall, talking with some gentlemen there, till they
all come out.  Then I, by coach with my Lord, to Mr. Crew's, in our way
talking of publick things, and how I should look after getting of his
Commissioner's despatch.  He told me he feared there was new design
hatching, as if Monk had a mind to get into the saddle.  Here I left him,
and went by appointment to Hering, the merchant, but missed of my money,
at which I was much troubled, but could not help myself. Returning, met
Mr. Gifford, who took me and gave me half a pint of wine, and told me, as
I hear this day from many, that things are in a very doubtful posture,
some of the Parliament being willing to keep the power in their hands.
After I had left him, I met with Tom Harper, who took me into a place in
Drury Lane, where we drank a great deal of strong water, more than ever I
did in my life at onetime before.  He talked huge high that my Lord
Protector would come in place again, which indeed is much discoursed of
again, though I do not see it possible.  Hence home and wrote to my father
at Brampton by the post.  So to bed.  This day I was told that my Lord
General Fleetwood told my lord that he feared the King of Sweden is dead
of a fever at Gottenburg.

4th.  Lord's day.  Before I went to church I sang Orpheus' Hymn  to my
viall.  After that to Mr. Gunning's, an excellent sermon upon charity.
Then to my mother to dinner, where my wife and the maid were come.  After
dinner we three to Mr. Messum's where we met Mons. L'Impertinent, who got
us a seat and told me a ridiculous story how that last week he had caused
a simple citizen to spend; L80 in entertainments of him and some friends
of his upon pretence of some service that he would do him in his suit
after a widow.  Then to my mother again, and after supper she and I talked
very high about religion, I in defence of the religion I was born in.
Then home.

5th.  Early in the morning Mr. Hill comes to string my theorbo,

     [The theorbo was a bass lute.  Having gut strings it was played with
     the fingers.  There is a humorous comparison of the long waists of
     ladies, which came into fashion about 1621, with the theorbo, by
     Bishop Corbet:

         "She was barr'd up in whale-bones, that did leese
          None of the whale's length, for they reached her knees;
          Off with her head, and then she hath a middle
          As her waste stands, just like the new found fiddle,
          The favourite Theorbo, truth to tell ye,
          Whose neck and throat are deeper than the belly."

                                   Corbet, 'Iter Boreale'.]

which we were about till past ten o'clock, with a great deal of pleasure.
Then to Westminster, where I met with Mr. Sheply and Mr. Pinkney at
Will's, who took me by water to Billingsgate, at the Salutation Tavern,
whither by-and-by, Mr. Talbot and Adams came, and bring a great [deal of]
good meat, a ham of bacon, &c.  Here we staid and drank till Mr. Adams
began to be overcome.  Then we parted, and so to Westminster by water,
only seeing Mr. Pinkney at his own house, where he shewed me how he had
alway kept the Lion and Unicorn, in the back of his chimney, bright, in
expectation of the King's coming again.  At home I found Mr. Hunt, who
told me how the Parliament had voted that the Covenant be printed and
hung in churches again.  Great hopes of the King's coming again.  To bed.

6th.  (Shrove Tuesday.) I called Mr. Sheply and we both went up to my
Lord's lodgings at Mr. Crew's, where he bade us to go home again, and get
a fire against an hour after.  Which we did at White Hall, whither he
came, and after talking with him and me about his going to sea, he called
me by myself to go along with him into the garden, where he asked me how
things were with me, and what he had endeavoured to do with my uncle to
get him to do something for me but he would say nothing too.  He likewise
bade me look out now at this turn some good place, and he would use all
his own, and all the interest of his friends that he had in England, to do
me good.  And asked me whether I could, without too much inconvenience, go
to sea as his secretary, and bid me think of it.  He also began to talk of
things of State, and told me that he should want one in that capacity at
sea, that he might trust in, and therefore he would have me to go.  He
told me also, that he did believe the King would come in, and did
discourse with me about it, and about the affection of the people and
City, at which I was full glad.  After he was gone, I waiting upon him
through the garden till he came to the Hall, where I left him and went up
to my office, where Mr. Hawly brought one to me, a seaman, that had
promised Rio to him if he get him a purser's place, which I think to
endeavour to do.  Here comes my uncle Tom, whom I took to Will's and drank
with, poor man, he comes to inquire about the knights of Windsor, of which
he desires to get to be one.

     [The body of Poor Knights of Windsor was founded by Edward III.  The
     intention of the king with regard to the poor knights was to provide
     relief and comfortable subsistence for such valiant soldiers as
     happened in their old age to fall into poverty and decay.  On
     September 20th, 1659, a Report having been read respecting the Poor
     Knights of Windsor, the House "ordered that it be referred to a
     Committee, to look into the revenue for maintenance of the Poor
     Knights of Windsor," &c.  (See Tighe and Davis's "Annals of
     Windsor.")]

While we were drinking, in comes Mr. Day, a carpenter in Westminster, to
tell me that it was Shrove Tuesday, and that I must go with him to their
yearly Club upon this day, which I confess I had quite forgot.  So I went
to the Bell, where were Mr. Eglin, Veezy, Vincent a butcher, one more, and
Mr. Tanner, with whom I played upon a viall, and he a viallin, after
dinner, and were very merry, with a special good dinner, a leg of veal and
bacon, two capons and sausages and fritters, with abundance of wine. After
that I went home, where I found Kate Sterpin who hath not been here a
great while before.  She gone I went to see Mrs. Jem, at whose chamber
door I found a couple of ladies, but she not being there, we hunted her
out, and found that she and another had hid themselves behind a door.
Well, they all went down into the dining-room, where it was full of tag,
rag, and bobtail, dancing, singing, and drinking, of which I was ashamed,
and after I had staid a dance or two I went away.  Going home, called at
my Lord's for Mr. Sheply, but found him at the Lion with a pewterer, that
he had bought pewter to-day of.  With them I drank, and so home and wrote
by the post, by my Lord's command, for J. Goods to come up presently. For
my Lord intends to go forthwith into the Swiftsure till the Nazeby be
ready.  This day I hear that the Lords do intend to sit, and great store
of them are now in town, and I see in the Hall to-day.  Overton at Hull do
stand out, but can, it is thought, do nothing; and Lawson, it is said, is
gone with some ships thither, but all that is nothing.  My Lord told me,
that there was great endeavours to bring in the Protector again; but he
told me, too, that he did believe it would not last long if he were
brought in; no, nor the King neither (though he seems to think that he
will come in), unless he carry himself very soberly and well.  Every body
now drinks the King's health without any fear, whereas before it was very
private that a man dare do it.  Monk this day is feasted at Mercers' Hall,
and is invited one after another to all the twelve Halls in London! Many
think that he is honest yet, and some or more think him to be a fool that
would raise himself, but think that he will undo himself by endeavouring
it.  My mind, I must needs remember, has been very much eased and joyed at
my Lord's great expressions of kindness this day, and in discourse
thereupon my wife and I lay awake an hour or two in our bed.

7th.  (Ash Wednesday.) In the morning I went to my Lord at Mr. Crew's, in
my way Washington overtook me and told me upon my question whether he knew
of any place now void that I might have, by power over friends, that this
day Mr. G. Montagu was to be made 'Custos Rotulorum' for Westminster, and
that by friends I might get to be named by him Clerk of the Peace, with
which I was, as I am at all new things, very much joyed, so when I came to
Mr. Crew's, I spoke to my Lord about it, who told me he believed Mr.
Montagu had already promised it, and that it was given him only that he
might gratify one person with the place I look for.  Here, among many that
were here, I met with Mr. Lynes, the surgeon, who promised me some seeds
of the sensitive plant.

     [Evelyn, about the same date (August 9th, 1661), "tried several
     experiments on the sensitive plant and humilis, which contracted
     with the least touch of the sun through a burning glass, though it
     rises and opens only when it shines on it"]

I spoke too with Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who gave me great encouragement
to go to sea with my Lord.  Thence going homewards, my Lord overtook me in
his coach, and called me in, and so I went with him to St. James's, and G.
Montagu being gone to White Hall, we walked over the Park thither, all the
way he discoursing of the times, and of the change of things since the
last year, and wondering how he could bear with so great disappointment as
he did.  He did give me the best advice that he could what was best for
me, whether to stay or go with him, and offered all the ways that could
be, how he might do me good, with the greatest liberty and love that could
be.  I left him at Whitehall, and myself went to Westminster to my office,
whither nothing to do, but I did discourse with Mr. Falconbridge about Le
Squire's place, and had his consent to get it if I could.  I afterwards in
the Hall met with W. Simons, who put me in the best way how to get it
done.  Thence by appointment to the Angel in King Street, where Chetwind,
Mr. Thomas and Doling were at oysters, and beginning Lent this day with a
fish dinner.  After dinner Mr. Thomas and I by water to London, where I
went to Herring's and received the L50 of my Lord's upon Frank's bill from
Worcester.  I gave in the bill and set my hand to his bill.  Thence I went
to the Pope's Head Alley and called on Adam Chard, and bought a catcall
there, it cost me two groats.  Thence went and gave him a cup of ale.
After that to the Sun behind the Exchange,  where meeting my uncle Wight
by the way, took him with me thither, and after drinking a health or two
round at the Cock (Mr. Thomas being gone thither), we parted, he and I
homewards, parted at Fleet Street, where I found my father newly come home
from Brampton very well. He left my uncle with his leg very dangerous, and
do believe he cannot continue in that condition long.  He tells me that my
uncle did acquaint him very largely what he did intend to do with his
estate, to make me his heir and give my brother Tom something, and that my
father and mother should have likewise something, to raise portions for
John and Pall.  I pray God he may be as good as his word.  Here I staid
and supped and so home, there being Joyce Norton there and Ch. Glascock.
Going home I called at Wotton's and took home a piece of cheese.  At home
Mr. Sheply sat with me a little while, and so we all to bed.  This news
and my Lord's great kindness makes me very cheerful within.  I pray God
make me thankful.  This day, according to order, Sir Arthur [Haselrigge]
appeared at the House; what was done I know not, but there was all the
Rumpers almost come to the House to-day.  My Lord did seem to wonder much
why Lambert was so willing to be put into the Tower, and thinks he has
some design in it; but I think that he is so poor that he cannot use his
liberty for debts, if he were at liberty; and so it is as good and better
for him to be there, than any where else.

8th.  To Whitehall to bespeak some firing for my father at Short's, and
likewise to speak to Mr. Blackburne about Batters being gunner in the
"Wexford."  Then to Westminster Hall, where there was a general damp over
men's minds and faces upon some of the Officers of the Army being about
making a remonstrance against Charles Stuart or any single person; but at
noon it was told, that the General had put a stop to it, so all was well
again.  Here I met with Jasper, who was to look for me to bring me to my
Lord at the lobby; whither sending a note to my Lord, he comes out to me
and gives me direction to look after getting some money for him from the
Admiralty, seeing that things are so unsafe, that he would not lay out a
farthing for the State, till he had received some money of theirs.  Home
about two o'clock, and took my wife by land to Paternoster Row, to buy
some Paragon for a petticoat and so home again.  In my way meeting Mr.
Moore, who went home with me while I ate a bit and so back to Whitehall
again, both of us.  He waited at the Council for Mr. Crew.  I to the
Admiralty, where I got the order for the money, and have taken care for
the getting of it assigned upon Mr. Hutchinson, Treasurer for the Navy,
against tomorrow.  Hence going home I met with Mr. King that belonged to
the Treasurers at War and took him to Harper's, who told me that he and
the rest of his fellows are cast out of office by the new Treasurers. This
afternoon, some of the Officers of the Army, and some of the Parliament,
had a conference at White Hall to make all right again, but I know not
what is done.  This noon I met at the Dog tavern Captain Philip Holland,
with whom I advised how to make some advantage of my Lord's going to sea,
which he told me might be by having of five or six servants entered on
board, and I to give them what wages I pleased, and so their pay to be
mine; he was also very urgent to have me take the Secretary's place, that
my Lord did proffer me.  At the same time in comes Mr. Wade and Mr.
Sterry, secretary to the plenipotentiary in Denmark, who brought the news
of the death of the King of Sweden at Gottenburgh the 3rd of the last
month, and he told me what a great change he found when he came here, the
secluded members being restored.  He also spoke very freely of Mr. Wades
profit, which he made while he was in Zeeland, how he did believe that he
cheated Mr. Powell, and that he made above L500 on the voyage, which Mr.
Wade did very angrily deny, though I believe he was guilty enough.

9th.  To my Lord at his lodging, and came to Westminster with him in the
coach, with Mr. Dudley with him, and he in the Painted Chamber

     [The Painted Chamber, or St. Edward's Chamber, in the old Palace at
     Westminster.  The first name was given to it from the curious
     paintings on the walls, and the second from the tradition that
     Edward the Confessor died in it.]

walked a good while; and I telling him that I was willing and ready to go
with him to sea, he agreed that I should, and advised me what to write to
Mr. Downing about it, which I did at my office, that by my Lord's desire I
offered that my place might for a while be supplied by Mr. Moore, and that
I and my security should be bound by the same bond for him.  I went and
dined at Mr. Crew's, where Mr. Hawly comes to me, and I told him the
business and shewed him the letter promising him L20 a year, which he
liked very well of.  I did the same to Mr. Moore, which he also took for a
courtesy.  In the afternoon by coach, taking Mr. Butler with me to the
Navy Office, about the L500 for my Lord, which I am promised to have
to-morrow morning.  Then by coach back again, and at White Hall at the
Council Chamber spoke with my Lord and got him to sign the acquittance for
the L500, and he also told me that he had spoke to Mr. Blackburne to put
off Mr. Creed and that I should come to him for direction in the
employment.  After this Mr. Butler and I to Harper's, where we sat and
drank for two hours till ten at night; the old woman she was drunk and
began to talk foolishly in commendation of her son James.  Home and to
bed.  All night troubled in my thoughts how to order my business upon this
great change with me that I could not sleep, and being overheated with
drink I made a promise the next morning to drink no strong drink this
week, for I find that it makes me sweat and puts me quite out of order.
This day it was resolved that the writs do go out in the name of the
Keepers of the Liberty, and I hear that it is resolved privately that a
treaty be offered with the King.  And that Monk did check his soldiers
highly for what they did yesterday.

10th.  In the morning went to my father's, whom I took in his cutting
house,--[His father was a tailor, and this was his cutting-out room.]--and
there I told him my resolution to go to sea with my Lord, and consulted
with him how to dispose of my wife, and we resolved of letting her be at
Mr. Bowyer's.  Thence to the Treasurer of the Navy, where I received L500
for my Lord, and having left L200 of it with Mr. Rawlinson at his house
for Sheply, I went with the rest to the Sun tavern on Fish Street Hill,
where Mr. Hill, Stevens and Mr. Hater of the Navy Office had invited me,
where we had good discourse and a fine breakfast of Mr. Hater.  Then by
coach home, where I took occasion to tell my wife of my going to sea, who
was much troubled at it, and was with some dispute at last willing to
continue at Mr. Bowyer's in my absence.  After this to see Mrs. Jem and
paid her maid L7, and then to Mr. Blackburne, who told me what Mr. Creed
did say upon the news of my coming into his place, and that he did propose
to my Lord that there should be two Secretaries, which made me go to Sir
H. Wright's where my Lord dined and spoke with him about it, but he seemed
not to agree to the motion.  Hither W. Howe comes to me and so to
Westminster.  In the way he told me, what I was to provide and so forth
against my going.  He went with me to my office, whither also Mr. Madge
comes half foxed and played the fool upon the violin that made me weary.
Then to Whitehall and so home and set many of my things in order against
my going.  My wife was late making of caps for me, and the wench making an
end of a pair of stockings that she was knitting of.  So to bed.

11th.  (Sunday.) All the day busy without my band on, putting up my books
and things, in order to my going to sea.  At night my wife and I went to
my father's to supper, where J. Norton and Chas. Glascocke supt with us,
and after supper home, where the wench had provided all things against
tomorrow to wash, and so to bed, where I much troubled with my cold and
coughing.

12th.  This day the wench rose at two in the morning to wash, and my wife
and I lay talking a great while.  I by reason of my cold could not tell
how to sleep.  My wife and I to the Exchange, where we bought a great many
things, where I left her and went into London, and at Bedells the
bookseller's at the Temple gate I paid L12 10s. 6d. for Mr. Fuller by his
direction.  So came back and at Wilkinson's found Mr. Sheply and some sea
people, as the cook of the Nazeby and others, at dinner.  Then to the
White Horse in King Street, where I got Mr. Buddle's horse to ride to
Huntsmore to Mr. Bowyer's, where I found him and all well, and willing to
have my wife come and board with them while I was at sea, which was the
business I went about.  Here I lay and took a thing for my cold, namely a
spoonful of honey and a nutmeg scraped into it, by Mr. Bowyer's direction,
and so took it into my mouth, which I found did do me much good.

13th.  It rained hard and I got up early, and got to London by 8 o'clock
at my Lord's lodgings, who told me that I was to be secretary, and Creed
to be deputy treasurer to the Fleet, at which I was troubled, but I could
not help it.  After that to my father's to look after things, and so at my
shoemaker's and others.  At night to Whitehall, where I met with Simons
and Luellin at drink with them at Roberts at Whitehall.  Then to the
Admiralty, where I talked with Mr. Creed till the Brothers, and they were
very seemingly willing and glad that I have the place since my Lord would
dispose of it otherwise than to them.  Home and to bed.  This day the
Parliament voted all that had been done by the former Rump against the
House of Lords be void, and to-night that the writs go out without any
qualification.  Things seem very doubtful what will be the end of all; for
the Parliament seems to be strong for the King, while the soldiers do all
talk against.

14th.  To my Lord, where infinity of applications to him and to me.  To my
great trouble, my Lord gives me all the papers that was given to him, to
put in order and give him an account of them.  Here I got half-a-piece of
a person of Mr. Wright's recommending to my Lord to be Preacher of the
Speaker frigate.  I went hence to St. James's and Mr. Pierce the surgeon
with me, to speak with Mr. Clerke,  Monk's secretary, about getting some
soldiers removed out of Huntingdon to Oundle, which my Lord told me he did
to do a courtesy to the town, that he might have the greater interest in
them, in the choice of the next Parliament; not that he intends to be
chosen himself, but that he might have Mr. G. Montagu and my Lord
Mandeville chose there in spite of the Bernards.  This done (where I saw
General Monk and methought he seemed a dull heavy man), he and I to
Whitehall, where with Luellin we dined at Marsh's.  Coming home telling my
wife what we had to dinner, she had a mind to some cabbage, and I sent for
some and she had it.  Went to the Admiralty, where a strange thing how I
am already courted by the people.  This morning among others that came to
me I hired a boy of Jenkins of Westminster and Burr to be my clerk.  This
night I went to Mr. Creed's chamber where he gave me the former book of
the proceedings in the fleet and the Seal.  Then to Harper's where old
Beard was and I took him by coach to my Lord's, but he was not at home,
but afterwards I found him out at Sir H. Wright's. Thence by coach, it
raining hard, to Mrs. Jem, where I staid a while, and so home, and late in
the night put up my things in a sea-chest that Mr. Sheply lent me, and so
to bed.

15th.  Early packing up my things to be sent by cart with the rest of my
Lord's.  So to Will's, where I took leave of some of my friends.  Here I
met Tom Alcock, one that went to school with me at Huntingdon, but I had
not seen him these sixteen years.  So in the Hall paid and made even with
Mrs. Michell; afterwards met with old Beale, and at the Axe paid him this
quarter to Ladyday next.  In the afternoon Dick Mathews comes to dine, and
I went and drank with him at Harper's.  So into London by water, and in
Fish Street my wife and I bought a bit of salmon for 8d. and went to the
Sun Tavern and ate it, where I did promise to give her all that I have in
the world but my books, in case I should die at sea.  From thence
homewards; in the way my wife bought linen for three smocks and other
things.  I went to my Lord's and spoke with him.  So home with Mrs. Jem by
coach and then home to my own house.  From thence to the Fox in
King-street to supper on a brave turkey of Mr. Hawly's, with some friends
of his there, Will Bowyer, &c.  After supper I went to Westminster Hall,
and the Parliament sat till ten at night, thinking and being expected to
dissolve themselves to-day, but they did not.  Great talk to-night that
the discontented officers did think this night to make a stir, but
prevented.  To the Fox again.  Home with my wife, and to bed extraordinary
sleepy.

16th.  No sooner out of bed but troubled with abundance of clients,
seamen.  My landlord Vanly's man came to me by my direction yesterday, for
I was there at his house as I was going to London by water, and I paid him
rent for my house for this quarter ending at Lady day, and took an
acquittance that he wrote me from his master.  Then to Mr. Sheply, to the
Rhenish Tavern House, where Mr. Pim, the tailor, was, and gave us a
morning draft and a neat's tongue.  Home and with my wife to London, we
dined at my father's, where Joyce Norton and Mr. Armiger dined also. After
dinner my wife took leave of them in order to her going to-morrow to
Huntsmore.  In my way home I went to the Chapel in Chancery Lane to
bespeak papers of all sorts and other things belonging to writing against
my voyage.  So home, where I spent an hour or two about my business in my
study.  Thence to the Admiralty, and staid a while, so home again, where
Will Bowyer came to tell us that he would bear my wife company in the
coach to-morrow.  Then to Westminster Hall, where I heard how the
Parliament had this day dissolved themselves, and did pass very cheerfully
through the Hall, and the Speaker without his mace.  The whole Hall was
joyful thereat, as well as themselves, and now they begin to talk loud of
the King.  To-night I am told, that yesterday, about five o'clock in the
afternoon, one came with a ladder to the Great Exchange, and wiped with a
brush the inscription that was upon King Charles, and that there was a
great bonfire made in the Exchange, and people called out "God bless.
King Charles the Second!"

     ["Then the writing in golden letters, that was engraven under the
     statue of Charles I, in the Royal Exchange ('Exit tyrannus, Regum
     ultimus, anno libertatis Angliae, anno Domini 1648, Januarie xxx.)
     was washed out by a painter, who in the day time raised a ladder,
     and with a pot and brush washed the writing quite out, threw down
     his pot and brush and said it should never do him any more service,
     in regard that it had the honour to put out rebels' hand-writing.
     He then came down, took away his ladder, not a misword said to him,
     and by whose order it was done was not then known.  The merchants
     were glad and joyful, many people were gathered together, and
     against the Exchange made a bonfire. "Rugge's Diurnal."  In the
     Thomason Collection of Civil War Tracts at the British Museum is a
     pamphlet which is dated in MS. March 21st, 1659-60, where this act
     is said to be by order of Monk: "The Loyal Subjects Teares for the
     Sufferings and Absence of their Sovereign Charles II., King of
     England, Scotland, and Ireland; with an Observation upon the
     expunging of 'Exit Tyrannus, Regum ultimus', by order of General
     Monk, and some Advice to the Independents, Anabaptists, Phanatiques,
     &c.  London, 1660."]

From the Hall I went home to bed, very sad in mind to part with my wife,
but God's will be done.

17th.  This morning bade adieu in bed to the company of my wife.  We rose
and I gave my wife some money to serve her for a time, and what papers of
consequence I had.  Then I left her to get her ready and went to my Lord's
with my boy Eliezer to my Lord's lodging at Mr. Crew's.  Here I had much
business with my Lord, and papers, great store, given me by my Lord to
dispose of as of the rest.  After that, with Mr. Moore home to my house
and took my wife by coach to the Chequer in Holborn, where, after we had
drank, &c., she took coach and so farewell.  I staid behind with Tom
Alcock and Mr. Anderson, my old chamber fellow at Cambridge his brother,
and drank with them there, who were come to me thither about one that
would have a place at sea.  Thence with Mr. Hawly to dinner at Mr. Crew's.
After dinner to my own house, where all things were put up into the
dining-room and locked up, and my wife took the keys along with her.

This day, in the presence of Mr. Moore (who made it) and Mr. Hawly, I did
before I went out with my wife, seal my will to her, whereby I did give
her all that I have in the world, but my books which I give to my brother
John, excepting only French books, which my wife is to have.  In the
evening at the Admiralty, I met my Lord there and got a commission for
Williamson to be captain of the Harp frigate, and afterwards went by coach
taking Mr. Crips with me to my Lord and got him to sign it at table as he
was at supper.  And so to Westminster back again with him with me, who had
a great desire to go to sea and my Lord told me that he would do him any
favour.  So I went home with him to his mother's house by me in Axe Yard,
where I found Dr. Clodius's wife and sat there talking and hearing of old
Mrs. Crisp playing of her old lessons upon the harpsichon till it was time
to go to bed.  After that to bed, and Laud, her son lay with me in the
best chamber in her house, which indeed was finely furnished.

18th.  I rose early and went to the barber's (Jervas) in Palace Yard and I
was trimmed by him, and afterwards drank with him a cup or two of ale, and
did begin to hire his man to go with me to sea.  Then to my Lord's lodging
where I found Captain Williamson and gave him his commission to be Captain
of the Harp, and he gave me a piece of gold and 20s. in silver.  So to my
own house, where I staid a while and then to dinner with Mr. Shepley at my
Lord's lodgings.  After that to Mr. Mossum's, where he made a very gallant
sermon upon "Pray for the life of the King and the King's son."  (Ezra vi.
10.) From thence to Mr. Crew's, but my Lord not being within I did not
stay, but went away and met with Mr. Woodfine, who took me to an alehouse
in Drury Lane, and we sat and drank together, and ate toasted cakes which
were very good, and we had a great deal of mirth with the mistress of the
house about them.  From thence homewards, and called at Mr. Blagrave's,
where I took up my note that he had of mine for 40s., which he two years
ago did give me as a pawn while he had my lute.  So that all things are
even between him and I.  So to Mrs. Crisp, where she and her daughter and
son and I sat talking till ten o'clock at night, I giving them the best
advice that I could concerning their son, how he should go to sea, and so
to bed.

19th.  Early to my Lord, where infinity of business to do, which makes my
head full; and indeed, for these two or three days, I have not been
without a great many cares and thoughts concerning them.  After that to
the Admiralty, where a good while with Mr. Blackburne, who told me that it
was much to be feared that the King would come in, for all good men and
good things were now discouraged.  Thence to Wilkinson's, where Mr. Sheply
and I dined; and while we were at dinner, my Lord Monk's lifeguard come by
with the Serjeant at Arms before them, with two Proclamations, that all
Cavaliers do depart the town; but the other that all officers that were
lately disbanded should do the same.  The last of which Mr. R. Creed, I
remember, said, that he looked upon it as if they had said, that all God's
people should depart the town.  Thence with some sea officers to the Swan,
where we drank wine till one comes to me to pay me some money from
Worcester, viz., L25.  His name is Wilday.  I sat in another room and took
my money and drank with him till the rest of my company were gone and so
we parted.  Going home the water was high, and so I got Crockford to carry
me over it.  So home, and left my money there.  All the discourse
now-a-day is, that the King will come again; and for all I see, it is the
wishes of all; and all do believe that it will be so.  My mind is still
much troubled for my poor wife, but I hope that this undertaking will be
worth my pains.  To Whitehall and staid about business at the Admiralty
late, then to Tony Robins's, where Capt. Stokes, Mr. Luddington and others
were, and I did solicit the Captain for Laud Crisp, who gave me a promise
that he would entertain him.  After that to Mrs. Crisp's where Dr. Clodius
and his wife were.  He very merry with drink.  We played at cards late and
so to bed. This day my Lord dined at my Lord Mayor's [Allen], and Jasper
was made drunk, which my Lord was very angry at.

20th. This morning I rose early and went to my house to put things in a
little order against my going, which I conceive will be to-morrow (the
weather still very rainy).  After that to my Lord, where I found very
great deal of business, he giving me all letters and papers that come to
him about business, for me to give him account of when we come on
shipboard.  Hence with Capt. Isham by coach to Whitehall to the Admiralty.
He and I and Chetwind, Doling and Luellin dined together at Marsh's at
Whitehall.  So to the Bull Head whither W. Simons comes to us and I gave
them my foy

     [Foy. A feast given by one who is about to leave a place.  In Kent,
     according to Grose, a treat to friends, either at going abroad or
     coming home.  See Diary, November 25th, 1661.]

against my going to sea; and so we took leave one of another, they
promising me to write to me to sea.  Hither comes Pim's boy, by my
direction, with two monteeres--[Monteeres, montero (Spanish), a kind of
huntsman's cap.]--for me to take my choice of, and I chose the saddest
colour and left the other for Mr. Sheply.  Hence by coach to London, and
took a short melancholy leave of my father and mother, without having them
to drink, or say anything of business one to another.  And indeed I had a
fear upon me I should scarce ever see my mother again, she having a great
cold then upon her.  Then to Westminster, where by reason of rain and an
easterly wind, the water was so high that there was boats rowed in King
Street and all our yard was drowned, that one could not go to my house, so
as no man has seen the like almost, most houses full of water.

     ["In this month the wind was very high, and caused great tides, so
     that great hurt was done to the inhabitants of Westminster, King
     Street being quite drowned.  The Maidenhead boat was cast away, and
     twelve persons with her.  Also, about Dover the waters brake in upon
     the mainland; and in Kent was very much damage done; so that report
     said, there was L20,000 worth of harm done."--Rugge's Diurnal.--B.]

Then back by coach to my Lord's; where I met Mr. Sheply, who staid with me
waiting for my Lord's coming in till very late.  Then he and I, and
William Howe went with our swords to bring my Lord home from Sir H.
Wright's.  He resolved to go to-morrow if the wind ceased.  Sheply and I
home by coach.  I to Mrs. Crisp's, who had sat over a good supper long
looking for me.  So we sat talking and laughing till it was very late, and
so Laud and I to bed.

21st.  To my Lord's, but the wind very high against us, and the weather
bad we could not go to-day; here I did very much business, and then to my
Lord Widdrington's from my Lord, with his desire that he might have the
disposal of the writs of the Cinque Ports.  My Lord was very civil to me,
and called for wine, and writ a long letter in answer.  Thence I went to a
tavern over against Mr. Pierce's with judge Advocate Fowler and Mr. Burr,
and sat and drank with them two or three pints of wine.  After that to Mr.
Crew's again and gave my Lord an account of what I had done, and so about
my business to take leave of my father and mother, which by a mistake I
have put down yesterday.  Thence to Westminster to Crisp's, where we were
very merry; the old woman sent for a supper for me, and gave me a
handkercher with strawberry buttons on it, and so to bed.

22nd.  Up very early and set things in order at my house, and so took
leave of Mrs. Crispe and her daughter (who was in bed) and of Mrs. Hunt.
Then to my Lord's lodging at the gate and did so there, where Mr. Hawly
came to me and I gave him the key of my house to keep, and he went with me
to Mr. Crew's, and there I took my last leave of him.  But the weather
continuing very bad my Lord would not go to-day.  My Lord spent this
morning private in sealing of his last will and testament with Mr. W.
Mountagu.  After that I went forth about my own business to buy a pair of
riding grey serge stockings and sword and belt and hose, and after that
took Wotton and Brigden to the Pope's Head Tavern in Chancery Lane, where
Gilb. Holland and Shelston were, and we dined and drank a great deal of
wine, and they paid all.  Strange how these people do now promise me
anything; one a rapier, the other a vessel of wine or a gun, and one
offered me his silver hatband to do him a courtesy.  I pray God to keep me
from being proud or too much lifted up hereby.  After that to Westminster,
and took leave of Kate Sterpin who was very sorry to part with me, and
after that of Mr. George Mountagu, and received my warrant of Mr.
Blackburne, to be Secretary to the two Generals of the Fleet. Then to take
my leave of the Clerks of the Council, and thence Doling and Luellin would
have me go with them to Mount's chamber, where we sat and talked and then
I went away.  So to my Lord (in my way meeting Chetwind and Swan and bade
them farewell) where I lay all night with Mr. Andrews. This day Mr. Sheply
went away on board and I sent my boy with him.  This day also Mrs. Jemimah
went to Marrowbone, so I could not see her.  Mr. Moore being out of town
to-night I could not take leave of him nor speak to him about business
which troubled me much.  I left my small case therefore with Mr. Andrews
for him.

23rd.  Up early, carried my Lord's will in a black box to Mr. William
Montagu for him to keep for him.  Then to the barber's and put on my
cravat there.  So to my Lord again, who was almost ready to be gone and
had staid for me.  Hither came Gilb. Holland, and brought me a stick
rapier and Shelston a sugar-loaf, and had brought his wife who he said was
a very pretty woman to the Ship tavern hard by for me to see but I could
not go.  Young Reeve also brought me a little perspective glass which I
bought for my Lord, it cost me 8s.  So after that my Lord in Sir H.
Wright's coach with Captain Isham, Mr. Thomas, John Crew, W. Howe, and I
in a Hackney to the Tower, where the barges staid for us; my Lord and the
Captain in one, and W. Howe and I, &c., in the other, to the Long Reach,
where the Swiftsure lay at anchor; (in our way we saw the great breach
which the late high water had made, to the loss of many L1000 to the
people about Limehouse.)  Soon as my Lord on board, the guns went off
bravely from the ships.  And a little while after comes the Vice-Admiral
Lawson, and seemed very respectful to my Lord, and so did the rest of the
Commanders of the frigates that were thereabouts.  I to the cabin allotted
for me, which was the best that any had that belonged to my Lord.  I got
out some things out of my chest for writing and to work presently, Mr,
Burr and I both.  I supped at the deck table with Mr. Sheply.  We were
late writing of orders for the getting of ships ready, &c.; and also
making of others to all the seaports between Hastings and Yarmouth, to
stop all dangerous persons that are going or coming between Flanders and
there.  After that to bed in my cabin, which was but short; however I made
shift with it and slept very well, and the weather being good I was not
sick at all yet, I know not what I shall be.

24th.  At work hard all the day writing letters to the Council, &c.  This
day Mr. Creed came on: board and dined very boldly with my Lord, but he
could not get a bed there.  At night Capt.  Isham who had been at
Gravesend all last night and to-day came and brought Mr. Lucy (one
acquainted with Mrs. Pierce, with whom I had been at her house), I drank
with him in the Captain's cabin, but my business could not stay with him.
I despatch many letters to-day abroad and it was late before we could get
to bed.  Mr. Sheply and Howe supped with me in my cabin.  The boy Eliezer
flung down a can of beer upon my papers which made me give him a box of
the ear, it having all spoiled my papers and cost me a great deal of work.
So to bed.

25th.  (Lord's day).  About two o'clock in the morning, letters came from
London by our coxon, so they waked me, but I would not rise but bid him
stay till morning, which he did, and then I rose and carried them in to my
Lord, who read them a-bed.  Among the rest, there was the writ and mandate
for him to dispose to the Cinque Ports for choice of Parliament-men.
There was also one for me from Mr. Blackburne, who with his own hand
superscribes it to S.P. Esq., of which God knows I was not a little proud.
After that I wrote a letter to the Clerk of Dover Castle, to come to my
Lord about issuing of those writs.  About ten o'clock Mr. Ibbott, at the
end of the long table, begun to pray and preach and indeed made a very
good sermon, upon the duty of all Christians to be stedfast in faith.
After that Captain Cuttance and I had oysters, my Lord being in his cabin
not intending to stir out to-day.  After that up into the great cabin
above to dinner with the Captain, where was Captain Isham and all the
officers of the ship.  I took place of all but the Captains; after dinner
I wrote a great many letters to my friends at London.  After that, sermon
again, at which I slept, God forgive me!  After that, it being a fair day,
I walked with the Captain upon the deck talking.  At night I supped with
him and after that had orders from my Lord about some business to be done
against to-morrow, which I sat up late and did and then to bed.

26th.  This day it is two years since it pleased God that I was cut of the
stone at Mrs. Turner's in Salisbury Court.  And did resolve while I live
to keep it a festival, as I did the last year at my house, and for ever to
have Mrs. Turner and her company with me.  But now it pleases God that I
am where I am and so prevented to do it openly; only within my soul I can
and do rejoice, and bless God, being at this time blessed be his holy
name, in as good health as ever I was in my life.  This morning I rose
early, and went about making of an establishment of the whole Fleet, and a
list of all the ships, with the number of men and guns: About an hour
after that, we had a meeting of the principal commanders and seamen, to
proportion out the number of these things.  After that to dinner, there
being very many commanders on board.  All the afternoon very many orders
were made, till I was very weary.  At night Mr. Sheply and W. Howe came
and brought some bottles of wine and some things to eat in my cabin, where
we were very merry, remembering the day of being cut for the stone.
Captain Cuttance came afterwards and sat drinking a bottle of wine till
eleven, a kindness he do not usually do the greatest officer in the ship.
After that to bed.

27th.  Early in the morning at making a fair new establishment of the
Fleet to send to the Council.  This morning, the wind came about, and we
fell into the Hope,--[A reach of the Thames near Tilbury.]--and in our
passing by the Vice-Admiral, he and the rest of the frigates, with him,
did give us abundance of guns and we them, so much that the report of them
broke all the windows in my cabin and broke off the iron bar that was upon
it to keep anybody from creeping in at the Scuttle.--["A small hole or
port cut either in the deck or side of a ship, generally for ventilation.
That in the deck is a small hatch-way."--Smyth's Sailor's
Word-Book.]--This noon I sat the first time with my Lord at table since my
coming to sea.  All the afternoon exceeding busy in writing of letters and
orders.  In the afternoon, Sir Harry Wright came onboard us, about his
business of being chosen Parliament-man.  My Lord brought him to see my
cabin, when I was hard a-writing.  At night supped with my Lord too, with
the Captain, and after that to work again till it be very late.  So to
bed.

28th.  This morning and the whole day busy, and that the more because Mr.
Burr was about his own business all the day at Gravesend.  At night there
was a gentleman very well bred, his name was Banes, going for Flushing,
who spoke French and Latin very well, brought by direction from Captain
Clerke  hither, as a prisoner, because he called out of the vessel that he
went in, "Where is your King, we have done our business, Vive le Roi." He
confessed himself a Cavalier in his heart, and that he and his whole
family had fought for the King; but that he was then drunk, having been
all night taking his leave at Gravesend the night before, and so could not
remember what it was that he said; but in his words and carriage showed
much of a gentleman.  My Lord had a great kindness for him, but did not
think it safe to release him, but commanded him to be used civilly, so he
was taken to the Master's Cabin and had supper there. In the meantime I
wrote a letter to the Council about him, and an order for the vessel to be
sent for back that he was taken out of.  But a while after, he sent a
letter down to my Lord, which my Lord did like very well, and did advise
with me what was best to be done.  So I put in something to my Lord and
then to the Captain that the gentleman was to be released and the letter
stopped, which was done.  So I went up and sat and talked with him in
Latin and French, and drank a bottle or two with him; and about eleven at
night he took boat again, and so God bless him. Thence I to my cabin and
to bed.  This day we had news of the election at Huntingdon for Bernard
and Pedly, at which my Lord was much troubled for his friends' missing of
it.

29th.  We lie still a little below Gravesend.  At night Mr. Sheply
returned from London, and told us of several elections for the next
Parliament.  That the King's effigies was new making to be set up in the
Exchange again.  This evening was a great whispering of some of the
Vice-Admiral's captains that they were dissatisfied, and did intend to
fight themselves, to oppose the General.  But it was soon hushed, and the
Vice-Admiral did wholly deny any such thing, and protested to stand by the
General.  At night Mr. Sheply, W. Howe, and I supped in my cabin.  So up
to the Master's cabin, where we sat talking, and then to bed.

30th.  I was saluted in the morning with two letters, from some that I had
done a favour to, which brought me in each a piece of gold.  This day,
while my Lord and we were at dinner, the Nazeby came in sight towards us,
and at last came to anchor close by us.  After dinner my Lord and many
others went on board her, where every thing was out of order, and a new
chimney made for my Lord in his bedchamber, which he was much pleased
with.  My Lord, in his discourse, discovered a great deal of love to this
ship.

31st.  This morning Captain Jowles of the "Wexford" came on board, for
whom I got commission from my Lord to be commander of the ship.  Upon the
doing thereof he was to make the 20s. piece that he sent me yesterday, up
L5; wherefore he sent me a bill that he did owe me L4., which I sent my
boy to Gravesend with him, and he did give the boy L4 for me, and the boy
gave him the bill under his hand.  This morning, Mr. Hill that lives in
Axe-yard was here on board with the Vice-Admiral.  I did give him a bottle
of wine, and was exceedingly satisfied of the power that I have to make my
friends welcome.  Many orders to make all the afternoon.  At night Mr.
Sheply, Howe, Ibbott, and I supped in my cabin together.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 APRIL
                                 1660

April 1st (Lord's day).  Mr. Ibbott preached very well.  After dinner my
Lord did give me a private list of all the ships that were to be set out
this summer, wherein I do discern that he bath made it his care to put by
as much of the Anabaptists as he can.  By reason of my Lord and my being
busy to send away the packet by Mr. Cooke of the Nazeby, it was four
o'clock before we could begin sermon again.  This day Captain Guy come on
board from Dunkirk, who tells me that the King will come in, and that the
soldiers at Dunkirk do drink the King's health in the streets.  At night
the Captain, Sir R. Stayner, Mr. Sheply, and I did sup together in the
Captain's cabin.  I made a commission for Captain Wilgness, of the Bear,
to-night, which got me 30s.  So after writing a while I went to bed.

2d.  Up very early, and to get all my things and my boy's packed up. Great
concourse of commanders here this morning to take leave of my Lord upon
his going into the Nazeby, so that the table was full, so there dined
below many commanders, and Mr. Creed, who was much troubled to hear that
he could not go along with my Lord, for he had already got all his things
thither, thinking to stay there, but W. Howe was very high against it, and
he indeed did put him out, though everybody was glad of it. After dinner I
went in one of the boats with my boy before my Lord, and made shift before
night to get my cabin in pretty good order.  It is but little, but very
convenient, having one window to the sea and another to the deck, and a
good bed.  This morning comes Mr. Ed. Pickering, like a coxcomb as he
always was.  He tells me that the King will come in, but that Monk did
resolve to have the doing of it himself, or else to hinder it.

3d.  Late to bed.  About three in the morning there was great knocking at
my cabin, which with much difficulty (so they say) waked me, and I rose,
but it was only for a packet, so went to my bed again, and in the morning
gave it my Lord.  This morning Capt. Isham comes on board to see my Lord
and drunk his wine before he went into the Downs, there likewise come many
merchants to get convoy to the Baltique, which a course was taken for.
They dined with my Lord, and one of them by name Alderman Wood talked much
to my Lord of the hopes that we have now to be settled, (under the King he
meant); but my Lord took no notice of it.  After dinner which was late my
Lord went on shore, and after him I and Capt. Sparling went in his boat,
but the water being almost at low water we could not stay for fear of not
getting into our boat again.  So back again.  This day come the Lieutenant
of the Swiftsure, who was sent by my Lord to Hastings, one of the Cinque
Ports, to have got Mr. Edward Montagu to have been one of their burgesses,
but could not, for they were all promised before.  After he had done his
message, I took him and Mr. Pierce, the surgeon (who this day came on
board, and not before), to my cabin, where we drank a bottle of wine.  At
night, busy a-writing, and so to bed.  My heart exceeding heavy for not
hearing of my dear wife, and indeed I do not remember that ever my heart
was so apprehensive of her absence as at this very time.

4th.  This morning I dispatch many letters of my own private business to
London.  There come Colonel Thomson with the wooden leg, and General Pen,

     [This is the first mention in the Diary of Admiral (afterwards Sir
     William) Penn, with whom Pepys was subsequently so particularly
     intimate.  At this time admirals were sometimes styled generals.
     William Penn was born at Bristol in 1621, of the ancient family of
     the Penns of Penn Lodge, Wilts.  He was Captain at the age of
     twenty-one; Rear-Admiral of Ireland at twenty-three; Vice-Admiral of
     England and General in the first Dutch war, at thirty-two.  He was
     subsequently M.P. for Weymouth, Governor of Kingsale, and Vice-
     Admiral of Munster.  He was a highly successful commander, and in
     1654 he obtained possession of Jamaica.  He was appointed a
     Commissioner of the Navy in 1660, in which year he was knighted.
     After the Dutch fight in 1665, where he distinguished himself as
     second in command under the Duke of York, he took leave of the sea,
     but continued to act as a Commissioner for the Navy till 1669, when
     he retired to Wanstead, on account of his bodily infirmities, and
     dying there, September 16th, 1670, aged forty-nine, was buried in
     the church of St. Mary Redcliffe, in Bristol, where a monument to
     his memory was erected.]

and dined with my Lord and Mr. Blackburne, who told me that it was certain
now that the King must of necessity come in, and that one of the Council
told him there is something doing in order to a treaty already among them.
And it was strange to hear how Mr. Blackburne did already begin to commend
him for a sober man, and how quiet he would be under his government, &c.
I dined all alone to prevent company, which was exceeding great to-day, in
my cabin.  After these two were gone Sir W. Wheeler and Sir John Petters
came on board and staid about two or three hours, and so went away.  The
Commissioners came to-day, only to consult about a further reducement of
the Fleet, and to pay them as fast as they can.  I did give Davis, their
servant, L5 10s.  to give to Mr. Moore from me, in part of the L7 that I
borrowed of him, and he is to discount the rest out of the 36s. that he do
owe me.  At night, my Lord resolved to send the Captain of our ship to
Waymouth and promote his being chosen there, which he did put himself into
a readiness to do the next morning.

5th.  Infinity of business all the morning of orders to make, that I was
very much perplexed that Mr. Burr had failed me of coming back last night,
and we ready to set sail, which we did about noon, and came in the evening
to Lee roads and anchored.  At night Mr. Sheply overtook us who had been
at Gray's Market this morning.  I spent all the afternoon upon the deck,
it being very pleasant weather.  This afternoon Sir Rich. Stayner and Mr.
Creed, after we were come to anchor, did come on board, and Creed brought
me L30, which my Lord had ordered him to pay me upon account, and Captain
Clerke brought me a noted caudle.  At night very sleepy to bed.

6th.  This morning came my brother-in-law Balty to see me, and to desire
to be here with me as Reformado,--["a broken or disbanded officer."] which
did much trouble me.  But after dinner (my Lord using him very civilly, at
table) I spoke to my Lord, and he presented me a letter to Captain Stokes
for him that he should be there.  All the day with him walking and
talking, we under sail as far as the Spitts.  In the afternoon, W. Howe
and I to our viallins, the first time since we came on board.  This
afternoon I made even with my Lord to this day, and did give him all the
money remaining in my hands.  In the evening, it being fine moonshine, I
staid late walking upon the quarter-deck with Mr. Cuttance, learning of
some sea terms; and so down to supper and to bed, having an hour before
put Balty into Burr's cabin, he being out of the ship.

7th.  This day, about nine o'clock in the morning, the wind grew high, and
we being among the sands lay at anchor; I began to be dizzy and squeamish.
Before dinner my Lord sent for me down to eat some oysters, the best my
Lord said that ever he ate in his life, though I have ate as good at
Bardsey.  After dinner, and all the afternoon I walked upon the deck to
keep myself from being sick, and at last about five o'clock, went to bed
and got a caudle made me, and sleep upon it very well.  This day Mr.
Sheply went to Sheppy.

8th (Lord's day).  Very calm again, and I pretty well, but my head aked
all day.  About noon set sail; in our way I see many vessels and masts,
which are now the greatest guides for ships.  We had a brave wind all the
afternoon, and overtook two good merchantmen that overtook us yesterday,
going to the East Indies.  The lieutenant and I lay out of his window with
his glass, looking at the women that were on board them, being pretty
handsome.  This evening Major Willoughby, who had been here three or four
days on board with Mr. Pickering, went on board a catch [ketch] for
Dunkirk.  We continued sailing when I went to bed, being somewhat ill
again, and Will Howe, the surgeon, parson, and Balty supped in the
Lieutenant's cabin and afterwards sat disputing, the parson for and I
against extemporary prayers, very hot.

9th.  We having sailed all night, were come in sight of the Nore and South
Forelands in the morning, and so sailed all day.  In the afternoon we had
a very fresh gale, which I brooked better than I thought I should be able
to do.  This afternoon I first saw France and Calais, with which I was
much pleased, though it was at a distance.  About five o'clock we came to
the Goodwin, so to the Castles about Deal; where our Fleet lay, among whom
we anchored.  Great was the shout of guns from the castles and ships, and
our answers, that I never heard yet so great rattling of guns. Nor could
we see one another on board for the smoke that was among us, nor one ship
from another.  Soon as we came to anchor, the captains came from on board
their ships all to us on board.  This afternoon I wrote letters for my
Lord to the Council, &c., which Mr. Dickering was to carry, who took his
leave this night of my Lord, and Balty after I had wrote two or three
letters by him to my wife and Mr. Bowyer, and had drank a bottle of wine
with him in my cabin which J. Goods and W. Howe brought on purpose, he
took leave of me too to go away to-morrow morning with Mr. Dickering.  I
lent Balty 15s. which he was to pay to my wife. It was one in the morning
before we parted.  This evening Mr. Sheply came on board, having escaped a
very great danger upon a sand coming from Chatham.

10th.  This morning many or most of the commanders in the Fleet came on
board and dined here, so that some of them and I dined together in the
Round-house, where we were very merry.  Hither came the Vice-Admiral to
us, and sat and talked and seemed a very good-natured man.  At night as I
was all alone in my cabin, in a melancholy fit playing on my viallin, my
Lord and Sir R. Stayner came into the coach

     ["A sort of chamber or apartment in a large ship of war, just before
     the great cabin.  The floor of it is formed by the aftmost part of
     the quarter deck, and the roof of it by the poop: it is generally
     the habitation of the flag-captain."--Smyth's Sailor's Word-Book.]

and supped there, and called me out to supper with them.  After that up to
the Lieutenant's cabin, where he and I and Sir Richard sat till 11 o'clock
talking, and so to bed.  This day my Lord Goring returned from France, and
landed at Dover.

11th.  A Gentleman came this morning from my Lord of Manchester to my Lord
for a pass for Mr. Boyle,' which was made him.  I ate a good breakfast by
my Lord's orders with him in the great cabin below.  The wind all this day
was very high, so that a gentleman that was at dinner with my Lord that
came along with Sir John Bloys (who seemed a fine man) was forced to rise
from table.  This afternoon came a great packet of letters from London
directed to me, among the rest two from my wife, the first that I have
since coming away from London.  All the news from London is that things go
on further towards a King.  That the Skinners' Company the other day at
their entertaining of General Monk had took down the Parliament Arms in
their Hall, and set up the King's.  In the evening my Lord and I had a
great deal of discourse about the several Captains of the Fleet and his
interest among them, and had his mind clear to bring in the King.  He
confessed to me that he was not sure of his own Captain [Cuttance] to be
true to him, and that he did not like Captain Stokes. At night W. Howe and
I at our viallins in my cabin, where Mr. Ibbott and the lieutenant were
late.  I staid the lieutenant late, shewing him my manner of keeping a
journal.  After that to bed.  It comes now into my mind to observe that I
am sensible that I have been a little too free to make mirth with the
minister of our ship, he being a very sober and an upright man.

12th.  This day, the weather being very bad, we had no strangers on board.
In the afternoon came the Vice-Admiral on board, with whom my Lord
consulted, and I sent a packet to London at night with several letters to
my friends, as to my wife about my getting of money for her when she
should need it, to Mr. Bowyer that he tell me when the Messieurs of the
offices be paid, to Mr. Moore about the business of my office, and making
even with him as to matter of money.  At night after I had despatched my
letters, to bed.

13th.  This day very foul all day for rain and wind.  In the afternoon set
my own things in my cabin and chests in better order than hitherto, and
set my papers in order.  At night sent another packet to London by the
post, and after that was done I went up to the lieutenant's cabin and
there we broached a vessel of ale that we had sent for among us from Deal
to-day.  There was the minister and doctor with us.  After that till one
o'clock in the morning writing letters to Mr. Downing about my business of
continuing my office to myself, only Mr. Moore to execute it for me. I had
also a very serious and effectual letter from my Lord to him to that
purpose.  After that done then to bed, and it being very rainy, and the
rain coming upon my bed, I went and lay with John Goods in the great cabin
below, the wind being so high that we were faro to lower some of the
masts.  I to bed, and what with the goodness of the bed and the rocking of
the ship I slept till almost ten o'clock, and then--

14th.  Rose and drank a good morning draught there with Mr. Sheply, which
occasioned my thinking upon the happy life that I live now, had I nothing
to care for but myself.  The sea was this morning very high, and looking
out of the window I saw our boat come with Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, in it
in great danger, who endeavouring to come on board us, had like to have
been drowned had it not been for a rope.  This day I was informed that my
Lord Lambert is got out of the Towers and that there is L100 proffered to
whoever shall bring him forth to the Council of State.

     [The manner of the escape of John Lambert, out of the Tower, on the
     11th inst., as related by Rugge:--"That about eight of the clock at
     night he escaped by a rope tied fast to his window, by which he slid
     down, and in each hand he had a handkerchief; and six men were ready
     to receive him, who had a barge to hasten him away.  She who made
     the bed, being privy to his escape, that night, to blind the warder
     when he came to lock the chamber-door, went to bed, and possessed
     Colonel Lambert's place, and put on his night-cap.  So, when the
     said warder came to lock the door, according to his usual manner, he
     found the curtains drawn, and conceiving it to be Colonel John
     Lambert, he said, 'Good night, my Lord.'  To which a seeming voice
     replied, and prevented all further jealousies.  The next morning, on
     coming to unlock the door, and espying her face, he cried out, 'In
     the name of God, Joan, what makes you here?  Where is my Lord
     Lambert?'  She said, 'He is gone; but I cannot tell whither.'
     Whereupon he caused her to rise, and carried her before the officer
     in the Tower, and [she] was committed to custody.  Some said that a
     lady knit for him a garter of silk, by which he was conveyed down,
     and that she received L100 for her pains."--B]

My Lord is chosen at Waymouth this morning; my Lord had his freedom
brought him by Captain Tiddiman of the port of Dover, by which he is
capable of being elected for them.  This day I heard that the Army had in
general declared to stand by what the next Parliament shall do.  At night
supped with my Lord.

15th (Lord's day).  Up early and was trimmed by the barber in the great
cabin below.  After that to put my clothes on and then to sermon, and then
to dinner, where my Lord told us that the University of Cambridge had a
mind to choose him for their burgess, which he pleased himself with, to
think that they do look upon him as a thriving man, and said so openly at
table.  At dinner-time Mr. Cook came back from London with a packet which
caused my Lord to be full of thoughts all day, and at night he bid me
privately to get two commissions ready, one for Capt. Robert Blake to be
captain of the Worcester, in the room of Capt. Dekings, an anabaptist, and
one that had witnessed a great deal of discontent with the present
proceedings.  The other for Capt. Coppin  to come out of that into the
Newbury in the room of Blake, whereby I perceive that General Monk do
resolve to make a thorough change, to make way for the King. From London I
hear that since Lambert got out of the Tower, the Fanatiques had held up
their heads high, but I hope all that will come to nothing.  Late a
writing of letters to London to get ready for Mr. Cook. Then to bed.

16th.  And about 4 o'clock in the morning Mr. Cook waked me where I lay in
the great cabin below, and I did give him his packet and directions for
London.  So to sleep again.  All the morning giving out orders and tickets
to the Commanders of the Fleet to discharge all supernumeraries that they
had above the number that the Council had set in their last establishment.
After dinner busy all the afternoon writing, and so till night, then to
bed.

17th.  All the morning getting ready commissions for the Vice-Admiral and
the Rear-Admiral, wherein my Lord was very careful to express the utmost
of his own power, commanding them to obey what orders they should receive
from the Parliament, &c., or both or either of the Generals.

     [Sir Edward Montagu afterwards recommended the Duke of York as High
     Admiral, to give regular and lawful commissions to the Commanders of
     the Fleet, instead of those which they had received from Sir Edward
     himself, or from the Rump Parliament.--Kennett's Register, p. 163.]

The Vice-Admiral dined with us, and in the afternoon my Lord called me to
give him the commission for him, which I did, and he gave it him himself.
A very pleasant afternoon, and I upon the deck all the day, it was so
clear that my Lord's glass shewed us Calais very plain, and the cliffs
were as plain to be seen as Kent, and my Lord at first made me believe
that it was Kent.  At night, after supper, my Lord called for the
Rear-Admiral's commission, which I brought him, and I sitting in my study
heard my Lord discourse with him concerning D. King's and Newberry's being
put out of commission.  And by the way I did observe that my Lord did
speak more openly his mind to me afterwards at night than I can find that
he did to the Rear-Admiral, though his great confidant.  For I was with
him an hour together, when he told me clearly his thoughts that the King
would carry it, and that he did think himself very happy that he was now
at sea, as well for his own sake, as that he thought he might do his
country some service in keeping things quiet.  To bed, and shifting myself
from top to toe, there being J. Goods and W. Howe sat late by my bedside
talking.  So to sleep, every day bringing me a fresh sense of the pleasure
of my present life.

18th.  This morning very early came Mr. Edward Montagu on board, but what
was the business of his coming again or before without any servant and
making no stay at all I cannot guess.  This day Sir R. Stayner, Mr.
Sheply, and as many of my Lord's people as could be spared went to Dover
to get things ready against to-morrow for the election there.  I all the
afternoon dictating in my cabin (my own head being troubled with
multiplicity of business) to Burr, who wrote for me above a dozen letters,
by which I have made my mind more light and clear than I have had it yet
since I came on board.  At night sent a packet to London, and Mr. Cook
returned hence bringing me this news, that the Sectaries do talk high what
they will do, but I believe all to no purpose, but the Cavaliers are
something unwise to talk so high on the other side as they do.  That the
Lords do meet every day at my Lord of Manchester's, and resolve to sit the
first day of the Parliament.  That it is evident now that the General and
the Council do resolve to make way for the King's coming.  And it is now
clear that either the Fanatiques must now be undone, or the gentry and
citizens throughout England, and clergy must fall, in spite of their
militia and army, which is not at all possible I think.  At night I supped
with W. Howe and Mr. Luellin (being the first time that I had been so long
with him) in the great cabin below.  After that to bed, and W. Howe sat by
my bedside, and he and I sang a psalm or two and so I to sleep.

19th.  A great deal of business all this day, and Burr being gone to shore
without my leave did vex me much.  At dinner news was brought us that my
Lord was chosen at Dover.  This afternoon came one Mr. Mansell on board as
a Reformado, to whom my Lord did shew exceeding great respect, but upon
what account I do not yet know.  This day it has rained much, so that when
I came to go to bed I found it wet through, so I was fain to wrap myself
up in a dry sheet, and so lay all night.

20th.  All the morning I was busy to get my window altered, and to have my
table set as I would have it, which after it was done I was infinitely
pleased with it, and also to see what a command I have to have every one
ready to come and go at my command.  This evening came Mr. Boyle on board,
for whom I writ an order for a ship to transport him to Flushing. He
supped with my Lord, my Lord using him as a person of honour.  This
evening too came Mr. John Pickering on board us.  This evening my head
ached exceedingly, which I impute to my sitting backwards in my cabin,
otherwise than I am used to do.  To-night Mr. Sheply told me that he heard
for certain at Dover that Mr. Edw. Montagu did go beyond sea when he was
here first the other day, and I am apt to believe that he went to speak
with the King.  This day one told me how that at the election at Cambridge
for knights of the shire, Wendby and Thornton by declaring to stand for
the Parliament and a King and the settlement of the Church, did carry it
against all expectation against Sir Dudley North and Sir Thomas Willis!  I
supped to-night with Mr. Sheply below at the half-deck table, and after
that I saw Mr. Pickering whom my Lord brought down to his cabin, and so to
bed.

21st.  This day dined Sir John Boys

     [Of Bonnington and Sandwich, Gentleman of the Privy-Chamber to
     Charles I.  He defended Donnington Castle, Berkshire, for the King
     against Jeremiah Horton, 1644, and received an augmentation to his
     arms in consequence.]

and some other gentlemen formerly great Cavaliers, and among the rest one
Mr. Norwood, for whom my Lord give a convoy to carry him to the
Brill,--[Brielle, or Den Briel, a seaport town in the province of South
Holland.]--but he is certainly going to the King.  For my Lord commanded
me that I should not enter his name in my book.  My Lord do show them and
that sort of people great civility.  All their discourse and others are of
the King's coming, and we begin to speak of it very freely.  And heard how
in many churches in London, and upon many signs there, and upon merchants'
ships in the river, they had set up the King's arms.  In the afternoon the
Captain would by all means have me up to his cabin, and there treated me
huge nobly, giving me a barrel of pickled oysters, and opened another for
me, and a bottle of wine, which was a very great favour.  At night late
singing with W. Howe, and under the barber's hands in the coach. This
night there came one with a letter from Mr. Edw. Montagu to my Lord, with
command to deliver it to his own hands.  I do believe that he do carry
some close business on for the King.

     [Pepys's guess at E. Montagu's business is confirmed by Clarendon's
     account of his employment of him to negotiate with Lord Sandwich on
     behalf of the King.  ("History of the Rebellion," book xvi.)--Notes
     and Queries, vol. x.  p. 3--M. B.]

This day I had a large letter from Mr. Moore, giving me an account of the
present dispute at London that is like to be at the beginning of the
Parliament, about the House of Lords, who do resolve to sit with the
Commons, as not thinking themselves dissolved yet.  Which, whether it be
granted or no, or whether they will sit or no, it will bring a great many
inconveniences.  His letter I keep, it being a very well writ one.

22d (Easter Sunday).  Several Londoners, strangers, friends of the
Captains, dined here, who, among other things told us, how the King's Arms
are every day set up in houses and churches, particularly in Allhallows
Church in Thames-street, John Simpson's church, which being privately done
was, a great eye-sore to his people when they came to church and saw it.
Also they told us for certain, that the King's statue is making by the
Mercers' Company (who are bound to do it) to set up in the Exchange.
After sermon in the afternoon I fell to writing letters against to-morrow
to send to London.  After supper to bed.

23rd.  All the morning very busy getting my packet ready for London, only
for an hour or two had the Captain and Mr. Sheply in my cabin at the
barrel of pickled oysters that the Captain did give me on Saturday last.
After dinner I sent Mr. Dunn to London with the packet.  This afternoon I
had 40s. given me by Captain Cowes of the Paradox.' In the evening the
first time that we had any sport among the seamen, and indeed there was
extraordinary good sport after my Lord had done playing at ninepins. After
that W. Howe and I went to play two trebles in the great cabin below,
which my Lord hearing, after supper he called for our instruments, and
played a set of Lock's, two trebles, and a base, and that being done, he
fell to singing of a song made upon the Rump, with which he played himself
well, to the tune of "The Blacksmith."  After all that done, then to bed.

     ["The Blacksmith" was the same tune as "Green Sleeves."  The
     earliest known copy of "The Praise of the Blacksmith" is in "An
     Antidote against Melancholy," 1661.  See "Roxburghe Ballads," ed.
     W. Chappell, 1872, vol. ii.  p. 126.  (Ballad Society:)]

24th.  This morning I had Mr. Luellin and Mr. Sheply to the remainder of
my oysters that were left yesterday.  After that very busy all the
morning.  While I was at dinner with my Lord, the Coxon of the
Vice-Admiral came for me to the Vice-Admiral to dinner.  So I told my Lord
and he gave me leave to go.  I rose therefore from table and went, where
there was very many commanders, and very pleasant we were on board the
London, which hath a state-room much bigger than the Nazeby, but not so
rich.  After that, with the Captain on board our own ship, where we were
saluted with the news of Lambert's being taken, which news was brought to
London on Sunday last.  He was taken in Northamptonshire by Colonel
Ingoldsby, at the head of a party, by which means their whole design is
broke, and things now very open and safe.  And every man begins to be
merry and full of hopes.  In the afternoon my Lord gave a great large
character to write out, so I spent all the day about it, and after supper
my Lord and we had some more very good musique and singing of "Turne
Amaryllis," as it is printed in the song book, with which my Lord was very
much pleased.  After that to bed.

25th.  All the morning about my Lord's character.  Dined to-day with
Captain Clerke on board the Speaker (a very brave ship) where was the
Vice-Admiral, Rear-Admiral, and many other commanders.  After dinner home,
not a little contented to see how I am treated, and with what respect made
a fellow to the best commanders in the Fleet.  All the afternoon finishing
of the character, which I did and gave it my Lord, it being very
handsomely done and a very good one in itself, but that not truly
Alphabetical.  Supped with Mr. Sheply, W. Howe, &c. in Mr. Pierce, the
Purser's cabin, where very merry, and so to bed.  Captain Isham came
hither to-day.

26th.  This day came Mr. Donne back from London, who brought letters with
him that signify the meeting of the Parliament yesterday.  And in the
afternoon by other letters I hear, that about twelve of the Lords met and
had chosen my Lord of Manchester' Speaker of the House of Lords (the young
Lords that never sat yet, do forbear to sit for the present); and Sir
Harbottle Grimstone, Speaker for the House of Commons.  The House of Lords
sent to have a conference with the House of Commons, which, after a little
debate, was granted.  Dr. Reynolds' preached before the Commons before
they sat.  My Lord told me how Sir H. Yelverton (formerly my
school-fellow) was chosen in the first place for Northamptonshire and Mr.
Crew in the second.  And told me how he did believe that the Cavaliers
have now the upper hand clear of the Presbyterians.  All the afternoon I
was writing of letters, among the rest one to W. Simons, Peter Luellin and
Tom Doling, which because it is somewhat merry I keep a copy of. After
that done Mr. Sheply, W. Howe and I down with J. Goods into my Lord's
storeroom of wine and other drink, where it was very pleasant to observe
the massy timbers that the ship is made of.  We in the room were wholly
under water and yet a deck below that.  After that to supper, where Tom
Guy supped with us, and we had very good laughing, and after that some
musique, where Mr. Pickering beginning to play a bass part upon the viall
did it so like a fool that I was ashamed of him.  After that to bed.

27th.  This morning Burr was absent again from on board, which I was
troubled at, and spoke to Mr. Pierce, Purser, to speak to him of it, and
it is my mind.  This morning Pim [the tailor] spent in my cabin, putting a
great many ribbons to a suit.  After dinner in the afternoon came on board
Sir Thomas Hatton and Sir R. Maleverer going for Flushing; but all the
world know that they go where the rest of the many gentlemen go that every
day flock to the King at Breda.

     [The King arrived at Breda on the 14th April.  Sir W. Lower writes
     ("Voiage and Residence of Charles II. in Holland," p. 5): "Many
     considerations obliged him to depart the territories under the
     obedience of the King of Spain in this conjuncture of affairs."]

They supped here, and my Lord treated them as he do the rest that go
thither, with a great deal of civility.  While we were at supper a packet
came, wherein much news from several friends.  The chief is that, that I
had from Mr. Moore, viz. that he fears the Cavaliers in the House will be
so high, that the others will be forced to leave the House and fall in
with General Monk, and so offer things to the King so high on the
Presbyterian account that he may refuse, and so they will endeavour some
more mischief; but when I told my Lord it, he shook his head and told me,
that the Presbyterians are deceived, for the General is certainly for the
King's interest, and so they will not be able to prevail that way with
him.  After supper the two knights went on board the Grantham, that is to
convey them to Flushing.  I am informed that the Exchequer is now so low,
that there is not L20 there, to give the messenger that brought the news
of Lambert's being taken; which story is very strange that he should lose
his reputation of being a man of courage now at one blow, for that he was
not able to fight one stroke, but desired of Colonel Ingoldsby several
times for God's sake to let him escape.  Late reading my letters, my mind
being much troubled to think that, after all our hopes, we should have any
cause to fear any more disappointments therein.  To bed.  This day I made
even with Mr. Creed, by sending him my bill and he me my money by Burr
whom I sent for it.

28th.  This morning sending a packet by Mr. Dunne to London.  In the
afternoon I played at ninepins with Mr. Pickering, I and Mr. Pett against
him and Ted Osgood, and won a crown apiece of him.  He had not money
enough to pay me.  After supper my Lord exceeding merry, and he and I and
W. Howe to sing, and so to bed.

29th (Sunday).  This day I put on first my fine cloth suit made of a cloak
that had like to have been [dirted] a year ago, the very day that I put it
on.  After sermon in the morning Mr. Cook came from London with a packet,
bringing news how all the young lords that were not in arms against the
Parliament do now sit.  That a letter is come from the King to the House,
which is locked up by the Council 'till next Tuesday that it may be read
in the open House when they meet again, they having adjourned till then to
keep a fast tomorrow.  And so the contents is not yet known.  L13,000 of
the L20,000 given to General Monk is paid out of the Exchequer, he giving
L12 among the teller clerks of Exchequer.  My Lord called me into the
great cabin below, where I opened my letters and he told me that the
Presbyterians are quite mastered by the Cavaliers, and that he fears Mr.
Crew did go a little too far the other day in keeping out the young lords
from sitting.  That he do expect that the King should be brought over
suddenly, without staying to make any terms at all, saying that the
Presbyterians did intend to have brought him in with such conditions as if
he had been in chains.  But he shook his shoulders when he told me how
Monk had betrayed him, for it was he that did put them upon standing to
put out the lords and other members that came not within the
qualifications, which he [Montagu] did not like, but however he [Monk] had
done his business, though it be with some kind of baseness.  After dinner
I walked a great while upon the deck with the chyrurgeon and purser, and
other officers of the ship, and they all pray for the King's coming, which
I pray God send.

30th.  All the morning getting instructions ready for the Squadron of
ships that are going to-day to the Streights, among others Captain
Teddiman, Curtis, and Captain Robert Blake to be commander of the whole
Squadron.  After dinner to ninepins, W. Howe and I against Mr. Creed and
the Captain.  We lost 5s. apiece to them.  After that W. Howe, Mr. Sheply
and I got my Lord's leave to go to see Captain Sparling.  So we took boat
and first went on shore, it being very pleasant in the fields; but a very
pitiful town Deal is.  We went to Fuller's (the famous place for ale), but
they have none but what was in the vat.  After that to Poole's, a tavern
in the town, where we drank, and so to boat again, and went to the
Assistance, where we were treated very civilly by the Captain, and he did
give us such music upon the harp by a fellow that he keeps on board that I
never expect to hear the like again, yet he is a drunken simple fellow to
look on as any I ever saw.  After that on board the Nazeby, where we found
my Lord at supper, so I sat down and very pleasant my Lord was with Mr.
Creed and Sheply, who he puzzled about finding out the meaning of the
three notes which my Lord had cut over the chrystal of his watch.  After
supper some musique.  Then Mr. Sheply, W. Howe and I up to the
Lieutenant's cabin, where we drank, and I and W. Howe were very merry, and
among other frolics he pulls out the spigot of the little vessel of ale
that was there in the cabin and drew some into his mounteere, and after he
had drank, I endeavouring to dash it in his face, he got my velvet
studying cap and drew some into mine too, that we made ourselves a great
deal of mirth, but spoiled my clothes with the ale that we dashed up and
down.  After that to bed very late with drink enough in my head.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Cavaliers have now the upper hand clear of the Presbyterians
     Resolve to have the doing of it himself, or else to hinder it
     Strange thing how I am already courted by the people





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, March/April
1659/1660, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4120.txt or 4120.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/2/4120/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
