Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, May 1660, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, May 1660

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 29, 2004 [EBook #4121]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, MAY 1660 ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.   F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A.  LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 MAY
                                1660

May 1st.  This morning I was told how the people of Deal have set up two
or three Maypoles, and have hung up their flags upon the top of them, and
do resolve to be very merry to-day.  It being a very pleasant day, I
wished myself in Hide Park.  This day I do count myself to have had full
two years of perfect cure for the stone, for which God of heaven be
blessed.  This day Captain Parker came on board, and without his
expectation I had a commission for him for the Nonsuch frigate

     [The "Nonsuch" was a fourth-rate of thirty-two guns, built at
     Deptford in 1646 by Peter Pett, jun.  The captain was John Parker.]

(he being now in the Cheriton), for which he gave me a French pistole.
Captain H. Cuttance has commission for the Cheriton.  After dinner to
nine-pins, and won something.  The rest of the afternoon in my cabin
writing and piping.  While we were at supper we heard a great noise upon
the Quarter Deck, so we all rose instantly, and found it was to save the
coxon of the Cheriton, who, dropping overboard, could not be saved, but
was drowned.  To-day I put on my suit that was altered from the great
skirts to little ones.  To-day I hear they were very merry at Deal,
setting up the King's flag upon one of their maypoles, and drinking his
health upon their knees in the streets, and firing the guns, which the
soldiers of the Castle threatened; but durst not oppose.

2nd.  In the morning at a breakfast of radishes at the Purser's cabin.
After that to writing till dinner.  At which time comes Dunne from London,
with letters that tell us the welcome news of the Parliament's votes
yesterday, which will be remembered for the happiest May-day that bath
been many a year to England.  The King's letter was read in the House,
wherein he submits himself and all things to them, as to an Act of
Oblivion to all,

     ["His Majesty added thereunto an excellent Declaration for the
     safety and repose of those, who tortured in their consciences, for
     having partaken in the rebellion, might fear the punishment of it,
     and in that fear might oppose the tranquillity of the Estate, and
     the calling in of their lawful Prince.  It is printed and published
     as well as the letter, but that shall not hinder me to say, that
     there was never seen a more perfect assemblage of all the most
     excellent natural qualities, and of all the venues, as well Royal as
     Christian, wherewith a great Prince may be endowed, than was found
     in those two wonderful productions."--Sir William Lowers 'Relation
     .  .  . of the voiage and Residence Which .  .  .  Charles the II.
     Hath made in Holland,' Hague, 1660, folio, p. 3.]

unless they shall please to except any, as to the confirming of the sales
of the King's and Church lands, if they see good.  The House upon reading
the letter, ordered L50,000 to be forthwith provided to send to His
Majesty for his present supply; and a committee chosen to return an answer
of thanks to His Majesty for his gracious letter; and that the letter be
kept among the records of the Parliament; and in all this not so much as
one No.  So that Luke Robinson himself stood up and made a recantation for
what he had done, and promises to be a loyal subject to his Prince for the
time to come.  The City of London have put a Declaration, wherein they do
disclaim their owing any other government but that of a King, Lords, and
Commons.  Thanks was given by the House to Sir John Greenville,

     [Created Earl of Bath, 1661; son of Sir Bevil Grenville, killed at
     the battle of Lansdowne; he was, when a boy, left for dead on the
     field at the second battle of Newbury, and said to have been the
     only person entrusted by Charles II. and Monk in bringing about the
     Restoration.]

one of the bedchamber to the King, who brought the letter, and they
continued bare all the time it was reading.  Upon notice made from the
Lords to the Commons, of their desire that the Commons would join with
them in their vote for King, Lords, and Commons; the Commons did concur
and voted that all books whatever that are out against the Government of
King, Lords, and Commons, should be brought into the House and burned.
Great joy all yesterday at London, and at night more bonfires than ever,
and ringing of bells, and drinking of the King's health upon their knees
in the streets, which methinks is a little too much.  But every body seems
to be very joyfull in the business, insomuch that our sea-commanders now
begin to say so too, which a week ago they would not do.

     ["The picture of King Charles II. was often set up in houses,
     without the least molestation, whereas a while ago, it was almost a
     hanging matter so to do; but now the Rump Parliament was so hated
     and jeered at, that the butchers' boys would say, 'Will you buy any
     Parliament rumps and kidneys?'  And it was a very ordinary thing to
     see little children make a fire in the streets, and burn rumps."
     --Rugge's Diurnal.--B.]

And our seamen, as many as had money or credit for drink, did do nothing
else this evening.  This day came Mr. North (Sir Dudley North's son) on
board, to spend a little time here, which my Lord was a little troubled
at, but he seems to be a fine gentleman, and at night did play his part
exceeding well at first sight.  After musique I went up to the Captain's
Cabin with him and Lieutenant Ferrers, who came hither to-day from London
to bring this news to my Lord, and after a bottle of wine we all to bed.

3d.  This morning my Lord showed me the King's declaration and his letter
to the two Generals to be communicated to the fleet.

     ["King Charles II. his Declaration to all his loving Subjects of the
     Kingdome of England, dated from his Court at Breda in Holland 4/14
     of April, 1660, and read in Parliament with his Majesties Letter of
     the same date to his Excellence the Ld. Gen. Monck to be
     communicated to the Ld. President of the Council of State and
     to the Officers of the Army under his Command.  London, Printed by
     W. Godbid for John Playford in the Temple, 1660."  40, pp. 8.]

The contents of the letter are his offer of grace to all that will come in
within forty days, only excepting them that the Parliament shall hereafter
except.  That the sales of lands during these troubles, and all other
things, shall be left to the Parliament, by which he will stand. The
letter dated at Breda, April, 4 1660, in the 12th year of his reign. Upon
the receipt of it this morning by an express, Mr. Phillips, one of the
messengers of the Council from General Monk, my Lord summoned a council of
war, and in the mean time did dictate to me how he would have the vote
ordered which he would have pass this council.  Which done, the Commanders
all came on board, and the council sat in the coach (the first council of
war that had been in my time), where I read the letter and declaration;
and while they were discoursing upon it, I seemed to draw up a vote, which
being offered, they passed.  Not one man seemed to say no to it, though I
am confident many in their hearts were against it.  After this was done, I
went up to the quarter-deck with my Lord and the Commanders, and there
read both the papers and the vote; which done, and demanding their
opinion, the seamen did all of them cry out, "God bless King Charles!"
with the greatest joy imaginable.  That being done, Sir R. Stayner, who
had invited us yesterday, took all the Commanders and myself on board him
to dinner, which not being ready, I went with Captain Hayward to the
Plimouth and Essex, and did what I had to do there and returned, where
very merry at dinner.  After dinner, to the rest of the ships (staid at
the Assistance to hear the harper a good while) quite through the fleet.
Which was a very brave sight to visit all the ships, and to be received
with the respect and honour that I was on board them all; and much more to
see the great joy that I brought to all men; not one through the whole
fleet showing the least dislike of the business. In the evening as I was
going on board the Vice-Admiral, the General began to fire his guns, which
he did all that he had in the ship, and so did all the rest of the
Commanders, which was very gallant, and to hear the bullets go hissing
over our heads as we were in the boat.  This done and finished my
Proclamation, I returned to the Nazeby, where my Lord was much pleased to
hear how all the fleet took it in a transport of joy, showed me a private
letter of the King's to him, and another from the Duke of York in such
familiar style as to their common friend, with all kindness imaginable.
And I found by the letters, and so my Lord told me too, that there had
been many letters passed between them for a great while, and I perceive
unknown to Monk.  And among the rest that had carried these letters Sir
John Boys is one, and that Mr. Norwood, which had a ship to carry him over
the other day, when my Lord would not have me put down his name in the
book.  The King speaks of his being courted to come to the Hague, but do
desire my Lord's advice whither to come to take ship.  And the Duke offers
to learn the seaman's trade of him, in such familiar words as if Jack Cole
and I had writ them.  This was very strange to me, that my Lord should
carry all things so wisely and prudently as he do, and I was over joyful
to see him in so good condition, and he did not a little please himself to
tell me how he had provided for himself so great a hold on the King.

After this to supper, and then to writing of letters till twelve at night,
and so up again at three in the morning.  My Lord seemed to put great
confidence in me, and would take my advice in many things.  I perceive his
being willing to do all the honour in the world to Monk, and to let him
have all the honour of doing the business, though he will many times
express his thoughts of him to be but a thick-sculled fool.  So that I do
believe there is some agreement more than ordinary between the King and my
Lord to let Monk carry on the business, for it is he that must do the
business, or at least that can hinder it, if he be not flattered and
observed.  This, my Lord will hint himself sometimes.  My Lord, I perceive
by the King's letter, had writ to him about his father, Crew,--[When only
seventeen years old, Montagu had married Jemima, daughter of John Crew,
created afterwards Baron Crew of Stene.]--and the King did speak well of
him; but my Lord tells me, that he is afeard that he hath too much
concerned himself with the Presbyterians against the House of Lords, which
will do him a great discourtesy.

4th.  I wrote this morning many letters, and to all the copies of the vote
of the council of war I put my name, that if it should come in print my
name maybe at it.  I sent a copy of the vote to Doling, inclosed in this
letter:

     "SIR,

     "He that can fancy a fleet (like ours) in her pride, with pendants
     loose, guns roaring, caps flying, and the loud 'Vive le Roys,'
     echoed from one ship's company to another, he, and he only, can
     apprehend the joy this inclosed vote was received with, or the
     blessing he thought himself possessed of that bore it, and is

                                   "Your humble servant."

About nine o'clock I got all my letters done, and sent them by the
messenger that came yesterday.  This morning came Captain Isham on board
with a gentleman going to the King, by whom very cunningly, my Lord tells
me, he intends to send an account of this day's and yesterday's actions
here, notwithstanding he had writ to the Parliament to have leave of them
to send the King the answer of the fleet.  Since my writing of the last
paragraph, my Lord called me to him to read his letter to the King, to see
whether I could find any slips in it or no.  And as much of the letter' as
I can remember, is thus:

     "May it please your Most Excellent Majesty," and so begins.

     "That he yesterday received from General Monk his Majesty's letter
     and direction; and that General Monk had desired him to write to the
     Parliament to have leave to send the vote of the seamen before he
     did send it to him, which he had done by writing to both Speakers;
     but for his private satisfaction he had sent it thus privately (and
     so the copy of the proceedings yesterday was sent him), and that
     this come by a gentleman that came this day on board, intending to
     wait upon his Majesty, that he is my Lord's countryman, and one
     whose friends have suffered much on his Majesty's behalf.  That my
     Lords Pembroke and Salisbury are put out of the House of Lords.
     That my Lord is very joyful that other countries do pay him the
     civility and respect due to him; and that he do much rejoice to see
     that the King do resolve to receive none of their assistance (or
     some such words), from them, he having strength enough in the love
     and loyalty of his own subjects to support him.  That his Majesty
     had chosen the best place, Scheveling,--[Schevingen, the port of the
     Hague]--for his embarking, and that there is nothing in the world of
     which he is more ambitious, than to have the honour of attending his
     Majesty, which he hoped would be speedy.  That he had commanded the
     vessel to attend at Helversluce--[Hellevoetsluis, in South Holland]
     --till this gentleman returns, that so if his Majesty do not think
     it fit to command the fleet himself, yet that he may be there to
     receive his commands and bring them to his Lordship.  He ends his
     letter, that he is confounded with the thoughts of the high
     expressions of love to him in the King's letter, and concludes,

     "Your most loyall, dutifull, faithfull and obedient subject and
     servant, E. M."

The rest of the afternoon at ninepins.  In the evening came a packet from
London, among the rest a letter from my wife, which tells me that she has
not been well, which did exceedingly trouble me, but my Lord sending Mr.
Cook at night, I wrote to her and sent a piece of gold enclosed to her,
and wrote also to Mrs. Bowyer, and enclosed a half piece to her for a
token.  After supper at the table in the coach, my Lord talking concerning
the uncertainty of the places of the Exchequer to them that had them now;
he did at last think of an office which do belong to him in case the King
do restore every man to his places that ever had been patent, which is to
be one of the clerks of the signet, which will be a fine employment for
one of his sons.  After all this discourse we broke up and to bed.

In the afternoon came a minister on board, one Mr. Sharpe, who is going to
the King; who tells me that Commissioners are chosen both of Lords and
Commons to go to the King; and that Dr. Clarges

     [Thomas Clarges, physician to the army, created a baronet, 1674,
     died 1695.  He had been previously knighted; his sister Anne married
     General Monk.  "The Parliament also permitted General Monk to send
     Mr. Clarges, his brother-in-law, accompanied with some officers of
     the army, to assure his Majesty of the fidelity and obedience of the
     army, which had made publick and solemn protestations thereof, after
     the Letter and Declaration was communicated unto them by the
     General."--Sir William Lowers Relation .  .  . of the Voiage and
     Residence which .  .  . Charles the II.  Hath made in Holland,
     Hague, 1660, folio.]

is going to him from the Army, and that he will be here to-morrow.  My
letters at night tell me, that the House did deliver their letter to Sir
John Greenville, in answer to the King's sending, and that they give him
L500 for his pains, to buy him a jewel, and that besides the L50,000
ordered to be borrowed of the City for the present use of the King, the
twelve companies of the City do give every one of them to his Majesty, as
a present, L1000.

5th.  All the morning very busy writing letters to London, and a packet to
Mr. Downing, to acquaint him with what had been done lately in the fleet.
And this I did by my Lord's command, who, I thank him, did of himself
think of doing it, to do me a kindness, for he writ a letter himself to
him, thanking him for his kindness to me.  All the afternoon at ninepins,
at night after supper good musique, my Lord, Mr. North, I and W. Howe.
After that to bed.  This evening came Dr. Clarges to Deal, going to the
King; where the towns-people strewed the streets with herbes against his
coming, for joy of his going.  Never was there so general a content as
there is now.  I cannot but remember that our parson did, in his prayer
to-night, pray for the long life and happiness of our King and dread
Soveraign, that may last as long as the sun and moon endureth.

6th (Lord's day).  This morning while we were at sermon comes in Dr.
Clarges and a dozen gentlemen to see my Lord, who, after sermon, dined
with him; I remember that last night upon discourse concerning Clarges my
Lord told me that he was a man of small entendimiento.--[Entendimiento,
Spanish: the understanding.]--This afternoon there was a gentleman with
me, an officer of Dunkirk going over, who came to me for an order and told
me he was lately with my uncle and Aunt Fenner and that Kate's fits of the
convulsions did hold her still.  It fell very well to-day, a stranger
preached here for Mr. Ibbot, one Mr. Stanley, who prayed for King Charles,
by the Grace of God, &c., which gave great contentment to the gentlemen
that were on board here, and they said they would talk of it, when they
come to Breda, as not having it done yet in London so publickly.  After
they were gone from on board, my Lord writ a letter to the King and give
it to me to carry privately to Sir William Compton' on board the
Assistance, which I did, and after a health to his Majesty on board there,
I left them under sail for Breda.  Back again and found them at sermon.  I
went up to my cabin and looked over my accounts, and find that, all my
debts paid and my preparations to sea paid for, I have L640 clear in my
purse.  After supper to bed.

7th.  This morning Captain Cuttance sent me 12 bottles of Margate ale.
Three of them I drank presently with some friends in the Coach.  My Lord
went this morning about the flag-ships in a boat, to see what alterations
there must be, as to the arms and flags.  He did give me order also to
write for silk flags and scarlett waistcloathes.

     [Waist-cloths are the painted canvas coverings of the hammocks which
     are stowed in the waist-nettings.]

For a rich barge; for a noise of trumpets,

     [A set or company of musicians, an expression constantly used by old
     writers without any disparaging meaning.  It is sometimes applied to
     voices as well as to instruments.]

and a set of fidlers.  Very great deal of company come today, among others
Mr. Bellasses, Sir Thomas Lenthropp, Sir Henry Chichley, Colonel Philip
Honiwood, and Captain Titus, the last of whom my Lord showed all our
cabins, and I suppose he is to take notice what room there will be for the
King's entertainment.  Here were also all the Jurates of the town of Dover
come to give my Lord a visit, and after dinner all went away. I could not
but observe that the Vice-Admiral after dinner came into the great cabin
below, where the Jurates and I and the commanders for want of room dined,
and there told us we must drink a health to the King, and himself called
for a bottle of wine, and begun his and the Duke of York's.  In the
afternoon I lost 5s. at ninepins.  After supper musique, and to bed.
Having also among us at the Coach table wrote a letter to the French
ambassador, in French, about the release of a ship we had taken.  After I
was in bed Mr. Sheply and W. Howe came and sat in my cabin, where I gave
them three bottles of Margate ale, and sat laughing and very merry, till
almost one o'clock in the morning, and so good night.

8th.  All the morning busy.  After dinner come several persons of honour,
as my Lord St. John and others, for convoy to Flushing, and great giving
of them salutes.  My Lord and we at nine-pins: I lost 9s.  While we were
at play Mr. Cook brings me word of my wife.  He went to Huntsmore to see
her, and brought her and my father Bowyer to London, where he left her at
my father's, very well, and speaks very well of her love to me.  My
letters to-day tell me how it was intended that the King should be
proclaimed to-day in London, with a great deal of pomp.  I had also news
who they are that are chosen of the Lords and Commons to attend the King.
And also the whole story of what we did the other day in the fleet, at
reading of the King's declaration, and my name at the bottom of it. After
supper some musique and to bed.  I resolving to rise betimes to-morrow to
write letters to London.

9th.  Up very early, writing a letter to the King, as from the two
Generals of the fleet, in answer to his letter to them, wherein my Lord do
give most humble thanks for his gracious letter and declaration; and
promises all duty and obedience to him.  This letter was carried this
morning to Sir Peter Killigrew,

     [Sir Peter Killigrew, Knight, of Arwenack, Cornwall, was known as
     "Peter the Post," from the alacrity with which he despatched "like
     wild fire" all the messages and other commissions entrusted to him
     in the King's cause.  His son Peter, who succeeded his uncle as
     second baronet in 1665, was M.P. for Camelford in 1660.]

who came hither this morning early to bring an order from the Lords' House
to my Lord, giving him power to write an answer to the King.  This morning
my Lord St. John and other persons of honour were here to see my Lord, and
so away to Flushing.  After they were gone my Lord and I to write letters
to London, which we sent by Mr. Cook, who was very desirous to go because
of seeing my wife before she went out of town.  As we were sitting down to
dinner, in comes Noble with a letter from the House of Lords to my Lord,
to desire him to provide ships to transport the Commissioners to the King,
which are expected here this week.  He brought us certain news that the
King was proclaimed yesterday with great pomp, and brought down one of the
Proclamations, with great joy to us all; for which God be praised.  After
dinner to ninepins and lost 5s.  This morning came Mr. Saunderson,

     [Afterwards Sir William Sanderson, gentleman of the chamber, author
     of the "History of Mary Queen of Scots, James I., and Charles I."
     His wife, Dame Bridget, was mother of the maids.]

that writ the story of the King, hither, who is going over to the King. He
calls me cozen and seems a very knowing man.  After supper to bed betimes,
leaving my Lord talking in the Coach with the Captain.

10th.  This morning came on board Mr. Pinkney and his son, going to the
King with a petition finely writ by Mr. Whore, for to be the King's
embroiderer; for whom and Mr. Saunderson I got a ship.  This morning come
my Lord Winchelsea and a great deal of company, and dined here.  In the
afternoon, while my Lord and we were at musique in the great cabin below,
comes in a messenger to tell us that Mr. Edward Montagu,

     [Sir Edward Montagu's eldest son, afterwards second Earl of
     Sandwich, called by Pepys "The child."]

my Lord's son, was come to Deal, who afterwards came on board with Mr.
Pickering with him.  The child was sick in the evening.  At night, while
my Lord was at supper, in comes my Lord Lauderdale and Sir John
Greenville, who supped here, and so went away.  After they were gone, my
Lord called me into his cabin, and told me how he was commanded to set
sail presently for the King,

     ["Ordered that General Montagu do observe the command of His Majesty
     for the disposing of the fleet, in order to His Majesty's returning
     home to England to his kingly government: and that all proceedings
     in law be in His Majesty's name."--Rugge's Diurnal.--B.]

and was very glad thereof, and so put me to writing of letters and other
work that night till it was very late, he going to bed.  I got him
afterwards to sign things in bed.  After I had done some more work I to
bed also.

11th.  Up very early in the morning, and so about a great deal of business
in order to our going hence to-day.  Burr going on shore last night made
me very angry.  So that I sent for Mr. Pitts to come tome from the
Vice-Admiral's, intending not to have employed Burr any more.  But Burr by
and by coming and desiring humbly that I would forgive him and Pitts not
coming I did set him to work.  This morning we began to pull down all the
State's arms in the fleet, having first sent to Dover for painters and
others to come to set up the King's.  The rest of the morning writing of
letters to London which I afterwards sent by Dunne. I had this morning my
first opportunity of discoursing with Dr. Clarke,

     [Timothy Clarke, M. D., one of the original Fellows of the Royal
     Society.  He was appointed one of the physicians in ordinary to
     Charles II.  on the death of Dr. Quartermaine in 1667.]

whom I found to be a very pretty man and very knowing.  He is now going in
this ship to the King.  There dined here my Lord Crafford and my Lord
Cavendish, and other Scotchmen whom I afterwards ordered to be received on
board the Plymouth, and to go along with us.  After dinner we set sail
from the Downs, I leaving my boy to go to Deal for my linen.  In the
afternoon overtook us three or four gentlemen; two of the Berties, and one
Mr. Dormerhoy, a Scotch gentleman, whom I afterwards found to be a very
fine man, who, telling my Lord that they heard the Commissioners were come
out of London to-day, my Lord dropt anchor over against Dover Castle
(which give us about thirty guns in passing), and upon a high debate with
the Vice and Rear Admiral whether it were safe to go and not stay for the
Commissioners, he did resolve to send Sir R. Stayner to Dover, to enquire
of my Lord Winchelsea, whether or no they are come out of London, and then
to resolve to-morrow morning of going or not; which was done.  It blew
very hard all this night that I was afeard of my boy. About 11 at night
came the boats from Deal, with great store of provisions, by the same
token John Goods told me that above 20 of the fowls are smothered, but my
boy was put on board the Northwich.  To bed.

12th.  This morning I inquired for my boy, whether he was come well or no,
and it was told me that he was well in bed.  My Lord called me to his
chamber, he being in bed, and gave me many orders to make for direction
for the ships that are left in the Downs, giving them the greatest charge
in the world to bring no passengers with them, when they come after us to
Scheveling Bay, excepting Mr. Edward Montagu, Mr. Thomas Crew, and Sir H.
Wright.  Sir R. Stayner hath been here early in the morning and told my
Lord, that my Lord Winchelsea understands by letters, that the
Commissioners are only to come to Dover to attend the coming over of the
King.  So my Lord did give order for weighing anchor, which we did, and
sailed all day.  In our way in the morning, coming in the midway between
Dover and Calais, we could see both places very easily, and very pleasant
it was to me that the further we went the more we lost sight of both
lands.  In the afternoon at cards with Mr. North and the
Doctor.--[Clarke]--There by us, in the Lark frigate, Sir R. Freeman and
some others, going from the King to England, come to see my Lord and so
onward on their voyage.  In the afternoon upon the quarterdeck the Doctor
told Mr. North and me an admirable story called "The Fruitless
Precaution," an exceeding pretty story and worthy my getting without book
when I can get the book.[??]  This evening came Mr. Sheply on board, whom
we had left at Deal and Dover getting of provision and borrowing of money.
In the evening late, after discoursing with the Doctor, &c., to bed.

13th (Lord's day).  Trimmed in the morning, after that to the cook's room
with Mr. Sheply, the first time that I was there this voyage.  Then to the
quarter-deck, upon which the tailors and painters were at work, cutting
out some pieces of yellow cloth into the fashion of a crown and C. R.  and
put it upon a fine sheet, and that into the flag instead of the State's
arms, which after dinner was finished and set up after it had been shewn
to my Lord, who took physic to-day and was in his chamber, and liked it so
well as to bid me give the tailors 20s. among them for doing of it.  This
morn Sir J. Boys and Capt. Isham met us in the Nonsuch, the first of whom,
after a word or two with my Lord, went forward, the other staid.  I heard
by them how Mr. Downing had never made any address to the King, and for
that was hated exceedingly by the Court, and that he was in a Dutch ship
which sailed by us, then going to England with disgrace. Also how Mr.
Morland was knighted by the King this week, and that the King did give the
reason of it openly, that it was for his giving him intelligence all the
time he was clerk to Secretary Thurloe.  In the afternoon a council of
war, only to acquaint them that the Harp must be taken out of all their
flags,

     [In May, 1658, the old Union Jack (being the crosses of St. George
     and St. Andrew combined) was revived, with the Irish harp over the
     centre of the flag.  This harp was taken off at the Restoration.
     (See "The National Flags of the Commonwealth," by H. W. Henfrey,"
     Journ. Brit.  Arch.  Assoc.," vol.  xxxi, p. 54.) The sign of the
     "Commonwealth Arms" was an uncommon one, but a token of one exists--
     "Francis Wood at ye Commonwealth arms in Mary Maudlens" [St. Mary
     Magdalen, Old Fish Street].]

it being very offensive to the King.  Mr. Cook, who came after us in the
Yarmouth, bringing me a letter from my wife and a Latin letter from my
brother John, with both of which I was exceedingly pleased.  No sermon all
day, we being under sail, only at night prayers, wherein Mr. Ibbott prayed
for all that were related to us in a spiritual and fleshly way. We came
within sight of Middle's shore.  Late at night we writ letters to the King
of the news of our coming, and Mr. Edward Picketing carried them.  Capt.
Isham went on shore, nobody showing of him any respect; so the old man
very fairly took leave of my Lord, and my Lord very coldly bid him "God be
with you," which was very strange, but that I hear that he keeps a great
deal of prating and talking on shore, on board, at the King's Courts, what
command he had with my Lord, &c.  After letters were gone then to bed.

14th.  In the morning when I woke and rose, I saw myself out of the
scuttle close by the shore, which afterwards I was told to be the Dutch
shore; the Hague was clearly to be seen by us.  My Lord went up in his
nightgown into the cuddy,

     ["A sort of cabin or cook-room, generally in the fore-part, but
     sometimes near the stern of lighters and barges of burden."--Smyth's
     Sailor's Word-Book.]

to see how to dispose thereof for himself and us that belong to him, to
give order for our removal to-day.  Some nasty Dutchmen came on board to
proffer their boats to carry things from us on shore, &c., to get money by
us.  Before noon some gentlemen came on board from the shore to kiss my
Lord's hands.  And by and by Mr. North and Dr. Clerke went to kiss the
Queen of Bohemia's' hands, from my Lord, with twelve attendants from on
board to wait on them, among which I sent my boy, who, like myself, is
with child to see any strange thing.  After noon they came back again
after having kissed the Queen of Bohemia's hand, and were sent again by my
Lord to do the same to the Prince of Orange.

     [Son of the Prince of Orange and Mary, eldest daughter of Charles I.
     --afterwards William III.  He was then in his tenth year, having
     been born in 1650.]

So I got the Captain to ask leave for me to go, which my Lord did give,
and I taking my boy and judge Advocate with me, went in company with them.
The weather bad; we were sadly washed when we came near the shore, it
being very hard to land there.  The shore is, as all the country between
that and the Hague, all sand.  The rest of the company got a coach by
themselves; Mr. Creed and I went in the fore part of a coach wherein were
two very pretty ladies, very fashionable and with black patches, who very
merrily sang all the way and that very well, and were very free to kiss
the two blades that were with them.  I took out my flageolette and piped,
but in piping I dropped my rapier-stick, but when I came to the Hague, I
sent my boy back again for it and he found it, for which I did give him
6d., but some horses had gone over it and broke the scabbard.  The Hague
is a most neat place in all respects.  The houses so neat in all places
and things as is possible.  Here we walked up and down a great while, the
town being now very full of Englishmen, for that the Londoners were come
on shore today.  But going to see the Prince,--[Prince of Orange,
afterwards William III.]--he was gone forth with his governor, and so we
walked up and down the town and court to see the place; and by the help of
a stranger, an Englishman, we saw a great many places, and were made to
understand many things, as the intention of may-poles, which we saw there
standing at every great man's door, of different greatness according to
the quality of the person.  About 10 at night the Prince comes home, and
we found an easy admission.  His attendance very inconsiderable as for a
prince; but yet handsome, and his tutor a fine man, and himself a very
pretty boy.  It was bright moonshine to-night.  This done we went to a
place we had taken to sup in, where a sallet and two or three bones of
mutton were provided for a matter of ten of us which was very strange.
After supper the Judge and I to another house, leaving them there, and he
and I lay in one press bed, there being two more in the same room, but all
very neat and handsome, my boy sleeping upon a bench by me.

15th.  We lay till past three o'clock, then up and down the town, to see
it by daylight, where we saw the soldiers of the Prince's guard, all very
fine, and the burghers of the town with their arms and muskets as bright
as silver.  And meeting this morning a schoolmaster that spoke good
English and French, he went along with us and shewed us the whole town,
and indeed I cannot speak enough of the gallantry of the town.  Every body
of fashion speaks French or Latin, or both.  The women many of them very
pretty and in good habits, fashionable and black spots.  He went with me
to buy a couple of baskets, one of them for Mrs. Pierce, the other for my
wife.  After he was gone, we having first drank with him at our lodging,
the judge and I to the Grande Salle where we were shewed the place where
the States General sit in council.  The hall is a great place, where the
flags that they take from their enemies are all hung up; and things to be
sold, as in Westminster Hall, and not much unlike it, but that not so big,
but much neater.  After that to a bookseller's and bought for the love of
the binding three books: the French Psalms in four parts, Bacon's Organon,
and Farnab. Rhetor.

     ["Index Rhetoricus" of Thomas Farnaby was a book which went through
     several editions.  The first was published at London by R. Allot in
     1633.]

After that the judge, I and my boy by coach to Scheveling again, where we
went into a house of entertainment and drank there, the wind being very
high, and we saw two boats overset and the gallants forced to be pulled on
shore by the heels, while their trunks, portmanteaus, hats, and feathers,
were swimming in the sea.  Among others I saw the ministers that come
along with the Commissioners (Mr. Case among the rest) sadly dipped.

     [Thomas Case, born 1598, was a famous preacher and a zealous
     advocate for the Solemn League and Covenant, a member of the
     assembly of divines, and rector of St. Giles's-in-the-Fields.  He
     was one of the deputation to Charles II.  at Breda, and appointed a
     royal chaplain.  He was ejected by the Act of Uniformity, but
     remained in London after his ejection.  Died May 30th, 1682.]

So they came in where we were, and I being in haste left my Copenhagen
knife, and so lost it.  Having staid here a great while a gentleman that
was going to kiss my Lord's hand, from the Queen of Bohemia, and I hired a
Dutch boat for four rixdollars to carry us on board.  We were fain to wait
a great while before we could get off from the shore, the sea being very
rough.  The Dutchman would fain have made all pay that came into our boat
besides us two and our company, there being many of our ship's company got
in who were on shore, but some of them had no money, having spent all on
shore.  Coming on board we found all the Commissioners of the House of
Lords at dinner with my Lord, who after dinner went away for shore.  Mr.
Morland, now Sir Samuel, was here on board, but I do not find that my Lord
or any body did give him any respect, he being looked upon by him and all
men as a knave.  Among others he betrayed Sir Rich. Willis

     [This is somewhat different to the usual account of Morland's
     connection with Sir Richard Willis.  In the beginning of 1659
     Cromwell, Thurloe, and Willis formed a plot to inveigle Charles II.
     into England and into the hands of his enemies.  The plot was
     discussed in Thurloe's office, and Morland, who pretended to be
     asleep, heard it and discovered it.  Willis sent for Morland, and
     received him in a cellar.  He said that one of them must have
     discovered the plot.  He laid his hand upon the Bible and swore that
     he had not been the discoverer, calling upon Morland to do the same.
     Morland, with presence of mind, said he was ready to do so if Willis
     would give him a reason why he should suspect him.  By this ready
     answer he is said to have escaped the ordeal (see Birch's "Life of
     Thurloe").]

that married Dr. F. Jones's daughter, that he had paid him L1000 at one
time by the Protector's and Secretary Thurloe's order, for intelligence
that he sent concerning the King.  In the afternoon my Lord called me on
purpose to show me his fine cloathes which are now come hither, and indeed
are very rich as gold and silver can make them, only his sword he and I do
not like.  In the afternoon my Lord and I walked together in the coach two
hours, talking together upon all sorts of discourse: as religion, wherein
he is, I perceive, wholly sceptical, as well as I, saying, that indeed the
Protestants as to the Church of Rome are wholly fanatiques: he likes
uniformity and form of prayer; about State-business, among other things he
told me that his conversion to the King's cause (for so I was saying that
I wondered from what time the King could look upon him to become his
friend), commenced from his being in the Sound, when he found what usage
he was likely to have from a Commonwealth.  My Lord, the Captain, and I
supped in my Lord's chamber, where I did perceive that he did begin to
show me much more respect than ever he did yet.  After supper, my Lord
sent for me, intending to have me play at cards with him, but I not
knowing cribbage, we fell into discourse of many things, till it was so
rough sea and the ship rolled so much that I was not able to stand, and so
he bid me go to bed.

16th.  Soon as I was up I went down to be trimmed below in the great
cabin, but then come in some with visits, among the rest one from Admiral
Opdam,

     [The admiral celebrated in Lord Dorset's ballad, "To all you ladies
     now at land."

                   "Should foggy Opdam chance to know
                    Our sad and dismal story;
                    The Dutch would scorn so weak a foe,
                    And quit their fort at Goree
                    For what resistance can they find
                    From men who've left their hearts behind?"--B.]

who spoke Latin well, but not French nor English, to whom my Lord made me
to give his answer and to entertain; he brought my Lord a tierce of wine
and a barrel of butter, as a present from the Admiral.  After that to
finish my trimming, and while I was doing of it in comes Mr. North very
sea-sick from shore, and to bed he goes.  After that to dinner, where
Commissioner Pett was come to take care to get all things ready for the
King on board.  My Lord in his best suit, this the first day, in
expectation to wait upon the King.  But Mr. Edw. Pickering coming from the
King brought word that the King would not put my Lord to the trouble of
coming to him; but that he would come to the shore to look upon the fleet
to-day, which we expected, and had our guns ready to fire, and our scarlet
waistcloathes out and silk pendants, but he did not come.  My Lord and we
at ninepins this afternoon upon the Quarterdeck, which was very pretty
sport.  This evening came Mr. John Pickering on board, like an ass, with
his feathers and new suit that he had made at the Hague. My Lord very
angry for his staying on shore, bidding me a little before to send to him,
telling me that he was afraid that for his father's sake he might have
some mischief done him, unless he used the General's name. To supper, and
after supper to cards.  I stood by and looked on till 11 at night and so
to bed.  This afternoon Mr. Edwd. Pickering told me in what a sad, poor
condition for clothes and money the King was, and all his attendants, when
he came to him first from my Lord, their clothes not being worth forty
shillings the best of them.

     [Andrew Marvell alludes to the poor condition, for clothes and
     money, in which the King was at this time, in "A Historical Poem":--

               "At length, by wonderful impulse of fate,
               The people call him back to help the State;
               And what is more, they send him money, too,
               And clothe him all from head to foot anew."]

And how overjoyed the King was when Sir J. Greenville brought him some
money; so joyful, that he called the Princess Royal and Duke of York to
look upon it as it lay in the portmanteau before it was taken out.  My
Lord told me, too, that the Duke of York is made High Admiral of England.

17th.  Up early to write down my last two days' observations.  Dr. Clerke
came to me to tell me that he heard this morning, by some Dutch that are
come on board already to see the ship, that there was a Portuguese taken
yesterday at the Hague, that had a design to kill the King.  But this I
heard afterwards was only the mistake upon one being observed to walk with
his sword naked, he having lost his scabbard.  Before dinner Mr. Edw.
Pickering and I, W. Howe, Pim, and my boy,--[Edward Montagu, afterwards
Lord Hinchinbroke.]--to Scheveling, where we took coach, and so to the
Hague, where walking, intending to find one that might show us the King
incognito, I met with Captain Whittington (that had formerly brought a
letter to my Lord from the Mayor of London) and he did promise me to do
it, but first we went and dined at a French house, but paid 16s. for our
part of the club.  At dinner in came Dr. Cade, a merry mad parson of the
King's.  And they two after dinner got the child and me (the others not
being able to crowd in) to see the King, who kissed the child very
affectionately.  Then we kissed his, and the Duke of York's, and the
Princess Royal's hands.  The King seems to be a very sober man; and a very
splendid Court he hath in the number of persons of quality that are about
him, English very rich in habit.  From the King to the Lord Chancellor,

     [On January 29th, 1658, Charles II.  entrusted the Great Seal to Sir
     Edward Hyde, with the title of Lord Chancellor, and in that
     character Sir Edward accompanied the King to England.]

who did lie bed-rid of the gout: he spoke very merrily to the child and
me.  After that, going to see the Queen of Bohemia, I met with Dr. Fullers
whom I sent to a tavern with Mr. Edw. Pickering, while I and the rest went
to see the Queen,--[Henrietta Maria.]--who used us very respectfully; her
hand we all kissed.  She seems a very debonaire, but plain lady.  After
that to the Dr.'s, where we drank a while or so.  In a coach of a friend's
of Dr. Cade we went to see a house of the Princess Dowager's in a park
about half-a-mile or a mile from the Hague, where there is one, the most
beautiful room for pictures in the whole world. She had here one picture
upon the top, with these words, dedicating it to the memory of her
husband:--"Incomparabili marito, inconsolabilis vidua."

     [Mary, Princess Royal, eldest daughter of Charles I., and widow of
     William of Nassau, Prince of Orange.  She was not supposed to be
     inconsolable, and scandal followed her at the court of Charles II.,
     where she died of small-pox, December 24th, 1660.]

Here I met with Mr. Woodcock of Cambridge, Mr. Hardy and another, and Mr.
Woodcock beginning we had two or three fine songs, he and I, and W. Howe
to the Echo, which was very pleasant, and the more because in a heaven of
pleasure and in a strange country, that I never was taken up more with a
sense of pleasure in my life.  After that we parted and back to the Hague
and took a tour or two about the Forehault,--[The Voorhout is the
principal street of the Hague, and it is lined with handsome
trees.]--where the ladies in the evening do as our ladies do in Hide Park.
But for my life I could not find one handsome, but their coaches very rich
and themselves so too.  From thence, taking leave of the Doctor, we took
wagon to Scheveling, where we had a fray with the Boatswain of the
Richmond, who would not freely carry us on board, but at last he was
willing to it, but then it was so late we durst not go.  So we returned
between 10 and 11 at night in the dark with a wagon with one horse to the
Hague, where being come we went to bed as well as we could be
accommodated, and so to sleep.

18th.  Very early up, and, hearing that the Duke of York, our Lord High
Admiral, would go on board to-day, Mr. Pickering and I took waggon for
Scheveling, leaving the child in Mr. Pierces hands, with directions to
keep him within doors all day till he heard from me.  But the wind being
very high that no boats could get off from shore, we returned to the Hague
(having breakfasted with a gentleman of the Duke's, and Commissioner Pett,
sent on purpose to give notice to my Lord of his coming), where I hear
that the child is gone to Delfe to see the town. So we all and Mr. Ibbott,
the Minister, took a schuit--[The trekschuit (drag-boat) along the canal
is still described as an agreeable conveyance from Leyden to Delft.]--and
very much pleased with the manner and conversation of the passengers,
where most speak French; went after them, but met them by the way.  But
however we went forward making no stop. Where when we were come we got a
smith's boy of the town to go along with us, but could speak nothing but
Dutch, and he showed us the church where Van Trump lies entombed with a
very fine monument.  His epitaph concluded thus:--"Tandem Bello Anglico
tantum non victor, certe invictus, vivere et vincere desiit."  There is a
sea-fight cut in marble, with the smoke, the best expressed that ever I
saw in my life.  From thence to the great church, that stands in a fine
great market-place, over against the Stadt-house, and there I saw a
stately tomb of the old Prince of Orange, of marble and brass; wherein
among other rarities there are the angels with their trumpets expressed as
it were crying.  Here were very fine organs in both the churches.  It is a
most sweet town, with bridges, and a river in every street.  Observing
that in every house of entertainment there hangs in every room a
poor-man's box, and desiring to know the reason thereof, it was told me
that it is their custom to confirm all bargains by putting something into
the poor people's box, and that binds as fast as any thing.  We also saw
the Guesthouse, where it was very pleasant to see what neat preparation
there is for the poor.  We saw one poor man a-dying there.  After we had
seen all, we light by chance of an English house to drink in, where we
were very merry, discoursing of the town and the thing that hangs up in
the Stadthouse like a bushel, which I was told is a sort of punishment for
some sort of offenders to carry through the streets of the town over his
head, which is a great weight. Back by water, where a pretty sober Dutch
lass sat reading all the way, and I could not fasten any discourse upon
her.  At our landing we met with Commissioner Pett going down to the
water-side with Major Harly, who is going upon a dispatch into England.
They having a coach I left the Parson and my boy and went along with
Commissioner Pett, Mr. Ackworth and Mr. Dawes his friends, to the Princess
Dowager's house again. Thither also my Lord Fairfax and some other English
Lords did come to see it, and my pleasure was increased by seeing of it
again.  Besides we went into the garden, wherein are gallant nuts better
than ever I saw, and a fine Echo under the house in a vault made on
purpose with pillars, where I played on my flageolette to great advantage.
Back to the Hague, where not finding Mr. Edward, I was much troubled, but
went with the Parson to supper to Commissioner Pett, where we sat late.
And among other mirth Mr. Ackworth vyed wives, each endeavouring to set
his own wife out to the best advantage, he having as they said an
extraordinary handsome wife. But Mr. Dawes could not be got to say
anything of his.  After that to our lodging where W. Howe and I exceeding
troubled not to know what is become of our young gentleman.  So to bed.

19th.  Up early, hearing nothing of the child, and went to Scheveling,
where I found no getting on board, though the Duke of York sent every day
to see whether he could do it or no.  Here I met with Mr. Pinkney and his
sons, and with them went back to the Hague, in our way lighting and going
to see a woman that makes pretty rock-work in shells, &c., which could I
have carried safe I would have bought some of.  At the Hague we went to
buy some pictures, where I saw a sort of painting done upon woollen cloth,
drawn as if there was a curtain over it, which was very pleasant, but
dear.  Another pretty piece of painting I saw, on which there was a great
wager laid by young Pinkney and me whether it was a principal or a copy.
But not knowing how to decide, it was broken off, and I got the old man to
lay out as much as my piece of gold come to, and so saved my money, which
had been 24s. lost, I fear.  While we were here buying of pictures, we saw
Mr. Edward and his company land.  Who told me that they had been at Leyden
all night, at which I was very angry with Mr. Pierce, and shall not be
friends I believe a good while.  To our lodging to dinner.  After that out
to buy some linen to wear against to-morrow, and so to the barber's.
After that by waggon to Lausdune, where the 365 children were born.  We
saw the hill where they say the house stood and sunk wherein the children
were born.  The basins wherein the male and female children were baptized
do stand over a large table that hangs upon a wall, with the whole story
of the thing in Dutch and Latin, beginning, "Margarita Herman Comitissa,"
&c.  The thing was done about 200 years ago.

The town is a little small village which answers much to one of our small
villages, such a one as Chesterton in all respects, and one could have
thought it in England but for the language of the people.  We went into a
little drinking house where there were a great many Dutch boors eating of
fish in a boorish manner, but very merry in their way.  But the houses
here as neat as in the great places.  From thence to the Hague again
playing at crambo--[Crambo is described as "a play at short verses in
which a word is given, and the parties contend who can find most rhymes to
it."]--in the waggon, Mr. Edward, Mr. Ibbott, W. Howe, Mr. Pinkney, and I.
When we were come thither W. Howe, and Mr. Ibbott, and Mr. Pinckney went
away for Scheveling, while I and the child to walk up and down the town,
where I met my old chamber-fellow, Mr. Ch. Anderson, and a friend of his
(both Physicians), Mr. Wright, who took me to a Dutch house, where there
was an exceeding pretty lass, and right for the sport, but it being
Saturday we could not have much of her company, but however I staid with
them (having left the child with my uncle Pickering, whom I met in the
street) till 12 at night.  By that time Charles was almost drunk, and then
broke up, he resolving to go thither again, after he had seen me at my
lodging, and lie with the girl, which he told me he had done in the
morning.  Going to my lodging we met with the bellman, who struck upon a
clapper, which I took in my hand, and it is just like the clapper that our
boys frighten the birds away from the corn with in summer time in England.
To bed.

20th.  Up early, and with Mr. Pickering and the child by waggon to
Scheveling, where it not being yet fit to go off, I went to lie down in a
chamber in the house, where in another bed there was a pretty Dutch woman
in bed alone, but though I had a month's-mind

     [Month's-mind.  An earnest desire or longing, explained as alluding
     to "a woman's longing."  See Shakespeare, "Two Gentlemen of Verona,"
     act i.  sc. 2:

               "I see you have a month's mind to them."--M. B.]

I had not the boldness to go to her.  So there I slept an hour or two. At
last she rose, and then I rose and walked up and down the chamber, and saw
her dress herself after the Dutch dress, and talked to her as much as I
could, and took occasion, from her ring which she wore on her first
finger, to kiss her hand, but had not the face to offer anything more. So
at last I left her there and went to my company.  About 8 o'clock I went
into the church at Scheveling, which was pretty handsome, and in the
chancel a very great upper part of the mouth of a whale, which indeed was
of a prodigious bigness, bigger than one of our long boats that belong to
one of our ships.  Commissioner Pett at last came to our lodging, and
caused the boats to go off; so some in one boat and some in another we all
bid adieu to the shore.  But through badness of weather we were in great
danger, and a great while before we could get to the ship, so that of all
the company not one but myself that was not sick.  I keeping myself in the
open air, though I was soundly wet for it.  This hath not been known four
days together such weather at this time of year, a great while.  Indeed
our fleet was thought to be in great danger, but we found all well, and
Mr. Thos. Crew came on board.  I having spoke a word or two with my Lord,
being not very well settled, partly through last night's drinking and want
of sleep, I lay down in my gown upon my bed and slept till the 4 o'clock
gun the next morning waked me, which I took for 8 at night, and rising
.  .  .  mistook the sun rising for the sun setting on Sunday night.

21st.  So into my naked bed

     [This is a somewhat late use of an expression which was once
     universal.  It was formerly the custom for both sexes to sleep in
     bed without any nightlinen.

              "Who sees his true love in her naked bed,
               Teaching the sheets a whiter hue than white."

                              Shakespeare, Venus and Adonis.

     Nares ("Glossary") notes the expression so late as in the very odd
     novel by T. Amory, called "John Bunde," where a young lady declares,
     after an alarm, "that she would never go into naked bed on board
     ship again."  Octavo edition, vol. i.  p. 90.]

and slept till 9 o'clock, and then John Goods waked me, [by] and by the
captain's boy brought me four barrels of Mallows oysters, which Captain
Tatnell had sent me from Murlace.--[Apparently Mallows stands for St. Malo
and Murlace for Morlaise.]--The weather foul all this day also. After
dinner, about writing one thing or other all day, and setting my papers in
order, having been so long absent.  At night Mr. Pierce, Purser (the other
Pierce and I having not spoken to one another since we fell out about Mr.
Edward), and Mr. Cook sat with me in my cabin and supped with me, and then
I went to bed.  By letters that came hither in my absence, I understand
that the Parliament had ordered all persons to be secured, in order to a
trial, that did sit as judges in the late King's death, and all the
officers too attending the Court.  Sir John Lenthall moving in the House,
that all that had borne arms against the King should be exempted from
pardon, he was called to the bar of the House, and after a severe reproof
he was degraded his knighthood.  At Court I find that all things grow
high.  The old clergy talk as being sure of their lands again, and laugh
at the Presbytery; and it is believed that the sales of the King's and
Bishops' lands will never be confirmed by Parliament, there being nothing
now in any man's, power to hinder them and the King from doing what they
have a mind, but every body willing to submit to any thing.  We expect
every day to have the King and Duke on board as soon as it is fair.  My
Lord do nothing now, but offers all things to the pleasure of the Duke as
Lord High Admiral.  So that I am at a loss what to do.

22nd.  Up very early, and now beginning to be settled in my wits again, I
went about setting down my last four days' observations this morning.
After that, was trimmed by a barber that has not trimmed me yet, my
Spaniard being on shore.  News brought that the two Dukes are coming on
board, which, by and by, they did, in a Dutch boats the Duke of York in
yellow trimmings, the Duke of Gloucester

     [Henry, Duke of Gloucester, the youngest child of Charles L, born
     July 6th, 16--, who, with his sister Elizabeth, was allowed a
     meeting with his father on the night before the King's execution.
     Burnet says: "He was active, and loved business; was apt to have
     particular friendships, and had an insinuating temper which was
     generally very acceptable.  The King loved him much better than the
     Duke of York."  He died of smallpox at Whitehall, September 13th,
     1660, and was buried in Henry VII's Chapel.]

in grey and red.  My Lord went in a boat to meet them, the Captain,
myself, and others, standing at the entering port.  So soon as they were
entered we shot the guns off round the fleet.  After that they went to
view the ship all over, and were most exceedingly pleased with it.  They
seem to be both very fine gentlemen.  After that done, upon the
quarter-deck table, under the awning, the Duke of York and my Lord, Mr.
Coventry,

     [William Coventry, to whom Pepys became so warmly attached
     afterwards, was the fourth son of Thomas, first Lord Coventry, the
     Lord Keeper.  He was born in 1628, and entered at Queen's College,
     Oxford, in 1642; after the Restoration he became private secretary
     to the Duke of York, his commission as Secretary to the Lord High
     Admiral not being conferred until 1664; elected M.P. for Great
     Yarmouth in 1661.  In 1662 he was appointed an extra Commissioner of
     the Navy, an office he held until 1667; in 1665, knighted and sworn
     a Privy Councillor, and, in 1667, constituted a Commissioner of the
     Treasury; but, having been forbid the court on account of his
     challenging the Duke of Buckingham, he retired into the country, nor
     could he subsequently be prevailed upon to accept of any official
     employment.  Burnet calls Sir William Coventry the best speaker in
     the House of Commons, and "a man of the finest and best temper that
     belonged to the court," and Pepys never omits an opportunity of
     paying a tribute to his public and private worth.  He died, 1686, of
     gout in the stomach.]

and I, spent an hour at allotting to every ship their service, in their
return to England; which having done, they went to dinner, where the table
was very full: the two Dukes at the upper end, my Lord Opdam next on one
side, and my Lord on the other.  Two guns given to every man while he was
drinking the King's health, and so likewise to the Duke's health. I took
down Monsieur d'Esquier to the great cabin below, and dined with him in
state alone with only one or two friends of his.  All dinner the harper
belonging to Captain Sparling played to the Dukes.  After dinner, the
Dukes and my Lord to see the Vice and Rear-Admirals; and I in a boat after
them.  After that done, they made to the shore in the Dutch boat that
brought them, and I got into the boat with them; but the shore was so full
of people to expect their coming, as that it was as black (which otherwise
is white sand), as every one could stand by another.  When we came near
the shore, my Lord left them and came into his own boat, and General Pen
and I with him; my Lord being very well pleased with this day's work.  By
the time we came on board again, news is sent us that the King is on
shore; so my Lord fired all his guns round twice, and all the fleet after
him, which in the end fell into disorder, which seemed very handsome.  The
gun over against my cabin I fired myself to the King, which was the first
time that he had been saluted by his own ships since this change; but
holding my head too much over the gun, I had almost spoiled my right eye.
Nothing in the world but going of guns almost all this day.  In the
evening we began to remove cabins; I to the carpenter's cabin, and Dr.
Clerke with me, who came on board this afternoon, having been twice ducked
in the sea to-day coming from shore, and Mr. North and John Pickering the
like.  Many of the King's servants came on board to-night; and so many
Dutch of all sorts came to see the ship till it was quite dark, that we
could not pass by one another, which was a great trouble to us all.  This
afternoon Mr. Downing (who was knighted yesterday by the King') was here
on board, and had a ship for his passage into England, with his lady and
servants.

     ["About midnight arrived there Mr. Downing, who did the affairs of
     England to the Lords the Estates, in quality of Resident under
     Oliver Cromwell, and afterward under the pretended Parliament, which
     having changed the form of the government, after having cast forth
     the last Protector, had continued him in his imploiment, under the
     quality of Extraordinary Envoy.  He began to have respect for the
     King's person, when he knew that all England declared for a free
     parliament, and departed from Holland without order, as soon as he
     understood that there was nothing that could longer oppose the re-
     establishment of monarchal government, with a design to crave
     letters of recommendation to General Monk.  This lord considered
     him, as well because of the birth of his wife, which is illustrious,
     as because Downing had expressed some respect for him in a time when
     that eminent person could not yet discover his intentions.  He had
     his letters when he arrived at midnight at the house of the Spanish
     Embassador, as we have said.  He presented them forthwith to the
     King, who arose from table a while after, read the letters, receiv'd
     the submissions of Downing, and granted him the pardon and grace
     which he asked for him to whom he could deny nothing.  Some daies
     after the King knighted him, and would it should be believed, that
     the strong aversions which this minister of the Protector had made
     appear against him on all occasions, and with all sorts of persons
     indifferently, even a few daies before the publick and general
     declaration of all England, proceeded not from any evil intention,
     but only from a deep dissimulation, wherewith he was constrained to
     cover his true sentiments, for fear to prejudice the affairs of his
     Majesty."--Sir William Lowers Relation .  .  . of the Voiage and
     Residence which .  .  .  Charles the II.  hath made in Holland,
     Hague, 1660, folio, pp. 72-73.]

By the same token he called me to him when I was going to write the order,
to tell me that I must write him Sir G. Downing.  My Lord lay in the
roundhouse to-night.  This evening I was late writing a French letter
myself by my Lord's order to Monsieur Kragh,  Embassador de Denmarke a la
Haye, which my Lord signed in bed.  After that I to bed, and the Doctor,
and sleep well.

23rd.  The Doctor and I waked very merry, only my eye was very red and ill
in the morning from yesterday's hurt.  In the morning came infinity of
people on board from the King to go along with him.  My Lord, Mr. Crew,
and others, go on shore to meet the King as he comes off from shore, where
Sir R. Stayner bringing His Majesty into the boat, I hear that His Majesty
did with a great deal of affection kiss my Lord upon his first meeting.
The King, with the two Dukes and Queen of Bohemia, Princess Royal, and
Prince of Orange, came on board, where I in their coming in kissed the
King's, Queen's, and Princess's hands, having done the other before.
Infinite shooting off of the guns, and that in a disorder on purpose,
which was better than if it had been otherwise.  All day nothing but Lords
and persons of honour on board, that we were exceeding full.  Dined in a
great deal of state, the Royall company by themselves in the coach, which
was a blessed sight to see.  I dined with Dr. Clerke, Dr. Quarterman, and
Mr. Darcy in my cabin.  This morning Mr. Lucy came on board, to whom and
his company of the King's Guard in another ship my Lord did give three
dozen of bottles of wine.  He made friends between Mr. Pierce and me.
After dinner the King and Duke altered the name of some of the ships, viz.
the Nazeby into Charles; the Richard, James; the Speakers Mary; the Dunbar
(which was not in company with us), the Henry; Winsly, Happy Return;
Wakefield, Richmond; Lambert; the Henrietta; Cheriton, the Speedwell;
Bradford, the Success. That done, the Queen, Princess Royal, and Prince of
Orange, took leave of the King, and the Duke of York went on board the
London, and the Duke of Gloucester, the Swiftsure.  Which done, we weighed
anchor, and with a fresh gale and most happy weather we set sail for
England.  All the afternoon the King walked here and there, up and down
(quite contrary to what I thought him to have been), very active and
stirring.  Upon the quarterdeck he fell into discourse of his escape from
Worcester,

     [For the King's own account of his escape dictated to Pepys, see
     "Boscobel" (Bohn's "Standard Library").]

where it made me ready to weep to hear the stories that he told of his
difficulties that he had passed through, as his travelling four days and
three nights on foot, every step up to his knees in dirt, with nothing but
a green coat and a pair of country breeches on, and a pair of country
shoes that made him so sore all over his feet, that he could scarce stir.
Yet he was forced to run away from a miller and other company, that took
them for rogues.  His sitting at table at one place, where the master of
the house, that had not seen him in eight years, did know him, but kept it
private; when at the same table there was one that had been of his own
regiment at Worcester, could not know him, but made him drink the King's
health, and said that the King was at least four fingers higher than he.
At another place he was by some servants of the house made to drink, that
they might know him not to be a Roundhead, which they swore he was.  In
another place at his inn, the master of the house,

     [This was at Brighton.  The inn was the "George," and the innkeeper
     was named Smith.  Charles related this circumstance again to Pepys
     in October, 1680.  He then said, "And here also I ran into another
     very great danger, as being confident I was known by the master of
     the inn; for, as I was standing after supper by the fireside,
     leaning my hand upon a chair, and all the rest of the company being
     gone into another room, the master of the inn came in and fell a-
     talking with me, and just as he was looking about, and saw there was
     nobody in the room, he upon a sudden kissed my hand that was upon
     the back of the chair, and said to me, 'God bless you wheresoever
     you go!  I do not doubt before I die, but to be a lord, and my wife
     a lady.' So I laughed, and went away into the next room."]

as the King was standing with his hands upon the back of a chair by the
fire-side, kneeled down and kissed his hand, privately, saying, that he
would not ask him who he was, but bid God bless him whither he was going.
Then the difficulty of getting a boat to get into France, where he was
fain to plot with the master thereof to keep his design from the four men
and a boy (which was all his ship's company), and so got to Fecamp in
France.

     [On Saturday, October 11th, 1651, Colonel Gunter made an agreement
     at Chichester with Nicholas Tettersell, through Francis Mansell (a
     French merchant), to have Tettersell's vessel ready at an hour's
     warning.  Charles II., in his narrative dictated to Pepys in 1680,
     said, "We went to a place, four miles off Shoreham, called
     Brighthelmstone, where we were to meet with the master of the ship,
     as thinking it more convenient to meet there than just at Shoreham,
     where the ship was.  So when we came to the inn at Brighthelmstone
     we met with one, the merchant Francis Mansell] who had hired the
     vessel, in company with her master [Tettersell], the merchant only
     knowing me, as having hired her only to carry over a person of
     quality that was escaped from the battle of Worcester without naming
     anybody."

     The boat was supposed to be bound for Poole, but Charles says in his
     narrative: "As we were sailing the master came to me, and desired me
     that I would persuade his men to use their best endeavours with him
     to get him to set us on shore in France, the better to cover him
     from any suspicion thereof, upon which I went to the men, which were
     four and a boy."

     After the Restoration Mansell was granted a pension of L200 a year,
     and Tettersell one of L100 a year.  (See "Captain Nicholas
     Tettersell and the Escape of Charles II.," by F. E. Sawyer, F.S.A.,
     "Sussex Archaeological Collections," vol. xxxii.  pp. 81-104).)

At Rouen he looked so poorly, that the people went into the rooms before
he went away to see whether he had not stole something or other.  In the
evening I went up to my Lord to write letters for England, which we sent
away with word of our coming, by Mr. Edw. Pickering.  The King supped
alone in the coach; after that I got a dish, and we four supped in my
cabin, as at noon.  About bed-time my Lord Bartlett

     [A mistake for Lord Berkeley of Berkeley, who had been deputed, with
     Lord Middlesex and four other Peers, by the House of Lords to
     present an address of congratulation to the King.--B.]

(who I had offered my service to before) sent for me to get him a bed, who
with much ado I did get to bed to my Lord Middlesex in the great cabin
below, but I was cruelly troubled before I could dispose of him, and quit
myself of him.  So to my cabin again, where the company still was, and
were talking more of the King's difficulties; as how he was fain to eat a
piece of bread and cheese out of a poor boy's pocket; how, at a Catholique
house, he was fain to lie in the priest's hole a good while in the house
for his privacy.  After that our company broke up, and the Doctor and I to
bed.  We have all the Lords Commissioners on board us, and many others.
Under sail all night, and most glorious weather.

24th.  Up, and made myself as fine as I could, with the Tinning stockings
on and wide canons--["Cannions, boot hose tops; an old-fashioned ornament
for the legs."  That is to say, a particular addition to breeches.]--that
I bought the other day at Hague.  Extraordinary press of noble company,
and great mirth all the day.  There dined with me in my cabin (that is,
the carpenter's) Dr. Earle

     [John Earle, born about 1601; appointed in 1643 one of the
     Westminster Assembly of Divines, but his principles did not allow
     him to act.  He accompanied Charles II. when he was obliged to fly
     from England.  Dean of Westminster at the Restoration, Bishop of
     Worcester, November 30th, 1662, and translated to Salisbury,
     September 28th, 1663.  He was tender to the Nonconformists, and
     Baxter wrote of him, "O that they were all such!"  Author of
     "Microcosmography."  Died November 17th, 1665, and was buried in the
     chapel of Merton College, of which he had been a Fellow.  Charles
     II.  had the highest esteem for him.]

and Mr. Hollis,

     [Denzil Holles, second son of John, first Earl of Clare, born at
     Houghton, Notts, in 1597.  He was one of the five members charged
     with high treason by Charles I. in 1641.  He was a Presbyterian, and
     one of the Commissioners sent by Parliament to wait on Charles II.
     at the Hague.  Sir William Lower, in his "Relation," 1660, writes:
     "All agreed that never person spake with more affection nor
     expressed himself in better terms than Mr. Denzil Hollis, who was
     orator for the Deputies of the Lower House, to whom those of London
     were joined."  He was created Baron Holles on April 20th, 1661, on
     the occasion of the coronation of Charles II.]

the King's Chaplins, Dr. Scarborough,

     [Charles Scarburgh, M.D., an eminent physician who suffered for the
     royal cause during the Civil Wars.  He was born in London, and
     educated at St. Paul's School and Caius College, Cambridge.  He was
     ejected from his fellowship at Caius, and withdrew to Oxford.  He
     entered himself at Merton College, then presided over by Harvey,
     with whom he formed a lifelong friendship.  He was knighted by
     Charles II. in 1669, and attended the King in his last illness.  He
     was also physician to James II. and to William III., and died
     February 26th, 1693-4.]

Dr. Quarterman, and Dr. Clerke, Physicians, Mr. Darcy, and Mr. Fox

     [Stephen Fox, born 1627, and said to have been a choir-boy in
     Salisbury Cathedral.  He was the first person to announce the death
     of Cromwell to Charles II., and at the Restoration he was made Clerk
     of the Green Cloth, and afterwards Paymaster of the Forces.  He was
     knighted in 1665.  He married Elizabeth, daughter of William Whittle
     of Lancashire.  (See June 25th, 1660.) Fox died in 1716.  His sons
     Stephen and Henry were created respectively Earl of Ilchester and
     Lord Holland.]

(both very fine gentlemen), the King's servants, where we had brave
discourse.  Walking upon the decks, where persons of honour all the
afternoon, among others, Thomas Killigrew (a merry droll, but a gentleman
of great esteem with the King), who told us many merry stories: one, how
he wrote a letter three or four days ago to the Princess Royal, about a
Queen Dowager of Judaea and Palestine, that was at the Hague incognita,
that made love to the King, &c., which was Mr. Cary (a courtier's) wife
that had been a nun, who are all married to Jesus.  At supper the three
Drs. of Physic again at my cabin; where I put Dr. Scarborough in mind of
what I heard him say about the use of the eyes, which he owned, that
children do, in every day's experience, look several ways with both their
eyes, till custom teaches them otherwise.  And that we do now see but with
one eye, our eyes looking in parallel lines.  After this discourse I was
called to write a pass for my Lord Mandeville to take up horses to London,
which I wrote in the King's name,--[This right of purveyance was abolished
in Charles's reign.]--and carried it to him to sign, which was the first
and only one that ever he signed in the ship Charles. To bed, coming in
sight of land a little before night.

25th.  By the morning we were come close to the land, and every body made
ready to get on shore.  The King and the two Dukes did eat their breakfast
before they went, and there being set some ship's diet before them, only
to show them the manner of the ship's diet, they eat of nothing else but
pease and pork, and boiled beef.  I had Mr. Darcy in my cabin and Dr.
Clerke, who eat with me, told me how the King had given L50 to Mr. Sheply
for my Lord's servants, and L500 among the officers and common men of the
ship.  I spoke with the Duke of York about business, who called me Pepys
by name, and upon my desire did promise me his future favour.  Great
expectation of the King's making some Knights, but there was none.  About
noon (though the brigantine that Beale made was there ready to carry him)
yet he would go in my Lord's barge with the two Dukes.  Our Captain
steered, and my Lord went along bare with him.  I went, and Mr. Mansell,
and one of the King's footmen, with a dog that the King loved,

     [Charles II.'s love of dogs is well known, but it is not so well
     known that his dogs were continually being stolen from him.  In the
     "Mercurius Publicus," June 28-July 5, 1660, is the following
     advertisement, apparently drawn up by the King himself: "We must
     call upon you again for a Black Dog between a greyhound and a
     spaniel, no white about him, onely a streak on his brest, and his
     tayl a little bobbed.  It is His Majesties own Dog, and doubtless
     was stoln, for the dog was not born nor bred in England, and would
     never forsake His master.  Whoesoever findes him may acquaint any at
     Whitehal for the Dog was better known at Court, than those who stole
     him.  Will they never leave robbing his Majesty!  Must he not keep a
     Dog?  This dog's place (though better than some imagine) is the only
     place which nobody offers to beg."  (Quoted in "Notes and Queries,"
     7th S., vii. 26, where are printed two other advertisements of
     Charles's lost dogs.)]

(which [dirted] the boat, which made us laugh, and me think that a King
and all that belong to him are but just as others are), in a boat by
ourselves, and so got on shore when the King did, who was received by
General Monk with all imaginable love and respect at his entrance upon the
land of Dover.  Infinite the crowd of people and the horsemen, citizens,
and noblemen of all sorts.  The Mayor of the town came and gave him his
white staff, the badge of his place, which the King did give him again.
The Mayor also presented him from the town a very rich Bible, which he
took and said it was the thing that he loved above all things in the
world.  A canopy was provided for him to stand under, which he did, and
talked awhile with General Monk and others, and so into a stately coach
there set for him, and so away through the town towards Canterbury,
without making any stay at Dover.  The shouting and joy expressed by all
is past imagination.  Seeing that my Lord did not stir out of his barge, I
got into a boat, and so into his barge, whither Mr. John Crew stepped, and
spoke a word or two to my Lord, and so returned, we back to the ship, and
going did see a man almost drowned that fell out of his boat into the sea,
but with much ado was got out.  My Lord almost transported with joy that
he had done all this without any the least blur or obstruction in the
world, that could give an offence to any, and with the great honour he
thought it would be to him.  Being overtook by the brigantine, my Lord and
we went out of our barge into it, and so went on board with Sir W. Batten,

     [Clarendon describes William Batten as an obscure fellow, and,
     although unknown to the service, a good seaman, who was in 1642 made
     Surveyor to the Navy; in which employ he evinced great animosity
     against the King.  The following year, while Vice-Admiral to the
     Earl of Warwick, he chased a Dutch man-of-war into Burlington Bay,
     knowing that Queen Henrietta Maria was on board; and then, learning
     that she had landed and was lodged on the quay, he fired above a
     hundred shot upon the house, some of which passing through her
     majesty's chamber, she was obliged, though indisposed, to retire for
     safety into the open fields.  This act, brutal as it was, found
     favour with the Parliament.  But Batten became afterwards
     discontented; and, when a portion of the fleet revolted, he carried
     the "Constant Warwick," one of the best ships in the Parliament
     navy, over into Holland, with several seamen of note.  For this act
     of treachery he was knighted and made a Rear-Admiral by Prince
     Charles.  We hear no more of Batten till the Restoration, when he
     became a Commissioner of the Navy, and was soon after M.P. for
     Rochester.  See an account of his second wife, in note to November
     24th, 1660, and of his illness and death, October 5th, 1667.  He had
     a son, Benjamin, and a daughter, Martha, by his first wife.--B.]

and the Vice and Rear-Admirals.  At night my Lord supped and Mr. Thomas
Crew with Captain Stoakes, I supped with the Captain, who told me what the
King had given us.  My Lord returned late, and at his coming did give me
order to cause the marke to be gilded, and a Crown and C.  R.  to be made
at the head of the coach table, where the King to-day with his own hand
did mark his height, which accordingly I caused the painter to do, and is
now done as is to be seen.

26th.  Thanks to God I got to bed in my own poor cabin, and slept well
till 9 o'clock this morning.  Mr. North and Dr. Clerke and all the great
company being gone, I found myself very uncouth all this day for want
thereof.  My Lord dined with the Vice-Admiral to-day (who is as officious,
poor man! as any spaniel can be; but I believe all to no purpose, for I
believe he will not hold his place), so I dined commander at the coach
table to-day, and all the officers of the ship with me, and Mr. White of
Dover.  After a game or two at nine-pins, to work all the afternoon,
making above twenty orders.  In the evening my Lord having been a-shore,
the first time that he hath been a-shore since he came out of the Hope
(having resolved not to go till he had brought his Majesty into England),
returned on board with a great deal of pleasure.  I supped with the
Captain in his cabin with young Captain Cuttance, and afterwards a
messenger from the King came with a letter, and to go into France, and by
that means we supped again with him at 12 o'clock at night.  This night
the Captain told me that my Lord had appointed me L30 out of the 1000
ducats which the King had given to the ship, at which my heart was very
much joyed.  To bed.

27th (Lord's day).  Called up by John Goods to see the Garter and Heralds
coat, which lay in the coach, brought by Sir Edward Walker,

     [Edward Walker was knighted February 2nd, 1644-5, and on the 24th of
     the same month was sworn in as Garter King at Arms.  He adhered to
     the cause of the king, and published "Iter Carolinum", being a
     succinct account of the necessitated marches, retreats, and
     sufferings of his Majesty King Charles I., from Jan. 10, 1641, to
     the time of his death in 1648, collected by a daily attendant upon
     his sacred Majesty during all that time: He joined Charles II. in
     exile, and received the reward of his loyalty at the Restoration.
     He died at Whitehall, February 19th, 1676-7, and was buried at
     Stratford-on-Avon, his daughter having married Sir John Clepton of
     that place.]

King at Arms, this morning, for my Lord.  My Lord hath summoned all the
Commanders on board him, to see the ceremony, which was thus: Sir Edward
putting on his coat, and having laid the George and Garter, and the King's
letter to my Lord, upon a crimson cushion (in the coach, all the
Commanders standing by), makes three congees to him, holding the cushion
in his arms.  Then laying it down with the things upon it upon a chair, he
takes the letter, and delivers it to my Lord, which my Lord breaks open
and gives him to read.  It was directed to our trusty and well beloved Sir
Edward Montagu, Knight, one of our Generals at sea, and our Companion
elect of our Noble Order of the Garter.  The contents of the letter is to
show that the Kings of England have for many years made use of this
honour, as a special mark of favour, to persons of good extraction and
virtue (and that many Emperors, Kings and Princes of other countries have
borne this honour), and that whereas my Lord is of a noble family, and
hath now done the King such service by sea, at this time, as he hath done;
he do send him this George and Garter to wear as Knight of the Order, with
a dispensation for the other ceremonies of the habit of the Order, and
other things, till hereafter, when it can be done.  So the herald putting
the ribbon about his neck, and the Garter about his left leg, he salutes
him with joy as Knight of the Garter, and that was all. After that was
done, and the Captain and I had breakfasted with Sir Edward while my Lord
was writing of a letter, he took his leave of my Lord, and so to shore
again to the King at Canterbury, where he yesterday gave the like honour
to General Monk,

     ["His Majesty put the George on his Excellency, and the two Dukes
     put on the Garter.  The Princes thus honoured the Lord-General for
     the restoration of that lawful family."--Rugge's Diurnal.]

who are the only two for many years that have had the Garter given them,
before they had other honours of Earldom, or the like, excepting only the
Duke of Buckingham, who was only Sir George Villiers when he was made
Knight of the Garter.  A while after Mr. Thos. Crew and Mr. J. Pickering
(who had staid long enough to make all the world see him to be a fool),
took ship for London.  So there now remain no strangers with my Lord but
Mr. Hetley,  who had been with us a day before the King went from us. My
Lord and the ship's company down to sermon.  I staid above to write and
look over my new song book, which came last night to me from London in
lieu of that that my Lord had of me.  The officers being all on board,
there was not room for me at table, so I dined in my cabin, where, among
other things, Mr. Drum brought me a lobster and a bottle of oil, instead
of a bottle of vinegar, whereby I spoiled my dinner.  Many orders in the
ordering of ships this afternoon.  Late to a sermon.  After that up to the
Lieutenant's cabin, where Mr. Sheply, I, and the Minister supped, and
after that I went down to W. Howe's cabin, and there, with a great deal of
pleasure, singing till it was late.  After that to bed.

28th.  Called up at two in the morning for letters for my Lord from the
Duke of York, but I went to bed again till 5.  Trimmed early this morning.
This morning the Captain did call over all the men in the ship (not the
boys), and give every one of them a ducat of the King's money that he gave
the ship, and the officers according to their quality.  I received in the
Captain's cabin, for my share, sixty ducats.  The rest of the morning busy
writing letters.  So was my Lord that he would not come to dinner.  After
dinner to write again in order to sending to London, but my Lord did not
finish his, so we did not send to London to-day.  A great part of the
afternoon at nine-pins with my Lord and Mr. Hetley.  I lost about 4s.
Supped with my Lord, and after that to bed.  At night I had a strange
dream of--myself, which I really did, and having kicked my clothes off, I
got cold; and found myself all much wet in the morning, and had a great
deal of pain .  .  .  which made me very melancholy.

29th.  The King's birthday.  Busy all the morning writing letters to
London, among the rest one to Mr. Chetwind to give me an account of the
fees due to the Herald for the Order of the Garter, which my Lord desires
to know.  After dinner got all ready and sent away Mr. Cook to London with
a letter and token to my wife.  After that abroad to shore with my Lord
(which he offered me of himself, saying that I had a great deal of work to
do this month, which was very true).  On shore we took horses, my Lord and
Mr. Edward, Mr. Hetly and I, and three or four servants, and had a great
deal of pleasure in riding.  Among other things my Lord showed me a house
that cost a great deal of money, and is built in so barren and
inconvenient a place that my Lord calls it the fool's house.  At last we
came upon a very high cliff by the sea-side, and rode under it, we having
laid great wagers, I and Dr. Mathews, that it was not so high as Paul's;
my Lord and Mr. Hetly, that it was.  But we riding under it, my Lord made
a pretty good measure of it with two sticks, and found it to be not above
thirty-five yards high, and Paul's is reckoned to be about ninety.  From
thence toward the barge again, and in our way found the people at Deal
going to make a bonfire for joy of the day, it being the King's birthday,
and had some guns which they did fire at my Lord's coming by.  For which I
did give twenty shillings among them to drink.  While we were on the top
of the cliffe, we saw and heard our guns in the fleet go off for the same
joy.  And it being a pretty fair day we could see above twenty miles into
France.  Being returned on board, my Lord called for Mr. Sheply's book of
Paul's, by which we were confirmed in our wager.  After that to supper and
then to musique, and so to bed.  The pain that I have got last night by
cold is not yet gone, but troubles me at the time of .  .  .  . This day,
it is thought, the King do enter the city of London.

     ["Divers maidens, in behalf of themselves and others, presented a
     petition to the Lord Mayor of London, wherein they pray his Lordship
     to grant them leave and liberty to meet His Majesty on the day of
     his passing through the city; and if their petition be granted, that
     they will all be clad in white waistcoats and crimson petticoats,
     and other ornaments of triumph and rejoicing."-Rugge's Diurnal, May,
     1660.--B.]

30th.  About eight o'clock in the morning the lieutenant came to me to
know whether I would eat a dish of mackerel, newly catched, for my
breakfast, which the Captain and we did in the coach.  All yesterday and
to-day I had a great deal of pain .  .  .  and in my back, which made me
afeard.  But it proved nothing but cold, which I took yesterday night. All
this morning making up my accounts, in which I counted that I had made
myself now worth about L80, at which my heart was glad, and blessed God.
Many Dover men come and dine with my Lord.  My Lord at ninepins in the
afternoon.  In the afternoon Mr. Sheply told me how my Lord had put me
down for 70 guilders among the money which was given to my Lord's
servants, which my heart did much rejoice at.  My Lord supped alone in his
chamber.  Sir R. Stayner supped with us, and among other things told us
how some of his men did grumble that no more of the Duke's money come to
their share and so would not receive any; whereupon he called up those
that had taken it, and gives them three shares apiece more, which was very
good, and made good sport among the seamen.  To bed.

31st.  This day my Lord took physic, and came not out of his chamber.

All the morning making orders.  After dinner a great while below in the
great cabin trying with W. Howe some of Mr. Laws' songs,' particularly
that of "What is a kiss," with which we had a great deal of pleasure.
After that to making of orders again.  Captain Sparling of the Assistance
brought me a pair of silk stockings of a light blue, which I was much
pleased with.  The Captain and I to supper, and after that a most pleasant
walk till to at night with him upon the deck, it being a fine evening.  My
pain was gone again that I had yesterday, blessed be God. This day the
month ends, I in very good health, and all the world in a merry mood
because of the King's coming.  This day I began to teach Mr. Edward; who I
find to have a very good foundation laid for his Latin by Mr. Fuller.  I
expect every minute to hear how my poor wife do.  I find myself in all
things well as to body and mind, but troubled for the absence of my wife.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     An exceeding pretty lass, and right for the sport
     And in all this not so much as one
     Bought for the love of the binding three books
     Drinking of the King's health upon their knees in the streets
     Fashionable and black spots
     He and I lay in one press bed, there being two more
     He is, I perceive, wholly sceptical, as well as I
     He that must do the business, or at least that can hinder it
     He was fain to lie in the priest's hole a good while
     If it should come in print my name maybe at it
     In comes Mr. North very sea-sick from shore
     John Pickering on board, like an ass, with his feathers
     Made to drink, that they might know him not to be a Roundhead
     My Lord, who took physic to-day and was in his chamber
     Presbyterians against the House of Lords
     Protestants as to the Church of Rome are wholly fanatiques





End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, May 1660, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, MAY 1660 ***

***** This file should be named 4121.txt or 4121.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/2/4121/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
