The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1661, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1661
       Transcribed From The Shorthand Manuscript In The Pepysian
       Library Magdalene College Cambridge By The Rev. Mynors
       Bright

Author: Samuel Pepys

Commentator: Lord Braybrooke

Editor: Henry B. Wheatley

Release Date: October 7, 2006 [EBook #4131]
Posting Date: March 22, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1661 ***




Produced by David Widger





THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

(Unabridged)

WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

1961

By Samuel Pepys

Edited With Additions By

Henry B. Wheatley F.S.A.




    LONDON
    GEORGE BELL & SONS YORK ST.  COVENT GARDEN
    CAMBRIDGE DEIGHTON BELL & CO.


    1893



JANUARY 1660-1661

1660-61. At the end of the last and the beginning of this year, I do
live in one of the houses belonging to the Navy Office, as one of the
principal officers, and have done now about half a year. After much
trouble with workmen I am now almost settled; my family being, myself,
my wife, Jane, Will. Hewer, and Wayneman,--[Will Wayneman appears by
this to have been forgiven for his theft (see ante). He was dismissed
on July 8th, 1663.]--my girle's brother. Myself in constant good health,
and in a most handsome and thriving condition. Blessed be Almighty God
for it. I am now taking of my sister to come and live with me. As to
things of State.--The King settled, and loved of all. The Duke of York
matched to my Lord Chancellor's daughter, which do not please many.
The Queen upon her return to France with the Princess Henrietta. The
Princess of Orange lately dead, and we into new mourning for her. We
have been lately frighted with a great plot, and many taken up on it,
and the fright not quite over. The Parliament, which had done all
this great good to the King, beginning to grow factious, the King
did dissolve it December 29th last, and another likely to be chosen
speedily. I take myself now to be worth L300 clear in money, and all my
goods and all manner of debts paid, which are none at all.

January 1st. Called up this morning by Mr. Moore, who brought me my last
things for me to sign for the last month, and to my great comfort tells
me that my fees will come to L80 clear to myself, and about L25 for him,
which he hath got out of the pardons, though there be no fee due to me
at all out of them. Then comes in my brother Thomas, and after him my
father, Dr. Thomas Pepys, my uncle Fenner and his two sons (Anthony's'
only child dying this morning, yet he was so civil to come, and was
pretty merry) to breakfast; and I had for them a barrel of oysters, a
dish of neat's tongues, and a dish of anchovies, wine of all sorts, and
Northdown ale. We were very merry till about eleven o'clock, and then
they went away. At noon I carried my wife by coach to my cozen, Thomas
Pepys, where we, with my father, Dr. Thomas, cozen Stradwick, Scott, and
their wives, dined. Here I saw first his second wife, which is a very
respectfull woman, but his dinner a sorry, poor dinner for a man of his
estate, there being nothing but ordinary meat in it. To-day the King
dined at a lord's, two doors from us. After dinner I took my wife
to Whitehall, I sent her to Mrs. Pierces (where we should have dined
today), and I to the Privy Seal, where Mr. Moore took out all his money,
and he and I went to Mr. Pierces; in our way seeing the Duke of York
bring his Lady this day to wait upon the Queen, the first time that ever
she did since that great business; and the Queen is said to receive her
now with much respect and love; and there he cast up the fees, and I
told the money, by the same token one L100 bag, after I had told it,
fell all about the room, and I fear I have lost some of it. That done I
left my friends and went to my Lord's, but he being not come in I lodged
the money with Mr. Shepley, and bade good night to Mr. Moore, and so
returned to Mr. Pierces, and there supped with them, and Mr. Pierce, the
purser, and his wife and mine, where we had a calf's head carboned,

     [Meat cut crosswise and broiled was said to be carboned.  Falstaff
     says in "King Henry IV.," Part L, act v., sc. 3, "Well, if Percy be
     alive, I'll pierce him.  If he do come in my way, so; if he do not,
     if I come in his willingly, let him make a carbonado of me."]

but it was raw, we could not eat it, and a good hen. But she is such a
slut that I do not love her victualls. After supper I sent them home
by coach, and I went to my Lord's and there played till 12 at night
at cards at Best with J. Goods and N. Osgood, and then to bed with Mr.
Shepley.

2d. Up early, and being called up to my Lord he did give me many
commands in his business. As about taking care to write to my uncle that
Mr. Barnewell's papers should be locked up, in case he should die, he
being now suspected to be very ill. Also about consulting with Mr. W.
Montagu for the settling of the L4000 a-year that the King had promised
my Lord. As also about getting of Mr. George Montagu to be chosen at
Huntingdon this next Parliament, &c. That done he to White Hall stairs
with much company, and I with him; where we took water for Lambeth, and
there coach for Portsmouth. The Queen's things were all in White Hall
Court ready to be sent away, and her Majesty ready to be gone an hour
after to Hampton Court to-night, and so to be at Ports mouth on Saturday
next. I by water to my office, and there all the morning, and so home
to dinner, where I found Pall (my sister) was come; but I do not let her
sit down at table with me, which I do at first that she may not expect
it hereafter from me. After dinner I to Westminster by water, and there
found my brother Spicer at the Leg with all the rest of the Exchequer
men (most of whom I now do not know) at dinner. Here I staid and
drank with them, and then to Mr. George Montagu about the business of
election, and he did give me a piece in gold; so to my Lord's and got
the chest of plate brought to the Exchequer, and my brother Spicer put
it into his treasury. So to Will's with them to a pot of ale, and so
parted. I took a turn in the Hall, and bought the King and Chancellor's
speeches at the dissolving the Parliament last Saturday. So to my
Lord's, and took my money I brought 'thither last night and the silver
candlesticks, and by coach left the latter at Alderman Backwell's, I
having no use for them, and the former home. There stood a man at our
door, when I carried it in, and saw me, which made me a little afeard.
Up to my chamber and wrote letters to Huntingdon and did other business.
This day I lent Sir W. Batten and Captn. Rider my chine of beef for to
serve at dinner tomorrow at Trinity House, the Duke of Albemarle being
to be there and all the rest of the Brethren, it being a great day for
the reading over of their new Charter, which the King hath newly given
them.

3d. Early in the morning to the Exchequer, where I told over what money
I had of my Lord's and my own there, which I found to be L970. Thence to
Will's, where Spicer and I eat our dinner of a roasted leg of pork
which Will did give us, and after that to the Theatre, where was acted
"Beggars' Bush," it being very well done; and here the first time that
ever I saw women come upon the stage.

     [Downes does not give the cast of this play.  After the Restoration
     the acting of female characters by women became common.  The first
     English professional actress was Mrs. Coleman, who acted Ianthe in
     Davenant's "Siege of Rhodes," at Rutland House in 1656.]

From thence to my father's, where I found my mother gone by Bird, the
carrier, to Brampton, upon my uncle's great desire, my aunt being now in
despair of life. So home.

4th. Office all the morning, my wife and Pall being gone to my father's
to dress dinner for Mr. Honiwood, my mother being gone out of town.
Dined at home, and Mr. Moore with me, with whom I had been early this
morning at White Hall, at the Jewell Office,

     [Several of the Jewel Office rolls are in the British Museum.  They
     recite all the sums of money given to the King, and the particulars
     of all the plate distributed in his name, as well as gloves and
     sweetmeats.  The Museum possesses these rolls for the 4th, 9th,
     18th, 30th, and 31st Eliz.; for the 13th Charles I.; and the 23rd,
     24th, 26th, and 27th of Charles II.--B.]

to choose a piece of gilt plate for my Lord, in return of his offering
to the King (which it seems is usual at this time of year, and an Earl
gives twenty pieces in gold in a purse to the King). I chose a gilt
tankard, weighing 31 ounces and a half, and he is allowed 30; so I paid
12s. for the ounce and half over what he is to have; but strange it was
for me to see what a company of small fees I was called upon by a great
many to pay there, which, I perceive, is the manner that courtiers do
get their estates. After dinner Mr. Moore and I to the Theatre, where
was "The Scornful Lady," acted very well, it being the first play that
ever he saw. Thence with him to drink a cup of ale at Hercules Pillars,
and so parted. I called to see my father, who told me by the way
how Will and Mary Joyce do live a strange life together, nothing but
fighting, &c., so that sometimes her father has a mind to have them
divorced. Thence home.

5th. Home all the morning. Several people came to me about business,
among others the great Tom Fuller, who came to desire a kindness for
a friend of his, who hath a mind to go to Jamaica with these two ships
that are going, which I promised to do. So to Whitehall to my Lady, whom
I found at dinner and dined with her, and staid with her talking all
the afternoon, and thence walked to Westminster Hall. So to Will's, and
drank with Spicer, and thence by coach home, staying a little in Paul's
Churchyard, to bespeak Ogilby's AEsop's Fables and Tully's Officys to be
bound for me. So home and to bed.

6th (Lord's day). My wife and I to church this morning, and so home
to dinner to a boiled leg of mutton all alone. To church again, where,
before sermon, a long Psalm was set that lasted an hour, while the
sexton gathered his year's contribucion through the whole church. After
sermon home, and there I went to my chamber and wrote a letter to
send to Mr. Coventry, with a piece of plate along with it, which I do
preserve among my other letters. So to supper, and thence after prayers
to bed.

7th. This morning, news was brought to me to my bedside, that there had
been a great stir in the City this night by the Fanatiques, who had been
up and killed six or seven men, but all are fled.

     ["A great rising in the city of the Fifth-monarchy men, which did
     very much disturb the peace and liberty of the people, so that all
     the train-bands arose in arms, both in London and Westminster, as
     likewise all the king's guards; and most of the noblemen mounted,
     and put all their servants on coach horses, for the defence of his
     Majesty, and the peace of his kingdom."--Rugge's Diurnal.  The
     notorious Thomas Venner, the Fifth-monarchy man, a cooper and
     preacher to a conventicle in Swan Alley, Coleman Street, with a
     small following (about fifty in number) took arms on the 6th January
     for the avowed purpose of establishing the Millennium.  He was a
     violent enthusiast, and persuaded his followers that they were
     invulnerable.  After exciting much alarm in the City, and
     skirmishing with the Trained Bands, they marched to Caen Wood.  They
     were driven out by a party of guards, but again entered the City,
     where they were overpowered by the Trained Bands.  The men were
     brought to trial and condemned; four, however, were acquitted and
     two reprieved.  The execution of some of these men is mentioned by
     Pepys under date January 19th and 21st.  "A Relation of the
     Arraignment and Trial of those who made the late Rebellious
     Insurrections in London, 1661," is reprinted in "Somers Tracts,"
     vol. vii.  (1812), p. 469.]

My Lord Mayor and the whole City had been in arms, above 40,000. To the
office, and after that to dinner, where my brother Tom came and dined
with me, and after dinner (leaving 12d. with the servants to buy a cake
with at night, this day being kept as Twelfth day) Tom and I and my wife
to the Theatre, and there saw "The Silent Woman." The first time that
ever I did see it, and it is an excellent play. Among other things here,
Kinaston, the boy; had the good turn to appear in three shapes: first,
as a poor woman in ordinary clothes, to please Morose; then in fine
clothes, as a gallant, and in them was clearly the prettiest woman in
the whole house, and lastly, as a man; and then likewise did appear
the handsomest man in the house. From thence by link to my cozen
Stradwick's, where my father and we and Dr. Pepys, Scott, and his wife,
and one Mr. Ward and his; and after a good supper, we had an excellent
cake, where the mark for the Queen was cut, and so there was two queens,
my wife and Mrs. Ward; and the King being lost, they chose the Doctor
to be King, so we made him send for some wine, and then home, and in
our way home we were in many places strictly examined, more than in
the worst of times, there being great fears of these Fanatiques rising
again: for the present I do not hear that any of them are taken. Home,
it being a clear moonshine and after 12 o'clock at night. Being come
home we found that my people had been very merry, and my wife tells me
afterwards that she had heard that they had got young Davis and some
other neighbours with them to be merry, but no harm.

8th. My wife and I lay very long in bed to-day talking and pleasing one
another in discourse. Being up, Mr. Warren came, and he and I agreed
for the deals that my Lord is to, have. Then Will and I to Westminster,
where I dined with my Lady. After dinner I took my Lord Hinchinbroke and
Mr. Sidney to the Theatre, and shewed them "The Widdow," an indifferent
good play, but wronged by the women being to seek in their parts. That
being done, my Lord's coach waited for us, and so back to my Lady's,
where she made me drink of some Florence wine, and did give me two
bottles for my wife. From thence walked to my cozen Stradwick's,
and there chose a small banquet and some other things against our
entertainment on Thursday next. Thence to Tom Pepys and bought a dozen
of trenchers, and so home. Some talk to-day of a head of Fanatiques
that do appear about Barnett, but I do not believe it. However, my Lord
Mayor, Sir Richd. Browne, hath carried himself very honourably, and hath
caused one of their meeting-houses in London to be pulled down.

9th. Waked in the morning about six o'clock, by people running up and
down in Mr. Davis's house, talking that the Fanatiques were up in arms
in the City. And so I rose and went forth; where in the street I found
every body in arms at the doors. So I returned (though with no good
courage at all, but that I might not seem to be afeared), and got my
sword and pistol, which, however, I had no powder to charge; and went to
the door, where I found Sir R. Ford, and with him I walked up and down
as far as the Exchange, and there I left him. In our way, the streets
full of Train-band, and great stories, what mischief these rogues have
done; and I think near a dozen have been killed this morning on both
sides. Seeing the city in this condition, the shops shut, and all things
in trouble, I went home and sat, it being office day, till noon. So
home, and dined at home, my father with me, and after dinner he would
needs have me go to my uncle Wight's (where I have been so long absent
that I am ashamed to go). I found him at home and his wife, and I can
see they have taken my absence ill, but all things are past and we good
friends, and here I sat with my aunt till it was late, my uncle going
forth about business. My aunt being very fearful to be alone. So home to
my lute till late, and then to bed, there being strict guards all night
in the City, though most of the enemies, they say, are killed or taken.
This morning my wife and Pall went forth early, and I staid within.

10th. There comes Mr. Hawley to me and brings me my money for the
quarter of a year's salary of my place under Downing that I was at sea.
So I did give him half, whereof he did in his nobleness give the odd 5s,
to my Jane. So we both went forth (calling first to see how Sir W. Pen
do, whom I found very ill), and at the Hoop by the bridge we drank two
pints of wormwood and sack. Talking of his wooing afresh of Mrs. Lane,
and of his going to serve the Bishop of London. Thence by water to
Whitehall, and found my wife at Mrs. Hunt's. Leaving her to dine there,
I went and dined with my Lady, and staid to talk a while with her. After
dinner Will. comes to tell me that he had presented my piece of plate to
Mr. Coventry, who takes it very kindly, and sends me a very kind letter,
and the plate back again; of which my heart is very glad. So to Mrs.
Hunt, where I found a Frenchman, a lodger of hers, at dinner, and just
as I came in was kissing my wife, which I did not like, though there
could not be any hurt in it. Thence by coach to my Uncle Wight's with my
wife, but they being out of doors we went home, where, after I had put
some papers in order and entered some letters in my book which I have
a mind to keep, I went with my wife to see Sir W. Pen, who we found ill
still, but he do make very much of it. Here we sat a great while, at
last comes in Mr. Davis and his lady (who takes it very ill that my wife
never did go to see her), and so we fell to talk. Among other things Mr.
Davis told us the particular examinations of these Fanatiques that are
taken: and in short it is this, of all these Fanatiques that have done
all this, viz., routed all the Trainbands that they met with, put the
King's life-guards to the run, killed about twenty men, broke through
the City gates twice; and all this in the day-time, when all the City
was in arms; are not in all about 31. Whereas we did believe them
(because they were seen up and down in every place almost in the City,
and had been about Highgate two or three days, and in several other
places) to be at least 500. A thing that never was heard of, that so
few men should dare and do so much mischief. Their word was, "The King
Jesus, and the heads upon the gates." Few of them would receive any
quarter, but such as were taken by force and kept alive; expecting Jesus
to come here and reign in the world presently, and will not believe yet
but their work will be carried on though they do die. The King this day
came to town.

11th. Office day. This day comes news, by letters from Portsmouth,
that the Princess Henrietta is fallen sick of the meazles on board the
London, after the Queen and she was under sail. And so was forced to
come back again into Portsmouth harbour; and in their way, by negligence
of the pilot, run upon the Horse sand. The Queen and she continue
aboard, and do not intend to come on shore till she sees what will
become of the young Princess. This news do make people think something
indeed, that three of the Royal Family should fall sick of the same
disease, one after another. This morning likewise, we had order to see
guards set in all the King's yards; and so we do appoint who and who
should go to them. Sir Wm. Batten to Chatham, Colonel Slingsby and I to
Deptford and Woolwich. Portsmouth being a garrison, needs none. Dined at
home, discontented that my wife do not go neater now she has two maids.
After dinner comes in Kate Sterpin (whom we had not seen a great while)
and her husband to see us, with whom I staid a while, and then to
the office, and left them with my wife. At night walked to Paul's
Churchyard, and bespoke some books against next week, and from thence to
the Coffeehouse, where I met Captain Morrice, the upholster, who
would fain have lent me a horse to-night to have rid with him upon the
Cityguards, with the Lord Mayor, there being some new expectations of
these rogues; but I refused by reason of my going out of town tomorrow.
So home to bed.

12th. With Colonel Slingsby and a friend of his, Major Waters (a deaf
and most amorous melancholy gentleman, who is under a despayr in love,
as the Colonel told me, which makes him bad company, though a most
good-natured man), by water to Redriffe, and so on foot to Deptford (our
servants by water), where we fell to choosing four captains to command
the guards, and choosing the places where to keep them, and other things
in order thereunto. We dined at the Globe, having our messenger with us
to take care for us. Never till now did I see the great authority of my
place, all the captains of the fleet coming cap in hand to us. Having
staid very late there talking with the Colonel, I went home with Mr.
Davis, storekeeper (whose wife is ill and so I could not see her), and
was there most prince-like lodged, with so much respect and honour that
I was at a loss how to behave myself.

13th. In the morning we all went to church, and sat in the pew belonging
to us, where a cold sermon of a young man that never had preached
before. Here Commissioner came with his wife and daughters, the eldest
being his wife's daughter is a very comely black woman.--[The old
expression for a brunette.]--So to the Globe to dinner, and then with
Commissioner Pett to his lodgings there (which he hath for the present
while he is building the King's yacht, which will be a pretty thing, and
much beyond the Dutchman's), and from thence with him and his wife and
daughter-in-law by coach to Greenwich Church, where a good sermon, a
fine church, and a great company of handsome women. After sermon to
Deptford again; where, at the Commissioner's and the Globe, we staid
long. And so I to Mr. Davis's to bed again. But no sooner in bed, but we
had an alarm, and so we rose: and the Comptroller comes into the Yard to
us; and seamen of all the ships present repair to us, and there we armed
with every one a handspike, with which they were as fierce as could be.
At last we hear that it was only five or six men that did ride through
the guard in the town, without stopping to the guard that was there;
and, some say, shot at them. But all being quiet there, we caused the
seamen to go on board again: And so we all to bed (after I had sat
awhile with Mr. Davis in his study, which is filled with good books and
some very good song books) I likewise to bed.

14th. The arms being come this morning from the Tower, we caused them
to be distributed. I spent much time walking with Lieutenant Lambert,
walking up and down the yards, who did give me much light into things
there, and so went along with me and dined with us. After dinner Mrs.
Pett, her husband being gone this morning with Sir W. Batten to Chatham,
lent us her coach, and carried us to Woolwich, where we did also
dispose of the arms there and settle the guards. So to Mr. Pett's, the
shipwright, and there supped, where he did treat us very handsomely (and
strange it is to see what neat houses all the officers of the King's
yards have), his wife a proper woman, and has been handsome, and yet has
a very pretty hand. Thence I with Mr. Ackworth to his house, where he
has a very pretty house, and a very proper lovely woman to his wife,
who both sat with me in my chamber, and they being gone, I went to bed,
which was also most neat and fine.

15th. Up and down the yard all the morning and seeing the seamen
exercise, which they do already very handsomely. Then to dinner at Mr.
Ackworth's, where there also dined with us one Captain Bethell, a friend
of the Comptroller's. A good dinner and very handsome. After that
and taking our leaves of the officers of the yard, we walked to the
waterside and in our way walked into the rope-yard, where I do look
into the tar-houses and other places, and took great notice of all the
several works belonging to the making of a cable. So after a cup of
burnt wine--[Burnt wine was somewhat similar to mulled wine, and
a favourite drink]--at the tavern there, we took barge and went to
Blackwall and viewed the dock and the new Wet dock, which is newly made
there, and a brave new merchantman which is to be launched shortly, and
they say to be called the Royal Oak. Hence we walked to Dick-Shore, and
thence to the Towre and so home. Where I found my wife and Pall abroad,
so I went to see Sir W. Pen, and there found Mr. Coventry come to see
him, and now had an opportunity to thank him, and he did express much
kindness to me. I sat a great while with Sir Wm. after he was gone, and
had much talk with him. I perceive none of our officers care much for
one another, but I do keep in with them all as much as I can. Sir W. Pen
is still very ill as when I went. Home, where my wife not yet come home,
so I went up to put my papers in order, and then was much troubled my
wife was not come, it being 10 o'clock just now striking as I write this
last line. This day I hear the Princess is recovered again. The King
hath been this afternoon at Deptford, to see the yacht that Commissioner
Pett is building, which will be very pretty; as also that that his
brother at Woolwich is in making. By and by comes in my boy and tells
me that his mistress do lie this night at Mrs. Hunt's, who is very ill,
with which being something satisfied, I went to bed.

16th. This morning I went early to the Comptroller's and so with him by
coach to Whitehall, to wait upon Mr. Coventry to give him an account of
what we have done, which having done, I went away to wait upon my Lady;
but coming to her lodgings I find that she is gone this morning to
Chatham by coach, thinking to meet me there, which did trouble me
exceedingly, and I did not know what to do, being loth to follow her,
and yet could not imagine what she would do when she found me not there.
In this trouble, I went to take a walk in Westminster Hall and by chance
met with Mr. Child, who went forth with my Lady to-day, but his horse
being bad, he come back again, which then did trouble me more, so that
I did resolve to go to her; and so by boat home and put on my boots, and
so over to Southwarke to the posthouse, and there took horse and guide
to Dartford and thence to Rochester (I having good horses and good
way, come thither about half-an-hour after daylight, which was before
6 o'clock and I set forth after two), where I found my Lady and her
daughter Jem., and Mrs. Browne' and five servants, all at a great loss,
not finding me here, but at my coming she was overjoyed. The sport was
how she had intended to have kept herself unknown, and how the Captain
(whom she had sent for) of the Charles had forsoothed

     [To forsooth is to address in a polite and ceremonious manner.
     "Your city-mannerly word forsooth, use it not too often in any
     case."--Ben Jonson's Poetaster, act iv., sc.  1.]

her, though he knew her well and she him. In fine we supped merry and
so to bed, there coming several of the Charles's men to see me before, I
got to bed. The page lay with me.

17th. Up, and breakfast with my Lady. Then come Captains Cuttance and
Blake to carry her in the barge on board; and so we went through Ham
Creeke to the Soverayne (a goodly sight all the way to see the brave
ships that lie here) first, which is a most noble ship. I never saw her
before. My Lady Sandwich, my Lady Jemimah, Mrs. Browne, Mrs. Grace,
and Mary and the page, my lady's servants and myself, all went into the
lanthorn together. From thence to the Charles, where my lady took great
pleasure to see all the rooms, and to hear me tell her how things are
when my Lord is there. After we had seen all, then the officers of
the ship had prepared a handsome breakfast for her, and while she was
pledging my Lord's health they give her five guns. That done, we went
off, and then they give us thirteen guns more. I confess it was a great
pleasure to myself to see the ship that I begun my good fortune in. From
thence on board the Newcastle, to show my Lady the difference between
a great and a small ship. Among these ships I did give away L7. So back
again and went on shore at Chatham, where I had ordered the coach to
wait for us. Here I heard that Sir William Batten and his lady (who I
knew were here, and did endeavour to avoyd) were now gone this morning
to London. So we took coach, and I went into the coach, and went through
the town, without making stop at our inn, but left J. Goods to pay the
reckoning. So I rode with my lady in the coach, and the page on the
horse that I should have rid on--he desiring it. It begun to be dark
before we could come to Dartford, and to rain hard, and the horses
to fayle, which was our great care to prevent, for fear of my Lord's
displeasure, so here we sat up for to-night, as also Captains Cuttance
and Blake, who came along with us. We sat and talked till supper, and at
supper my Lady and I entered into a great dispute concerning what were
best for a man to do with his estate--whether to make his elder son
heir, which my Lady is for, and I against, but rather to make all
equall. This discourse took us much time, till it was time to go to bed;
but we being merry, we bade my Lady goodnight, and intended to have gone
to the Post-house to drink, and hear a pretty girl play of the cittern
(and indeed we should have lain there, but by a mistake we did not), but
it was late, and we could not hear her, and the guard came to examine
what we were; so we returned to our Inn and to bed, the page and I in
one bed, and the two captains in another, all in one chamber, where we
had very good mirth with our most abominable lodging.

18th. The Captains went with me to the post-house about 9 o'clock, and
after a morning draft I took horse and guide for London; and through
some rain, and a great wind in my face, I got to London at eleven
o'clock. At home found all well, but the monkey loose, which did anger
me, and so I did strike her till she was almost dead, that they might
make her fast again, which did still trouble me more. In the afternoon
we met at the office and sat till night, and then I to see my father who
I found well, and took him to Standing's' to drink a cup of ale. He told
me my aunt at Brampton is yet alive and my mother well there. In comes
Will Joyce to us drunk, and in a talking vapouring humour of his state,
and I know not what, which did vex me cruelly. After him Mr. Hollier had
learned at my father's that I was here (where I had appointed to meet
him) and so he did give me some things to take for prevention. Will
Joyce not letting us talk as I would I left my father and him and took
Mr. Hollier to the Greyhound, where he did advise me above all things,
both as to the stone and the decay of my memory (of which I now complain
to him), to avoid drinking often, which I am resolved, if I can, to
leave off. Hence home, and took home with me from the bookseller's
Ogilby's AEsop, which he had bound for me, and indeed I am very much
pleased with the book. Home and to bed.

19th. To the Comptroller's, and with him by coach to White Hall; in our
way meeting Venner and Pritchard upon a sledge, who with two more Fifth
Monarchy men were hanged to-day, and the two first drawn and quartered.
Where we walked up and down, and at last found Sir G. Carteret, whom
I had not seen a great while, and did discourse with him about our
assisting the Commissioners in paying off the Fleet, which we think to
decline. Here the Treasurer did tell me that he did suspect Thos.
Hater to be an informer of them in this work, which we do take to be a
diminution of us, which do trouble me, and I do intend to find out
the truth. Hence to my Lady, who told me how Mr. Hetley is dead of the
small-pox going to Portsmouth with my Lord. My Lady went forth to dinner
to her father's, and so I went to the Leg in King Street and had a
rabbit for myself and my Will, and after dinner I sent him home and
myself went to the Theatre, where I saw "The Lost Lady," which do not
please me much. Here I was troubled to be seen by four of our office
clerks, which sat in the half-crown box and I in the 1s. 6d. From thence
by link, and bought two mouse traps of Thomas Pepys, the Turner, and so
went and drank a cup of ale with him, and so home and wrote by post to
Portsmouth to my Lord and so to bed.

20th (Lord's day). To Church in the morning. Dined at home. My wife
and I to Church in the afternoon, and that being done we went to see my
uncle and aunt Wight. There I left my wife and came back, and sat with
Sir W. Pen, who is not yet well again. Thence back again to my wife
and supped there, and were very merry and so home, and after prayers to
write down my journall for the last five days, and so to bed.

21st. This morning Sir W. Batten, the Comptroller and I to Westminster,
to the Commissioners for paying off the Army and Navy, where the Duke
of Albemarle was; and we sat with our hats on, and did discourse about
paying off the ships and do find that they do intend to undertake it
without our help; and we are glad of it, for it is a work that will much
displease the poor seamen, and so we are glad to have no hand in it.
From thence to the Exchequer, and took L200 and carried it home, and so
to the office till night, and then to see Sir W. Pen, whither came my
Lady Batten and her daughter, and then I sent for my wife, and so we sat
talking till it was late. So home to supper and then to bed, having
eat no dinner to-day. It is strange what weather we have had all this
winter; no cold at all; but the ways are dusty, and the flyes fly up and
down, and the rose-bushes are full of leaves, such a time of the year
as was never known in this world before here. This day many more of the
Fifth Monarchy men were hanged.

22nd. To the Comptroller's house, where I read over his proposals to the
Lord Admiral for the regulating of the officers of the Navy, in which he
hath taken much pains, only he do seem to have too good opinion of them
himself. From thence in his coach to Mercer's Chappell, and so up to the
great hall, where we met with the King's Councell for Trade, upon some
proposals of theirs for settling convoys for the whole English trade,
and that by having 33 ships (four fourth-rates, nineteen fifths, ten
sixths) settled by the King for that purpose, which indeed was argued
very finely by many persons of honour and merchants that were there. It
pleased me much now to come in this condition to this place, where I was
once a petitioner for my exhibition in Paul's School; and also where Sir
G. Downing (my late master) was chairman, and so but equally concerned
with me. From thence home, and after a little dinner my wife and I by
coach into London, and bought some glasses, and then to Whitehall to
see Mrs. Fox, but she not within, my wife to my mother Bowyer, and I met
with Dr. Thomas Fuller, and took him to the Dog, where he tells me of
his last and great book that is coming out: that is, his History of all
the Families in England;' and could tell me more of my own, than I
knew myself. And also to what perfection he hath now brought the art
of memory; that he did lately to four eminently great scholars dictate
together in Latin, upon different subjects of their proposing, faster
than they were able to write, till they were tired; and by the way in
discourse tells me that the best way of beginning a sentence, if a man
should be out and forget his last sentence (which he never was), that
then his last refuge is to begin with an Utcunque. From thence I to Mr.
Bowyer's, and there sat a while, and so to Mr. Fox's, and sat with them
a very little while, and then by coach home, and so to see Sir Win. Pen,
where we found Mrs. Martha Batten and two handsome ladies more, and so
we staid supper and were very merry, and so home to bed.

23rd. To the office all the morning. My wife and people at home busy to
get things ready for tomorrow's dinner. At noon, without dinner, went
into the City, and there meeting with Greatorex, we went and drank a pot
of ale. He told me that he was upon a design to go to Teneriffe to try
experiments there. With him to Gresham Colledge

     [Gresham College occupied the house of Sir Thomas Gresham, in
     Bishopsgate Street, from 1596, when Lady Gresham, Sir Thomas's
     widow, died.  The meeting which Pepys attended was an early one of
     the Royal Society, which was incorporated by royal charter in 1663.]

(where I never was before), and saw the manner of the house, and found
great company of persons of honour there; thence to my bookseller's,
and for books, and to Stevens, the silversmith, to make clean some plate
against to-morrow, and so home, by the way paying many little debts for
wine and pictures, &c., which is my great pleasure. Home and found all
things in a hurry of business, Slater, our messenger, being here as my
cook till very late. I in my chamber all the evening looking over my
Osborn's works and new Emanuel Thesaurus Patriarchae. So late to
bed, having ate nothing to-day but a piece of bread and cheese at the
ale-house with Greatorex, and some bread and butter at home.

24th. At home all day. There dined with me Sir William Batten and his
lady and daughter, Sir W. Pen, Mr. Fox (his lady being ill could not
come), and Captain Cuttance; the first dinner I have made since I
came hither. This cost me above L5, and merry we were--only my chimney
smokes. In the afternoon Mr. Hater bringing me my last quarter's salary,
which I received of him, and so I have now Mr. Barlow's money in my
hands. The company all go away, and by and by Sir Wms. both and my Lady
Batten and his daughter come again and supped with me and talked till
late, and so to bed, being glad that the trouble is over.

25th. At the office all the morning. Dined at home and Mr. Hater with
me, and so I did make even with him for the last quarter. After dinner
he and I to look upon the instructions of my Lord Northumberland's, but
we were interrupted by Mr. Salisbury's coming in, who came to see me and
to show me my Lord's picture in little, of his doing. And truly it is
strange to what a perfection he is come in a year's time. From thence to
Paul's Churchyard about books, and so back again home. This night
comes two cages, which I bought this evening for my canary birds, which
Captain Rooth this day sent me. So to bed.

26th. Within all the morning. About noon comes one that had formerly
known me and I him, but I know not his name, to borrow L5 of me, but I
had the wit to deny him. There dined with me this day both the Pierces'
and their wives, and Captain Cuttance, and Lieutenant Lambert, with whom
we made ourselves very merry by taking away his ribbans and garters,
having made him to confess that he is lately married. The company being
gone I went to my lute till night, and so to bed.

27th (Lord's day). Before I rose, letters come to me from Portsmouth,
telling me that the Princess is now well, and my Lord Sandwich set sail
with the Queen and her yesterday from thence for France. To church,
leaving my wife sick.... at home, a poor dull sermon of a stranger.
Home, and at dinner was very angry at my people's eating a fine pudding
(made me by Slater, the cook, last Thursday) without my wife's leave.
To church again, a good sermon of Mr. Mills, and after sermon Sir W.
Pen and I an hour in the garden talking, and he did answer me to many
things, I asked Mr. Coventry's opinion of me, and Sir W. Batten's of my
Lord Sandwich, which do both please me. Then to Sir W. Batten's, where
very merry, and here I met the Comptroller and his lady and daughter
(the first time I ever saw them) and Mrs. Turner, who and her husband
supped with us here (I having fetched my wife thither), and after supper
we fell to oysters, and then Mr. Turner went and fetched some strong
waters, and so being very merry we parted, and home to bed. This day the
parson read a proclamation at church, for the keeping of Wednesday next,
the 30th of January, a fast for the murther of the late King.

28th. At the office all the morning; dined at home, and after dinner to
Fleet Street, with my sword to Mr. Brigden (lately made Captain of the
Auxiliaries) to be refreshed, and with him to an ale-house, where I met
Mr. Davenport; and after some talk of Cromwell, Ireton and Bradshaw's
bodies being taken out of their graves to-day,

     ["The bodies of Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw, and
     Thomas Pride, were dug up out of their graves to be hanged at
     Tyburn, and buried under the gallows.  Cromwell's vault having been
     opened, the people crowded very much to see him."--Rugge's Diurnal.]

I went to Mr. Crew's and thence to the Theatre, where I saw again
"The Lost Lady," which do now please me better than before; and here
I sitting behind in a dark place, a lady spit backward upon me by a
mistake, not seeing me, but after seeing her to be a very pretty lady,
I was not troubled at it at all. Thence to Mr. Crew's, and there met Mr.
Moore, who came lately to me, and went with me to my father's, and with
him to Standing's, whither came to us Dr. Fairbrother, who I took and my
father to the Bear and gave a pint of sack and a pint of claret.

He do still continue his expressions of respect and love to me, and
tells me my brother John will make a good scholar. Thence to see the
Doctor at his lodging at Mr. Holden's, where I bought a hat, cost
me 35s. So home by moonshine, and by the way was overtaken by the
Comptroller's coach, and so home to his house with him. So home and to
bed. This noon I had my press set up in my chamber for papers to be put
in.

29th. Mr. Moore making up accounts with me all this morning till Lieut.
Lambert came, and so with them over the water to Southwark, and so over
the fields to Lambeth, and there drank, it being a most glorious and
warm day, even to amazement, for this time of the year. Thence to my
Lord's, where we found my Lady gone with some company to see Hampton
Court, so we three went to Blackfryers (the first time I ever was
there since plays begun), and there after great patience and little
expectation, from so poor beginning, I saw three acts of "The Mayd in ye
Mill" acted to my great content. But it being late, I left the play and
them, and by water through bridge home, and so to Mr. Turner's house,
where the Comptroller, Sir William Batten, and Mr. Davis and their
ladies; and here we had a most neat little but costly and genteel
supper, and after that a great deal of impertinent mirth by Mr. Davis,
and some catches, and so broke up, and going away, Mr. Davis's eldest
son took up my old Lady Slingsby in his arms, and carried her to the
coach, and is said to be able to carry three of the biggest men that
were in the company, which I wonder at. So home and to bed.

30th (Fast day). The first time that this day hath been yet observed:
and Mr. Mills made a most excellent sermon, upon "Lord forgive us
our former iniquities;" speaking excellently of the justice of God in
punishing men for the sins of their ancestors. Home, and John Goods
comes, and after dinner I did pay him L30 for my Lady, and after that
Sir W. Pen and I into Moorfields and had a brave talk, it being a most
pleasant day, and besides much discourse did please ourselves to see
young Davis and Whitton, two of our clerks, going by us in the field,
who we observe to take much pleasure together, and I did most often
see them at play together. Back to the Old James in Bishopsgate Street,
where Sir W. Batten and Sir Wm. Rider met him about business of the
Trinity House. So I went home, and there understand that my mother is
come home well from Brampton, and had a letter from my brother John, a
very ingenious one, and he therein begs to have leave to come to town
at the Coronacion. Then to my Lady Batten's; where my wife and she
are lately come back again from being abroad, and seeing of Cromwell,
Ireton, and Bradshaw hanged and buried at Tyburn. Then I home.

     ["Jan. 30th was kept as a very solemn day of fasting and prayer.
     This morning the carcases of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw (which
     the day before had been brought from the Red Lion Inn, Holborn),
     were drawn upon a sledge to Tyburn, and then taken out of their
     coffins, and in their shrouds hanged by the neck, until the going
     down of the sun.  They were then cut down, their heads taken off,
     and their bodies buried in a grave made under the gallows.  The
     coffin in which was the body of Cromwell was a very rich thing, very
     full of gilded hinges and nails."--Rugge's Diurnal.]

31st. This morning with Mr. Coventry at Whitehall about getting a ship
to carry my Lord's deals to Lynne, and we have chosen the Gift. Thence
at noon to my Lord's, where my Lady not well, so I eat a mouthfull of
dinner there, and thence to the Theatre, and there sat in the pit among
the company of fine ladys, &c.; and the house was exceeding full, to
see Argalus and Parthenia, the first time that it hath been acted: and
indeed it is good, though wronged by my over great expectations, as all
things else are. Thence to my father's to see my mother, who is pretty
well after her journey from Brampton. She tells me my aunt is pretty
well, yet cannot live long. My uncle pretty well too, and she believes
would marry again were my aunt dead, which God forbid. So home.




FEBRUARY 1660-61

February 1st (Friday). A full office all this morning, and busy about
answering the Commissioners of Parliament to their letter, wherein they
desire to borrow two clerks of ours, which we will not grant them. After
dinner into London and bought some books, and a belt, and had my sword
new furbished. To the alehouse with Mr. Brigden and W. Symons. At night
home. So after a little music to bed, leaving my people up getting
things ready against to-morrow's dinner.

2nd. Early to Mr. Moore, and with him to Sir Peter Ball, who proffers my
uncle Robert much civility in letting him continue in the grounds which
he had hired of Hetley who is now dead. Thence home, where all things in
a hurry for dinner, a strange cook being come in the room of Slater, who
could not come. There dined here my uncle Wight and my aunt, my father
and mother, and my brother Tom, Dr. Fairbrother and Mr. Mills, the
parson, and his wife, who is a neighbour's daughter of my uncle
Robert's, and knows my Aunt Wight and all her and my friends there; and
so we had excellent company to-day. After dinner I was sent for to Sir
G. Carteret's, where he was, and I found the Comptroller, who are upon
writing a letter to the Commissioners of Parliament in some things a
rougher stile than our last, because they seem to speak high to us. So
the Comptroller and I thence to a tavern hard by, and there did agree
upon drawing up some letters to be sent to all the pursers and Clerks
of the Cheques to make up their accounts. Then home; where I found the
parson and his wife gone. And by and by the rest of the company, very
well pleased, and I too; it being the last dinner I intend to make a
great while, it having now cost me almost L15 in three dinners within
this fortnight. In the evening comes Sir W. Pen, pretty merry, to sit
with me and talk, which we did for an hour or two, and so good night,
and I to bed.

3d (Lord's day). This day I first begun to go forth in my coat and
sword, as the manner now among gentlemen is. To Whitehall. In my way
heard Mr. Thomas Fuller preach at the Savoy upon our forgiving of other
men's trespasses, shewing among other things that we are to go to law
never to revenge, but only to repayre, which I think a good distinction.
So to White Hall; where I staid to hear the trumpets and kettle-drums,
and then the other drums, which are much cried up, though I think it
dull, vulgar musique. So to Mr. Fox's, unbid; where I had a good dinner
and special company. Among other discourse, I observed one story, how my
Lord of Northwich, at a public audience before the King of France, made
the Duke of Anjou cry, by making ugly faces as he was stepping to the
King, but undiscovered.

     [This story relates to circumstances which had occurred many years
     previously.  George, Lord Goring, was sent by Charles I. as
     Ambassador Extraordinary to France in 1644, to witness the oath of
     Louis XIV. to the observance of the treaties concluded with England
     by his father, Louis XIII., and his grandfather, Henry IV.  Louis
     XIV. took this oath at Ruel, on July 3rd, 1644, when he was not yet
     six years of age, and when his brother Philippe, then called Duke of
     Anjou, was not four years old.  Shortly after his return home, Lord
     Goring was created, in September, 1644, Earl of Norwich, the title
     by which he is here mentioned.  Philippe, Duke of Anjou, who was
     frightened by the English nobleman's ugly faces, took the title of
     Duke of Orleans after the death of his uncle, Jean Baptiste Gaston,
     in 1660.  He married his cousin, Henrietta of England.--B.]

And how Sir Phillip Warwick's' lady did wonder to have Mr. Darcy' send
for several dozen bottles of Rhenish wine to her house, not knowing that
the wine was his. Thence to my Lord's; where I am told how Sir Thomas
Crew's Pedro, with two of his countrymen more, did last night kill
one soldier of four that quarrelled with them in the street, about 10
o'clock. The other two are taken; but he is now hid at my Lord's till
night, that he do intend to make his escape away. So up to my Lady, and
sat and talked with her long, and so to Westminster Stairs, and there
took boat to the bridge, and so home, where I met with letters to call
us all up to-morrow morning to Whitehall about office business.

4th. Early up to Court with Sir W. Pen, where, at Mr. Coventry's
chamber, we met with all our fellow officers, and there after a hot
debate about the business of paying off the Fleet, and how far we
should join with the Commissioners of Parliament, which is now the great
business of this month more to determine, and about which there is
a great deal of difference between us, and then how far we should be
assistants to them therein. That being done, he and I back again home,
where I met with my father and mother going to my cozen Snow's to
Blackwall, and had promised to bring me and my wife along with them,
which we could not do because we are to go to the Dolphin to-day to a
dinner of Capt. Tayler's. So at last I let my wife go with them, and
I to the tavern, where Sir William Pen and the Comptroller and several
others were, men and women; and we had a very great and merry dinner;
and after dinner the Comptroller begun some sports, among others the
naming of people round and afterwards demanding questions of them that
they are forced to answer their names to, which do make very good sport.
And here I took pleasure to take the forfeits of the ladies who would
not do their duty by kissing of them; among others a pretty lady, who I
found afterwards to be wife to Sir W. Batten's son. Home, and then with
my wife to see Sir W. Batten, who could not be with us this day being
ill, but we found him at cards, and here we sat late, talking with my
Lady and others and Dr. Whistler,

     [Daniel Whistler, M.D., Fellow of Merton College, whose inaugural
     dissertation on Rickets in 1645 contains the earliest printed
     account of that disease.  He was Gresham Professor of Geometry,
     1648-57, and held several offices at the College of Physicians,
     being elected President in 1683.  He was one of the original Fellows
     of the Royal Society.  Dr. Munk, in his "Roll of the Royal College
     of Physicians," speaks very unfavourably of Whistler, and says that
     he defrauded the college.  He died May 11th, 1684.]

who I found good company and a very ingenious man. So home and to bed.

5th. Washing-day. My wife and I by water to Westminster. She to her
mother's and I to Westminster Hall, where I found a full term, and here
I went to Will's, and there found Shaw and Ashwell and another Bragrave
(who knew my mother wash-maid to my Lady Veere), who by cursing and
swearing made me weary of his company and so I went away. Into the Hall
and there saw my Lord Treasurer (who was sworn to-day at the Exchequer,
with a great company of Lords and persons of honour to attend him) go up
to the Treasury Offices, and take possession thereof; and also saw the
heads of Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Ireton, set up upon the further end of
the Hall. Then at Mrs. Michell's in the Hall met my wife and Shaw, and
she and I and Captain Murford to the Dog, and there I gave them some
wine, and after some mirth and talk (Mr. Langley coming in afterwards) I
went by coach to the play-house at the Theatre, our coach in King Street
breaking, and so took another. Here we saw Argalus and Parthenia, which
I lately saw, but though pleasant for the dancing and singing, I do not
find good for any wit or design therein. That done home by coach and to
supper, being very hungry for want of dinner, and so to bed.

6th. Called up by my Cozen Snow, who sat by me while I was trimmed, and
then I drank with him, he desiring a courtesy for a friend, which I have
done for him. Then to the office, and there sat long, then to dinner,
Captain Murford with me. I had a dish of fish and a good hare, which
was sent me the other day by Goodenough the plasterer. So to the office
again, where Sir W. Pen and I sat all alone, answering of petitions and
nothing else, and so to Sir W. Batten's, where comes Mr. Jessop (one
whom I could not formerly have looked upon, and now he comes cap in hand
to us from the Commissioners of the Navy, though indeed he is a man of
a great estate and of good report), about some business from them to
us, which we answered by letter. Here I sat long with Sir W., who is not
well, and then home and to my chamber, and some little, music, and so to
bed.

7th. With Sir W. Batten and Pen to Whitehall to Mr. Coventry's chamber,
to debate upon the business we were upon the other day morning, and
thence to Westminster Hall. And after a walk to my Lord's; where, while
I and my Lady were in her chamber in talk, in comes my Lord from sea,
to our great wonder. He had dined at Havre de Grace on Monday last, and
came to the Downs the next day, and lay at Canterbury that night; and so
to Dartford, and thence this morning to White Hall. All my friends his
servants well. Among others, Mr. Creed and Captain Ferrers tell me the
stories of my Lord Duke of Buckingham's and my Lord's falling out at
Havre de Grace, at cards; they two and my Lord St. Alban's playing.
The Duke did, to my Lord's dishonour, often say that he did in his
conscience know the contrary to what he then said, about the difference
at cards; and so did take up the money that he should have lost to my
Lord. Which my Lord resenting, said nothing then, but that he doubted
not but there were ways enough to get his money of him. So they parted
that night; and my Lord sent for Sir R. Stayner and sent him the next
morning to the Duke, to know whether he did remember what he said last
night, and whether he would own it with his sword and a second; which
he said he would, and so both sides agreed. But my Lord St. Alban's, and
the Queen and Ambassador Montagu, did waylay them at their lodgings
till the difference was made up, to my Lord's honour; who hath got great
reputation thereby. I dined with my Lord, and then with Mr. Shepley and
Creed (who talked very high of France for a fine country) to the tavern,
and then I home. To the office, where the two Sir Williams had staid
for me, and then we drew up a letter to the Commissioners of Parliament
again, and so to Sir W. Batten, where I staid late in talk, and so home,
and after writing the letter fair then I went to bed.

8th. At the office all the morning. At noon to the Exchange to meet Mr.
Warren the timber merchant, but could not meet with him. Here I met with
many sea commanders, and among others Captain Cuttle, and Curtis, and
Mootham, and I, went to the Fleece Tavern to drink; and there we spent
till four o'clock, telling stories of Algiers, and the manner of the
life of slaves there! And truly Captn. Mootham and Mr. Dawes (who
have been both slaves there) did make me fully acquainted with their
condition there: as, how they eat nothing but bread and water. At their
redemption they pay so much for the water they drink at the public
fountaynes, during their being slaves. How they are beat upon the soles
of their feet and bellies at the liberty of their padron. How they are
all, at night, called into their master's Bagnard; and there they lie.
How the poorest men do use their slaves best. How some rogues do live
well, if they do invent to bring their masters in so much a week by
their industry or theft; and then they are put to no other work at
all. And theft there is counted no great crime at all. Thence to Mr.
Rawlinson's, having met my old friend Dick Scobell, and there I drank a
great deal with him, and so home and to bed betimes, my head aching.

9th. To my Lord's with Mr. Creed (who was come to me this morning to get
a bill of imprest signed), and my Lord being gone out he and I to the
Rhenish wine-house with Mr. Blackburne. To whom I did make known my
fears of Will's losing of his time, which he will take care to give him
good advice about. Afterwards to my Lord's and Mr. Shepley and I did
make even his accounts and mine. And then with Mr. Creed and two friends
of his (my late landlord Jones' son one of them), to an ordinary to
dinner, and then Creed and I to Whitefriars' to the Play-house, and saw
"The Mad Lover," the first time I ever saw it acted, which I like pretty
well, and home.

10th (Lord's day). Took physique all day, and, God forgive me, did spend
it in reading of some little French romances. At night my wife and I
did please ourselves talking of our going into France, which I hope to
effect this summer. At noon one came to ask for Mrs. Hunt that was here
yesterday, and it seems is not come home yet, which makes us afraid of
her. At night to bed.

11th. At the office all the morning. Dined at home, and then to the
Exchequer, and took Mr. Warren with me to Mr. Kennard, the master
joiner, at Whitehall, who was at a tavern, and there he and I to him,
and agreed about getting some of my Lord's deals on board to-morrow.
Then with young Mr. Reeve home to his house, who did there show me many
pretty pleasures in perspectives,

     ['Telescope' and 'microscope' are both as old as Milton, but for long
     while 'perspective' (glass being sometimes understood and sometimes
     expressed) did the work of these.  It is sometimes written
     'prospective.' Our present use of 'perspective' does not, I suppose,
     date farther back than Dryden.--Trench's Select Glossary.--M. B.]

that I have not seen before, and I did buy a little glass of him cost
me 5s. And so to Mr. Crew's, and with Mr. Moore to see how my father and
mother did, and so with him to Mr. Adam Chard's' (the first time I ever
was at his house since he was married) to drink, then we parted, and I
home to my study, and set some papers and money in order, and so to bed.

12th. To my Lord's, and there with him all the morning, and then (he
going out to dinner) I and Mr. Pickering, Creed, and Captain Ferrers
to the Leg in the Palace to dinner, where strange Pickering's
impertinences. Thence the two others and I after a great dispute whither
to go, we went by water to Salsbury Court play-house, where not liking
to sit, we went out again, and by coach to the Theatre, and there saw
"The Scornfull Lady," now done by a woman, which makes the play appear
much better than ever it did to me. Then Creed and I (the other being
lost in the crowd) to drink a cup of ale at Temple Bar, and there we
parted, and I (seeing my father and mother by the way) went home.

13th. At the office all the morning; dined at home, and poor Mr. Wood
with me, who after dinner would have borrowed money of me, but I would
lend none. Then to Whitehall by coach with Sir W. Pen, where we did very
little business, and so back to Mr. Rawlinson's, where I took him and
gave him a cup of wine, he having formerly known Mr. Rawlinson, and
here I met my uncle Wight, and he drank with us, and with him to Sir W.
Batten's, whither I sent for my wife, and we chose Valentines' against
to-morrow.

     [The observation of St. Valentine's day is very ancient in this
     country.  Shakespeare makes Ophelia sing

                   "To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,
                    All in the morning betime,
                    And I a maid at your window
                    To be your Valentine."

                         Hamlet, act iv.  sc. 5.--M. B.]

My wife chose me, which did much please me; my Lady Batten Sir W. Pen,
&c. Here we sat late, and so home to bed, having got my Lady Batten to
give me a spoonful of honey for my cold.

14th (Valentine's day). Up early and to Sir W. Batten's, but would not
go in till I asked whether they that opened the door was a man or a
woman, and Mingo, who was there, answered a woman, which, with his tone,
made me laugh; so up I went and took Mrs. Martha for my Valentine (which
I do only for complacency), and Sir W. Batten he go in the same manner
to my wife, and so we were very merry. About 10 o'clock we, with a great
deal of company, went down by our barge to Deptford, and there only went
to see how forward Mr. Pett's yacht is; and so all into the barge again,
and so to Woolwich, on board the Rose-bush, Captain Brown's' ship, that
is brother-in-law to Sir W. Batten, where we had a very fine dinner,
dressed on shore, and great mirth and all things successfull; the first
time I ever carried my wife a-ship-board, as also my boy Wayneman, who
hath all this day been called young Pepys, as Sir W. Pen's boy young
Pen. So home by barge again; good weather, but pretty cold. I to my
study, and began to make up my accounts for my Lord, which I intend to
end tomorrow. To bed. The talk of the town now is, who the King is
like to have for his Queen: and whether Lent shall be kept with the
strictness of the King's proclamation;

     ["A Proclamation for restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of
     Flesh in Lent or on fish-dayes appointed by the law to be observed,"
     was dated 29th January, 1660-61].

which it is thought cannot be, because of the poor, who cannot buy
fish. And also the great preparation for the King's crowning is now much
thought upon and talked of.

15th. At the office all the morning, and in the afternoon at making up
my accounts for my Lord to-morrow; and that being done I found myself
to be clear (as I think) L350 in the world, besides my goods in my house
and all things paid for.

16th. To my Lord in the morning, who looked over my accounts and agreed
to them. I did also get him to sign a bill (which do make my heart
merry) for L60 to me, in consideration of my work extraordinary at sea
this last voyage, which I hope to get paid. I dined with my Lord and
then to the Theatre, where I saw "The Virgin Martyr," a good but too
sober a play for the company. Then home.

17th (Lord's day). A most tedious, unreasonable, and impertinent sermon,
by an Irish Doctor. His text was "Scatter them, O Lord, that delight in
war." Sir Wm. Batten and I very much angry with the parson. And so I to
Westminster as soon as I came home to my Lord's, where I dined with
Mr. Shepley and Howe. After dinner (without speaking to my Lord), Mr.
Shepley and I into the city, and so I home and took my wife to my uncle
Wight's, and there did sup with them, and so home again and to bed.

18th. At the office all the morning, dined at home with a very good
dinner, only my wife and I, which is not yet very usual. In the
afternoon my wife and I and Mrs. Martha Batten, my Valentine, to the
Exchange, and there upon a payre of embroydered and six payre of plain
white gloves I laid out 40s. upon her. Then we went to a mercer's at the
end of Lombard Street, and there she bought a suit of Lutestring--[More
properly called "lustring"; a fine glossy silk.]--for herself, and so
home. And at night I got the whole company and Sir Wm. Pen home to my
house, and there I did give them Rhenish wine and sugar, and continued
together till it was late, and so to bed. It is much talked that the
King is already married to the niece of the Prince de Ligne,

     [The Prince de Ligne had no niece, and probably Pepys has made some
     mistake in the name.  Charles at one time made an offer of marriage
     to Mazarin's niece, Hortense Mancini.]

and that he hath two sons already by her: which I am sorry to hear; but
yet am gladder that it should be so, than that the Duke of York and
his family should come to the crown, he being a professed friend to the
Catholiques.

19th. By coach to Whitehall with Colonel Slingsby (carrying Mrs. Turner
with us) and there he and I up into the house, where we met with Sir G.
Carteret: who afterwards, with the Duke of York, my Lord Sandwich,
and others, went into a private room to consult: and we were a little
troubled that we were not called in with the rest. But I do believe it
was upon something very private. We staid walking in the gallery; where
we met with Mr. Slingsby, that was formerly a great friend of Mons.
Blondeau, who showed me the stamps of the King's new coyne; which is
strange to see, how good they are in the stamp and bad in the money, for
lack of skill to make them. But he says Blondeau will shortly come over,
and then we shall have it better, and the best in the world.

     [Peter Blondeau, medallist, was invited to London from Paris in
     1649, and appointed by the Council of State to coin their money; but
     the moneyers succeeded in driving him out of the country.  Soon
     after the Restoration he returned, and was appointed engineer to the
     mint.]

The Comptroller and I to the Commissioners of Parliament, and after some
talk away again and to drink a cup of ale. He tells me, he is sure that
the King is not yet married, as it is said; nor that it is known who he
will have. To my Lord's and found him dined, and so I lost my dinner,
but I staid and played with him and Mr. Child, &c., some things of four
parts, and so it raining hard and bitter cold (the first winter day we
have yet had this winter), I took coach home and spent the evening in
reading of a Latin play, the "Naufragium Joculare." And so to bed.

20th. All the morning at the office, dined at home and my brother Tom
with me, who brought me a pair of fine slippers which he gave me. By and
by comes little Luellin and friend to see me, and then my coz Stradwick,
who was never here before. With them I drank a bottle of wine or two,
and to the office again, and there staid about business late, and
then all of us to Sir W. Pen's, where we had, and my Lady Batten, Mrs.
Martha, and my wife, and other company, a good supper, and sat playing
at cards and talking till 12 at night, and so all to our lodgings.

21st. To Westminster by coach with Sir W. Pen, and in our way saw the
city begin to build scaffolds against the Coronacion. To my Lord, and
there found him out of doors. So to the Hall and called for some caps
that I have a making there, and here met with Mr. Hawley, and with him
to Will's and drank, and then by coach with Mr. Langley our old friend
into the city. I set him down by the way, and I home and there staid all
day within, having found Mr. Moore, who staid with me till late at night
talking and reading some good books. Then he went away, and I to bed.

22nd. All the morning at the office. At noon with my wife and Pall to
my father's to dinner, where Dr. Thos. Pepys and my coz Snow and Joyce
Norton. After dinner came The. Turner, and so I home with her to her
mother, good woman, whom I had not seen through my great neglect this
half year, but she would not be angry with me. Here I staid all the
afternoon talking of the King's being married, which is now the town
talk, but I believe false. In the evening Mrs. The. and Joyce took us
all into the coach home, calling in Bishopsgate Street, thinking to have
seen a new Harpsicon--[The harpsichord is an instrument larger than a
spinet, with two or three strings to a note.]--that she had a making
there, but it was not done, and so we did not see it. Then to my home,
where I made very much of her, and then she went home. Then my wife to
Sir W. Batten's, and there sat a while; he having yesterday sent my wife
half-a-dozen pairs of gloves, and a pair of silk stockings and garters,
for her Valentine's gift. Then home and to bed.

23rd. This my birthday, 28 years. This morning Sir W. Batten, Pen, and
I did some business, and then I by water to Whitehall, having met Mr.
Hartlibb by the way at Alderman Backwell's. So he did give me a glass
of Rhenish wine at the Steeleyard, and so to Whitehall by water. He
continues of the same bold impertinent humour that he was always of and
will ever be. He told me how my Lord Chancellor had lately got the Duke
of York and Duchess, and her woman, my Lord Ossory's and a Doctor, to
make oath before most of the judges of the kingdom, concerning all the
circumstances of their marriage. And in fine, it is confessed that they
were not fully married till about a month or two before she was brought
to bed; but that they were contracted long before, and time enough for
the child to be legitimate.

     [The Duke of York's marriage took place September 3rd, 1660.  Anne
     Hyde was contracted to the Duke at Breda, November 24th, 1659.]

But I do not hear that it was put to the judges to determine whether it
was so or no. To my Lord and there spoke to him about his opinion of the
Light, the sea-mark that Captain Murford is about, and do offer me
an eighth part to concern myself with it, and my Lord do give me some
encouragement in it, and I shall go on. I dined herewith Mr. Shepley and
Howe. After dinner to Whitehall Chappell with Mr. Child, and there
did hear Captain Cooke and his boy make a trial of an Anthem against
tomorrow, which was brave musique. Then by water to Whitefriars to the
Play-house, and there saw "The Changeling," the first time it hath been
acted these twenty years, and it takes exceedingly. Besides, I see the
gallants do begin to be tyred with the vanity and pride of the theatre
actors who are indeed grown very proud and rich. Then by link home, and
there to my book awhile and to bed. I met to-day with Mr. Townsend, who
tells me that the old man is yet alive in whose place in the Wardrobe he
hopes to get my father, which I do resolve to put for. I also met with
the Comptroller, who told me how it was easy for us all, the principal
officers, and proper for us, to labour to get into the next Parliament;
and would have me to ask the Duke's letter, but I shall not endeavour it
because it will spend much money, though I am sure I could well obtain
it. This is now 28 years that I am born. And blessed be God, in a state
of full content, and great hopes to be a happy man in all respects, both
to myself and friends.

24th (Sunday). Mr. Mills made as excellent a sermon in the morning
against drunkenness as ever I heard in my life. I dined at home; another
good one of his in the afternoon. My Valentine had her fine gloves on at
church to-day that I did give her. After sermon my wife and I unto Sir
Wm. Batten and sat awhile. Then home, I to read, then to supper and to
bed.

25th. Sir Wm. Pen and I to my Lord Sandwich's by coach in the morning to
see him, but he takes physic to-day and so we could not see him. So he
went away, and I with Luellin to Mr. Mount's chamber at the Cockpit,
where he did lie of old, and there we drank, and from thence to W.
Symons where we found him abroad, but she, like a good lady, within, and
there we did eat some nettle porrige, which was made on purpose to-day
for some of their coming, and was very good. With her we sat a good
while, merry in discourse, and so away, Luellin and I to my Lord's, and
there dined. He told me one of the prettiest stories, how Mr. Blurton,
his friend that was with him at my house three or four days ago, did go
with him the same day from my house to the Fleet tavern by Guildhall,
and there (by some pretence) got the mistress of the house into their
company, and by and by Luellin calling him Doctor she thought that he
really was so, and did privately discover her disease to him, which was
only some ordinary infirmity belonging to women, and he proffering her
physic, she desired him to come some day and bring it, which he did.
After dinner by water to the office, and there Sir W. Pen and I met and
did business all the afternoon, and then I got him to my house and eat a
lobster together, and so to bed.

26th (Shrove Tuesday). I left my wife in bed, being indisposed... I to
Mrs. Turner's, who I found busy with The. and Joyce making of things
ready for fritters, so to Mr. Crew's and there delivered Cotgrave's
Dictionary' to my Lady Jemimah, and then with Mr. Moore to my coz Tom
Pepys, but he being out of town I spoke with his lady, though not of the
business I went about, which was to borrow L1000 for my Lord. Back
to Mrs. Turner's, where several friends, all strangers to me but Mr.
Armiger, dined. Very merry and the best fritters that ever I eat in my
life. After that looked out at window; saw the flinging at cocks.

     [The cruel custom of throwing at cocks on Shrove Tuesday is of
     considerable antiquity.  It is shown in the first print of Hogarth's
     "Four Stages of Cruelty."]

Then Mrs. The. and I, and a gentleman that dined there and his daughter,
a perfect handsome young and very tall lady that lately came out of the
country, and Mr. Thatcher the Virginall Maister to Bishopsgate Street,
and there saw the new Harpsicon made for Mrs. The. We offered L12, they
demanded L14. The Master not being at home, we could make no bargain,
so parted for to-night. So all by coach to my house, where I found my
Valentine with my wife, and here they drank, and then went away. Then I
sat and talked with my Valentine and my wife a good while, and then saw
her home, and went to Sir W. Batten to the Dolphin, where Mr. Newborne,
&c., were, and there after a quart or two of wine, we home, and I to
bed....

27th. At the office all the morning, that done I walked in the
garden with little Captain Murford, where he and I had some discourse
concerning the Light-House again, and I think I shall appear in the
business, he promising me that if I can bring it about, it will be worth
L100 per annum. Then came into the garden to me young Mr. Powell and Mr.
Hooke that I once knew at Cambridge, and I took them in and gave them a
bottle of wine, and so parted. Then I called for a dish of fish, which
we had for dinner, this being the first day of Lent; and I do intend to
try whether I can keep it or no. My father dined with me and did show
me a letter from my brother John, wherein he tells us that he is chosen
Schollar of the house,' which do please me much, because I do perceive
now it must chiefly come from his merit and not the power of his Tutor,
Dr. Widdrington, who is now quite out of interest there and hath put
over his pupils to Mr. Pepper, a young Fellow of the College. With my
father to Mr. Rawlinson's, where we met my uncle Wight, and after a
pint or two away. I walked with my father (who gave me an account of the
great falling out between my uncle Fenner and his son Will) as far
as Paul's Churchyard, and so left him, and I home. This day the
Commissioners of Parliament begin to pay off the Fleet, beginning with
the Hampshire, and do it at Guildhall, for fear of going out of town
into the power of the seamen, who are highly incensed against them.

28th. Early to wait on my Lord, and after a little talk with him I took
boat at Whitehall for Redriffe, but in my way overtook Captain Cuttance
and Teddiman in a boat and so ashore with them at Queenhithe, and so to
a tavern with them to a barrel of oysters, and so away. Capt. Cuttance
and I walked from Redriffe to Deptford, where I found both Sir
Williams and Sir G. Carteret at Mr. Uthwayt's, and there we dined, and
notwithstanding my resolution, yet for want of other victualls, I did
eat flesh this Lent, but am resolved to eat as little as I can. After
dinner we went to Captain Bodilaw's, and there made sale of many old
stores by the candle, and good sport it was to see how from a small
matter bid at first they would come to double and treble the price of
things. After that Sir W. Pen and I and my Lady Batten and her daughter
by land to Redriffe, staying a little at halfway house, and when we
came to take boat, found Sir George, &c., to have staid with the barge a
great while for us, which troubled us. Home and to bed. This month ends
with two great secrets under dispute but yet known to very few: first,
Who the King will marry; and What the meaning of this fleet is which
we are now sheathing to set out for the southward. Most think against
Algier against the Turk, or to the East Indys against the Dutch who, we
hear, are setting out a great fleet thither.




MARCH 1660-1661

March 1st. All the morning at the office. Dined at home only upon fish,
and Mr. Shepley and Tom Hater with me. After dinner Mr. Shepley and I
in private talking about my Lord's intentions to go speedily into the
country, but to what end we know not. We fear he is to go to sea with
this fleet now preparing. But we wish that he could get his L4000 per
annum settled before he do go. Then he and I walked into London, he
to the Wardrobe and I to Whitefryars, and saw "The Bondman" acted; an
excellent play and well done. But above all that ever I saw, Betterton
do the Bond man the best. Then to my father's and found my mother ill.
After staying a while with them, I went home and sat up late, spending
my thoughts how to get money to bear me out in my great expense at the
Coronacion, against which all provide, and scaffolds setting up in every
street. I had many designs in my head to get some, but know not which
will take. To bed.

2d. Early with Mr. Moore about Sir Paul Neale's' business with my uncle
and other things all the morning. Dined with him at Mr. Crew's, and
after dinner I went to the Theatre, where I found so few people (which
is strange, and the reason I did not know) that I went out again, and so
to Salsbury Court, where the house as full as could be; and it seems
it was a new play, "The Queen's Maske," wherein there are some good
humours: among others, a good jeer to the old story of the Siege of
Troy, making it to be a common country tale. But above all it was
strange to see so little a boy as that was to act Cupid, which is one of
the greatest parts in it. Then home and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day): Mr. Woodcocke preached at our church a very good
sermon upon the imaginacions of the thoughts of man's heart being only
evil. So home, where being told that my Lord had sent for me I went, and
got there to dine with my Lord, who is to go into the country tomorrow.
I did give up the mortgage made to me by Sir R. Parkhurst for L2,000.
In the Abby all the afternoon. Then at Mr. Pierces the surgeon, where
Shepley and I supped. So to my Lord's, who comes in late and tells us
how news is come to-day of Mazarin's being dead, which is very great
news and of great consequence.--[This report of the death of Cardinal
Mazarin appears to have been premature, for he did not die until the
9th of March, 1661.]--I lay tonight with Mr. Shepley here, because of my
Lord's going to-morrow.

4th. My Lord went this morning on his journey to Hinchingbroke, Mr.
Parker with him; the chief business being to look over and determine
how, and in what manner, his great work of building shall be done.
Before his going he did give me some jewells to keep for him, viz., that
that the King of Sweden did give him, with the King's own picture in
it, most excellently done; and a brave George, all of diamonds, and
this with the greatest expressions of love and confidence that I could
imagine or hope for, which is a very great joy to me. To the office all
the forenoon. Then to dinner and so to Whitehall to Mr. Coventry about
several businesses, and then with Mr. Moore, who went with me to drink a
cup of ale, and after some good discourse then home and sat late talking
with Sir W. Batten. So home and to bed.

5th. With Mr. Pierce, purser, to Westminster Hall, and there met with
Captain Cuttance, Lieut. Lambert, and Pierce, surgeon, thinking to have
met with the Commissioners of Parliament, but they not sitting, we went
to the Swan, where I did give them a barrel of oysters; and so I to my
Lady's and there dined, and had very much talk and pleasant discourse
with my Lady, my esteem growing every day higher and higher in her
and my Lord. So to my father Bowyer's where my wife was, and to the
Commissioners of Parliament, and there did take some course about having
my Lord's salary paid tomorrow when; the Charles is paid off, but I
was troubled to see how high they carry themselves, when in good truth
nobody cares for them. So home by coach and my wife. I then to the
office, where Sir Williams both and I set about making an estimate of
all the officers' salaries in ordinary in the Navy till 10 o'clock at
night. So home, and I with my head full of thoughts how to get a little
present money, I eat a bit of bread and cheese, and so to bed.

6th. At the office all the morning. At dinner Sir W. Batten came
and took me and my wife to his house to dinner, my Lady being in the
country, where we had a good Lenten dinner. Then to Whitehall with
Captn. Cuttle, and there I did some business with Mr. Coventry, and
after that home, thinking to have had Sir W. Batten, &c., to have eat a
wigg--[Wigg, a kind of north country bun or tea-cake, still so called,
to my knowledge, in Staffordshire.--M. B.]--at my house at night. But my
Lady being come home out of the country ill by reason of much rain that
has fallen lately, and the waters being very high, we could not, and so
I home and to bed.

7th. This morning Sir Williams both went to Woolwich to sell some old
provisions there. I to Whitehall, and up and down about many businesses.
Dined at my Lord's, then to Mr. Crew to Mr. Moore, and he and I to
London to Guildhall to see the seamen paid off, but could not without
trouble, and so I took him to the Fleece tavern, where the pretty woman
that Luellin lately told me the story of dwells, but I could not see
her. Then towards home and met Spicer, D. Vines, Ruddiard, and a company
more of my old acquaintance, and went into a place to drink some ale,
and there we staid playing the fool till late, and so I home. At home
met with ill news that my hopes of getting some money for the Charles
were spoiled through Mr. Waith's perverseness, which did so vex me
that I could not sleep at night. But I wrote a letter to him to send
to-morrow morning for him to take my money for me, and so with good
words I thought to coy with him. To bed.

8th. All the morning at the office. At noon Sir W. Batten, Col. Slingsby
and I by coach to the Tower, to Sir John Robinson's, to dinner; where
great good cheer. High company; among others the Duchess of Albemarle,
who is ever a plain homely dowdy. After dinner, to drink all the
afternoon. Towards night the Duchess and ladies went away. Then we set
to it again till it was very late. And at last came in Sir William Wale,
almost fuddled; and because I was set between him and another, only to
keep them from talking and spoiling the company (as we did to others),
he fell out with the Lieutenant of the Tower; but with much ado we made
him under stand his error, and then all quiet. And so he carried Sir
William Batten and I home again in his coach, and so I almost overcome
with drink went to bed. I was much contented to ride in such state into
the Tower, and be received among such high company, while Mr. Mount,
my Lady Duchess's gentleman usher, stood waiting at table, whom I
ever thought a man so much above me in all respects; also to hear the
discourse of so many high Cavaliers of things past. It was a great
content and joy to me.

9th. To Whitehall and there with Mr. Creed took a most pleasant walk
for two hours in the park, which is now a very fair place. Here we had a
long and candid discourse one to another of one another's condition, and
he giving me an occasion I told him of my intention to get L60 paid me
by him for a gratuity for my labour extraordinary at sea. Which he did
not seem unwilling to, and therefore I am very glad it is out. To my
Lord's, where we found him lately come from Hinchingbroke, where he left
my uncle very well, but my aunt not likely to live. I staid and dined
with him. He took me aside, and asked me what the world spoke of the
King's marriage. Which I answering as one that knew nothing, he enquired
no further of me. But I do perceive by it that there is something in it
that is ready to come out that the world knows not of yet. After dinner
into London to Mrs. Turner's and my father's, made visits and then home,
where I sat late making of my journal for four days past, and so to bed.

10th (Lord's day). Heard Mr. Mills in the morning, a good sermon. Dined
at home on a poor Lenten dinner of coleworts and bacon. In the afternoon
again to church, and there heard one Castle, whom I knew of my year at
Cambridge. He made a dull sermon. After sermon came my uncle and aunt
Wight to see us, and we sat together a great while. Then to reading and
at night to bed.

11th. At the office all the morning, dined at home and my father and
Dr. Thos. Pepys with him upon a poor dinner, my wife being abroad. After
dinner I went to the theatre, and there saw "Love's Mistress" done by
them, which I do not like in some things as well as their acting in
Salsbury Court. At night home and found my wife come home, and among
other things she hath got her teeth new done by La Roche, and are indeed
now pretty handsome, and I was much pleased with it. So to bed.

12th. At the office about business all the morning, so to the Exchange,
and there met with Nick Osborne lately married, and with him to the
Fleece, where we drank a glass of wine. So home, where I found Mrs. Hunt
in great trouble about her husband's losing of his place in the Excise.
From thence to Guildhall, and there set my hand to the book before
Colonel King for my sea pay, and blessed be God! they have cast me at
midshipman's pay, which do make my heart very glad. So, home, and there
had Sir W. Batten and my Lady and all their company and Capt. Browne and
his wife to a collation at my house till it was late, and then to bed.

13th. Early up in the morning to read "The Seaman's Grammar and
Dictionary" I lately have got, which do please me exceeding well. At the
office all the morning, dined at home, and Mrs. Turner, The. Joyce, and
Mr. Armiger, and my father and mother with me, where they stand till I
was weary of their company and so away. Then up to my chamber, and there
set papers and things in order, and so to bed.

14th. With Sir W. Batten and Pen to Mr. Coventry's, and there had a
dispute about my claim to the place of Purveyor of Petty-provisions, and
at last to my content did conclude to have my hand to all the bills for
these provisions and Mr. Turner to purvey them, because I would not have
him to lose the place. Then to my Lord's, and so with Mr. Creed to an
alehouse, where he told me a long story of his amours at Portsmouth to
one of Mrs. Boat's daughters, which was very pleasant. Dined with my
Lord and Lady, and so with Mr. Creed to the Theatre, and there saw "King
and no King," well acted. Thence with him to the Cock alehouse at Temple
Bar, where he did ask my advice about his amours, and I did give him it,
which was to enquire into the condition of his competitor, who is a
son of Mr. Gauden's, and that I promised to do for him, and he to make
[what] use he can of it to his advantage. Home and to bed.

15th. At the office all the morning. At noon Sir Williams both and I at
a great fish dinner at the Dolphin, given us by two tax merchants, and
very merry we were till night, and so home. This day my wife and Pall
went to see my Lady Kingston, her brother's lady.

16th. Early at Sir Wm. Pen's, and there before Mr. Turner did reconcile
the business of the purveyance between us two. Then to Whitehall to my
Lord's, and dined with him, and so to Whitefriars and saw "The Spanish
Curate," in which I had no great content. So home, and was very much
troubled that Will. staid out late, and went to bed early, intending not
to let him come in, but by and by he comes and I did let him in, and he
did tell me that he was at Guildhall helping to pay off the seamen, and
cast the books late. Which since I found to be true. So to sleep, being
in bed when he came.

17th (Lord's day). At church in the morning, a stranger preached a good
honest and painfull sermon. My wife and I dined upon a chine of beef at
Sir W. Batten's, so to church again. Then home, and put some papers in
order. Then to supper at Sir W. Batten's again, where my wife by chance
fell down and hurt her knees exceedingly. So home and to bed.

18th. This morning early Sir W. Batten went to Rochester, where he
expects to be chosen Parliament man. At the office all the morning,
dined at home and with my wife to Westminster, where I had business with
the Commissioner for paying the seamen about my Lord's pay, and my wife
at Mrs. Hunt's. I called her home, and made inquiry at Greatorex's
and in other places to hear of Mr. Barlow (thinking to hear that he is
dead), but I cannot find it so, but the contrary. Home and called at
my Lady Batten's, and supped there, and so home. This day an ambassador
from Florence was brought into the town in state. Good hopes given me
to-day that Mrs. Davis is going away from us, her husband going shortly
to Ireland. Yesterday it was said was to be the day that the Princess
Henrietta was to marry the Duke d'Anjou' in France. This day I found in
the newes-booke that Roger Pepys is chosen at Cambridge for the town,
the first place that we hear of to have made their choice yet. To bed
with my head and mind full of business, which do a little put me out
of order, and I do find myself to become more and more thoughtful about
getting of money than ever heretofore.

19th. We met at the office this morning about some particular business,
and then I to Whitehall, and there dined with my Lord, and after dinner
Mr. Creed and I to White-Fryars, where we saw "The Bondman" acted most
excellently, and though I have seen it often, yet I am every time more
and more pleased with Betterton's action. From thence with him and young
Mr. Jones to Penell's in Fleet Street, and there we drank and talked a
good while, and so I home and to bed.

20th. At the office all the morning, dined at home and Mr. Creed and Mr.
Shepley with me, and after dinner we did a good deal of business in
my study about my Lord's accounts to be made up and presented to our
office. That done to White Hall to Mr. Coventry, where I did some
business with him, and so with Sir W. Pen (who I found with Mr. Coventry
teaching of him upon the map to understand Jamaica).

     [Sir William Penn was well fitted to give this information, as it
     was he who took the island from the Spaniards in 1655.]

By water in the dark home, and so to my Lady Batten's where my wife was,
and there we sat and eat and drank till very late, and so home to bed.
The great talk of the town is the strange election that the City of
London made yesterday for Parliament-men; viz. Fowke, Love, Jones,
and... men that are so far from being episcopall that they are thought
to be Anabaptists; and chosen with a great deal of zeal, in spite of
the other party that thought themselves very strong, calling out in the
Hall, "No Bishops! no Lord Bishops!" It do make people to fear it may
come to worse, by being an example to the country to do the same. And
indeed the Bishops are so high, that very few do love them.

21st. Up very early, and to work and study in my chamber, and then
to Whitehall to my Lord, and there did stay with him a good while
discoursing upon his accounts. Here I staid with Mr. Creed all the
morning, and at noon dined with my Lord, who was very merry, and after
dinner we sang and fiddled a great while. Then I by water (Mr. Shepley,
Pinkney, and others going part of the way) home, and then hard at work
setting my papers in order, and writing letters till night, and so to
bed. This day I saw the Florence Ambassador go to his audience, the
weather very foul, and yet he and his company very gallant. After I was
a-bed Sir W. Pen sent to desire me to go with him to-morrow morning to
meet Sir W. Batten coming from Rochester.

22nd. This morning I rose early, and my Lady Batten knocked at her door
that comes into one of my chambers, and called me to know whether I
and my wife were ready to go. So my wife got her ready, and about eight
o'clock I got a horseback, and my Lady and her two daughters, and Sir W.
Pen into coach, and so over London Bridge, and thence to Dartford. The
day very pleasant, though the way bad. Here we met with Sir W. Batten,
and some company along with him, who had assisted him in his election at
Rochester; and so we dined and were very merry. At 5 o'clock we set out
again in a coach home, and were very merry all the way. At Deptford we
met with Mr. Newborne, and some other friends and their wives in a coach
to meet us, and so they went home with us, and at Sir W. Batten's we
supped, and thence to bed, my head akeing mightily through the wine that
I drank to-day.

23d. All the morning at home putting papers in order, dined at home,
and then out to the Red Bull (where I had not been since plays come up
again), but coming too soon I went out again and walked all up and down
the Charterhouse yard and Aldersgate street. At last came back again
and went in, where I was led by a seaman that knew me, but is here as
a servant, up to the tireing-room, where strange the confusion and
disorder that there is among them in fitting themselves, especially
here, where the clothes are very poor, and the actors but common
fellows. At last into the Pitt, where I think there was not above ten
more than myself, and not one hundred in the whole house. And the play,
which is called "All's lost by Lust," poorly done; and with so much
disorder, among others, that in the musique-room the boy that was to
sing a song, not singing it right, his master fell about his ears and
beat him so, that it put the whole house in an uprore. Thence homewards,
and at the Mitre met my uncle Wight, and with him Lieut.-Col. Baron,
who told us how Crofton, the great Presbyterian minister that had lately
preached so highly against Bishops, is clapped up this day into the
Tower. Which do please some, and displease others exceedingly. Home and
to bed.

24th (Lord's day). My wife and I to church, and then home with Sir
W. Batten and my Lady to dinner, where very merry, and then to church
again, where Mr. Mills made a good sermon. Home again, and after a
walk in the garden Sir W. Batten's two daughters came and sat with us a
while, and I then up to my chamber to read.

25th (Lady day). This morning came workmen to begin the making of me a
new pair of stairs up out of my parler, which, with other work that I
have to do, I doubt will keep me this two months and so long I shall
be all in dirt; but the work do please me very well. To the office,
and there all the morning, dined at home, and after dinner comes Mr.
Salisbury to see me, and shewed me a face or two of his paynting,
and indeed I perceive that he will be a great master. I took him to
Whitehall with me by water, but he would not by any means be moved to go
through bridge, and so we were fain to go round by the Old Swan. To my
Lord's and there I shewed him the King's picture, which he intends to
copy out in little. After that I and Captain Ferrers to Salisbury Court
by water, and saw part of the "Queene's Maske." Then I to Mrs. Turner,
and there staid talking late. The. Turner being in a great chafe, about
being disappointed of a room to stand in at the Coronacion. Then to my
father's, and there staid talking with my mother and him late about my
dinner to-morrow. So homewards and took up a boy that had a lanthorn,
that was picking up of rags, and got him to light me home, and had great
discourse with him how he could get sometimes three or four bushells
of rags in a day, and got 3d. a bushell for them, and many other
discourses, what and how many ways there are for poor children to get
their livings honestly. So home and I to bed at 12 o'clock at night,
being pleased well with the work that my workmen have begun to-day.

26th. Up early to do business in my study. This is my great day that
three years ago I was cut of the stone, and, blessed be God, I do yet
find myself very free from pain again. All this morning I staid at home
looking after my workmen to my great content about my stairs, and
at noon by coach to my father's, where Mrs. Turner, The. Joyce, Mr.
Morrice, Mr. Armiger, Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, and his wife, my father
and mother, and myself and my wife. Very merry at dinner; among other
things, because Mrs. Turner and her company eat no flesh at all this
Lent, and I had a great deal of good flesh which made their mouths
water. After dinner Mrs. Pierce and her husband and I and my wife to
Salisbury Court, where coming late he and she light of Col. Boone that
made room for them, and I and my wife sat in the pit, and there met with
Mr. Lewes and Tom Whitton, and saw "The Bondman" done to admiration. So
home by coach, and after a view of what the workmen had done to-day I
went to bed.

27th. Up early to see my workmen at work. My brother Tom comes to me,
and among other things I looked over my old clothes and did give him a
suit of black stuff clothes and a hat and some shoes. At the office all
the morning, where Sir G. Carteret comes, and there I did get him to
promise me some money upon a bill of exchange, whereby I shall secure
myself of L60 which otherwise I should not know how to get. At noon
I found my stairs quite broke down, that I could not get up but by a
ladder; and my wife not being well she kept her chamber all this day. To
the Dolphin to a dinner of Mr. Harris's, where Sir Williams both and
my Lady Batten, and her two daughters, and other company, where a great
deal of mirth, and there staid till 11 o'clock at night; and in our
mirth I sang and sometimes fiddled (there being a noise of fiddlers
there), and at last we fell to dancing, the first time that ever I did
in my life, which I did wonder to see myself to do. At last we made
Mingo, Sir W. Batten's black, and Jack, Sir W. Pen's, dance, and it
was strange how the first did dance with a great deal of seeming skill.
Home, where I found my wife all day in her chamber. So to bed.

28th. Up early among my workmen, then Mr. Creed coming to see me I went
along with him to Sir Robert Slingsby (he being newly maister of that
title by being made a Baronett) to discourse about Mr. Creed's accounts
to be made up, and from thence by coach to my cozen Thomas Pepys, to
borrow L1000 for my Lord, which I am to expect an answer to tomorrow.
So to my Lord's, and there staid and dined, and after dinner did get my
Lord to view Mr. Shepley's accounts as I had examined them, and also to
sign me a bond for my L500. Then with Mr. Shepley to the Theatre and saw
"Rollo" ill acted. That done to drink a cup of ale and so by coach to
London, and having set him down in Cheapside I went home, where I found
a great deal of work done to-day, and also L70 paid me by the Treasurer
upon the bill of exchange that I have had hopes of so long, so that, my
heart in great content; I went to bed.

29th. Up among my workmen with great pleasure. Then to the office, where
I found Sir W. Pen sent down yesterday to Chatham to get two great ships
in readiness presently to go to the East Indies upon some design against
the Dutch, we think, at Goa but it is a great secret yet. Dined at home,
came Mr. Shepley and Moore, and did business with both of them. After
that to Sir W. Batten's, where great store of company at dinner. Among
others my schoolfellow, Mr. Christmas, where very merry, and hither
came letters from above for the fitting of two other ships for the East
Indies in all haste, and so we got orders presently for the Hampshire
and Nonsuch. Then home and there put some papers in order, and not
knowing what to do, the house being so dirty, I went to bed.

30th. At the office we and Sir W. Rider to advise what sort of
provisions to get ready for these ships going to the Indies. Then the
Comptroller and I by water to Mr. Coventry, and there discoursed upon
the same thing. So to my coz. Tho. Pepys, and got him to promise me
L1,000 to lend my Lord upon his and my uncle Robert's and my security.
So to my Lord's, and there got him to sign a bond to him, which I also
signed too, and he did sign counter security to us both. Then into
London up and down and drank a pint of wine with Mr. Creed, and so home
and sent a letter and the bonds to my uncle to sign for my Lord. This
day I spoke with Dr. Castle about making up the dividend for the last
quarter, and agreed to meet about it on Monday.

31st (Sunday). At church, where a stranger preached like a fool. From
thence home and dined with my wife, she staying at home, being unwilling
to dress herself, the house being all dirty. To church again, and after
sermon I walked to my father's, and to Mrs. Turner's, where I could not
woo The. to give me a lesson upon the harpsicon and was angry at it. So
home and finding Will abroad at Sir W. Batten's talking with the people
there (Sir W. and my Lady being in the country), I took occasion to be
angry with him, and so to prayers and to bed.




APRIL 1661

April 1st, 1661. This day my waiting at the Privy Seal comes in again.
Up early among my workmen. So to the once, and went home to dinner with
Sir W. Batten, and after that to the Goat tavern by Charing Cross to
meet Dr. Castle, where he and I drank a pint of wine and talked about
Privy Seal business. Then to the Privy Seal Office and there found Mr.
Moore, but no business yet. Then to Whitefryars, and there saw part of
"Rule a wife and have a wife," which I never saw before, but do not like
it. So to my father, and there finding a discontent between my
father and mother about the maid (which my father likes and my mother
dislikes), I staid till 10 at night, persuading my mother to understand
herself, and that in some high words, which I was sorry for, but she is
grown, poor woman, very froward. So leaving them in the same discontent
I went away home, it being a brave moonshine, and to bed.

2d. Among my workmen early and then along with my wife and Pall to my
Father's by coach there to have them lie a while till my house be done.
I found my mother alone weeping upon my last night's quarrel and so left
her, and took my wife to Charing Cross and there left her to see her
mother who is not well. So I into St. James's Park, where I saw the Duke
of York playing at Pelemele,

     [The game was originally played in the road now styled Pall Mall,
     near St. James's Square, but at the Restoration when sports came in
     fashion again the street was so much built over, that it became
     necessary to find another ground.  The Mall in St. James's Park was
     then laid out for the purpose.]

 the first time that ever I saw the sport.  Then to my Lord's, where I
dined with my Lady, and after we had dined in comes my Lord and Ned
Pickering hungry, and there was not a bit of meat left in the house, the
servants having eat up all, at which my Lord was very angry, and at last
got something dressed. Then to the Privy Seal, and signed some things,
and so to White-fryars and saw "The Little Thiefe," which is a very
merry and pretty play, and the little boy do very well. Then to my
Father's, where I found my mother and my wife in a very good mood, and
so left them and went home. Then to the Dolphin to Sir W. Batten, and
Pen, and other company; among others Mr. Delabar; where strange how
these men, who at other times are all wise men, do now, in their drink,
betwitt and reproach one another with their former conditions, and their
actions as in public concernments, till I was ashamed to see it. But
parted all friends at 12 at night after drinking a great deal of wine.
So home and alone to bed.

3rd. Up among my workmen, my head akeing all day from last night's
debauch. To the office all the morning, and at noon dined with Sir W.
Batten and Pen, who would needs have me drink two drafts of sack to-day
to cure me of last night's disease, which I thought strange but I think
find it true.

     [The proverb, "A hair of the dog that bit you," which probably had
     originally a literal meaning, has long been used to inculcate the
     advice of the two Sir Williams.]

Then home with my workmen all the afternoon, at night into the garden to
play on my flageolette, it being moonshine, where I staid a good while,
and so home and to bed. This day I hear that the Dutch have sent the
King a great present of money, which we think will stop the match with
Portugal; and judge this to be the reason that our so great haste in
sending the two ships to the East Indys is also stayed.

4th. To my workmen, then to my Lord's, and there dined with Mr. Shepley.
After dinner I went in to my Lord and there we had a great deal of
musique, and then came my cozen Tom Pepys and there did accept of the
security which we gave him for his L1000 that we borrow of him, and so
the money to be paid next week. Then to the Privy Seal, and so with Mr.
Moore to my father's, where some friends did sup there and we with them
and late went home, leaving my wife still there. So to bed.

5th: Up among my workmen and so to the office, and then to Sir W. Pen's
with the other Sir William and Sir John Lawson to dinner, and after
that, with them to Mr. Lucy's, a merchant, where much good company, and
there drank a great deal of wine, and in discourse fell to talk of
the weight of people, which did occasion some wagers, and where, among
others, I won half a piece to be spent. Then home, and at night to Sir
W. Batten's, and there very merry with a good barrell of oysters, and
this is the present life I lead. Home and to bed.

6th. Up among my workmen, then to Whitehall, and there at Privy Seal and
elsewhere did business, and among other things met with Mr. Townsend,
who told of his mistake the other day, to put both his legs through one
of his knees of his breeches, and went so all day. Then with Mr. Creed
and Moore to the Leg in the Palace to dinner which I gave them, and
after dinner I saw the girl of the house, being very pretty, go into a
chamber, and I went in after her and kissed her. Then by water, Creed
and I, to Salisbury Court and there saw "Love's Quarrell" acted the
first time, but I do not like the design or words. So calling at my
father's, where they and my wife well, and so home and to bed.

7th (Lord's day). All the morning at home making up my accounts (God
forgive me!) to give up to my Lord this afternoon. Then about 11 o'clock
out of doors towards Westminster and put in at Paul's, where I saw our
minister, Mr. Mills, preaching before my Lord Mayor. So to White Hall,
and there I met with Dr. Fuller of Twickenham, newly come from Ireland;
and took him to my Lord's, where he and I dined; and he did give my Lord
and me a good account of the condition of Ireland, and how it come to
pass, through the joyning of the Fanatiques and the Presbyterians, that
the latter and the former are in their declaration put together under
the names of Fanatiques. After dinner, my Lord and I and Mr. Shepley did
look over our accounts and settle matters of money between us; and my
Lord did tell me much of his mind about getting money and other things
of his family, &c. Then to my father's, where I found Mr. Hunt and his
wife at supper with my father and mother and my wife, where after supper
I left them and so home, and then I went to Sir W. Batten's and resolved
of a journey tomorrow to Chatham, and so home and to bed.

8th. Up early, my Lady Batten knocking at her door that comes into one
of my chambers. I did give directions to my people and workmen, and so
about 8 o'clock we took barge at the Tower, Sir William Batten and his
lady, Mrs. Turner, Mr. Fowler and I. A very pleasant passage and so to
Gravesend, where we dined, and from thence a coach took them and me,
and Mr. Fowler with some others came from Rochester to meet us, on
horseback. At Rochester, where alight at Mr. Alcock's and there drank
and had good sport, with his bringing out so many sorts of cheese. Then
to the Hillhouse at Chatham, where I never was before, and I found a
pretty pleasant house and am pleased with the arms that hang up there.
Here we supped very merry, and late to bed; Sir William telling me that
old Edgeborrow, his predecessor, did die and walk in my chamber, did
make me some what afeard, but not so much as for mirth's sake I did
seem. So to bed in the treasurer's chamber.

9th. And lay and slept well till 3 in the morning, and then waking, and
by the light of the moon I saw my pillow (which overnight I flung from
me) stand upright, but not bethinking myself what it might be, I was a
little afeard, but sleep overcame all and so lay till high morning,
at which time I had a candle brought me and a good fire made, and in
general it was a great pleasure all the time I staid here to see how I
am respected and honoured by all people; and I find that I begin to know
now how to receive so much reverence, which at the beginning I could not
tell how to do. Sir William and I by coach to the dock and there viewed
all the storehouses and the old goods that are this day to be sold,
which was great pleasure to me, and so back again by coach home, where
we had a good dinner, and among other strangers that come, there was Mr.
Hempson and his wife, a pretty woman, and speaks Latin; Mr. Allen and
two daughters of his, both very tall and the youngest very handsome, so
much as I could not forbear to love her exceedingly, having, among other
things, the best hand that ever I saw. After dinner, we went to fit
books and things (Tom Hater being this morning come to us) for the sale,
by an inch of candle, and very good sport we and the ladies that stood
by had, to see the people bid. Among other things sold there was all the
State's arms, which Sir W. Batten bought; intending to set up some of
the images in his garden, and the rest to burn on the Coronacion night.
The sale being done, the ladies and I and Captain Pett and Mr. Castle
took barge and down we went to see the Sovereign, which we did, taking
great pleasure therein, singing all the way, and, among other pleasures,
I put my Lady, Mrs. Turner, Mrs. Hempson, and the two Mrs. Allens into
the lanthorn and I went in and kissed them, demanding it as a fee due to
a principall officer, with all which we were exceeding merry, and drunk
some bottles of wine and neat's tongue, &c. Then back again home and so
supped, and after much mirth to bed.

10th. In the morning to see the Dockhouses. First, Mr. Pett's, the
builder, and there was very kindly received, and among other things he
did offer my Lady Batten a parrot, the best I ever saw, that knew Mingo
so soon as it saw him, having been bred formerly in the house with them;
but for talking and singing I never heard the like. My Lady did accept
of it: Then to see Commissioner Pett's house, he and his family being
absent, and here I wondered how my Lady Batten walked up and down with
envious looks to see how neat and rich everything is (and indeed both
the house and garden is most handsome), saying that she would get it,
for it belonged formerly to the Surveyor of the Navy. Then on board the
Prince, now in the dock, and indeed it has one and no more rich cabins
for carved work, but no gold in her. After that back home, and there eat
a little dinner. Then to Rochester, and there saw the Cathedrall, which
is now fitting for use, and the organ then a-tuning. Then away thence,
observing the great doors of the church, which, they say, was covered
with the skins of the Danes,

     [Traditions similar to that at Rochester, here alluded to, are to be
     found in other places in England.  Sir Harry Englefield, in a
     communication made to the Society of Antiquaries, July 2nd, 1789,
     called attention to the curious popular tale preserved in the
     village of Hadstock, Essex, that the door of the church had been
     covered with the skin of a Danish pirate, who had plundered the
     church.  At Worcester, likewise, it was asserted that the north
     doors of the cathedral had been covered with the skin of a person
     who had sacrilegiously robbed the high altar.  The date of these
     doors appears to be the latter part of the fourteenth century, the
     north porch having been built about 1385.  Dart, in his "History of
     the Abbey Church of St. Peter's, Westminster," 1723 (vol. i., book
     ii., p. 64), relates a like tradition then preserved in reference to
     a door, one of three which closed off a chamber from the south
     transept--namely, a certain building once known as the Chapel of
     Henry VIII., and used as a "Revestry."  This chamber, he states, "is
     inclosed with three doors, the inner cancellated, the middle, which
     is very thick, lined with skins like parchment, and driven full of
     nails.  These skins, they by tradition tell us, were some skins of
     the Danes, tann'd and given here as a memorial of our delivery from
     them."  Portions of this supposed human skin were examined under the
     microscope by the late Mr. John Quekett of the Hunterian Museum, who
     ascertained, beyond question, that in each of the cases the skin was
     human.  From a communication by the late Mr. Albert Way, F.S.A., to
     the late Lord Braybrooke.]

and also had much mirth at a tomb, on which was "Come sweet Jesu," and
I read "Come sweet Mall," &c., at which Captain Pett and I had good
laughter. So to the Salutacion tavern, where Mr. Alcock and many of the
town came and entertained us with wine and oysters and other things,
and hither come Sir John Minnes to us, who is come to-day to see "the
Henery," in which he intends to ride as Vice-Admiral in the narrow seas
all this summer. Here much mirth, but I was a little troubled to stay
too long, because of going to Hempson's, which afterwards we did, and
found it in all things a most pretty house, and rarely furnished, only
it had a most ill access on all sides to it, which is a greatest fault
that I think can be in a house. Here we had, for my sake, two fiddles,
the one a base viall, on which he that played, played well some lyra
lessons, but both together made the worst musique that ever I heard.
We had a fine collacion, but I took little pleasure in that, for the
illness of the musique and for the intentness of my mind upon Mrs.
Rebecca Allen. After we had done eating, the ladies went to dance, and
among the men we had, I was forced to dance too; and did make an ugly
shift. Mrs. R. Allen danced very well, and seems the best humoured woman
that ever I saw. About 9 o'clock Sir William and my Lady went home, and
we continued dancing an hour or two, and so broke up very pleasant and
merry, and so walked home, I leading Mrs. Rebecca, who seemed, I know
not why, in that and other things, to be desirous of my favours and
would in all things show me respects. Going home, she would needs have
me sing, and I did pretty well and was highly esteemed by them. So to
Captain Allen's (where we were last night, and heard him play on the
harpsicon, and I find him to be a perfect good musician), and there,
having no mind to leave Mrs. Rebecca, what with talk and singing (her
father and I), Mrs. Turner and I staid there till 2 o'clock in the
morning and was most exceeding merry, and I had the opportunity of
kissing Mrs. Rebecca very often. Among other things Captain Pett was
saying that he thought that he had got his wife with child since I came
thither. Which I took hold of and was merrily asking him what he would
take to have it said for my honour that it was of my getting? He merrily
answered that he would if I would promise to be godfather to it if it
did come within the time just, and I said that I would. So that I must
remember to compute it when the time comes.

11th. At 2 o'clock, with very great mirth, we went to our lodging and to
bed, and lay till 7, and then called up by Sir W. Batten, so I arose and
we did some business, and then came Captn. Allen, and he and I withdrew
and sang a song or two, and among others took pleasure in "Goe and bee
hanged, that's good-bye." The young ladies come too, and so I did again
please myself with Mrs. Rebecca, and about 9 o'clock, after we had
breakfasted, we sett forth for London, and indeed I was a little
troubled to part with Mrs. Rebecca, for which God forgive me. Thus we
went away through Rochester, calling and taking leave of Mr. Alcock
at the door, Capt. Cuttance going with us. We baited at Dartford, and
thence to London, but of all the journeys that ever I made this was the
merriest, and I was in a strange mood for mirth.

Among other things, I got my Lady to let her maid, Mrs. Anne, to ride
all the way on horseback, and she rides exceeding well; and so I called
her my clerk, that she went to wait upon me. I met two little schoolboys
going with pitchers of ale to their schoolmaster to break up against
Easter, and I did drink of some of one of them and give him two pence.
By and by we come to two little girls keeping cows, and I saw one of
them very pretty, so I had a mind to make her ask my blessing, and
telling her that I was her godfather, she asked me innocently whether I
was not Ned Wooding, and I said that I was, so she kneeled down and very
simply called, "Pray, godfather, pray to God to bless me," which made
us very merry, and I gave her twopence. In several places, I asked women
whether they would sell me their children, but they denied me all, but
said they would give me one to keep for them, if I would. Mrs. Anne and
I rode under the man that hangs upon Shooter's Hill,

     [Shooter's Hill, Kent, between the eighth and ninth milestones on
     the Dover road.  It was long a notorious haunt of highwaymen.  The
     custom was to leave the bodies of criminals hanging until the bones
     fell to the ground.]

and a filthy sight it was to see how his flesh is shrunk to his bones.
So home and I found all well, and a deal of work done since I went. I
sent to see how my wife do, who is well, and my brother John come from
Cambridge. To Sir W. Batten's and there supped, and very merry with the
young ladles. So to bed very sleepy for last night's work, concluding
that it is the pleasantest journey in all respects that ever I had in my
life.

12th. Up among my workmen, and about 7 o'clock comes my wife to see me
and my brother John with her, who I am glad to see, but I sent them away
because of going to the office, and there dined with Sir W. Batten,
all fish dinner, it being Good Friday. Then home and looking over my
workmen, and then into the City and saw in what forwardness all things
are for the Coronacion, which will be very magnificent. Then back again
home and to my chamber, to set down in my diary all my late journey,
which I do with great pleasure; and while I am now writing comes one
with a tickett to invite me to Captain Robert Blake's buriall, for whose
death I am very sorry, and do much wonder at it, he being a little while
since a very likely man to live as any I knew. Since my going out of
town, there is one Alexander Rosse taken and sent to the Counter by Sir
Thomas Allen, for counterfeiting my hand to a ticket, and we this day at
the office have given order to Mr. Smith to prosecute him. To bed.

13th. To Whitehall by water from Towre-wharf, where we could not pass
the ordinary way, because they were mending of the great stone steps
against the Coronacion. With Sir W. Pen, then to my Lord's, and thence
with Capt. Cuttance and Capt. Clark to drink our morning draught
together, and before we could get back again my Lord was gone out. So to
Whitehall again and, met with my Lord above with the Duke; and after a
little talk with him, I went to the Banquethouse, and there saw the King
heal, the first time that ever I saw him do it; which he did with great
gravity, and it seemed to me to be an ugly office and a simple one. That
done to my Lord's and dined there, and so by water with parson Turner
towards London, and upon my telling of him of Mr. Moore to be a fit man
to do his business with Bishop Wren, about which he was going, he went
back out of my boat into another to Whitehall, and so I forwards home
and there by and by took coach with Sir W. Pen and Captain Terne and
went to the buriall of Captain Robert Blake, at Wapping, and there had
each of us a ring, but it being dirty, we would not go to church with
them, but with our coach we returned home, and there staid a little, and
then he and I alone to the Dolphin (Sir W. Batten being this day gone
with his wife to Walthamstow to keep Easter), and there had a supper by
ourselves, we both being very hungry, and staying there late drinking I
became very sleepy, and so we went home and I to bed.

14th (Easter. Lord's day). In the morning towards my father's, and by
the way heard Mr. Jacomb, at Ludgate, upon these words, "Christ loved
you and therefore let us love one another," and made a lazy sermon, like
a Presbyterian. Then to my father's and dined there, and Dr. Fairbrother
(lately come to town) with us. After dinner I went to the Temple and
there heard Dr. Griffith, a good sermon for the day; so with Mr. Moore
(whom I met there) to my Lord's, and there he shewed me a copy of my
Lord Chancellor's patent for Earl, and I read the preamble, which is
very short, modest, and good. Here my Lord saw us and spoke to me about
getting Mr. Moore to come and govern his house while he goes to sea,
which I promised him to do and did afterwards speak to Mr. Moore, and
he is willing. Then hearing that Mr. Barnwell was come, with some of my
Lord's little children, yesterday to town, to see the Coronacion, I went
and found them at the Goat, at Charing Cross, and there I went and drank
with them a good while, whom I found in very good health and very merry
Then to my father's, and after supper seemed willing to go home, and
my wife seeming to be so too I went away in a discontent, but she, poor
wretch, followed me as far in the rain and dark as Fleet Bridge to fetch
me back again, and so I did, and lay with her to-night, which I have not
done these eight or ten days before.

15th. From my father's, it being a very foul morning for the King and
Lords to go to Windsor, I went to the office and there met Mr. Coventry
and Sir Robt. Slingsby, but did no business, but only appoint to go to
Deptford together tomorrow. Mr. Coventry being gone, and I having at
home laid up L200 which I had brought this morning home from Alderman
Backwell's, I went home by coach with Sir R. Slingsby and dined with
him, and had a very good dinner. His lady' seems a good woman and very
desirous they were to hear this noon by the post how the election has
gone at Newcastle, wherein he is concerned, but the letters are not come
yet. To my uncle Wight's, and after a little stay with them he and I to
Mr. Rawlinson's, and there staid all the afternoon, it being very foul,
and had a little talk with him what good I might make of these ships
that go to Portugal by venturing some money by them, and he will give me
an answer to it shortly. So home and sent for the Barber, and after that
to bed.

16th. So soon as word was brought me that Mr. Coventry was come with the
barge to the Towre, I went to him, and found him reading of the Psalms
in short hand (which he is now busy about), and had good sport about the
long marks that are made there for sentences in divinity, which he is
never like to make use of. Here he and I sat till the Comptroller came
and then we put off for Deptford, where we went on board the King's
pleasure boat that Commissioner Pett is making, and indeed it will be a
most pretty thing. From thence to Commr. Pett's lodging, and there had a
good breakfast, and in came the two Sir Wms. from Walthamstow, and so
we sat down and did a great deal of public business about the fitting
of the fleet that is now going out. That done we went to the Globe and
there had a good dinner, and by and by took barge again and so home. By
the way they would have me sing, which I did to Mr. Coventry, who went
up to Sir William Batten's, and there we staid and talked a good while,
and then broke up and I home, and then to my father's and there lay with
my wife.

17th. By land and saw the arches, which are now almost done and are very
fine, and I saw the picture of the ships and other things this morning,
set up before the East Indy House, which are well done. So to the
office, and that being done I went to dinner with Sir W. Batten, and
then home to my workmen, and saw them go on with great content to me.
Then comes Mr. Allen of Chatham, and I took him to the Mitre and there
did drink with him, and did get of him the song that pleased me so well
there the other day, "Of Shitten come Shites the beginning of love." His
daughters are to come to town to-morrow, but I know not whether I shall
see them or no. That done I went to the Dolphin by appointment and there
I met Sir Wms. both and Mr. Castle, and did eat a barrel of oysters and
two lobsters, which I did give them, and were very merry. Here we had
great talk of Mr. Warren's being knighted by the King, and Sir W. B.
seemed to be very much incensed against him. So home.

18th. Up with my workmen and then about 9 o'clock took horse with both
the Sir Williams for Walthamstow, and there we found my Lady and her
daughters all; and a pleasant day it was, and all things else, but that
my Lady was in a bad mood, which we were troubled at, and had she
been noble she would not have been so with her servants, when we came
thither, and this Sir W. Pen took notice of, as well as I. After dinner
we all went to the Church stile, and there eat and drank, and I was as
merry as I could counterfeit myself to be. Then, it raining hard, we
left Sir W. Batten, and we two returned and called at Mr.----and drank
some brave wine there, and then homewards again and in our way met with
two country fellows upon one horse, which I did, without much ado, give
the way to, but Sir W. Pen would not, but struck them and they him, and
so passed away, but they giving him some high words, he went back again
and struck them off their horse, in a simple fury, and without much
honour, in my mind, and so came away. Home, and I sat with him a good
while talking, and then home and to bed.

19th. Among my workmen and then to the office, and after that dined with
Sir W. Batten, and then home, where Sir W. Warren came, and I took him
and Mr. Shepley and Moore with me to the Mitre, and there I cleared with
Warren for the deals I bought lately for my Lord of him, and he went
away, and we staid afterwards a good while and talked, and so parted, it
being so foul that I could not go to Whitehall to see the Knights of
the Bath made to-day, which do trouble me mightily. So home, and having
staid awhile till Will came in (with whom I was vexed for staying
abroad), he comes and then I went by water to my father's, and then
after supper to bed with my wife.

20th. Here comes my boy to tell me that the Duke of York had sent for
all the principal officers, &c., to come to him to-day. So I went by
water to Mr. Coventry's, and there staid and talked a good while with
him till all the rest come. We went up and saw the Duke dress himself,
and in his night habitt he is a very plain man. Then he sent us to his
closett, where we saw among other things two very fine chests, covered
with gold and Indian varnish, given him by the East Indy Company of
Holland. The Duke comes; and after he had told us that the fleet was
designed for Algier (which was kept from us till now), we did advise
about many things as to the fitting of the fleet, and so went away. And
from thence to the Privy Seal, where little to do, and after that took
Mr. Creed and Moore and gave them their morning draught, and after that
to my Lord's, where Sir W. Pen came to me, and dined with my Lord. After
dinner he and others that dined there went away, and then my Lord looked
upon his pages' and footmen's liverys, which are come home to-day, and
will be handsome, though not gaudy. Then with my Lady and my Lady Wright
to White Hall; and in the Banqueting-house saw the King create my Lord
Chancellor and several others, Earls, and Mr. Crew and several others,
Barons: the first being led up by Heralds and five old Earls to the
King, and there the patent is read, and the King puts on his vest, and
sword, and coronet, and gives him the patent. And then he kisseth the
King's hand, and rises and stands covered before the king. And the same
for the Barons, only he is led up but by three of the old Barons, and
are girt with swords before they go to the King. That being done (which
was very pleasant to see their habits), I carried my Lady back, and I
found my Lord angry, for that his page had let my Lord's new beaver
be changed for an old hat; then I went away, and with Mr. Creed to the
Exchange and bought some things, as gloves and bandstrings, &c. So back
to the Cockpitt, and there, by the favour of one Mr. Bowman, he and I
got in, and there saw the King and Duke of York and his Duchess (which
is a plain woman, and like her mother, my Lady Chancellor). And so saw
"The Humersome Lieutenant" acted before the King, but not very well
done.

But my pleasure was great to see the manner of it, and so many great
beauties, but above all Mrs. Palmer, with whom the King do discover a
great deal of familiarity. So Mr. Creed and I (the play being done)
went to Mrs. Harper's, and there sat and drank, it being about twelve at
night. The ways being now so dirty, and stopped up with the rayles which
are this day set up in the streets, I would not go home, but went with
him to his lodging at Mr. Ware's, and there lay all night.

21st (Lord's day). In the morning we were troubled to hear it rain as it
did, because of the great show tomorrow. After I was ready I walked to
my father's and there found the late maid to be gone and another come by
my mother's choice, which my father do not like, and so great difference
there will be between my father and mother about it. Here dined Doctor
Thos. Pepys and Dr. Fayrebrother; and all our talk about to-morrow's
show, and our trouble that it is like to be a wet day. After dinner
comes in my coz. Snow and his wife, and I think stay there till the show
be over. Then I went home, and all the way is so thronged with people
to see the triumphal arches, that I could hardly pass for them. So home,
people being at church, and I got home unseen, and so up to my chamber
and saw done these last five or six days' diarys. My mind a little
troubled about my workmen, which, being foreigners,--[Foreigners were
workmen dwelling outside the city.]--are like to be troubled by a couple
of lazy rogues that worked with me the other day, that are citizens, and
so my work will be hindered, but I must prevent it if I can.

22d. KING'S GOING FROM YE TOWER TO WHITE HALL.

     [The king in the early morning of the 22nd went from Whitehall to
     the Tower by water, so that he might proceed from thence through the
     City to Westminster Abbey, there to be crowned.]

Up early and made myself as fine as I could, and put on my velvet coat,
the first day that I put it on, though made half a year ago. And being
ready, Sir W. Batten, my Lady, and his two daughters and his son
and wife, and Sir W. Pen and his son and I, went to Mr. Young's, the
flag-maker, in Corne-hill;

     [The members of the Navy Office appear to have chosen Mr. Young's
     house on account of its nearness to the second triumphal arch,
     situated near the Royal Exchange, which was dedicated to the Navy.]

and there we had a good room to ourselves, with wine and good cake, and
saw the show very well. In which it is impossible to relate the glory
of this day, expressed in the clothes of them that rid, and their horses
and horses clothes, among others, my Lord Sandwich's. Embroidery and
diamonds were ordinary among them. The Knights of the Bath was a brave
sight of itself; and their Esquires, among which Mr. Armiger was
an Esquire to one of the Knights. Remarquable were the two men that
represent the two Dukes of Normandy and Aquitane. The Bishops come next
after Barons, which is the higher place; which makes me think that the
next Parliament they will be called to the House of Lords. My Lord Monk
rode bare after the King, and led in his hand a spare horse, as being
Master of the Horse. The King, in a most rich embroidered suit and
cloak, looked most noble. Wadlow,

     [Simon Wadlow was the original of "old Sir Simon the king," the
     favourite air of Squire Western in "Tom Jones."

              "Hang up all the poor hop-drinkers,
               Cries old Sim, the king of skinkers."

     Ben Jonson, Verses over the door into the Apollo.]

the vintner, at the Devil; in Fleetstreet, did lead a fine company of
soldiers, all young comely men, in white doublets. There followed the
Vice-Chamberlain, Sir G. Carteret, a company of men all like Turks; but
I know not yet what they are for. The streets all gravelled, and the
houses hung with carpets before them, made brave show, and the ladies
out of the windows, one of which over against us I took much notice of,
and spoke of her, which made good sport among us. So glorious was the
show with gold and silver, that we were not able to look at it, our eyes
at last being so much overcome with it. Both the King and the Duke
of York took notice of us, as he saw us at the window. The show being
ended, Mr. Young did give us a dinner, at which we were very merry,
and pleased above imagination at what we have seen. Sir W. Batten going
home, he and I called and drunk some mum

     [Mum.  Ale brewed with wheat at Brunswick.

              "Sedulous and stout
               With bowls of fattening mum."

     J. Phillips, Cyder, Vol. ii.  p. 231.]

and laid our wager about my Lady Faulconbridge's name,

     [Mary, third daughter of Oliver Cromwell, and second wife of Thomas
     Bellasis, second Viscount Fauconberg, created Earl of Fauconberg,
     April 9th, 1689.]

which he says not to be Mary, and so I won above 20s. So home, where
Will and the boy staid and saw the show upon Towre Hill, and Jane at
T. Pepys's, The. Turner, and my wife at Charles Glassecocke's, in Fleet
Street. In the evening by water to White Hall to my Lord's, and there I
spoke with my Lord. He talked with me about his suit, which was made in
France, and cost him L200, and very rich it is with embroidery. I lay
with Mr. Shepley, and

                             CORONACION DAY.

23d. About 4 I rose and got to the Abbey, where I followed Sir J.
Denham, the Surveyor, with some company that he was leading in. And with
much ado, by the favour of Mr. Cooper, his man, did get up into a great
scaffold across the North end of the Abbey, where with a great deal of
patience I sat from past 4 till 11 before the King came in. And a great
pleasure it was to see the Abbey raised in the middle, all covered with
red, and a throne (that is a chair) and footstool on the top of it;
and all the officers of all kinds, so much as the very fidlers, in red
vests. At last comes in the Dean and Prebends of Westminster, with
the Bishops (many of them in cloth of gold copes), and after them the
Nobility, all in their Parliament robes, which was a most magnificent
sight. Then the Duke, and the King with a scepter (carried by my Lord
Sandwich) and sword and mond

     [Mond or orb of gold, with a cross set with precious stones, carried
     by the Duke of Buckingham.]

before him, and the crown too. The King in his robes, bare-headed, which
was very fine. And after all had placed themselves, there was a sermon
and the service; and then in the Quire at the high altar, the King
passed through all the ceremonies of the Coronacon, which to my great
grief I and most in the Abbey could not see. The crown being put upon
his head, a great shout begun, and he came forth to the throne, and
there passed more ceremonies: as taking the oath, and having things read
to him by the Bishop; and his lords (who put on their caps as soon as
the King put on his crown)

     [As yet barons had no coronet.  A grant of that outward mark of
     dignity was made to them by Charles soon after his coronation.
     Queen Elizabeth had assigned coronets to viscounts.--B.]

and bishops come, and kneeled before him. And three times the King at
Arms went to the three open places on the scaffold, and proclaimed, that
if any one could show any reason why Charles Stewart should not be King
of England, that now he should come and speak. And a Generall Pardon
also was read by the Lord Chancellor, and meddalls flung up and down by
my Lord Cornwallis, of silver, but I could not come by any. But so great
a noise that I could make but little of the musique; and indeed, it was
lost to every body. But I had so great a lust to.... that I went out a
little while before the King had done all his ceremonies, and went round
the Abbey to Westminster Hall, all the way within rayles, and 10,000
people, with the ground covered with blue cloth; and scaffolds all
the way. Into the Hall I got, where it was very fine with hangings and
scaffolds one upon another full of brave ladies; and my wife in one
little one, on the right hand. Here I staid walking up and down, and at
last upon one of the side stalls I stood and saw the King come in with
all the persons (but the soldiers) that were yesterday in the cavalcade;
and a most pleasant sight it was to see them in their several robes. And
the King came in with his crown on, and his sceptre in his hand, under
a canopy borne up by six silver staves, carried by Barons of the Cinque
Ports,

     [Pepys was himself one of the Barons of the Cinque Ports at the
     Coronation of James II.]

and little bells at every end. And after a long time, he got up to the
farther end, and all set themselves down at their several tables; and
that was also a brave sight: and the King's first course carried up
by the Knights of the Bath. And many fine ceremonies there was of
the Heralds leading up people before him, and bowing; and my Lord of
Albemarle's going to the kitchin and eat a bit of the first dish that
was to go to the King's table. But, above all, was these three Lords,
Northumberland, and Suffolk, and the Duke of Ormond, coming before the
courses on horseback, and staying so all dinner-time, and at last to
bring up [Dymock] the King's Champion, all in armour on horseback, with
his spear and targett carried before him. And a Herald proclaims "That
if any dare deny Charles Stewart to be lawful King of England, here was
a Champion that would fight with him;"

     [The terms of the Champion's challenge were as follows: "If any
     person of what degree soever, high or low, shall deny or gainsay our
     Soveraigne Lord King Charles the Second, King of England, Scotland,
     France and Ireland, defender of the faith, Sonne and next heire to
     our Soveraigne Lord Charles the First, the last King deceased, to be
     right heire to the Imperiall Crowne of this Realme of England, or
     that bee ought not to enjoy the same; here is his champion, who
     sayth that he lyeth and is a false Traytor, being ready in person to
     combate with him, and in this quarrell will venture his life against
     him, on what day soever hee shall be appointed."]

and with these words, the Champion flings down his gauntlet, and all
this he do three times in his going up towards the King's table. At
last when he is come, the King drinks to him, and then sends him the cup
which is of gold, and he drinks it off, and then rides back again with
the cup in his hand. I went from table to table to see the Bishops and
all others at their dinner, and was infinitely pleased with it. And at
the Lords' table, I met with William Howe, and he spoke to my Lord for
me, and he did give me four rabbits and a pullet, and so I got it and
Mr. Creed and I got Mr. Michell to give us some bread, and so we at a
stall eat it, as every body else did what they could get. I took a great
deal of pleasure to go up and down, and look upon the ladies, and to
hear the musique of all sorts, but above all, the 24 violins: About six
at night they had dined, and I went up to my wife, and there met with a
pretty lady (Mrs. Frankleyn, a Doctor's wife, a friend of Mr. Bowyer's),
and kissed them both, and by and by took them down to Mr. Bowyer's. And
strange it is to think, that these two days have held up fair till now
that all is done, and the King gone out of the Hall; and then it fell
a-raining and thundering and lightening as I have not seen it do for
some years: which people did take great notice of; God's blessing of the
work of these two days, which is a foolery to take too much notice of
such things. I observed little disorder in all this, but only the King's
footmen had got hold of the canopy, and would keep it from the Barons of
the Cinque Ports,

     [Bishop Kennett gives a somewhat fuller account of this unseemly
     broil: "No sooner had the aforesaid Barons brought up the King to
     the foot of the stairs in Westminster Hall, ascending to his throne,
     and turned on the left hand (towards their own table) out of the
     way, but the King's footmen most insolently and violently seized
     upon the canopy, which the Barons endeavouring to keep and defend,
     were by their number and strength dragged clown to the lower end of
     the Hall, nevertheless still keeping their hold; and had not Mr.
     Owen York Herald, being accidentally near the Hall door, and seeing
     the contest, caused the same to be shut, the footmen had certainly
     carried it away by force.  But in the interim also (speedy notice
     hereof having been given the King) one of the Querries were sent
     from him, with command to imprison the footmen, and dismiss them out
     of his service, which put an end to the present disturbance.  These
     footmen were also commanded to make their submission to the Court of
     Claims, which was accordingly done by them the 30th April following,
     and the canopy then delivered back to the said Barons."  Whilst this
     disturbance happened, the upper end of the first table, which had
     been appointed for the Barons of the Cinque Ports, was taken up by
     the Bishops, judges, &c., probably nothing loth to take precedence
     of them; and the poor Barons, naturally unwilling to lose their
     dinner, were necessitated to eat it at the bottom of the second
     table, below the Masters of Chancery and others of the long
     robe.-B.]

which they endeavoured to force from them again, but could not do it
till my Lord Duke of Albemarle caused it to be put into Sir R. Pye's'
hand till tomorrow to be decided. At Mr. Bowyer's; a great deal of
company, some I knew, others I did not. Here we staid upon the leads and
below till it was late, expecting to see the fire-works, but they were
not performed to-night: only the City had a light like a glory round
about it with bonfires. At last I went to Kingstreet, and there sent
Crockford to my father's and my house, to tell them I could not come
home tonight, because of the dirt, and a coach could not be had. And
so after drinking a pot of ale alone at Mrs. Harper's I returned to Mr.
Bowyer's, and after a little stay more I took my wife and Mrs. Frankleyn
(who I proffered the civility of lying with my wife at Mrs. Hunt's
to-night) to Axe-yard, in which at the further end there were three
great bonfires, and a great many great gallants, men and women; and
they laid hold of us, and would have us drink the King's health upon our
knees, kneeling upon a faggot, which we all did, they drinking to us one
after another. Which we thought a strange frolique; but these gallants
continued thus a great while, and I wondered to see how the ladies did
tipple. At last I sent my wife and her bedfellow to bed, and Mr. Hunt
and I went in with Mr. Thornbury (who did give the company all their
wine, he being yeoman of the wine-cellar to the King) to his house; and
there, with his wife and two of his sisters, and some gallant sparks
that were there, we drank the King's health, and nothing else, till one
of the gentlemen fell down stark drunk, and there lay spewing; and I
went to my Lord's pretty well. But no sooner a-bed with Mr. Shepley but
my head began to hum, and I to vomit, and if ever I was foxed it was
now, which I cannot say yet, because I fell asleep and slept till
morning. Only when I waked I found myself wet with my spewing. Thus did
the day end with joy every where; and blessed be God, I have not heard
of any mischance to any body through it all, but only to Serjt. Glynne,
whose horse fell upon him yesterday, and is like to kill him, which
people do please themselves to see how just God is to punish the rogue
at such a time as this; he being now one of the King's Serjeants,
and rode in the cavalcade with Maynard, to whom people wish the same
fortune. There was also this night in King-street, [a woman] had her eye
put out by a boy's flinging a firebrand into the coach. Now, after
all this, I can say that, besides the pleasure of the sight of these
glorious things, I may now shut my eyes against any other objects, nor
for the future trouble myself to see things of state and show, as being
sure never to see the like again in this world.

24th. Waked in the morning with my head in a sad taking through the last
night's drink, which I am very sorry for; so rose and went out with Mr.
Creed to drink our morning draft, which he did give me in chocolate

     [Chocolate was introduced into England about the year 1652.  In the
     "Publick Advertiser" of Tuesday, June 16-22, 1657, we find the
     following; "In Bishopsgate Street in Queen's Head Alley, at a
     Frenchman's house, is an excellent West India drink called
     chocolate, to be sold, where you may have it ready at any time, and
     also unmade at reasonable rates."--M. B.]

to settle my stomach. And after that I to my wife, who lay with Mrs.
Frankelyn at the next door to Mrs. Hunt's, and they were ready, and so I
took them up in a coach, and carried the ladies to Paul's, and there
set her down, and so my wife and I home, and I to the office. That being
done my wife and I went to dinner to Sir W. Batten, and all our talk
about the happy conclusion of these last solemnities. After dinner home,
and advised with my wife about ordering things in my house, and then
she went away to my father's to lie, and I staid with my workmen, who do
please me very well with their work. At night, set myself to write down
these three days' diary, and while I am about it, I hear the noise of
the chambers,--[A chamber is a small piece of ordnance.]--and other
things of the fire-works, which are now playing upon the Thames before
the King; and I wish myself with them, being sorry not to see them. So
to bed.

25th. All the morning with my workmen with great pleasure to see them
near coming to an end. At noon Mr. Moore and I went to an Ordinary
at the King's Head in Towre Street, and there had a dirty dinner.
Afterwards home and having done some business with him, in comes Mr.
Sheply and Pierce the surgeon, and they and I to the Mitre and there
staid a while and drank, and so home and after a little rending to bed.

26th. At the office all the morning, and at noon dined by myself at home
on a piece of meat from the cook's, and so at home all the afternoon
with my workmen, and at night to bed, having some thoughts to order
my business so as to go to Portsmouth the next week with Sir Robert
Slingsby.

27th. In the morning to my Lord's, and there dined with my Lady, and
after dinner with Mr. Creed and Captain Ferrers to the Theatre to see
"The Chances," and after that to the Cock alehouse, where we had a harp
and viallin played to us, and so home by coach to Sir W. Batten's, who
seems so inquisitive when my house will be made an end of that I am
troubled to go thither. So home with some trouble in my mind about it.

28th (Lord's day). In the morning to my father's, where I dined, and in
the afternoon to their church, where come Mrs. Turner and Mrs. Edward
Pepys, and several other ladies, and so I went out of the pew into
another. And after sermon home with them, and there staid a while and
talked with them and was sent for to my father's, where my cozen Angier
and his wife, of Cambridge, to whom I went, and was glad to see them,
and sent for wine for them, and they supped with my father. After supper
my father told me of an odd passage the other night in bed between my
mother and him, and she would not let him come to bed to her out of
jealousy of him and an ugly wench that lived there lately, the most
ill-favoured slut that ever I saw in my life, which I was ashamed to
hear that my mother should be become such a fool, and my father bid me
to take notice of it to my mother, and to make peace between him and
her. All which do trouble me very much. So to bed to my wife.

29th. Up and with my father towards my house, and by the way met with
Lieut. Lambert, and with him to the Dolphin in Tower Street and drank
our morning draught, he being much troubled about his being offered
a fourth rate ship to be Lieutenant of her now he has been two years
Lieutenant in a first rate. So to the office, where it is determined
that I should go to-morrow to Portsmouth. So I went out of the office
to Whitehall presently, and there spoke with Sir W. Pen and Sir George
Carteret and had their advice as to my going, and so back again home,
where I directed Mr. Hater what to do in order to our going to-morrow,
and so back again by coach to Whitehall and there eat something in the
buttery at my Lord's with John Goods and Ned Osgood. And so home again,
and gave order to my workmen what to do in my absence. At night to Sir
W. Batten's, and by his and Sir W. Pen's persuasion I sent for my wife
from my father's, who came to us to Mrs. Turner's, where we were all
at a collacion to-night till twelve o'clock, there being a gentlewoman
there that did play well and sang well to the Harpsicon, and very merry
we were. So home and to bed, where my wife had not lain a great while.

30th. This morning, after order given to my workmen, my wife and I and
Mr. Creed took coach, and in Fishstreet took up Mr. Hater and his wife,
who through her mask seemed at first to be an old woman, but afterwards
I found her to be a very pretty modest black woman. We got a small bait
at Leatherhead, and so to Godlyman, where we lay all night, and were
very merry, having this day no other extraordinary rencontre, but my
hat falling off my head at Newington into the water, by which it was
spoiled, and I ashamed of it. I am sorry that I am not at London, to be
at Hide-parke to-morrow, among the great gallants and ladies, which will
be very fine.




MAY 1661

May 1st. Up early, and bated at Petersfield, in the room which the King
lay in lately at his being there. Here very merry, and played us and our
wives at bowls. Then we set forth again, and so to Portsmouth, seeming
to me to be a very pleasant and strong place; and we lay at the Red
Lyon, where Haselrigge and Scott and Walton did hold their councill,
when they were here, against Lambert and the Committee of Safety.
Several officers of the Yard came to see us to-night, and merry we were,
but troubled to have no better lodgings.

2nd. Up, and Mr. Creed and I to walk round the town upon the walls. Then
to our inn, and there all the officers of the Yard to see me with great
respect, and I walked with them to the Dock and saw all the stores, and
much pleased with the sight of the place. Back and brought them all
to dinner with me, and treated them handsomely; and so after dinner by
water to the Yard, and there we made the sale of the old provisions.
Then we and our wives all to see the Montagu, which is a fine ship, and
so to the town again by water, and then to see the room where the Duke
of Buckingham was killed by Felton.--1628. So to our lodging, and to
supper and to bed. To-night came Mr. Stevens to town to help us to pay
off the Fox.

3rd. Early to walk with Mr. Creed up and down the town, and it was in
his and some others' thoughts to have got me made free of the town, but
the Mayor, it seems, unwilling, and so they could not do it. Then to
the payhouse, and there paid off the ship, and so to a short dinner,
and then took coach, leaving Mrs. Hater there to stay with her husband's
friends, and we to Petersfield, having nothing more of trouble in all
my journey, but the exceeding unmannerly and most epicure-like palate
of Mr. Creed. Here my wife and I lay in the room the Queen lately lay at
her going into France.

4th. Up in the morning and took coach, and so to Gilford, where we lay
at the Red Lyon, the best Inn, and lay in the room the King lately lay
in, where we had time to see the Hospital, built by Archbishop Abbott,
and the free school, and were civilly treated by the Mayster. So to
supper, and to bed, being very merry about our discourse with the
Drawers concerning the minister of the Town, with a red face and a
girdle. So to bed, where we lay and sleep well.

5th (Lord's day). Mr. Creed and I went to the red-faced Parson's church,
and heard a good sermon of him, better than I looked for. Then home, and
had a good dinner, and after dinner fell in some talk in Divinity with
Mr. Stevens that kept us till it was past Church time. Anon we walked
into the garden, and there played the fool a great while, trying who of
Mr. Creed or I could go best over the edge of an old fountain well, and
I won a quart of sack of him. Then to supper in the banquet house, and
there my wife and I did talk high, she against and I for Mrs. Pierce
(that she was a beauty), till we were both angry. Then to walk in the
fields, and so to our quarters, and to bed.

6th. Up by four o'clock and took coach. Mr. Creed rode, and left us that
we know not whither he went. We went on, thinking to be at home before
the officers rose, but finding we could not we staid by the way and eat
some cakes, and so home, where I was much troubled to see no more work
done in my absence than there was, but it could not be helped. I sent my
wife to my father's, and I went and sat till late with my Lady Batten,
both the Sir Williams being gone this day to pay off some ships at
Deptford. So home and to bed without seeing of them. I hear to-night
that the Duke of York's son is this day dead, which I believe will
please every body; and I hear that the Duke and his Lady themselves are
not much troubled at it.

7th. In the morning to Mr. Coventry, Sir G. Carteret, and my Lord's to
give them an account of my return. My Lady, I find, is, since my going,
gone to the Wardrobe. Then with Mr. Creed into London, to several places
about his and my business, being much stopped in our way by the City
traynebands, who go in much solemnity and pomp this day to muster before
the King and the Duke, and shops in the City are shut up every where
all this day. He carried me to an ordinary by the Old Exchange, where we
come a little too late, but we had very good cheer for our 18d. a-piece,
and an excellent droll too, my host, and his wife so fine a woman; and
sung and played so well that I staid a great while and drunk a great
deal of wine. Then home and staid among my workmen all day, and took
order for things for the finishing of their work, and so at night to
Sir W. Batten's, and there supped and so home and to bed, having sent my
Lord a letter to-night to excuse myself for not going with him to-morrow
to the Hope, whither he is to go to see in what condition the fleet is
in.

8th. This morning came my brother John to take his leave of me, he being
to return to Cambridge to-morrow, and after I had chid him for going
with my Will the other day to Deptford with the principal officers, I
did give him some good counsell and 20s. in money, and so he went away.
All this day I staid at home with my workmen without eating anything,
and took much pleasure to see my work go forward. At night comes my wife
not well from my father's, having had a fore-tooth drawn out to-day,
which do trouble me, and the more because I am now in the greatest of
all my dirt. My Will also returned to-night pretty well, he being gone
yesterday not very well to his father's. To-day I received a letter from
my uncle, to beg an old fiddle of me for my Cozen Perkin, the miller,
whose mill the wind hath lately broke down, and now he hath nothing to
live by but fiddling, and he must needs have it against Whitsuntide to
play to the country girls; but it vexed me to see how my uncle writes to
me, as if he were not able to buy him one. But I intend tomorrow to send
him one. At night I set down my journal of my late journey to this time,
and so to bed. My wife not being well and I very angry with her for her
coming hither in that condition.

9th. With my workmen all the morning, my wife being ill and in great
pain with her old pain, which troubled me much because that my house
is in this condition of dirt. In the afternoon I went to Whitehall and
there spoke with my Lord at his lodgings, and there being with him my
Lord Chamberlain, I spoke for my old waterman Payne, to get into White's
place, who was waterman to my Lord Chamberlain, and is now to go master
of the barge to my Lord to sea, and my Lord Chamberlain did promise that
Payne should be entertained in White's place with him. From thence to
Sir G. Carteret, and there did get his promise for the payment of the
remainder of the bill of Mr. Creed's, wherein of late I have been so
much concerned, which did so much rejoice me that I meeting with Mr.
Childe took him to the Swan Tavern in King Street, and there did give
him a tankard of white wine and sugar,--[The popular taste was formerly
for sweet wines, and sugar was frequently mixed with the wine.]--and so
I went by water home and set myself to get my Lord's accounts made up,
which was till nine at night before I could finish, and then I walked
to the Wardrobe, being the first time I was there since my Lady came
thither, who I found all alone, and so she shewed me all the lodgings as
they are now fitted, and they seem pretty pleasant. By and by comes in
my Lord, and so, after looking over my accounts, I returned home, being
a dirty and dark walk. So to bed.

10th. At the office all the morning, and the afternoon among my workmen
with great pleasure, because being near an end of their work. This
afternoon came Mr. Blackburn and Creed to see me, and I took them to the
Dolphin, and there drank a great deal of Rhenish wine with them and so
home, having some talk with Mr. Blackburn about his kinsman my Will,
and he did give me good satisfaction in that it is his desire that his
kinsman should do me all service, and that he would give him the best
counsel he could to make him good. Which I begin of late to fear that
he will not because of the bad company that I find that he do begin to
take. This afternoon Mr. Hater received for me the L225 due upon Mr.
Creed's bill in which I am concerned so much, which do make me very
glad. At night to Sir W. Batten and sat a while. So to bed.

11th. This morning I went by water with Payne (Mr. Moore being with me)
to my Lord Chamberlain at Whitehall, and there spoke with my Lord, and
he did accept of Payne for his waterman, as I had lately endeavoured
to get him to be. After that Mr. Cooling did give Payne an order to
be entertained, and so I left him and Mr. Moore, and I went to Graye's
Inne, and there to a barber's, where I was trimmed, and had my haire
cut, in which I am lately become a little curious, finding that the
length of it do become me very much. So, calling at my father's, I went
home, and there staid and saw my workmen follow their work, which this
night is brought to a very good condition. This afternoon Mr. Shepley,
Moore, and Creed came to me all about their several accounts with me,
and we did something with them all, and so they went away. This evening
Mr. Hater brought my last quarter's salary, of which I was very glad,
because I have lost my first bill for it, and so this morning was forced
to get another signed by three of my fellow officers for it. All this
evening till late setting my accounts and papers in order, and so to
bed.

12th. My wife had a very troublesome night this night and in great pain,
but about the morning her swelling broke, and she was in great ease
presently as she useth to be. So I put in a vent (which Dr. Williams
sent me yesterday) into the hole to keep it open till all the matter
be come out, and so I question not that she will soon be well again.
I staid at home all this morning, being the Lord's day, making up my
private accounts and setting papers in order. At noon went with my Lady
Montagu at the Wardrobe, but I found it so late that I came back again,
and so dined with my wife in her chamber. After dinner I went awhile
to my chamber to set my papers right. Then I walked forth towards
Westminster and at the Savoy heard Dr. Fuller preach upon David's words,
"I will wait with patience all the days of my appointed time until my
change comes;" but methought it was a poor dry sermon. And I am afeard
my former high esteem of his preaching was more out of opinion than
judgment. From thence homewards, but met with Mr. Creed, with whom I
went and walked in Grayes-Inn-walks, and from thence to Islington, and
there eat and drank at the house my father and we were wont of old to go
to; and after that walked homeward, and parted in Smithfield: and so I
home, much wondering to see how things are altered with Mr. Creed, who,
twelve months ago, might have been got to hang himself almost as soon as
go to a drinking-house on a Sunday.

13th. All the morning at home among my workmen. At noon Mr. Creed and I
went to the ordinary behind the Exchange, where we lately were, but I do
not like it so well as I did. So home with him and to the office, where
we sat late, and he did deliver his accounts to us. The office being
done I went home and took pleasure to see my work draw to an end.

14th. Up early and by water to Whitehall to my Lord, and there had
much talk with him about getting some money for him. He told me of his
intention to get the Muster Master's place for Mr. Pierce, the purser,
who he has a mind to carry to sea with him, and spoke very slightingly
of Mr. Creed, as that he had no opinion at all of him, but only he was
forced to make use of him because of his present accounts. Thence to
drink with Mr. Shepley and Mr. Pinkny, and so home and among my workmen
all day. In the evening Mr. Shepley came to me for some money, and so he
and I to the Mitre, and there we had good wine and a gammon of bacon.
My uncle Wight, Mr. Talbot, and others were with us, and we were pretty
merry. So at night home and to bed. Finding my head grow weak now-a-days
if I come to drink wine, and therefore hope that I shall leave it off of
myself, which I pray God I could do.

15th. With my workmen all day till the afternoon, and then to the
office, where Mr. Creed's accounts were passed. Home and found all my
joyner's work now done, but only a small job or two, which please
me very well. This afternoon there came two men with an order from a
Committee of Lords to demand some books of me out of the office, in
order to the examining of Mr. Hutchinson's accounts, but I give them
a surly answer, and they went away to complain, which put me into some
trouble with myself, but I resolve to go to-morrow myself to these Lords
and answer them. To bed, being in great fear because of the shavings
which lay all up and down the house and cellar, for fear of fire.

16th. Up early to see whether the work of my house be quite done, and I
found it to my mind. Staid at home all the morning, and about 2 o'clock
went in my velvet coat by water to the Savoy, and there, having staid a
good while, I was called into the Lords, and there, quite contrary to my
expectations, they did treat me very civilly, telling me that what they
had done was out of zeal to the King's service, and that they would
joyne with the governors of the chest with all their hearts, since they
knew that there was any, which they did not before. I give them very
respectful answer and so went away to the Theatre, and there saw the
latter end of "The Mayd's Tragedy," which I never saw before, and
methinks it is too sad and melancholy. Thence homewards, and meeting Mr.
Creed I took him by water to the Wardrobe with me, and there we found
my Lord newly gone away with the Duke of Ormond and some others, whom
he had had to the collation; and so we, with the rest of the servants in
the hall, sat down and eat of the best cold meats that ever I eat on
in all my life. From thence I went home (Mr. Moore with me to the
waterside, telling me how kindly he is used by my Lord and my Lady since
his coming hither as a servant), and to bed.

17th. All the morning at home. At noon Lieutenant Lambert came to me,
and he and I to the Exchange, and thence to an ordinary over against
it, where to our dinner we had a fellow play well upon the bagpipes
and whistle like a bird exceeding well, and I had a fancy to learn to
whistle as he do, and did promise to come some other day and give him an
angell to teach me. To the office, and sat there all the afternoon till
9 at night. So home to my musique, and my wife and I sat singing in my
chamber a good while together, and then to bed.

18th. Towards Westminster, from the Towre, by water, and was fain to
stand upon one of the piers about the bridge,

     [The dangers of shooting the bridge were so great that a popular
     proverb has it--London Bridge was made for wise men to go over and
     fools to go under.]

before the men could drag their boat through the lock, and which they
could not do till another was called to help them. Being through bridge
I found the Thames full of boats and gallys, and upon inquiry found that
there was a wager to be run this morning. So spying of Payne in a gully,
I went into him, and there staid, thinking to have gone to Chelsy with
them. But upon, the start, the wager boats fell foul one of another,
till at last one of them gives over, pretending foul play, and so the
other row away alone, and all our sport lost. So, I went ashore, at
Westminster; and to the Hall I went, where it was very pleasant to see
the Hall in the condition it is now with the judges on the benches at
the further end of it, which I had not seen all this term till now.
Thence with Mr. Spicer, Creed and some others to drink. And so away
homewards by water with Mr. Creed, whom I left in London going about
business and I home, where I staid all the afternoon in the garden
reading "Faber Fortunae" with great pleasure. So home to bed.

19th. (Lord's day) I walked in the morning towards Westminster, and
seeing many people at York House, I went down and found them at mass, it
being the Spanish ambassodors; and so I go into one of the gallerys,
and there heard two masses done, I think, not in so much state as I have
seen them heretofore. After that into the garden, and walked a turn or
two, but found it not so fine a place as I always took it for by the
outside. Thence to my Lord's and there spake with him about business,
and then he went to Whitehall to dinner, and Capt. Ferrers and Mr. Howe
and myself to Mr. Wilkinson's at the Crown, and though he had no meat of
his own, yet we happened to find our cook Mr. Robinson there, who had a
dinner for himself and some friends, and so he did give us a very fine
dinner. Then to my Lord's, where we went and sat talking and laughing
in the drawing-room a great while. All our talk about their going to sea
this voyage, which Capt. Ferrers is in some doubt whether he shall go
or no, but swears that he would go, if he were sure never to come back
again; and I, giving him some hopes, he grew so mad with joy that he
fell a-dancing and leaping like a madman. Now it fell out so that the
balcone windows were open, and he went to the rayle and made an offer
to leap over, and asked what if he should leap over there. I told him I
would give him L40 if he did not go to sea. With that thought I shut the
doors, and W. Howe hindered him all we could; yet he opened them again,
and, with a vault, leaps down into the garden:--the greatest and most
desperate frolic that ever I saw in my life. I run to see what was
become of him, and we found him crawled upon his knees, but could not
rise; so we went down into the garden and dragged him to the bench,
where he looked like a dead man, but could not stir; and, though he had
broke nothing, yet his pain in his back was such as he could not endure.
With this, my Lord (who was in the little new room) come to us in amaze,
and bid us carry him up, which, by our strength, we did, and so laid him
in East's bed, by the door; where he lay in great pain. We sent for a
doctor and chyrurgeon, but none to be found, till by-and-by by chance
comes in Dr. Clerke, who is afeard of him. So we sent to get a lodging
for him, and I went up to my Lord, where Captain Cooke, Mr. Gibbons, and
others of the King's musicians were come to present my Lord with some
songs and symphonys, which were performed very finely. Which being done
I took leave and supped at my father's, where was my cozen Beck come
lately out of the country. I am troubled to see my father so much decay
of a suddain, as he do both in his seeing and hearing, and as much
to hear of him how my brother Tom do grow disrespectful to him and my
mother. I took leave and went home, where to prayers (which I have not
had in my house a good while), and so to bed.

20th. At home all the morning; paid L50 to one Mr. Grant for Mr. Barlow,
for the last half year, and was visited by Mr. Anderson, my former
chamber fellow at Cambridge, with whom I parted at the Hague, but I did
not go forthwith him, only gave him a morning draft at home. At noon Mr.
Creed came to me, and he and I to the Exchange, and so to an ordinary to
dinner, and after dinner to the Mitre, and there sat drinking while it
rained very much. Then to the office, where I found Sir Williams both,
choosing of masters for the new fleet of ships that is ordered to be set
forth, and Pen seeming to be in an ugly humour, not willing to gratify
one that I mentioned to be put in, did vex me. We sat late, and so home.
Mr. Moore came to me when I was going to bed, and sat with me a good
while talking about my Lord's business and our own and so good night.

21st. Up early, and, with Sir R. Slingsby (and Major Waters the deaf
gentleman, his friend, for company's sake) to the Victualling-office
(the first time that I ever knew where it was), and there staid while he
read a commission for enquiry into some of the King's lands and houses
thereabouts, that are given his brother. And then we took boat to
Woolwich, where we staid and gave order for the fitting out of some more
ships presently. And then to Deptford, where we staid and did the same;
and so took barge again, and were overtaken by the King in his barge, he
having been down the river with his yacht this day for pleasure to try
it; and, as I hear, Commissioner Pett's do prove better than the Dutch
one, and that that his brother built. While we were upon the water, one
of the greatest showers of rain fell that ever I saw. The Comptroller
and I landed with our barge at the Temple, and from thence I went to my
father's, and there did give order about some clothes to be made, and
did buy a new hat, cost between 20 and 30 shillings, at Mr. Holden's. So
home.

22nd. To Westminster, and there missed of my Lord, and so about noon I
and W. Howe by water to the Wardrobe, where my Lord and all the officers
of the Wardrobe dined, and several other friends of my Lord, at a
venison pasty. Before dinner, my Lady Wright and my Lady Jem. sang songs
to the harpsicon. Very pleasant and merry at dinner. And then I went
away by water to the office, and there staid till it was late. At night
before I went to bed the barber came to trim me and wash me, and so to
bed, in order to my being clean to-morrow.

23rd. This day I went to my Lord, and about many other things at
Whitehall, and there made even my accounts with Mr. Shepley at my
Lord's, and then with him and Mr. Moore and John Bowles to the Rhenish
wine house, and there came Jonas Moore, the mathematician, to us, and
there he did by discourse make us fully believe that England and France
were once the same continent, by very good arguments, and spoke very
many things, not so much to prove the Scripture false as that the time
therein is not well computed nor understood. From thence home by water,
and there shifted myself into my black silk suit (the first day I have
put it on this year), and so to my Lord Mayor's by coach, with a great
deal of honourable company, and great entertainment. At table I had very
good discourse with Mr. Ashmole, wherein he did assure me that frogs
and many insects do often fall from the sky, ready formed. Dr. Bates's
singularity in not rising up nor drinking the King's nor other healths
at the table was very much observed.

     [Dr. William Bates, one of the most eminent of the Puritan divines,
     and who took part in the Savoy Conference.  His collected writings
     were published in 1700, and fill a large folio volume.  The
     Dissenters called him silver-tongued Bates.  Calamy affirmed that if
     Bates would have conformed to the Established Church he might have
     been raised to any bishopric in the kingdom.  He died in 1699, aged
     seventy-four.]

From thence we all took coach, and to our office, and there sat till
it was late; and so I home and to bed by day-light. This day was kept a
holy-day through the town; and it pleased me to see the little boys walk
up and down in procession with their broom-staffs in their hands, as I
had myself long ago gone.

     [Pepys here refers to the perambulation of parishes on Holy
     Thursday, still observed.  This ceremony was sometimes enlivened by
     whipping the boys, for the better impressing on their minds the
     remembrance of the day, and the boundaries of the parish, instead of
     beating houses or stones. But this would not have harmonized well
     with the excellent Hooker's practice on this day, when he "always
     dropped some loving and facetious observations, to be remembered
     against the next year, especially by the boys and young people."
     Amongst Dorsetshire customs, it seems that, in perambulating a manor
     or parish, a boy is tossed into a stream, if that be the boundary;
     if a hedge, a sapling from it is applied for the purpose of
     flagellation.--B.]

24th. At home all the morning making up my private accounts, and this is
the first time that I do find myself to be clearly worth L500 in money,
besides all my goods in my house, &c. In the afternoon at the office
late, and then I went to the Wardrobe, where I found my Lord at supper,
and therefore I walked a good while till he had done, and I went in to
him, and there he looked over my accounts. And they were committed
to Mr. Moore to see me paid what remained due to me. Then down to the
kitchen to eat a bit of bread and butter, which I did, and there I took
one of the maids by the chin, thinking her to be Susan, but it proved to
be her sister, who is very like her. From thence home.

25th. All the morning at home about business. At noon to the Temple,
where I staid and looked over a book or two at Playford's, and then to
the Theatre, where I saw a piece of "The Silent Woman," which pleased
me. So homewards, and in my way bought "The Bondman" in Paul's
Churchyard, and so home, where I found all clean, and the hearth and
range, as it is now enlarged, set up, which pleases me very much.

26th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed. To church and heard a good sermon at
our own church, where I have not been a great many weeks. Dined with my
wife alone at home pleasing myself in that my house do begin to look as
if at last it would be in good order. This day the Parliament received
the communion of Dr. Gunning at St. Margaret's, Westminster. In the
afternoon both the Sir Williams came to church, where we had a dull
stranger. After church home, and so to the Mitre, where I found Dr.
Burnett, the first time that ever I met him to drink with him, and my
uncle Wight and there we sat and drank a great deal, and so I to Sir W.
Batten's, where I have on purpose made myself a great stranger, only
to get a high opinion a little more of myself in them. Here I heard how
Mrs. Browne, Sir W. Batten's sister, is brought to bed, and I to be one
of the godfathers, which I could not nor did deny. Which, however, did
trouble me very much to be at charge to no purpose, so that I could not
sleep hardly all night, but in the morning I bethought myself, and I
think it is very well I should do it. Sir W. Batten told me how Mr. Prin
(among the two or three that did refuse to-day to receive the sacrament
upon their knees) was offered by a mistake the drink afterwards, which
he did receive, being denied the drink by Dr. Gunning, unless he would
take it on his knees; and after that by another the bread was brought
him, and he did take it sitting, which is thought very preposterous.
Home and to bed.

27th. To the Wardrobe, and from thence with my Lords Sandwich and
Hinchinbroke to the Lords' House by boat at Westminster, and there I
left them. Then to the lobby, and after waiting for Sir G. Downing's
coming out, to speak with him about the giving me up of my bond for my
honesty when I was his clerk, but to no purpose, I went to Clerke's at
the Legg, and there I found both Mr. Pierces, Mr. Rolt, formerly too
great a man to meet upon such even terms, and there we dined very merry,
there coming to us Captain Ferrers, this being the first day of his
going abroad since his leap a week ago, which I was greatly glad to see.
By water to the office, and there sat late, Sir George Carteret coming
in, who among other things did inquire into the naming of the maisters
for this fleet, and was very angry that they were named as they are, and
above all to see the maister of the Adventure (for whom there is some
kind of difference between Sir W. Pen and me) turned out, who has been
in her list. The office done, I went with the Comptroller to the Coffee
house, and there we discoursed of this, and I seem to be fond of him,
and indeed I find I must carry fair with all as far as I see it safe,
but I have got of him leave to have a little room from his lodgings to
my house, of which I am very glad, besides I do open him a way to get
lodgings himself in the office, of which I should be very glad. Home and
to bed.

28th. This morning to the Wardrobe, and thence to a little alehouse hard
by, to drink with John Bowies, who is now going to Hinchinbroke this
day. Thence with Mr. Shepley to the Exchange about business, and there,
by Mr. Rawlinson's favour, got into a balcone over against the Exchange;
and there saw the hangman burn, by vote of Parliament, two old acts, the
one for constituting us a Commonwealth, and the others I have forgot.
Which still do make me think of the greatness of this late turn, and
what people will do tomorrow against what they all, through profit or
fear, did promise and practise this day. Then to the Mitre with Mr.
Shepley, and there dined with D. Rawlinson and some friends of his very
well. So home, and then to Cheapside about buying a piece of plate to
give away to-morrow to Mrs. Browne's child. So to the Star in Cheapside,
where I left Mr. Moore telling L5 out for me, who I found in a great
strait for my coming back again, and so he went his way at my coming.
Then home, where Mr. Cook I met and he paid me 30s., an old debt of
his to me. So to Sir W. Pen's, and there sat alone with him till ten at
night in talk with great content, he telling me things and persons that
I did not understand in the late times, and so I home to bed. My cozen
John Holcroft (whom I have not seen many years) this morning came to see
me.

29th (King's birth-day). Rose early and having made myself fine, and put
six spoons and a porringer of silver in my pocket to give away to-day,
Sir W. Pen and I took coach, and (the weather and ways being foul) went
to Walthamstowe; and being come there heard Mr. Radcliffe, my former
school fellow at Paul's (who is yet a mere boy), preach upon "Nay, let
him take all, since my Lord the King is returned," &c. He reads all, and
his sermon very simple, but I looked for new matter. Back to dinner to
Sir William Batten's; and then, after a walk in the fine gardens, we
went to Mrs. Browne's, where Sir W. Pen and I were godfathers, and Mrs.
Jordan and Shipman godmothers to her boy. And there, before and after
the christening; we were with the woman above in her chamber; but
whether we carried ourselves well or ill, I know not; but I was directed
by young Mrs. Batten. One passage of a lady that eat wafers with her dog
did a little displease me. I did give the midwife 10s. and the nurse
5s. and the maid of the house 2s. But for as much I expected to give the
name to the child, but did not (it being called John), I forbore then
to give my plate till another time after a little more advice. All being
done, we went to Mrs. Shipman's, who is a great butter-woman, and I did
see there the most of milk and cream, and the cleanest that ever I saw
in my life. After we had filled our bellies with cream, we took our
leaves and away. In our way, we had great sport to try who should drive
fastest, Sir W. Batten's coach, or Sir W. Pen's chariott, they having
four, and we two horses, and we beat them. But it cost me the spoiling
of my clothes and velvet coat with dirt. Being come home I to bed, and
give my breeches to be dried by the fire against to-morrow.

30th. To the Wardrobe and there, with my Lord, went into his new barge
to try her, and found her a good boat, and like my Lord's contrivance
of the door to come out round and not square as they used to do. Back
to the Wardrobe with my Lord, and then with Mr. Moore to the Temple, and
thence to. Greatorex, who took me to Arundell-House, and there showed
me some fine flowers in his garden, and all the fine statues in the
gallery, which I formerly had seen, and is a brave sight, and thence to
a blind dark cellar, where we had two bottles of good ale, and so after
giving him direction for my silver side-table, I took boat at Arundell
stairs, and put in at Milford.... So home and found Sir Williams both
and my Lady going to Deptford to christen Captain Rooth's child, and
would have had me with them, but I could not go. To the office, where
Sir R. Slingsby was, and he and I into his and my lodgings to take a
view of them, out of a desire he has to have mine of me to join to his,
and give me Mr. Turner's. To the office again, where Sir G. Carteret
came and sat a while, he being angry for Sir Williams making of the
maisters of this fleet upon their own heads without a full table. Then
the Comptroller and I to the Coffee House, and there sat a great while
talking of many things. So home and to bed. This day, I hear, the
Parliament have ordered a bill to be brought in for the restoring the
Bishops to the House of Lords; which they had not done so soon but to
spite Mr. Prin, who is every day so bitter against them in his discourse
in the House.

31st. I went to my father's thinking to have met with my cozen John
Holcroft, but he came not, but to my great grief I found my father and
mother in a great deal of discontent one with another, and indeed my
mother is grown now so pettish that I know not how my father is able to
bear with it. I did talk to her so as did not indeed become me, but I
could not help it, she being so unsufferably foolish and simple, so that
my father, poor man, is become a very unhappy man. There I dined, and so
home and to the office all the afternoon till 9 at night, and then home
and to supper and to bed. Great talk now how the Parliament intend to
make a collection of free gifts to the King through the Kingdom; but I
think it will not come to much.




JUNE 1661

June 1st. Having taken our leaves of Sir W. Batten and my Lady, who are
gone this morning to keep their Whitsuntide, Sir W. Pen and I and Mr.
Gauden by water to Woolwich, and there went from ship to ship to give
order for and take notice of their forwardness to go forth, and then to
Deptford and did the like, having dined at Woolwich with Captain Poole
at the tavern there. From Deptford we walked to Redriffe, calling at the
half-way house, and there come into a room where there was infinite of
new cakes placed that are made against Whitsuntide, and there we were
very merry. By water home, and there did businesses of the office. Among
others got my Lord's imprest of L1000 and Mr. Creed's of L10,000 against
this voyage their bills signed. Having wrote letters into the country
and read some things I went to bed.

2nd (Whitsunday). The barber having done with me, I went to church, and
there heard a good sermon of Mr. Mills, fit for the day. Then home to
dinner, and then to church again, and going home I found Greatorex
(whom I expected today at dinner) come to see me, and so he and I in
my chamber drinking of wine and eating of anchovies an hour or two,
discoursing of many things in mathematics, and among others he showed
me how it comes to pass the strength that levers have, and he showed me
that what is got as to matter of strength is lost by them as to matter
of time. It rained very hard, as it hath done of late so much that we
begin to doubt a famine, and so he was forced to stay longer than I
desired. At night after prayers to bed.

3rd. To the Wardrobe, where discoursing with my Lord, he did instruct
me as to the business of the Wardrobe, in case, in his absence, Mr.
Townsend should die, and told me that he do intend to joyne me and Mr.
Moore with him as to the business, now he is going to sea, and spoke to
me many other things, as to one that he do put the greatest confidence
in, of which I am proud. Here I had a good occasion to tell him (what
I have had long in my mind) that, since it has pleased God to bless me
with something, I am desirous to lay out something for my father, and so
have pitched upon Mr. Young's place in the Wardrobe, which I desired he
would give order in his absence, if the place should fall that I might
have the refusal. Which my Lord did freely promise me, at which I was
very glad, he saying that he would do that at the least. So I saw my
Lord into the barge going to Whitehall, and I and Mr. Creed home to my
house, whither my father and my cozen Scott came to dine with me, and so
we dined together very well, and before we had done in comes my father
Bowyer and my mother and four daughters, and a young gentleman and his
sister, their friends, and there staid all the afternoon, which cost me
great store of wine, and were very merry. By and by I am called to the
office, and there staid a little. So home again, and took Mr. Creed and
left them, and so he and I to the Towre, to speak for some ammunition
for ships for my Lord; and so he and I, with much pleasure, walked quite
round the Towre, which I never did before. So home, and after a walk
with my wife upon the leads, I and she went to bed. This morning I and
Dr. Peirce went over to the Beare at the Bridge foot, thinking to have
met my Lord Hinchinbroke and his brother setting forth for France; but
they being not come we went over to the Wardrobe, and there found that
my Lord Abbot Montagu being not at Paris, my Lord hath a mind to have
them stay a little longer before they go.

4th. The Comptroller came this morning to get me to go see a house or
two near our office, which he would take for himself or Mr. Turner, and
then he would have me have Mr. Turner's lodgings and himself mine and
Mr. Davis's. But the houses did not like us, and so that design at
present is stopped. Then he and I by water to the bridge, and then
walked over the Bank-side till we came to the Temple, and so I went over
and to my father's, where I met with my cozen J. Holcroft, and took him
and my father and my brother Tom to the Bear tavern and gave them wine,
my cozen being to go into the country again to-morrow. From thence to my
Lord Crew's to dinner with him, and had very good discourse about having
of young noblemen and gentlemen to think of going to sea, as being as
honourable service as the land war. And among other things he told us
how, in Queen Elizabeth's time, one young nobleman would wait with
a trencher at the back of another till he came to age himself. And
witnessed in my young Lord of Kent, that then was, who waited upon my
Lord Bedford at table, when a letter came to my Lord Bedford that the
Earldom of Kent was fallen to his servant, the young Lord; and so he
rose from table, and made him sit down in his place, and took a lower
for himself, for so he was by place to sit. From thence to the Theatre
and saw "Harry the 4th," a good play. That done I went over the water
and walked over the fields to Southwark, and so home and to my lute. At
night to bed.

5th. This morning did give my wife L4 to lay out upon lace and other
things for herself. I to Wardrobe and so to Whitehall and Westminster,
where I dined with my Lord and Ned Dickering alone at his lodgings.
After dinner to the office, where we sat and did business, and Sir W.
Pen and I went home with Sir R. Slingsby to bowls in his ally, and there
had good sport, and afterwards went in and drank and talked. So home Sir
William and I, and it being very hot weather I took my flageolette and
played upon the leads in the garden, where Sir W. Pen came out in
his shirt into his leads, and there we staid talking and singing, and
drinking great drafts of claret, and eating botargo

     ["Botarga.  The roe of the mullet pressed flat and dried; that of
     commerce, however, is from the tunny, a large fish of passage which
     is common in the Mediterranean.  The best kind comes from Tunis."
     --Smyth's Sailor's Word-Book.  Botargo was chiefly used to promote
     drinking by causing thirst, and Rabelais makes Gargantua eat it.]

and bread and butter till 12 at night, it being moonshine; and so to
bed, very near fuddled.

6th. My head hath aked all night, and all this morning, with my last
night's debauch. Called up this morning by Lieutenant Lambert, who is
now made Captain of the Norwich, and he and I went down by water to
Greenwich, in our way observing and discoursing upon the things of a
ship, he telling me all I asked him, which was of good use to me. There
we went and eat and drank and heard musique at the Globe, and saw the
simple motion that is there of a woman with a rod in her hand keeping
time to the musique while it plays, which is simple, methinks. Back
again by water, calling at Captain Lambert's house, which is very
handsome and neat, and a fine prospect at top. So to the office, where
we sat a little, and then the Captain and I again to Bridewell to Mr.
Holland's, where his wife also, a plain dowdy, and his mother was. Here
I paid Mrs. Holland the money due from me to her husband. Here came two
young gentlewomen to see Mr. Holland, and one of them could play pretty
well upon the viallin, but, good God! how these ignorant people did cry
her up for it! We were very merry. I staid and supped there, and so home
and to bed. The weather very hot, this night I left off my wastecoat.

7th. To my Lord's at Whitehall, but not finding him I went to the
Wardrobe and there dined with my Lady, and was very kindly treated by
her. After dinner to the office, and there till late at night. So home,
and to Sir William Batten's, who is come this day from Chatham with my
Lady, who is and has been much troubled with the toothache. Here I staid
till late, and so home and to bed.

8th. To Whitehall to my Lord, who did tell me that he would have me go
to Mr. Townsend, whom he had ordered to discover to me the whole mystery
of the Wardrobe, and none else but me, and that he will make me deputy
with him for fear that he should die in my Lord's absence, of which I
was glad. Then to the Cook's with Mr. Shepley and Mr. Creed, and dined
together, and then I went to the Theatre and there saw Bartholomew
Faire, the first time it was acted now a-days. It is a most admirable
play and well acted, but too much prophane and abusive. From thence,
meeting Mr. Creed at the door, he and I went to the tobacco shop under
Temple Bar gate, and there went up to the top of the house and there sat
drinking Lambeth ale a good while. Then away home, and in my way called
upon Mr. Rawlinson (my uncle Wight being out of town), for his advice to
answer a letter of my uncle Robert, wherein he do offer me a purchase to
lay some money upon, that joynes upon some of his own lands, and plainly
telling me that the reason of his advice is the convenience that it will
give me as to his estate, of which I am exceeding glad, and am advised
to give up wholly the disposal of my money to him, let him do what he
will with it, which I shall do. So home and to bed.

9th (Lord's day). This day my wife put on her black silk gown, which is
now laced all over with black gimp lace, as the fashion is, in which she
is very pretty. She and I walked to my Lady's at the Wardrobe, and there
dined and was exceeding much made of. After dinner I left my wife there,
and I walked to Whitehall, and then went to Mr. Pierce's and sat with
his wife a good while (who continues very pretty) till he came, and
then he and I, and Mr. Symons (dancing master), that goes to sea with my
Lord, to the Swan tavern, and there drank, and so again to White Hall,
and there met with Dean Fuller, and walked a great while with him;
among other things discoursed of the liberty the Bishop (by name the of
Galloway) takes to admit into orders any body that will; among others,
Roundtree, a simple mechanique that was a person [parson?] formerly in
the fleet. He told me he would complain of it. By and by we went and got
a sculler, and landing him at Worcester House, I and W. Howe, who came
to us at Whitehall, went to the Wardrobe, where I met with Mr. Townsend,
who is very willing he says to communicate anything for my Lord's
advantage to me as to his business. I went up to Jane Shore's towre, and
there W. Howe and I sang, and so took my wife and walked home, and so to
bed. After I came home a messenger came from my Lord to bid me come to
him tomorrow morning.

10th. Early to my Lord's, who privately told me how the King had made
him Embassador in the bringing over the Queen.

     [Katherine of Braganza, daughter of John IV. of Portugal, born 1638,
     married to Charles II., May 21st, 1662.  After the death of the king
     she lived for some time at Somerset House, and then returned to
     Portugal, of which country she became Regent in 1704 on the
     retirement of her brother Don Pedro.  She died December 31st, 1705.]

That he is to go to Algier, &c., to settle the business, and to put the
fleet in order there; and so to come back to Lisbone with three ships,
and there to meet the fleet that is to follow him. He sent for me, to
tell me that he do intrust me with the seeing of all things done in his
absence as to this great preparation, as I shall receive orders from my
Lord Chancellor and Mr. Edward Montagu. At all which my heart is above
measure glad; for my Lord's honour, and some profit to myself, I hope.
By and by, out with Mr. Shepley Walden, Parliament-man for Huntingdon,
Rolt, Mackworth, and Alderman Backwell, to a house hard by, to drink
Lambeth ale. So I back to the Wardrobe, and there found my Lord going to
Trinity House, this being the solemn day of choosing Master, and my Lord
is chosen, so he dines there to-day. I staid and dined with my Lady;
but after we were set, comes in some persons of condition, and so the
children and I rose and dined by ourselves, all the children and I,
and were very merry and they mighty fond of me. Then to the office, and
there sat awhile. So home and at night to bed, where we lay in Sir R.
Slingsby's lodgings in the dining room there in one green bed, my house
being now in its last work of painting and whiting.

11th. At the office this morning, Sir G. Carteret with us; and we agreed
upon a letter to the Duke of York, to tell him the sad condition of this
office for want of money; how men are not able to serve us more without
some money; and that now the credit of the office is brought so low,
that none will sell us any thing without our personal security given
for the same. All the afternoon abroad about several businesses, and at
night home and to bed.

12th. Wednesday, a day kept between a fast and a feast, the Bishops not
being ready enough to keep the fast for foul weather before fair weather
came; and so they were forced to keep it between both.

     [A Form of Prayer was published to be used in London on the 12th,
     and in the country on the 19th of June, being the special days
     appointed for a general fast to be kept in the respective places for
     averting those sicknesses and diseases, that dearth and scarcity,
     which justly may be feared from the late immoderate rain and waters:
     for a thanksgiving also for the blessed change of weather; and the
     begging the continuance of it to us for our comfort: And likewise
     for beseeching a Blessing upon the High Court of Parliament now
     assembled: Set forth by his Majesty's authority.  A sermon was
     preached before the Commons by Thomas Greenfield, preacher of
     Lincoln's Inn.  The Lords taxed themselves for the poor--an earl,
     30s., a baron, 20s.  Those absent from prayers were to pay a
     forfeit.--B.]

I to Whitehall, and there with Captain Rolt and Ferrers we went to
Lambeth to drink our morning draft, where at the Three Mariners, a place
noted for their ale, we went and staid awhile very merry, and so away.
And wanting a boat, we found Captain Bun going down the river, and so
we went into his boat having a lady with him, and he landed them at
Westminster and me at the Bridge. At home all day with my workmen,
and doing several things, among others writing the letter resolved of
yesterday to the Duke. Then to White Hall, where I met my Lord, who told
me he must have L300 laid out in cloth, to give in Barbary, as presents
among the Turks. At which occasion of getting something I was very glad.
Home to supper, and then to Sir R. Slingsby, who with his brother and I
went to my Lord's at the Wardrobe, and there staid a great while, but
he being now taking his leave of his friends staid out late, and so they
went away. Anon came my Lord in, and I staid with him a good while, and
then to bed with Mr. Moore in his chamber.

13th. I went up and down to Alderman Backwell's, but his servants not
being up, I went home and put on my gray cloth suit and faced white
coat, made of one of my wife's pettycoates, the first time I have had
it on, and so in a riding garb back again and spoke with Mr. Shaw at
the Alderman's, who offers me L300 if my Lord pleases to buy this cloth
with, which pleased me well. So to the Wardrobe and got my Lord to order
Mr. Creed to imprest so much upon me to be paid by Alderman Backwell.
So with my Lord to Whitehall by water, and he having taken leave of the
King, comes to us at his lodgings and from thence goes to the garden
stairs and there takes barge, and at the stairs was met by Sir R.
Slingsby, who there took his leave of my Lord, and I heard my Lord
thank him for his kindness to me, which Sir Robert answered much to my
advantage. I went down with my Lord in the barge to Deptford, and there
went on board the Dutch yacht and staid there a good while, W. Howe not
being come with my Lord's things, which made my Lord very angry. By and
by he comes and so we set sayle, and anon went to dinner, my Lord and we
very merry; and after dinner I went down below and there sang, and took
leave of W. Howe, Captain Rolt, and the rest of my friends, then went
up and took leave of my Lord, who give me his hand and parted with great
respect. So went and Captain Ferrers with me into our wherry, and my
Lord did give five guns, all they had charged, which was the greatest
respect my Lord could do me, and of which I was not a little proud. So
with a sad and merry heart I left them sailing pleasantly from Erith,
hoping to be in the Downs tomorrow early. We toward London in our boat.
Pulled off our stockings and bathed our legs a great while in the river,
which I had not done some years before. By and by we come to Greenwich,
and thinking to have gone on the King's yacht, the King was in her, so
we passed by, and at Woolwich went on shore, in the company of Captain
Poole of Jamaica and young Mr. Kennersley, and many others, and so to
the tavern where we drank a great deal both wine and beer. So we parted
hence and went home with Mr. Falconer, who did give us cherrys and good
wine. So to boat, and young Poole took us on board the Charity and gave
us wine there, with which I had full enough, and so to our wherry again,
and there fell asleep till I came almost to the Tower, and there the
Captain and I parted, and I home and with wine enough in my head, went
to bed.

14th. To Whitehall to my Lord's, where I found Mr. Edward Montagu and
his family come to lie during my Lord's absence. I sent to my house
by my Lord's order his shipp--[Qy. glass omitted after shipp.]--and
triangle virginall. So to my father's, and did give him order about the
buying of this cloth to send to my Lord. But I could not stay with him
myself, for having got a great cold by my playing the fool in the water
yesterday I was in great pain, and so went home by coach to bed, and
went not to the office at all, and by keeping myself warm, I broke wind
and so came to some ease. Rose and eat some supper, and so to bed again.

15th. My father came and drank his morning draft with me, and sat with
me till I was ready, and so he and I about the business of the cloth. By
and by I left him and went and dined with my Lady, who, now my Lord is
gone, is come to her poor housekeeping again. Then to my father's, who
tells me what he has done, and we resolved upon two pieces of scarlet,
two of purple, and two of black, and L50 in linen. I home, taking L300
with me home from Alderman Backwell's. After writing to my Lord to let
him know what I had done I was going to bed, but there coming the purser
of the King's yacht for victualls presently, for the Duke of York is to
go down to-morrow, I got him to promise stowage for these things there,
and so I went to bed, bidding Will go and fetch the things from the
carrier's hither, which about 12 o'clock were brought to my house and
laid there all night.

16th (Lord's day). But no purser coming in the morning for them, and I
hear that the Duke went last night, and so I am at a great loss what to
do; and so this day (though the Lord's day) staid at home, sending
Will up and down to know what to do. Sometimes thinking to continue my
resolution of sending by the carrier to be at Deal on Wednesday next,
sometimes to send them by sea by a vessel on purpose, but am not yet
come to a resolution, but am at a very great loss and trouble in mind
what in the world to do herein. The afternoon (while Will was abroad)
I spent in reading "The Spanish Gypsey," a play not very good, though
commended much. At night resolved to hire a Margate Hoy, who would go
away to-morrow morning, which I did, and sent the things all by him, and
put them on board about 12 this night, hoping to have them as the wind
now serves in the Downs to-morrow night. To-bed with some quiet of mind,
having sent the things away.

17th. Visited this morning by my old friend Mr. Ch. Carter, who staid
and went to Westminster with me, and there we parted, and I to the
Wardrobe and dined with my Lady. So home to my painters, who are now
about painting my stairs. So to the office, and at night we all went to
Sir W. Pen's, and there sat and drank till 11 at night, and so home and
to bed.

18th. All this morning at home vexing about the delay of my painters,
and about four in the afternoon my wife and I by water to Captain
Lambert's, where we took great pleasure in their turret-garden, and
seeing the fine needle-works of his wife, the best I ever saw in my
life, and afterwards had a very handsome treat and good musique that she
made upon the harpsicon, and with a great deal of pleasure staid till
8 at night, and so home again, there being a little pretty witty child
that is kept in their house that would not let us go without her, and
so fell a-crying by the water-side. So home, where I met Jack Cole, who
staid with me a good while, and is still of the old good humour that we
were of at school together, and I am very glad to see him. He gone, I
went to bed.

19th. All the morning almost at home, seeing my stairs finished by the
painters, which pleases me well. So with Mr. Moore to Westminster Hall,
it being term, and then by water to the Wardrobe, where very merry, and
so home to the office all the afternoon, and at night to the Exchange
to my uncle Wight about my intention of purchasing at Brampton. So back
again home and at night to bed. Thanks be to God I am very well again
of my late pain, and to-morrow hope to be out of my pain of dirt and
trouble in my house, of which I am now become very weary. One thing I
must observe here while I think of it, that I am now become the most
negligent man in the world as to matters of news, insomuch that,
now-a-days, I neither can tell any, nor ask any of others.

20th. At home the greatest part of the day to see my workmen make an
end, which this night they did to my great content.

21st. This morning going to my father's I met him, and so he and I went
and drank our morning draft at the Samson in Paul's Churchyard, and eat
some gammon of bacon, &c., and then parted, having bought some green
Say--[A woollen cloth. "Saye clothe serge."--Palsgrave.]--for curtains
in my parler. Home, and so to the Exchequer, where I met with my uncle
Wight, and home with him to dinner, where among others (my aunt being
out of town), Mr. Norbury and I did discourse of his wife's house and
land at Brampton, which I find too much for me to buy. Home, and in the
afternoon to the office, and much pleased at night to see my house begin
to be clean after all the dirt.

22nd. Abroad all the morning about several businesses. At noon went and
dined with my Lord Crew, where very much made of by him and his lady.
Then to the Theatre, "The Alchymist,"--[Comedy by Ben Jonson, first
printed in 1612.]--which is a most incomparable play. And that being
done I met with little Luellin and Blirton, who took me to a friend's
of theirs in Lincoln's Inn fields, one Mr. Hodges, where we drank great
store of Rhenish wine and were very merry. So I went home, where I found
my house now very clean, which was great content to me.

23rd (Lord's day). In the morning to church, and my wife not being well,
I went with Sir W. Batten home to dinner, my Lady being out of town,
where there was Sir W. Pen, Captain Allen and his daughter Rebecca, and
Mr. Hempson and his wife. After dinner to church all of us and had a
very good sermon of a stranger, and so I and the young company to walk
first to Graye's Inn Walks, where great store of gallants, but above
all the ladies that I there saw, or ever did see, Mrs. Frances Butler
(Monsieur L'Impertinent's sister) is the greatest beauty. Then we went
to Islington, where at the great house I entertained them as well as I
could, and so home with them, and so to my own home and to bed. Pall,
who went this day to a child's christening of Kate Joyce's, staid out
all night at my father's, she not being well.

24th (Midsummer-day). We kept this a holiday, and so went not to the
office at all. All the morning at home. At noon my father came to see my
house now it is done, which is now very neat. He and I and Dr. Williams
(who is come to see my wife, whose soare belly is now grown dangerous
as she thinks) to the ordinary over against the Exchange, where we dined
and had great wrangling with the master of the house when the reckoning
was brought to us, he setting down exceeding high every thing. I home
again and to Sir W. Batten's, and there sat a good while. So home.

25th. Up this morning to put my papers in order that are come from my
Lord's, so that now I have nothing there remaining that is mine, which I
have had till now. This morning came Mr. Goodgroome

     [Theodore Goodgroome, Pepys's singing-master.  He was probably
     related to John Goodgroome, a Gentleman of the Chapel Royal, who is
     also referred to in the Diary.]

to me (recommended by Mr. Mage), with whom I agreed presently to give
him 20s. entrance, which I then did, and 20s. a month more to teach me
to sing, and so we began, and I hope I have come to something in it. His
first song is "La cruda la bella." He gone my brother Tom comes, with
whom I made even with my father and the two drapers for the cloths I
sent to sea lately. At home all day, in the afternoon came Captain
Allen and his daughter Rebecca and Mr. Hempson, and by and by both Sir
Williams, who sat with me till it was late, and I had a very gallant
collation for them. At night to bed.

26th. To Westminster about several businesses, then to dine with my Lady
at the Wardrobe, taking Dean Fuller along with me; then home, where I
heard my father had been to find me about special business; so I took
coach and went to him, and found by a letter to him from my aunt that my
uncle Robert is taken with a dizziness in his head, so that they desire
my father to come down to look after his business, by which we guess
that he is very ill, and so my father do think to go to-morrow. And so
God's will be done. Back by water to the office, there till night, and
so home to my musique and then to bed.

27th. To my father's, and with him to Mr. Starling's to drink our
morning draft, and there I told him how I would have him speak to my
uncle Robert, when he comes thither, concerning my buying of land, that
I could pay ready money L600 and the rest by L150 per annum, to make up
as much as will buy L50 per annum, which I do, though I not worth above
L500 ready money, that he may think me to be a greater saver than I am.
Here I took my leave of my father, who is going this morning to my uncle
upon my aunt's letter this week that he is not well and so needs my
father's help. At noon home, and then with my Lady Batten, Mrs.
Rebecca Allen, Mrs. Thompson, &c., two coaches of us, we went and saw
"Bartholomew Fayre" acted very well, and so home again and staid at
Sir W. Batten's late, and so home to bed. This day Mr. Holden sent me a
bever, which cost me L4 5s.

     [Whilst a hat (see January 28th, 1660-61, ante) cost only 35s.  See
     also Lord Sandwich's vexation at his beaver being stolen, and a hat
     only left in lieu of it, April 30th, 1661, ante; and April 19th and
     26th, 1662, Post.--B.]

28th. At home all the morning practising to sing, which is now my great
trade, and at noon to my Lady and dined with her. So back and to the
office, and there sat till 7 at night, and then Sir W. Pen and I in
his coach went to Moorefields, and there walked, and stood and saw the
wrestling, which I never saw so much of before, between the north and
west countrymen. So home, and this night had our bed set up in our room
that we called the Nursery, where we lay, and I am very much pleased
with the room.

29th. By a letter from the Duke complaining of the delay of the ships
that are to be got ready, Sir Williams both and I went to Deptford and
there examined into the delays, and were satisfyed. So back again home
and staid till the afternoon, and then I walked to the Bell at the
Maypole in the Strand, and thither came to me by appointment Mr.
Chetwind, Gregory, and Hartlibb, so many of our old club, and Mr. Kipps,
where we staid and drank and talked with much pleasure till it was late,
and so I walked home and to bed. Mr. Chetwind by chewing of tobacco
is become very fat and sallow, whereas he was consumptive, and in our
discourse he fell commending of "Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity," as
the best book, and the only one that made him a Christian, which puts me
upon the buying of it, which I will do shortly.

30th (Lord's day). To church, where we observe the trade of briefs is
come now up to so constant a course every Sunday, that we resolve to
give no more to them.

     [It appears, from an old MS. account-book of the collections in the
     church of St. Olave, Hart Street, beginning in 1642, still extant,
     that the money gathered on the 30th June, 1661, "for several
     inhabitants of the parish of St. Dunstan in the West towards their
     losse by fire," amounted to "xxs. viiid."  Pepys might complain of
     the trade in briefs, as similar contributions had been levied
     fourteen weeks successively, previous to the one in question at St.
     Olave's church.  Briefs were abolished in 1828.--B.]

A good sermon, and then home to dinner, my wife and I all alone. After
dinner Sir Williams both and I by water to Whitehall, where having
walked up and down, at last we met with the Duke of York, according to
an order sent us yesterday from him, to give him an account where the
fault lay in the not sending out of the ships, which we find to be only
the wind hath been against them, and so they could not get out of the
river. Hence I to Graye's Inn Walk, all alone, and with great pleasure
seeing the fine ladies walk there. Myself humming to myself (which
now-a-days is my constant practice since I begun to learn to sing) the
trillo, and found by use that it do come upon me. Home very weary and
to bed, finding my wife not sick, but yet out of order, that I fear she
will come to be sick. This day the Portuguese Embassador came to White
Hall to take leave of the King; he being now going to end all with the
Queen, and to send her over. The weather now very fair and pleasant, but
very hot. My father gone to Brampton to see my uncle Robert, not knowing
whether to find him dead or alive. Myself lately under a great expense
of money upon myself in clothes and other things, but I hope to make it
up this summer by my having to do in getting things ready to send with
the next fleet to the Queen.

Myself in good health, but mighty apt to take cold, so that this hot
weather I am fain to wear a cloth before my belly.




JULY 1661

July 1st. This morning I went up and down into the city, to buy several
things, as I have lately done, for my house. Among other things, a fair
chest of drawers for my own chamber, and an Indian gown for myself. The
first cost me 33s., the other 34s. Home and dined there, and Theodore
Goodgroome, my singing master, with me, and then to our singing. After
that to the office, and then home.

2nd. To Westminster Hall and there walked up and down, it being Term
time. Spoke with several, among others my cozen Roger Pepys, who was
going up to the Parliament House, and inquired whether I had heard from
my father since he went to Brampton, which I had done yesterday, who
writes that my uncle is by fits stupid, and like a man that is drunk,
and sometimes speechless. Home, and after my singing master had done,
took coach and went to Sir William Davenant's Opera; this being the
fourth day that it hath begun, and the first that I have seen it. To-day
was acted the second part of "The Siege of Rhodes." We staid a very
great while for the King and the Queen of Bohemia. And by the breaking
of a board over our heads, we had a great deal of dust fell into the
ladies' necks and the men's hair, which made good sport. The King being
come, the scene opened; which indeed is very fine and magnificent, and
well acted, all but the Eunuch, who was so much out that he was hissed
off the stage. Home and wrote letters to my Lord at sea, and so to bed.

3rd. To Westminster to Mr. Edward Montagu about business of my Lord's,
and so to the Wardrobe, and there dined with my Lady, who is in some
mourning for her brother, Mr. Saml. Crew, who died yesterday of the
spotted fever. So home through Duck Lane' to inquire for some Spanish
books, but found none that pleased me. So to the office, and that being
done to Sir W. Batten's with the Comptroller, where we sat late talking
and disputing with Mr. Mills the parson of our parish. This day my
Lady Batten and my wife were at the burial of a daughter of Sir John
Lawson's, and had rings for themselves and their husbands. Home and to
bed.

4th. At home all the morning; in the afternoon I went to the Theatre,
and there I saw "Claracilla" (the first time I ever saw it), well acted.
But strange to see this house, that used to be so thronged, now empty
since the Opera begun; and so will continue for a while, I believe.
Called at my father's, and there I heard that my uncle Robert--[Robert
Pepys, of Brampton, who died on the following day.]--continues to have
his fits of stupefaction every day for 10 or 12 hours together. From
thence to the Exchange at night, and then went with my uncle Wight to
the Mitre and were merry, but he takes it very ill that my father would
go out of town to Brampton on this occasion and would not tell him of
it, which I endeavoured to remove but could not. Here Mr. Batersby
the apothecary was, who told me that if my uncle had the
emerods--[Haemorrhoids or piles.]--(which I think he had) and that now
they are stopped, he will lay his life that bleeding behind by leeches
will cure him, but I am resolved not to meddle in it. Home and to bed.

5th. At home, and in the afternoon to the office, and that being done
all went to Sir W. Batten's and there had a venison pasty, and were very
merry. At night home and to bed.

6th. Waked this morning with news, brought me by a messenger on purpose,
that my uncle Robert is dead, and died yesterday; so I rose sorry in
some respect, glad in my expectations in another respect. So I made
myself ready, went and told my uncle Wight, my Lady, and some others
thereof, and bought me a pair of boots in St. Martin's, and got myself
ready, and then to the Post House and set out about eleven and twelve
o'clock, taking the messenger with me that came to me, and so we rode
and got well by nine o'clock to Brampton, where I found my father well.
My uncle's corps in a coffin standing upon joynt-stools in the chimney
in the hall; but it begun to smell, and so I caused it to be set forth
in the yard all night, and watched by two men. My aunt I found in bed
in a most nasty ugly pickle, made me sick to see it. My father and I lay
together tonight, I greedy to see the will, but did not ask to see it
till to-morrow.

7th (Lord's day). In the morning my father and I walked in the garden
and read the will; where, though he gives me nothing at present till my
father's death, or at least very little, yet I am glad to see that he
hath done so well for us, all, and well to the rest of his kindred.
After that done, we went about getting things, as ribbands and gloves,
ready for the burial. Which in the afternoon was done; where, it being
Sunday, all people far and near come in; and in the greatest disorder
that ever I saw, we made shift to serve them what we had of wine and
other things; and then to carry him to the church, where Mr. Taylor
buried him, and Mr. Turners preached a funerall sermon, where he spoke
not particularly of him anything, but that he was one so well known for
his honesty, that it spoke for itself above all that he could say for
it. And so made a very good sermon. Home with some of the company who
supped there, and things being quiet, at night to bed.

8th, 9th, Loth, 11th, 12th, 13th. I fell to work, and my father to look
over my uncle's papers and clothes, and continued all this week upon
that business, much troubled with my aunt's base, ugly humours. We had
news of Tom Trice's putting in a caveat against us, in behalf of his
mother, to whom my uncle hath not given anything, and for good reason
therein expressed, which troubled us also. But above all, our trouble
is to find that his estate appears nothing as we expected, and all the
world believes; nor his papers so well sorted as I would have had them,
but all in confusion, that break my brains to understand them. We missed
also the surrenders of his copyhold land, without which the land would
not come to us, but to the heir at law, so that what with this, and the
badness of the drink and the ill opinion I have of the meat, and the
biting of the gnats by night and my disappointment in getting home this
week, and the trouble of sorting all the papers, I am almost out of my
wits with trouble, only I appear the more contented, because I would not
have my father troubled. The latter end of the week Mr. Philips comes
home from London, and so we advised with him and have the best counsel
he could give us, but for all that we were not quiet in our minds.

14th (Lord's day). At home, and Robert Barnwell with us, and dined, and
in the evening my father and I walked round Portholme and viewed all the
fields, which was very pleasant. Thence to Hinchingbroke, which is now
all in dirt, because of my Lord's building, which will make it very
magnificent. Back to Brampton, and to supper and to bed.

15th. Up by three o'clock this morning, and rode to Cambridge, and was
there by seven o'clock, where, after I was trimmed, I went to Christ
College, and found my brother John at eight o'clock in bed, which vexed
me. Then to King's College chappell, where I found the scholars in their
surplices at the service with the organs, which is a strange sight to
what it used in my time to be here. Then with Dr. Fairbrother (whom I
met there) to the Rose tavern, and called for some wine, and there met
fortunately with Mr. Turner of our office, and sent for his wife, and
were very merry (they being come to settle their son here), and sent
also for Mr. Sanchy, of Magdalen, with whom and other gentlemen, friends
of his, we were very merry, and I treated them as well as I could, and
so at noon took horse again, having taken leave of my cozen Angier, and
rode to Impington, where I found my old uncle

     [Talbot Pepys, sixth son of John Pepys of Impington, was born 1583,
     and therefore at this time he was seventy-eight years of age.  He
     was educated at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and called to the bar at
     the Middle Temple in 1605.  He was M.P. for Cambridge in 1625, and
     Recorder of Cambridge from 1624 to 1660, in which year he was
     succeeded by his son Roger.  He died of the plague, March, 1666,
     aged eighty-three.]

sitting all alone, like a man out of the world: he can hardly see; but
all things else he do pretty livelyly. Then with Dr. John Pepys and
him, I read over the will, and had their advice therein, who, as to the
sufficiency thereof confirmed me, and advised me as to the other parts
thereof. Having done there, I rode to Gravely with much ado to inquire
for a surrender of my uncle's in some of the copyholders' hands there,
but I can hear of none, which puts me into very great trouble of mind,
and so with a sad heart rode home to Brampton, but made myself as
cheerful as I could to my father, and so to bed.

16th, 17th, 18th, 19th. These four days we spent in putting things in
order, letting of the crop upon the ground, agreeing with Stankes to
have a care of our business in our absence, and we think ourselves in
nothing happy but in lighting upon him to be our bayly; in riding to
Offord and Sturtlow, and up and down all our lands, and in the evening
walking, my father and I about the fields talking, and had advice from
Mr. Moore from London, by my desire, that the three witnesses of the
will being all legatees, will not do the will any wrong. To-night
Serjeant Bernard, I hear, is come home into the country. To supper and
to bed. My aunt continuing in her base, hypocritical tricks, which both
Jane Perkin (of whom we make great use), and the maid do tell us every
day of.

20th. Up to Huntingdon this morning to Sir Robert Bernard, with whom I
met Jaspar Trice. So Sir Robert caused us to sit down together and began
discourse very fairly between us, so I drew out the Will and show it
him, and [he] spoke between us as well as I could desire, but could come
to no issue till Tom Trice comes. Then Sir Robert and I fell to talk
about the money due to us upon surrender from Piggott, L164., which he
tells me will go with debts to the heir at law, which breaks my heart on
the other side. Here I staid and dined with Sir Robert Bernard and his
lady, my Lady Digby, a very good woman. After dinner I went into the
town and spent the afternoon, sometimes with Mr. Phillips, sometimes
with Dr. Symcottes, Mr. Vinter, Robert Ethell, and many more friends,
and at last Mr. Davenport, Phillips, Jaspar Trice, myself and others
at Mother-----over against the Crown we sat and drank ale and were very
merry till 9 at night, and so broke up. I walked home, and there found
Tom Trice come, and he and my father gone to Goody Gorum's, where I
found them and Jaspar Trice got before me, and Mr. Greene, and there had
some calm discourse, but came to no issue, and so parted. So home and to
bed, being now pretty well again of my left hand, which lately was stung
and very much swelled.

21st (Lord's day). At home all the morning, putting my papers in order
against my going to-morrow and doing many things else to that end. Had
a good dinner, and Stankes and his wife with us. To my business again in
the afternoon, and in the evening came the two Trices, Mr. Greene, and
Mr. Philips, and so we began to argue. At last it came to some agreement
that for our giving of my aunt L10 she is to quit the house, and for
other matters they are to be left to the law, which do please us all,
and so we broke up, pretty well satisfyed. Then came Mr. Barnwell and J.
Bowles and supped with us, and after supper away, and so I having taken
leave of them and put things in the best order I could against to-morrow
I went to bed. Old William Luffe having been here this afternoon and
paid up his bond of L20, and I did give him into his hand my uncle's
surrender of Sturtlow to me before Mr. Philips, R. Barnwell, and Mr.
Pigott, which he did acknowledge to them my uncle did in his lifetime
deliver to him.

22nd. Up by three, and going by four on my way to London; but the day
proves very cold, so that having put on no stockings but thread ones
under my boots, I was fain at Bigglesworth to buy a pair of coarse
woollen ones, and put them on. So by degrees till I come to Hatfield
before twelve o'clock, where I had a very good dinner with my hostess,
at my Lord of Salisbury's Inn, and after dinner though weary I walked
all alone to the Vineyard, which is now a very beautiful place again;
and coming back I met with Mr. Looker, my Lord's gardener (a friend of
Mr. Eglin's), who showed me the house, the chappell with brave pictures,
and, above all, the gardens, such as I never saw in all my life; nor so
good flowers, nor so great gooseberrys, as big as nutmegs. Back to the
inn, and drank with him, and so to horse again, and with much ado got to
London, and set him up at Smithfield; so called at my uncle Fenner's,
my mother's, my Lady's, and so home, in all which I found all things as
well as I could expect. So weary and to bed.

23rd. Put on my mourning. Made visits to Sir W. Pen and Batten. Then
to Westminster, and at the Hall staid talking with Mrs. Michell a good
while, and in the afternoon, finding myself unfit for business, I went
to the Theatre, and saw "Brenoralt," I never saw before. It seemed a
good play, but ill acted; only I sat before Mrs. Palmer, the King's
mistress, and filled my eyes with her, which much pleased me. Then to my
father's, where by my desire I met my uncle Thomas, and discoursed of my
uncle's will to him, and did satisfy [him] as well as I could. So to my
uncle Wight's, but found him out of doors, but my aunt I saw and staid a
while, and so home and to bed. Troubled to hear how proud and idle Pall
is grown, that I am resolved not to keep her.

24th. This morning my wife in bed tells me of our being robbed of our
silver tankard, which vexed me all day for the negligence of my people
to leave the door open. My wife and I by water to Whitehall, where I
left her to her business and I to my cozen Thomas Pepys, and discoursed
with him at large about our business of my uncle's will. He can give us
no light at all into his estate, but upon the whole tells me that he do
believe that he has left but little money, though something more than we
have found, which is about L500. Here came Sir G. Lane by chance, seeing
a bill upon the door to hire the house, with whom my coz and I walked
all up and down, and indeed it is a very pretty place, and he do intend
to leave the agreement for the House, which is L400 fine, and L46 rent a
year to me between them. Then to the Wardrobe, but come too late, and so
dined with the servants. And then to my Lady, who do shew my wife and me
the greatest favour in the world, in which I take great content. Home by
water and to the office all the afternoon, which is a great pleasure to
me again, to talk with persons of quality and to be in command, and I
give it out among them that the estate left me is L200 a year in land,
besides moneys, because I would put an esteem upon myself. At night home
and to bed after I had set down my journals ever since my going from
London this journey to this house. This afternoon I hear that my man
Will hath lost his clock with my tankard, at which I am very glad.

25th. This morning came my box of papers from Brampton of all my uncle's
papers, which will now set me at work enough. At noon I went to the
Exchange, where I met my uncle Wight, and found him so discontented
about my father (whether that he takes it ill that he has not been
acquainted with things, or whether he takes it ill that he has nothing
left him, I cannot tell), for which I am much troubled, and so staid not
long to talk with him. Thence to my mother's, where I found my wife
and my aunt Bell and Mrs. Ramsey, and great store of tattle there was
between the old women and my mother, who thinks that there is, God knows
what fallen to her, which makes me mad, but it was not a proper time to
speak to her of it, and so I went away with Mr. Moore, and he and I to
the Theatre, and saw "The Jovial Crew," the first time I saw it, and
indeed it is as merry and the most innocent play that ever I saw, and
well performed. From thence home, and wrote to my father and so to bed.
Full of thoughts to think of the trouble that we shall go through before
we come to see what will remain to us of all our expectations.

26th. At home all the morning, and walking met with Mr. Hill of
Cambridge at Pope's Head Alley with some women with him whom he took and
me into the tavern there, and did give us wine, and would fain seem to
be very knowing in the affairs of state, and tells me that yesterday put
a change to the whole state of England as to the Church; for the King
now would be forced to favour Presbytery, or the City would leave him:
but I heed not what he says, though upon enquiry I do find that things
in the Parliament are in a great disorder. Home at noon and there found
Mr. Moore, and with him to an ordinary alone and dined, and there he and
I read my uncle's will, and I had his opinion on it, and still find
more and more trouble like to attend it. Back to the office all the
afternoon, and that done home for all night. Having the beginning of
this week made a vow to myself to drink no wine this week (finding it to
unfit me to look after business), and this day breaking of it against my
will, I am much troubled for it, but I hope God will forgive me.

27th. To Westminster, where at Mr. Montagu's chamber I heard a Frenchman
play, a friend of Monsieur Eschar's, upon the guitar, most extreme
well, though at the best methinks it is but a bawble. From thence to
Westminster Hall, where it was expected that the Parliament was to have
been adjourned for two or three months, but something hinders it for a
day or two. In the lobby I spoke with Mr. George Montagu, and advised
about a ship to carry my Lord Hinchingbroke and the rest of the young
gentlemen to France, and they have resolved of going in a hired vessell
from Rye, and not in a man of war. He told me in discourse that my Lord
Chancellor is much envied, and that many great men, such as the Duke of
Buckingham and my Lord of Bristoll, do endeavour to undermine him, and
that he believes it will not be done; for that the King (though he loves
him not in the way of a companion, as he do these young gallants that
can answer him in his pleasures), yet cannot be without him, for his
policy and service. From thence to the Wardrobe, where my wife met me,
it being my Lord of Sandwich's birthday, and so we had many friends
here, Mr. Townsend and his wife, and Captain Ferrers lady and Captain
Isham, and were very merry, and had a good venison pasty. Mr. Pargiter,
the merchant, was with us also. After dinner Mr. Townsend was called
upon by Captain Cooke: so we three went to a tavern hard by, and there
he did give us a song or two; and without doubt he hath the best manner
of singing in the world. Back to my wife, and with my Lady Jem. and Pall
by water through bridge, and showed them the ships with great pleasure,
and then took them to my house to show it them (my Lady their mother
having been lately all alone to see it and my wife, in my absence in the
country), and we treated them well, and were very merry. Then back again
through bridge, and set them safe at home, and so my wife and I by coach
home again, and after writing a letter to my father at Brampton, who,
poor man, is there all alone, and I have not heard from him since my
coming from him, which troubles me. To bed.

28th (Lord's day). This morning as my wife and I were going to church,
comes Mrs. Ramsay to see us, so we sent her to church, and we went too,
and came back to dinner, and she dined with us and was wellcome. To
church again in the afternoon, and then come home with us Sir W. Pen,
and drank with us, and then went away, and my wife after him to see his
daughter that is lately come out of Ireland. I staid at home at my book;
she came back again and tells me that whereas I expected she should
have been a great beauty, she is a very plain girl. This evening my wife
gives me all my linen, which I have put up, and intend to keep it now in
my own custody. To supper and to bed.

29th. This morning we began again to sit in the mornings at the office,
but before we sat down. Sir R. Slingsby and I went to Sir R. Ford's to
see his house, and we find it will be very convenient for us to have it
added to the office if he can be got to part with it. Then we sat down
and did business in the office. So home to dinner, and my brother Tom
dined with me, and after dinner he and I alone in my chamber had a
great deal of talk, and I find that unless my father can forbear to make
profit of his house in London and leave it to Tom, he has no mind to
set up the trade any where else, and so I know not what to do with him.
After this I went with him to my mother, and there told her how things
do fall out short of our expectations, which I did (though it be true)
to make her leave off her spending, which I find she is nowadays very
free in, building upon what is left to us by my uncle to bear her out
in it, which troubles me much. While I was here word is brought that my
aunt Fenner is exceeding ill, and that my mother is sent for presently
to come to her: also that my cozen Charles Glassecocke, though very
ill himself, is this day gone to the country to his brother, John
Glassecocke, who is a-dying there. Home.

30th. After my singing-master had done with me this morning, I went to
White Hall and Westminster Hall, where I found the King expected to
come and adjourn the Parliament. I found the two Houses at a great
difference, about the Lords challenging their privileges not to have
their houses searched, which makes them deny to pass the House of
Commons' Bill for searching for pamphlets and seditious books. Thence
by water to the Wardrobe (meeting the King upon the water going in his
barge to adjourn the House) where I dined with my Lady, and there met
Dr. Thomas Pepys, who I found to be a silly talking fellow, but very
good-natured. So home to the office, where we met about the business of
Tangier this afternoon. That done, at home I found Mr. Moore, and he and
I walked into the City and there parted. To Fleet Street to find when
the Assizes begin at Cambridge and Huntingdon, in order to my going to
meet with Roger Pepys for counsel. So in Fleet Street I met with Mr.
Salisbury, who is now grown in less than two years' time so great a
limner--that he is become excellent, and gets a great deal of money at
it. I took him to Hercules Pillars to drink, and there came Mr. Whore
(whom I formerly have known), a friend of his to him, who is a very
ingenious fellow, and there I sat with them a good while, and so home
and wrote letters late to my Lord and to my father, and then to bed.

31st. Singing-master came to me this morning; then to the office all the
morning. In the afternoon I went to the Theatre, and there I saw "The
Tamer Tamed" well done. And then home, and prepared to go to Walthamstow
to-morrow. This night I was forced to borrow L40 of Sir W. Batten.




AUGUST 1661

August 1st. This morning Sir Williams both, and my wife and I and Mrs.
Margarett Pen (this first time that I have seen her since she came from
Ireland) went by coach to Walthamstow, a-gossiping to Mrs. Browne, where
I did give her six silver spoons--[But not the porringer of silver.
See May 29th, 1661.--M. B]--for her boy. Here we had a venison pasty,
brought hot from London, and were very merry. Only I hear how nurse's
husband has spoken strangely of my Lady Batten how she was such a man's
whore, who indeed is known to leave her her estate, which we would fain
have reconciled to-day, but could not and indeed I do believe that the
story is true. Back again at night home.

2d. At the office all the morning. At noon Dr. Thos. Pepys dined with
me, and after dinner my brother Tom came to me and then I made myself
ready to get a-horseback for Cambridge. So I set out and rode to Ware,
this night, in the way having much discourse with a fellmonger,--[A
dealer in hides.]--a Quaker, who told me what a wicked man he had been
all his life-time till within this two years. Here I lay, and

3rd. Got up early the next morning and got to Barkway, where I staid
and drank, and there met with a letter-carrier of Cambridge, with whom I
rode all the way to Cambridge, my horse being tired, and myself very
wet with rain. I went to the Castle Hill, where the judges were at the
Assizes; and I staid till Roger Pepys rose and went with him, and dined
with his brother, the Doctor, and Claxton at Trinity Hall. Then parted,
and I went to the Rose, and there with Mr. Pechell, Sanchy, and others,
sat and drank till night and were very merry, only they tell me how
high the old doctors are in the University over those they found there,
though a great deal better scholars than themselves; for which I am very
sorry, and, above all, Dr. Gunning. At night I took horse, and rode
with Roger Pepys and his two brothers to Impington, and there with great
respect was led up by them to the best chamber in the house, and there
slept.

4th (Lord's day). Got up, and by and by walked into the orchard with my
cozen Roger, and there plucked some fruit, and then discoursed at large
about the business I came for, that is, about my uncle's will, in which
he did give me good satisfaction, but tells me I shall meet with a great
deal of trouble in it. However, in all things he told me what I am to
expect and what to do. To church, and had a good plain sermon, and my
uncle Talbot went with us and at our coming in the country-people all
rose with so much reverence; and when the parson begins, he begins
"Right worshipfull and dearly beloved" to us. Home to dinner, which was
very good, and then to church again, and so home and to walk up and
down and so to supper, and after supper to talk about publique matters,
wherein Roger Pepys--(who I find a very sober man, and one whom I do now
honour more than ever before for this discourse sake only) told me how
basely things have been carried in Parliament by the young men, that did
labour to oppose all things that were moved by serious men. That they
are the most prophane swearing fellows that ever he heard in his life,
which makes him think that they will spoil all, and bring things into a
warr again if they can. So to bed.

5th. Early to Huntingdon, but was fain to stay a great while at Stanton
because of the rain, and there borrowed a coat of a man for 6d., and so
he rode all the way, poor man, without any. Staid at Huntingdon for a
little, but the judges are not come hither: so I went to Brampton, and
there found my father very well, and my aunt gone from the house, which
I am glad of, though it costs us a great deal of money, viz. L10. Here
I dined, and after dinner took horse and rode to Yelling, to my cozen
Nightingale's, who hath a pretty house here, and did learn of her all
she could tell me concerning my business, and has given me some light by
her discourse how I may get a surrender made for Graveley lands. Hence
to Graveley, and there at an alehouse met with Chancler and Jackson (one
of my tenants for Cotton closes) and another with whom I had a great
deal of discourse, much to my satisfaction. Hence back again to Brampton
and after supper to bed, being now very quiet in the house, which is a
content to us.

6th. Up early and went to Mr. Phillips, but lost my labour, he lying
at Huntingdon last night, so I went back again and took horse and rode
thither, where I staid with Thos. Trice and Mr. Philips drinking till
noon, and then Tom Trice and I to Brampton, where he to Goody Gorum's
and I home to my father, who could discern that I had been drinking,
which he did never see or hear of before, so I eat a bit of dinner and
went with him to Gorum's, and there talked with Tom Trice, and then went
and took horse for London, and with much ado, the ways being very bad,
got to Baldwick, and there lay and had a good supper by myself. The
landlady being a pretty woman, but I durst not take notice of her, her
husband being there. Before supper I went to see the church, which is
a very handsome church, but I find that both here, and every where else
that I come, the Quakers do still continue, and rather grow than lessen.
To bed.

7th. Called up at three o'clock, and was a-horseback by four; and as
I was eating my breakfast I saw a man riding by that rode a little way
upon the road with me last night; and he being going with venison in his
pan-yards to London, I called him in and did give him his breakfast
with me, and so we went together all the way. At Hatfield we bayted and
walked into the great house through all the courts; and I would fain
have stolen a pretty dog that followed me, but I could not, which
troubled me. To horse again, and by degrees with much ado got to London,
where I found all well at home and at my father's and my Lady's, but
no news yet from my Lord where he is. At my Lady's (whither I went with
Dean Fuller, who came to my house to see me just as I was come home)
I met with Mr. Moore, who told me at what a loss he was for me, for
to-morrow is a Seal day at the Privy Seal, and it being my month, I am
to wait upon my Lord Roberts, Lord Privy Seal, at the Seal. Home and to
bed.

8th. Early in the mornink to Whitehall, but my Lord Privy Seal came
not all the morning. At noon Mr. Moore and I to the Wardrobe to dinner,
where my Lady and all merry and well. Back again to the Privy Seal; but
my Lord comes not all the afternoon, which made me mad and gives all
the world reason to talk of his delaying of business, as well as of his
severity and ill using of the Clerks of the Privy Seal. In the evening I
took Mons. Eschar and Mr. Moore and Dr. Pierce's brother (the souldier)
to the tavern next the Savoy, and there staid and drank with them. Here
I met with Mr. Mage, and discoursing of musique Mons. Eschar spoke so
much against the English and in praise of the French that made him mad,
and so he went away. After a stay with them a little longer we parted
and I home.

9th. To the office, where word is brought me by a son-in-law of Mr.
Pierces; the purser, that his father is a dying and that he desires that
I would come to him before he dies. So I rose from the table and went,
where I found him not so ill as I thought that he had been ill. So I did
promise to be a friend to his wife and family if he should die, which
was all he desired of me, but I do believe he will recover. Back again
to the office, where I found Sir G. Carteret had a day or two ago
invited some of the officers to dinner to-day at Deptford. So at noon,
when I heard that he was a-coming, I went out, because I would see
whether he would send to me or no to go with them; but he did not, which
do a little trouble me till I see how it comes to pass. Although in
other things I am glad of it because of my going again to-day to the
Privy Seal. I dined at home, and having dined news is brought by Mr.
Hater that his wife is now falling into labour, so he is come for my
wife, who presently went with him. I to White Hall, where, after four
o'clock, comes my Lord Privy Seal, and so we went up to his chamber over
the gate at White Hall, where he asked me what deputacon I had from My
Lord. I told him none; but that I am sworn my Lord's deputy by both of
the Secretarys, which did satisfy him. So he caused Mr. Moore to read
over all the bills as is the manner, and all ended very well. So that
I see the Lyon is not so fierce as he is painted. That being done Mons.
Eschar (who all this afternoon had been waiting at the Privy Seal
for the Warrant for L5,000 for my Lord of Sandwich's preparation for
Portugal) and I took some wine with us and went to visit la belle
Pierce, who we find very big with child, and a pretty lady, one Mrs.
Clifford, with her, where we staid and were extraordinary merry. From
thence I took coach to my father's, where I found him come home this day
from Brampton (as I expected) very well, and after some discourse about
business and it being very late I took coach again home, where I hear
by my wife that Mrs. Hater is not yet delivered, but continues in her
pains. So to bed.

10th. This morning came the maid that my wife hath lately hired for
a chamber maid. She is very ugly, so that I cannot care for her, but
otherwise she seems very good. But however she do come about three weeks
hence, when my wife comes back from Brampton, if she go with my father.
By and by came my father to my house, and so he and I went and found out
my uncle Wight at the Coffee House, and there did agree with him to
meet the next week with my uncle Thomas and read over the Captain's will
before them both for their satisfaction. Having done with him I went
to my Lady's and dined with her, and after dinner took the two young
gentlemen and the two ladies and carried them and Captain Ferrers to the
Theatre, and shewed them "The merry Devill of Edmunton," which is a very
merry play, the first time I ever saw it, which pleased me well. And
that being done I took them all home by coach to my house and there
gave them fruit to eat and wine. So by water home with them, and so home
myself.

11th (Lord's day). To our own church in the forenoon, and in the
afternoon to Clerkenwell Church, only to see the two

     [A comedy acted at the Globe, and first printed in 1608.  In the
     original entry in the Stationers' books it is said to be by T. B.,
     which may stand for Tony or Anthony Brewer.  The play has been
     attributed without authority both to Shakespeare and to Drayton.]

fayre Botelers;--[Mrs. Frances Butler and her sister.]--and I happened
to be placed in the pew where they afterwards came to sit, but the pew
by their coming being too full, I went out into the next, and there
sat, and had my full view of them both, but I am out of conceit now with
them, Colonel Dillon being come back from Ireland again, and do still
court them, and comes to church with them, which makes me think they are
not honest. Hence to Graye's-Inn walks, and there staid a good while;
where I met with Ned Pickering, who told me what a great match of
hunting of a stagg the King had yesterday; and how the King tired all
their horses, and come home with not above two or three able to keep
pace with him. So to my father's, and there supped, and so home.

12th. At the office this morning. At home in the afternoon, and had
notice that my Lord Hinchingbroke is fallen ill, which I fear is with
the fruit that I did give them on Saturday last at my house: so in the
evening I went thither and there found him very ill, and in great fear
of the smallpox. I supped with my Lady, and did consult about him, but
we find it best to let him lie where he do; and so I went home with my
heart full of trouble for my Lord Hinchinabroke's sickness, and more for
my Lord Sandwich's himself, whom we are now confirmed is sick ashore at
Alicante, who, if he should miscarry, God knows in what condition would
his family be. I dined to-day with my Lord Crew, who is now at Sir H.
Wright's, while his new house is making fit for him, and he is much
troubled also at these things.

13th. To the Privy Seal in the morning, then to the Wardrobe to dinner,
where I met my wife, and found my young Lord very ill. So my Lady
intends to send her other three sons, Sidney, Oliver, and John, to my
house, for fear of the small-pox. After dinner I went to my father's,
where I found him within, and went up to him, and there found him
settling his papers against his removal, and I took some old papers of
difference between me and my wife and took them away. After that Pall
being there I spoke to my father about my intention not to keep her
longer for such and such reasons, which troubled him and me also, and
had like to have come to some high words between my mother and me, who
is become a very simple woman. By and by comes in Mrs. Cordery to
take her leave of my father, thinking he was to go presently into the
country, and will have us to come and see her before he do go. Then my
father and I went forth to Mr. Rawlinson's, where afterwards comes my
uncle Thomas and his two sons, and then my uncle Wight by appointment
of us all, and there we read the will and told them how things are,
and what our thoughts are of kindness to my uncle Thomas if he do carry
himself peaceable, but otherwise if he persist to keep his caveat up
against us. So he promised to withdraw it, and seemed to be very well
contented with things as they are. After a while drinking, we paid all
and parted, and so I home, and there found my Lady's three sons come, of
which I am glad that I am in condition to do her and my Lord any service
in this kind, but my mind is yet very much troubled about my Lord of
Sandwich's health, which I am afeard of.

14th. This morning Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen and I, waited upon the
Duke of York in his chamber, to give him an account of the condition of
the Navy for lack of money, and how our own very bills are offered upon
the Exchange, to be sold at 20 in the 100 loss. He is much troubled at
it, and will speak to the King and Council of it this morning. So I
went to my Lady's and dined with her, and found my Lord Hinchingbroke
somewhat better. After dinner Captain Ferrers and I to the Theatre, and
there saw "The Alchymist;" and there I saw Sir W. Pen, who took us when
the play was done and carried the Captain to Paul's and set him down,
and me home with him, and he and I to the Dolphin, but not finding Sir
W. Batten there, we went and carried a bottle of wine to his house,
and there sat a while and talked, and so home to bed. At home I found
a letter from Mr. Creed of the 15th of July last, that tells me that
my Lord is rid of his pain (which was wind got into the muscles of his
right side) and his feaver, and is now in hopes to go aboard in a day or
two, which do give me mighty great comfort.

15th. To the Privy Seal and Whitehall, up and down, and at noon Sir W.
Pen carried me to Paul's, and so I walked to the Wardrobe and dined with
my Lady, and there told her, of my Lord's sickness (of which though
it hath been the town-talk this fortnight, she had heard nothing) and
recovery, of which she was glad, though hardly persuaded of the latter.
I found my Lord Hinchingbroke better and better, and the worst past.
Thence to the Opera, which begins again to-day with "The Witts," never
acted yet with scenes; and the King and Duke and Duchess were there (who
dined to-day with Sir H. Finch, reader at the Temple, in great state);
and indeed it is a most excellent play, and admirable scenes. So
home and was overtaken by Sir W. Pen in his coach, who has been this
afternoon with my Lady Batten, &c., at the Theatre. So I followed him
to the Dolphin, where Sir W. Batten was, and there we sat awhile, and
so home after we had made shift to fuddle Mr. Falconer of Woolwich. So
home.

16th. At the office all the morning, though little to be done; because
all our clerks are gone to the buriall of Tom Whitton, one of the
Controller's clerks, a very ingenious, and a likely young man to live,
as any in the Office. But it is such a sickly time both in City and
country every where (of a sort of fever), that never was heard of
almost, unless it was in a plague-time.

Among others, the famous Tom Fuller is dead of it; and Dr. Nichols, Dean
of Paul's; and my Lord General Monk is very dangerously ill. Dined at
home with the children and were merry, and my father with me; who after
dinner he and I went forth about business. Among other things we found
one Dr. John Williams at an alehouse, where we staid till past nine at
night, in Shoe Lane, talking about our country business, and I found him
so well acquainted with the matters of Gravely that I expect he will be
of great use to me. So by link home. I understand my Aunt Fenner is upon
the point of death.

17th. At the Privy Seal, where we had a seal this morning. Then met with
Ned Pickering, and walked with him into St. James's Park (where I
had not been a great while), and there found great and very noble
alterations. And, in our discourse, he was very forward to complain and
to speak loud of the lewdness and beggary of the Court, which I am sorry
to hear, and which I am afeard will bring all to ruin again. So he and I
to the Wardrobe to dinner, and after dinner Captain Ferrers and I to the
Opera, and saw "The Witts" again, which I like exceedingly. The Queen
of Bohemia was here, brought by my Lord Craven. So the Captain and I and
another to the Devil tavern and drank, and so by coach home. Troubled in
mind that I cannot bring myself to mind my business, but to be so much
in love of plays. We have been at a great loss a great while for a
vessel that I sent about a month ago with, things of my Lord's to Lynn,
and cannot till now hear of them, but now we are told that they are put
into Soale Bay, but to what purpose I know not.

18th (Lord's day). To our own church in the morning and so home to
dinner, where my father and Dr. Tom Pepys came to me to dine, and were
very merry. After dinner I took my wife and Mr. Sidney to my Lady to
see my Lord Hinchingbroke, who is now pretty well again, and sits up and
walks about his chamber. So I went to White Hall, and there hear that my
Lord General Monk continues very ill: so I went to la belle Pierce
and sat with her; and then to walk in St. James's Park, and saw great
variety of fowl which I never saw before and so home. At night fell to
read in "Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity," which Mr. Moore did give me
last Wednesday very handsomely bound; and which I shall read with great
pains and love for his sake. So to supper and to bed.

19th. At the office all the morning; at noon the children are sent for
by their mother my Lady Sandwich to dinner, and my wife goes along with
them by coach, and she to my father's and dines there, and from thence
with them to see Mrs. Cordery, who do invite them before my father goes
into the country, and thither I should have gone too but that I am sent
for to the Privy Seal, and there I found a thing of my Lord Chancellor's

     [This "thing" was probably one of those large grants which Clarendon
     quietly, or, as he himself says, "without noise or scandal,"
     procured from the king.  Besides lands and manors, Clarendon states
     at one time that the king gave him a "little billet into his hand,
     that contained a warrant of his own hand-writing to Sir Stephen Fox
     to pay to the Chancellor the sum of L20,000,--[approximately 10
     million dollars in the year 2000]--of which nobody could have
     notice."  In 1662 he received L5,000 out of the money voted to the
     king by the Parliament of Ireland, as he mentions in his vindication
     of himself against the impeachment of the Commons; and we shall see
     that Pepys, in February, 1664, names another sum of L20,000 given to
     the Chancellor to clear the mortgage upon Clarendon Park; and this
     last sum, it was believed, was paid from the money received from
     France by the sale of Dunkirk.--B.]

to be sealed this afternoon, and so I am forced to go to Worcester
House, where severall Lords are met in Council this afternoon. And while
I am waiting there, in comes the King in a plain common riding-suit and
velvet cap, in which he seemed a very ordinary man to one that had not
known him. Here I staid till at last, hearing that my Lord Privy Seal
had not the seal here, Mr. Moore and I hired a coach and went to Chelsy,
and there at an alehouse sat and drank and past the time till my Lord
Privy Seal came to his house, and so we to him and examined and sealed
the thing, and so homewards, but when we came to look for our coach we
found it gone, so we were fain to walk home afoot and saved our money.
We met with a companion that walked with us, and coming among some
trees near the Neate houses, he began to whistle, which did give us some
suspicion, but it proved that he that answered him was Mr. Marsh (the
Lutenist) and his wife, and so we all walked to Westminster together,
in our way drinking a while at my cost, and had a song of him, but his
voice is quite lost. So walked home, and there I found that my Lady do
keep the children at home, and lets them not come any more hither at
present, which a little troubles me to lose their company. This day my
aunt Fenner dyed.

20th. At the office in the morning and all the afternoon at home to put
my papers in order. This day we come to some agreement with Sir R. Ford
for his house to be added to the office to enlarge our quarters.

21st. This morning by appointment I went to my father, and after a
morning draft he and I went to Dr. Williams, but he not within we
went to Mrs. Terry, a daughter of Mr. Whately's, who lately offered a
proposal of her sister for a wife for my brother Tom, and with her we
discoursed about and agreed to go to her mother this afternoon to speak
with her, and in the meantime went to Will. Joyce's and to an alehouse,
and drank a good while together, he being very angry that his father
Fenner will give him and his brother no more for mourning than their
father did give him and my aunt at their mother's death, and a very
troublesome fellow I still find him to be, that his company ever wearys
me. From thence about two o'clock to Mrs. Whately's, but she being going
to dinner we went to Whitehall and there staid till past three, and
here I understand by Mr. Moore that my Lady Sandwich is brought to bed
yesterday of a young Lady, and is very well. So to Mrs. Whately's again,
and there were well received, and she desirous to have the thing go
forward, only is afeard that her daughter is too young and portion
not big enough, but offers L200 down with her. The girl is very well
favoured,, and a very child, but modest, and one I think will do very
well for my brother: so parted till she hears from Hatfield from her
husband, who is there; but I find them very desirous of it, and so am
I. Hence home to my father's, and I to the Wardrobe, where I supped with
the ladies, and hear their mother is well and the young child, and so
home.

22nd. To the Privy Seal, and sealed; so home at noon, and there took my
wife by coach to my uncle Fenner's, where there was both at his house
and the Sessions, great deal of company, but poor entertainment, which
I wonder at; and the house so hot, that my uncle Wight, my father and I
were fain to go out, and stay at an alehouse awhile to cool ourselves.
Then back again and to church, my father's family being all in mourning,
doing him the greatest honour, the world believing that he did give us
it: so to church, and staid out the sermon, and then with my aunt Wight,
my wife, and Pall and I to her house by coach, and there staid and
supped upon a Westphalia ham, and so home and to bed.

23rd. This morning I went to my father's, and there found him and my
mother in a discontent, which troubles me much, and indeed she is become
very simple and unquiet. Hence he and I to Dr. Williams, and found him
within, and there we sat and talked a good while, and from him to Tom
Trice's to an alehouse near, and there sat and talked, and finding him
fair we examined my uncle's will before him and Dr. Williams, and had
them sign the copy and so did give T. Trice the original to prove, so
he took my father and me to one of the judges of the Court, and there we
were sworn, and so back again to the alehouse and drank and parted. Dr.
Williams and I to a cook's where we eat a bit of mutton, and away, I
to W. Joyce's, where by appointment my wife was, and I took her to the
Opera, and shewed her "The Witts," which I had seen already twice, and
was most highly pleased with it. So with my wife to the Wardrobe to see
my Lady, and then home.

24th. At the office all the morning and did business; by and by we
are called to Sir W. Batten's to see the strange creature that Captain
Holmes hath brought with him from Guiny; it is a great baboon, but so
much like a man in most things, that though they say there is a species
of them, yet I cannot believe but that it is a monster got of a man and
she-baboon. I do believe that it already understands much English, and
I am of the mind it might be taught to speak or make signs. Hence the
Comptroller and I to Sir Rd. Ford's and viewed the house again, and are
come to a complete end with him to give him L200 per an. for it. Home
and there met Capt. Isham inquiring for me to take his leave of me, he
being upon his voyage to Portugal, and for my letters to my Lord which
are not ready. But I took him to the Mitre and gave him a glass of sack,
and so adieu, and then straight to the Opera, and there saw "Hamlet,
Prince of Denmark," done with scenes very well, but above all, Betterton

     [Sir William Davenant introduced the use of scenery.  The character
     of Hamlet was one of Betterton's masterpieces.  Downes tells us that
     he was taught by Davenant how the part was acted by Taylor of the
     Blackfriars, who was instructed by Shakespeare himself.]

did the prince's part beyond imagination. Hence homeward, and met with
Mr. Spong and took him to the Sampson in Paul's churchyard, and there
staid till late, and it rained hard, so we were fain to get home wet,
and so to bed.

25th (Lord's day). At church in the morning, and dined at home alone
with my wife very comfortably, and so again to church with her, and had
a very good and pungent sermon of Mr. Mills, discoursing the necessity
of restitution. Home, and I found my Lady Batten and her daughter to
look something askew upon my wife, because my wife do not buckle to
them, and is not solicitous for their acquaintance, which I am not
troubled at at all. By and by comes in my father (he intends to go
into the country to-morrow), and he and I among other discourse at last
called Pall up to us, and there in great anger told her before my father
that I would keep her no longer, and my father he said he would have
nothing to do with her. At last, after we had brought down her high
spirit, I got my father to yield that she should go into the country
with my mother and him, and stay there awhile to see how she will demean
herself. That being done, my father and I to my uncle Wight's, and there
supped, and he took his leave of them, and so I walked with [him] as far
as Paul's and there parted, and I home, my mind at some rest upon this
making an end with Pall, who do trouble me exceedingly.

26th. This morning before I went out I made even with my maid Jane, who
has this day been my maid three years, and is this day to go into the
country to her mother. The poor girl cried, and I could hardly forbear
weeping to think of her going, for though she be grown lazy and spoilt
by Pall's coming, yet I shall never have one to please us better in all
things, and so harmless, while I live. So I paid her her wages and gave
her 2s. 6d. over, and bade her adieu, with my mind full of trouble
at her going. Hence to my father, where he and I and Thomas together
setting things even, and casting up my father's accounts, and upon the
whole I find that all he hath in money of his own due to him in the
world is but L45, and he owes about the same sum: so that I cannot but
think in what a condition he had left my mother if he should have died
before my uncle Robert. Hence to Tom Trice for the probate of the
will and had it done to my mind, which did give my father and me good
content. From thence to my Lady at the Wardrobe and thence to the
Theatre, and saw the "Antipodes," wherein there is much mirth, but no
great matter else. Hence with Mr. Bostock whom I met there (a clerk
formerly of Mr. Phelps) to the Devil tavern, and there drank and
so away. I to my uncle Fenner's, where my father was with him at an
alehouse, and so we three went by ourselves and sat talking a great
while about a broker's daughter that he do propose for a wife for Tom,
with a great portion, but I fear it will not take, but he will do what
he can. So we broke up, and going through the street we met with a
mother and son, friends of my father's man, Ned's, who are angry at my
father's putting him away, which troubled me and my father, but all will
be well as to that. We have news this morning of my uncle Thomas and his
son Thomas being gone into the country without giving notice thereof to
anybody, which puts us to a stand, but I fear them not. At night at home
I found a letter from my Lord Sandwich, who is now very well again of
his feaver, but not yet gone from Alicante, where he lay sick, and was
twice let blood. This letter dated the 22nd July last, which puts me out
of doubt of his being ill. In my coming home I called in at the Crane
tavern at the Stocks by appointment, and there met and took leave of
Mr. Fanshaw, who goes to-morrow and Captain Isham toward their voyage to
Portugal. Here we drank a great deal of wine, I too much and Mr. Fanshaw
till he could hardly go. So we took leave one of another.

27th. This morning to the Wardrobe, and there took leave of my Lord
Hinchingbroke and his brother, and saw them go out by coach toward
Rye in their way to France, whom God bless. Then I was called up to
my Lady's bedside, where we talked an hour about Mr. Edward Montagu's
disposing of the L5000 for my Lord's departure for Portugal, and our
fears that he will not do it to my Lord's honour, and less to his
profit, which I am to enquire a little after. Hence to the office, and
there sat till noon, and then my wife and I by coach to my cozen, Thos.
Pepys, the Executor, to dinner, where some ladies and my father and
mother, where very merry, but methinks he makes but poor dinners for
such guests, though there was a poor venison pasty. Hence my wife and I
to the Theatre, and there saw "The Joviall Crew," where the King, Duke
and Duchess, and Madame Palmer, were; and my wife, to her great content,
had a full sight of them all the while. The play full of mirth. Hence
to my father's, and there staid to talk a while and so by foot home by
moonshine. In my way and at home, my wife making a sad story to me of
her brother Balty's a condition, and would have me to do something for
him, which I shall endeavour to do, but am afeard to meddle therein
for fear I shall not be able to wipe my hands of him again, when I once
concern myself for him. I went to bed, my wife all the while telling me
his case with tears, which troubled me.

28th. At home all the morning setting papers in order. At noon to the
Exchange, and there met with Dr. Williams by appointment, and with him
went up and down to look for an attorney, a friend of his, to advise
with about our bond of my aunt Pepys of L200, and he tells me absolutely
that we shall not be forced to pay interest for the money yet. I do
doubt it very much. I spent the whole afternoon drinking with him and so
home. This day I counterfeited a letter to Sir W. Pen, as from the thief
that stole his tankard lately, only to abuse and laugh at him.

29th. At the office all the morning, and at noon my father, mother, and
my aunt Bell (the first time that ever she was at my house) come to dine
with me, and were very merry. After dinner the two women went to visit
my aunt Wight, &c., and my father about other business, and I abroad
to my bookseller, and there staid till four o'clock, at which time by
appointment I went to meet my father at my uncle Fenner's. So thither I
went and with him to an alehouse, and there came Mr. Evans, the taylor,
whose daughter we have had a mind to get for a wife for Tom, and then my
father, and there we sat a good while and talked about the business; in
fine he told us that he hath not to except against us or our motion,
but that the estate that God hath blessed him with is too great to give
where there is nothing in present possession but a trade and house; and
so we friendly ended. There parted, my father and I together, and walked
a little way, and then at Holborn he and I took leave of one another,
he being to go to Brampton (to settle things against my mother comes)
tomorrow morning. So I home.

30th. At noon my wife and I met at the Wardrobe, and there dined with
the children, and after dinner up to my Lady's bedside, and talked and
laughed a good while. Then my wife end I to Drury Lane to the French
comedy, which was so ill done, and the scenes and company and every
thing else so nasty and out of order and poor, that I was sick all the
while in my mind to be there. Here my wife met with a son of my Lord
Somersett, whom she knew in France, a pretty man; I showed him no great
countenance, to avoyd further acquaintance. That done, there being
nothing pleasant but the foolery of the farce, we went home.

31st. At home and the office all the morning, and at noon comes Luellin
to me, and he and I to the tavern and after that to Bartholomew fair,
and there upon his motion to a pitiful alehouse, where we had a dirty
slut or two come up that were whores, but my very heart went against
them, so that I took no pleasure but a great deal of trouble in being
there and getting from thence for fear of being seen. From hence he and
I walked towards Ludgate and parted. I back again to the fair all alone,
and there met with my Ladies Jemimah and Paulina, with Mr. Pickering and
Madamoiselle, at seeing the monkeys dance, which was much to see, when
they could be brought to do so, but it troubled me to sit among such
nasty company. After that with them into Christ's Hospitall, and there
Mr. Pickering bought them some fairings, and I did give every one of
them a bauble, which was the little globes of glass with things hanging
in them, which pleased the ladies very well. After that home with them
in their coach, and there was called up to my Lady, and she would have
me stay to talk with her, which I did I think a full hour. And the poor
lady did with so much innocency tell me how Mrs. Crispe had told her
that she did intend, by means of a lady that lies at her house, to get
the King to be godfather to the young lady that she is in childbed now
of; but to see in what a manner my Lady told it me, protesting that she
sweat in the very telling of it, was the greatest pleasure to me in the
world to see the simplicity and harmlessness of a lady. Then down to
supper with the ladies, and so home, Mr. Moore (as he and I cannot
easily part) leading me as far as Fenchurch Street to the Mitre, where
we drank a glass of wine and so parted, and I home and to bed.

Thus ends the month. My maid Jane newly gone, and Pall left now to do
all the work till another maid comes, which shall not be till she goes
away into the country with my mother. Myself and wife in good health. My
Lord Sandwich in the Straits and newly recovered of a great sickness at
Alicante. My father gone to settle at Brampton, and myself under much
business and trouble for to settle things in the estate to our content.
But what is worst, I find myself lately too much given to seeing of
plays, and expense, and pleasure, which makes me forget my business,
which I must labour to amend. No money comes in, so that I have been
forced to borrow a great deal for my own expenses, and to furnish my
father, to leave things in order. I have some trouble about my brother
Tom, who is now left to keep my father's trade, in which I have great
fears that he will miscarry for want of brains and care. At Court things
are in very ill condition, there being so much emulacion, poverty, and
the vices of drinking, swearing, and loose amours, that I know not what
will be the end of it, but confusion. And the Clergy so high, that all
people that I meet with do protest against their practice. In short, I
see no content or satisfaction any where, in any one sort of people. The
Benevolence

     [A voluntary contribution made by the subjects to their sovereign.
     Upon this occasion the clergy alone gave L33,743: See May 31st,
     1661.--B]

proves so little, and an occasion of so much discontent every where;
that it had better it had never been set up. I think to subscribe L20.
We are at our Office quiet, only for lack of money all things go to
rack. Our very bills offered to be sold upon the Exchange at 10 per
cent. loss. We are upon getting Sir R. Ford's house added to our Office.
But I see so many difficulties will follow in pleasing of one another in
the dividing of it, and in becoming bound personally to pay the rent of
L200 per annum, that I do believe it will yet scarce come to pass. The
season very sickly every where of strange and fatal fevers.




SEPTEMBER 1661

September 1st (Lord's day). Last night being very rainy [the rain] broke
into my house, the gutter being stopped, and spoiled all my ceilings
almost. At church in the morning, and dined at home with my wife. After
dinner to Sir W. Batten's, where I found Sir W. Pen and Captain Holmes.
Here we were very merry with Sir W. Pen about the loss of his tankard,
though all be but a cheat, and he do not yet understand it; but the
tankard was stole by Sir W. Batten, and the letter, as from the
thief, wrote by me, which makes: very good sport. Here I staid all the
afternoon, and then Captain Holmes and I by coach to White Hall; in our
way, I found him by discourse, to be a great friend of my Lord's, and he
told me there was many did seek to remove him; but they were old seamen,
such as Sir J. Minnes (but he would name no more, though I do believe
Sir W. Batten is one of them that do envy him), but he says he knows
that the King do so love him, and the Duke of York too, that there is no
fear of him. He seems to be very well acquainted with the King's mind,
and with all the several factions at Court, and spoke all with so much
frankness, that I do take him to be my Lord's good friend, and one able
to do him great service, being a cunning fellow, and one (by his own
confession to me) that can put on two several faces, and look his
enemies in the face with as much love as his friends. But, good God!
what an age is this, and what a world is this! that a man cannot live
without playing the knave and dissimulation. At Whitehall we parted, and
I to Mrs. Pierce's, meeting her and Madam Clifford in the street, and
there staid talking and laughing with them a good while, and so back to
my mother's, and there supped, and so home and to bed.

2nd. In the morning to my cozen Thos. Pepys, executor, and there talked
with him about my uncle Thomas, his being in the country, but he could
not advise me to anything therein, not knowing what the other has done
in the country, and so we parted. And so to Whitehall, and there my Lord
Privy Seal, who has been out of town this week, not being yet come,
we can have no seal, and therefore meeting with Mr. Battersby the
apothecary in Fenchurch Street to the King's Apothecary's chamber in
Whitehall, and there drank a bottle or two of wine, and so he and I by
water towards London. I landed at Blackfriars and so to the Wardrobe
and dined, and then back to Whitehall with Captain Ferrers, and there
walked, and thence to Westminster Hall, where we met with Mr. Pickering,
and so all of us to the Rhenish wine house (Prior's), where the master
of the house is laying out some money in making a cellar with an arch in
his yard, which is very convenient for him. Here we staid a good while,
and so Mr. Pickering and I to Westminster Hall again, and there walked
an hour or two talking, and though he be a fool, yet he keeps much
company, and will tell all he sees or hears, and so a man may understand
what the common talk of the town is, and I find by him that there
are endeavours to get my Lord out of play at sea, which I believe Mr.
Coventry and the Duke do think will make them more absolute; but I hope,
for all this, they will not be able to do it. He tells me plainly of the
vices of the Court, and how the pox is so common there, and so I hear on
all hands that it is as common as eating and swearing. From him by water
to the bridge, and thence to the Mitre, where I met my uncle and aunt
Wight come to see Mrs. Rawlinson (in her husband's absence out of town),
and so I staid with them and Mr. Lucas and other company, very merry,
and so home, Where my wife has been busy all the day making of pies, and
had been abroad and bought things for herself, and tells that she met at
the Change with my young ladies of the Wardrobe and there helped them to
buy things, and also with Mr. Somerset, who did give her a bracelet of
rings, which did a little trouble me, though I know there is no hurt yet
in it, but only for fear of further acquaintance. So to bed. This night
I sent another letter to Sir W. Pen to offer him the return of his
tankard upon his leaving of 30s. at a place where it should be brought.
The issue of which I am to expect.

3rd. This day some of us Commissioners went down to Deptford to pay
off some ships, but I could not go, but staid at home all the morning
setting papers to rights, and this morning Mr. Howell, our turner, sent
me two things to file papers on very handsome. Dined at home, and then
with my wife to the Wardrobe, where my Lady's child was christened (my
Lord Crew and his Lady, and my Lady Montagu, my Lord's mother-in-law,
were the witnesses), and named Katherine

     [Lady Katherine Montagu, youngest daughter of Lord Sandwich,
     married, first, Nicholas Bacon, eldest son and heir of Sir Nicholas
     Bacon, K.B., of Shrubland Hall, co.  Suffolk; and, secondly, the
     Rev. Balthazar Gardeman.  She died January 15th, 1757, at ninety-six
     years, four months.--B.]

(the Queen elect's name); but to my and all our trouble, the Parson of
the parish christened her, and did not sign the child with the sign of
the cross. After that was done, we had a very fine banquet, the best I
ever was at, and so (there being very little company) we by and by broke
up, and my wife and I to my mother, who I took a liberty to advise about
her getting things ready to go this week into the country to my father,
and she (being become now-a-days very simple) took it very ill, and we
had a great deal of noise and wrangling about it. So home by coach.

4th. In the morning to the Privy Seal to do some things of the last
month, my Lord Privy Seal having been some time out of town. Then my
wife came to me to Whitehall, and we went and walked a good while in St.
James's Park to see the brave alterations, and so to Wilkinson's, the
Cook's, to dinner, where we sent for Mrs. Sarah and there dined and had
oysters, the first I have eat this year, and were pretty good. After
dinner by agreement to visit Mrs. Symonds, but she is abroad, which I
wonder at, and so missing her my wife again to my mother's (calling at
Mrs. Pierce's, who we found brought to bed of a girl last night) and
there staid and drank, and she resolves to be going to-morrow without
fail. Many friends come in to take their leave of her, but a great
deal of stir I had again tonight about getting her to go to see my Lady
Sandwich before she goes, which she says she will do tomorrow. So I
home.

5th. To the Privy Seal this morning about business, in my way taking
leave of my mother, who goes to Brampton to-day. But doing my business
at the Privy Seal pretty soon, I took boat and went to my uncle
Fenner's, and there I found my mother and my wife and Pall (of whom I
had this morning at my own house taken leave, and given her 20s. and
good counsel how to carry herself to my father and mother), and so I
took them, it being late, to Beard's, where they were staid for, and so
I put them into the waggon, and saw them going presently, Pall crying
exceedingly. Then in with my wife, my aunt Bell and Charles Pepys, whom
we met there, and drank, and so to my uncle Fenner's to dinner (in the
way meeting a French footman with feathers, who was in quest of my wife,
and spoke with her privately, but I could not tell what it was, only my
wife promised to go to some place to-morrow morning, which do trouble
my mind how to know whither it was), where both his sons and daughters
were, and there we were merry and dined. After dinner news was brought
that my aunt Kite, the butcher's widow in London, is sick ready to die
and sends for my uncle and me to come to take charge of things, and to
be entrusted with the care of her daughter. But I through want of time
to undertake such a business, I was taken up by Antony Joyce, which
came at last to very high words, which made me very angry, and I did
not think that he would ever have been such a fool to meddle with other
people's business, but I saw he spoke worse to his father than to me and
therefore I bore it the better, but all the company was offended with
him, so we parted angry he and I, and so my wife and I to the fair,
and I showed her the Italians dancing the ropes, and the women that
do strange tumbling tricks and so by foot home vexed in my mind about
Antony Joyce.

6th. This morning my uncle Fenner by appointment came and drank his
morning draft with me, and from thence he and I go to see my aunt Kite
(my wife holding her resolution to go this morning as she resolved
yesterday, and though there could not be much hurt in it, yet my own
jealousy put a hundred things into my mind, which did much trouble me
all day), whom we found in bed and not like to live as we think, and she
told us her mind was that if she should die she should give all she had
to her daughter, only L5 apiece to her second husband's children, in
case they live to come out of their apprenticeships, and that if her
daughter should die before marrying, then L10 to be divided between
Sarah Kite's children and the rest as her own daughter shall dispose of
it, and this I set down that I may be able to swear in case there should
be occasion. From thence to an alehouse while it rained, which kept us
there I think above two hours, and at last we were fain to go through
the rainy street home, calling on his sister Utbeck and drank there.
Then I home to dinner all alone, and thence my mind being for my
wife's going abroad much troubled and unfit for business, I went to the
Theatre, and saw "Elder Brother" ill acted; that done, meeting here with
Sir G. Askew, Sir Theophilus Jones, and another Knight, with Sir W.
Pen, we to the Ship tavern, and there staid and were merry till late
at night, and so got a coach, and Sir Wm. and I home, where my wife had
been long come home, but I seemed very angry, as indeed I am, and did
not all night show her any countenance, neither before nor in bed, and
so slept and rose discontented.

7th. At the office all the morning. At noon Mr. Moore dined with me, and
then in comes Wm. Joyce to answer a letter of mine I wrote this morning
to him about a maid of his that my wife had hired, and she sent us word
that she was hired to stay longer with her master, which mistake he came
to clear himself of; and I took it very kindly. So I having appointed
the young ladies at the Wardrobe to go with them to a play to-day, I
left him and my brother Tom who came along with him to dine, and my wife
and I took them to the Theatre, where we seated ourselves close by the
King, and Duke of York, and Madame Palmer, which was great content; and,
indeed, I can never enough admire her beauty. And here was "Bartholomew
Fayre," with the puppet-show, acted to-day, which had not been these
forty years (it being so satyricall against Puritanism, they durst not
till now, which is strange they should already dare to do it, and the
King do countenance it), but I do never a whit like it the better for
the puppets, but rather the worse. Thence home with the ladies, it being
by reason of our staying a great while for the King's coming, and the
length of the play, near nine o'clock before it was done, and so in
their coach home, and still in discontent with my wife, to bed, and rose
so this morning also.

8th (Lord's day). To church, it being a very wet night last night
and to-day, dined at home, and so to church again with my wife in the
afternoon, and coming home again found our new maid Doll asleep, that
she could not hear to let us in, so that we were fain to send the boy in
at a window to open the door to us. So up to my chamber all alone, and
troubled in mind to think how much of late I have addicted myself to
expense and pleasure, that now I can hardly reclaim myself to look after
my great business of settling Gravely business, until now almost too
late. I pray God give me grace to begin now to look after my business,
but it always was, and I fear will ever be, my foible that after I am
once got behind-hand with business, I am hard to set to it again to
recover it. In the evening I begun to look over my accounts and upon
the whole I do find myself, by what I can yet see, worth near L600, for
which God be blessed, which put me into great comfort. So to supper and
to bed.

9th. To the Privy Seal in the morning, but my Lord did not come, so I
went with Captain Morrice at his desire into the King's Privy Kitchen
to Mr. Sayres, the Master Cook, and there we had a good slice of beef
or two to our breakfast, and from thence he took us into the wine cellar
where, by my troth, we were very merry, and I drank too much wine, and
all along had great and particular kindness from Mr. Sayres, but I drank
so much wine that I was not fit for business, and therefore at noon I
went and walked in Westminster Hall a while, and thence to Salisbury
Court play house, where was acted the first time "'Tis pity Shee's a
Whore," a simple play and ill acted, only it was my fortune to sit by a
most pretty and most ingenious lady, which pleased me much. Thence home,
and found Sir Williams both and much more company gone to the Dolphin
to drink the 30s. that we got the other day of Sir W. Pen about his
tankard. Here was Sir R. Slingsby, Holmes, Captn. Allen, Mr. Turner,
his wife and daughter, my Lady Batten, and Mrs. Martha, &c., and an
excellent company of fiddlers; so we exceeding merry till late; and
then we begun to tell Sir W. Pen the business, but he had been drinking
to-day, and so is almost gone, that we could not make him understand it,
which caused us more sport. But so much the better, for I believe when
he do come to understand it he will be angry, he has so talked of the
business himself and the letter up and down that he will be ashamed to
be found abused in it. So home and to bed.

10th. At the office all the morn, dined at home; then my wife into
Wood Street to buy a chest, and thence to buy other things at my uncle
Fenner's (though by reason of rain we had ill walking), thence to my
brother Tom's, and there discoursed with him about business, and so to
the Wardrobe to see my Lady, and after supper with the young ladies,
bought a link and carried it myself till I met one that would light me
home for the link. So he light me home with his own, and then I did give
him mine. This night I found Mary, my cozen W. Joyce's maid, come to me
to be my cook maid, and so my house is full again. So to bed.

11th. Early to my cozen Thomas Trice to discourse about our affairs,
and he did make demand of the L200 and the interest thereof. But for
the L200 I did agree to pay him, but for the other I did desire to be
advised. So from him to Dr. Williams, who did carry me into his garden,
where he hath abundance of grapes; and did show me how a dog that he
hath do kill all the cats that come thither to kill his pigeons, and
do afterwards bury them; and do it with so much care that they shall be
quite covered; that if but the tip of the tail hangs out he will take
up the cat again, and dig the hole deeper. Which is very strange; and he
tells me that he do believe that he hath killed above 100 cats. After
he was ready we went up and down to inquire about my affairs and then
parted, and to the Wardrobe, and there took Mr. Moore to Tom Trice, who
promised to let Mr. Moore have copies of the bond and my aunt's deed
of gift, and so I took him home to my house to dinner, where I found my
wife's brother, Balty, as fine as hands could make him, and his servant,
a Frenchman, to wait on him, and come to have my wife to visit a young
lady which he is a servant to, and have hope to trepan and get for his
wife. I did give way for my wife to go with him, and so after dinner
they went, and Mr. Moore and I out again, he about his business and I
to Dr. Williams: to talk with him again, and he and I walking through
Lincoln's Fields observed at the Opera a new play, "Twelfth Night"

     [Pepys seldom liked any play of Shakespeare's, and he sadly
     blundered when he supposed "Twelfth Night" was a new play.]

was acted there, and the King there; so I, against my own mind and
resolution, could not forbear to go in, which did make the play seem a
burthen to me, and I took no pleasure at all in it; and so after it
was done went home with my mind troubled for my going thither, after my
swearing to my wife that I would never go to a play without her. So
that what with this and things going so cross to me as to matters of my
uncle's estate, makes me very much troubled in my mind, and so to bed.
My wife was with her brother to see his mistress today, and says she is
young, rich, and handsome, but not likely for him to get.

12th. Though it was an office day, yet I was forced to go to the Privy
Seal, at which I was all the morning, and from thence to my Lady's to
dinner at the Wardrobe; and in my way upon the Thames, I saw the King's
new pleasure-boat that is come now for the King to take pleasure in
above bridge; and also two Gundaloes

     ["Two long boats that were made in Venice, called gondolas, were by
     the Duke of Venice (Dominico Contareni) presented to His Majesty;
     and the attending watermen, being four, were in very rich clothes,
     crimson satin; very big were their breeches and doublets; they wore
     also very large shirts of the same satin, very richly laced."
     --Rugge's Diurnal.--B.]

that are lately brought, which are very rich and fine. After dinner
I went into my Lady's chamber where I found her up now out of her
childbed, which I was glad to see, and after an hour's talk with her I
took leave and to Tom Trice again, and sat talking and drinking with him
about our business a great while. I do find I am likely to be forced to
pay interest for the L200. By and by in comes my uncle Thomas, and as he
was always a close cunning fellow, so he carries himself to me, and says
nothing of what his endeavours are, though to my trouble I know that he
is about recovering of Gravely, but neither I nor he began any discourse
of the business. From thence to Dr. Williams (at the little blind
alehouse in Shoe Lane, at the Gridiron, a place I am ashamed to be seen
to go into), and there with some bland counsel of his we discuss our
matters, but I find men of so different minds that by my troth I know
not what to trust to. It being late I took leave, and by link home and
called at Sir W. Batten's, and there hear that Sir W. Pen do take our
jest of the tankard very ill, which Pam sorry for.

13th. This morning I was sent for by my uncle Fenner to come and advise
about the buriall of my aunt, the butcher, who died yesterday; and from
thence to the Anchor, by Doctor's Commons, and there Dr. Williams and I
did write a letter for my purpose to Mr. Sedgewick, of Cambridge, about
Gravely business, and after that I left him and an attorney with him and
went to the Wardrobe, where I found my wife, and thence she and I to
the water to spend the afternoon in pleasure; and so we went to old
George's, and there eat as much as we would of a hot shoulder of mutton,
and so to boat again and home. So to bed, my mind very full of business
and trouble.

14th. At the office all the morning, at noon to the Change, and then
home again. To dinner, where my uncle Fenner by appointment came and
dined with me, thinking to go together to my aunt Kite's that is dead;
but before we had dined comes Sir R. Slingsby and his lady, and a great
deal of company, to take my wife and I out by barge to shew them the
King's and Duke's yachts. So I was forced to leave my uncle and brother
Tom at dinner and go forth with them, and we had great pleasure, seeing
all four yachts, viz., these two and the two Dutch ones. And so home
again, and after writing letters by post, to bed.

15th (Lord's day). To my aunt Kite's in the morning to help my uncle
Fenner to put things in order against anon for the buriall, and at noon
home again; and after dinner to church, my wife and I, and after sermon
with my wife to the buriall of my aunt Kite, where besides us and my
uncle Fenner's family, there was none of any quality, but poor rascally
people. So we went to church with the corps, and there had service read
at the grave, and back again with Pegg Kite who will be, I doubt, a
troublesome carrion to us executors; but if she will not be ruled, I
shall fling up my executorship. After that home, and Will Joyce along
with me where we sat and talked and drank and ate an hour or two, and so
he went away and I up to my chamber and then to prayers and to bed.

16th. This morning I was busy at home to take in my part of our freight
of Coles, which Sir G. Carteret, Sir R. Slingsby, and myself sent for,
which is 10 Chaldron, 8 of which I took in, and with the other to repay
Sir W. Pen what I borrowed of him a little while ago. So that from this
day I should see how long 10 chaldron of coals will serve my house, if
it please the Lord to let me live to see them burned. In the afternoon
by appointment to meet Dr. Williams and his attorney, and they and I to
Tom Trice, and there got him in discourse to confess the words that he
had said that his mother did desire him not to see my uncle about her
L200 bond while she was alive. Here we were at high words with T. Trice
and then parted, and we to Standing's, in Fleet Street, where we sat and
drank and talked a great while about my going down to Gravely Court,

     [The manorial court of Graveley, in Huntingdonshire, to which
     Impington owed suit or service, and under which the Pepys's copyhold
     estates were held.  See July 8th, 1661, ante.--B.]

which will be this week, whereof the Doctor had notice in a letter from
his sister this week. In the middle of our discourse word was brought me
from my brother's that there is a fellow come from my father out of the
country, on purpose to speak to me, so I went to him and he made a story
how he had lost his letter, but he was sure it was for me to go into the
country, which I believed, and thought it might be to give me notice of
Gravely Court, but I afterwards found that it was a rogue that did use
to play such tricks to get money of people, but he got none of me. At
night I went home, and there found letters-from my father informing me
of the Court, and that I must come down and meet him at Impington, which
I presently resolved to do,

17th. And the next morning got up, telling my wife of my journey, and
she with a few words got me to hire her a horse to go along with me. So
I went to my Lady's and elsewhere to take leave, and of Mr. Townsend did
borrow a very fine side-saddle for my wife; and so after all things were
ready, she and I took coach to the end of the town towards Kingsland,
and there got upon my horse and she upon her pretty mare that I hired
for her, and she rides very well. By the mare at one time falling she
got a fall, but no harm; so we got to Ware, and there supped, and to bed
very merry and pleasant.

18th. The next morning up early and begun our march; the way about
Puckridge--[Puckeridge, a village in Hertfordshire six and a half miles
N.N.E, of Ware.]--very bad, and my wife, in the very last dirty place of
all, got a fall, but no hurt, though some dirt. At last she begun, poor
wretch, to be tired, and I to be angry at it, but I was to blame; for
she is a very good companion as long as she is well. In the afternoon we
got to Cambridge, where I left my wife at my cozen Angier's while I
went to Christ's College, and there found my brother in his chamber, and
talked with him; and so to the barber's, and then to my wife again, and
remounted for Impington, where my uncle received me and my wife very
kindly. And by and by in comes my father, and we supped and talked and
were merry, but being weary and sleepy my wife and I to bed without
talking with my father anything about our business.

19th. Up early, and my father and I alone into the garden, and there
talked about our business, and what to do therein. So after I had talked
and advised with my coz Claxton, and then with my uncle by his bedside,
we all horsed away to Cambridge, where my father and I, having left my
wife at the Beare with my brother, went to Mr. Sedgewicke, the steward
of Gravely, and there talked with him, but could get little hopes from
anything that he would tell us; but at last I did give him a fee, and
then he was free to tell me what I asked, which was something, though
not much comfort. From thence to our horses, and with my wife went and
rode through Sturbridge

     [Sturbridge fair is of great antiquity.  The first trace of it is
     found in a charter granted about 1211 by King John to the Lepers of
     the Hospital of St. Mary Magdalen at Sturbridge by Cambridge, a fair
     to be held in the close of the hospital on the vigil and feast of
     the Holy Cross (see Cornelius Walford's "Fairs Past and Present,"
     1883, p. 54).]

but the fair was almost done. So we did not 'light there at all, but
went back to Cambridge, and there at the Beare we had some herrings, we
and my brother, and after dinner set out for Brampton, where we come
in very good time, and found all things well, and being somewhat weary,
after some talk about tomorrow's business with my father, we went to
bed.

20th. Will Stankes and I set out in the morning betimes for Gravely,
where to an ale-house and drank, and then, going towards the Court
House, met my uncle Thomas and his son Thomas, with Bradly, the rogue
that had betrayed us, and one Young, a cunning fellow, who guides them.
There passed no unkind words at all between us, but I seemed fair and
went to drink with them. I said little till by and by that we come to
the Court, which was a simple meeting of a company of country rogues,
with the Steward, and two Fellows of Jesus College, that are lords of
the town where the jury were sworn; and I producing no surrender, though
I told them I was sure there is and must be one somewhere, they found
my uncle Thomas heir at law, as he is, and so, though I did tell him and
his son that they would find themselves abused by these fellows, and did
advise them to forbear being admitted this Court (which they could have
done, but that these rogues did persuade them to do it now), my uncle
was admitted, and his son also, in reversion after his father, which he
did well in to secure his money. The father paid a year and a half for
his fine, and the son half a year, in all L48, besides about L3 fees; so
that I do believe the charges of his journeys, and what he gives those
two rogues, and other expenses herein, cannot be less than L70, which
will be a sad thing for them if a surrender be found. After all was
done, I openly wished them joy in it, and so rode to Offord with them
and there parted fairly without any words. I took occasion to bid them
money for their half acre of land, which I had a mind to do that in the
surrender I might secure Piggott's, which otherwise I should be forced
to lose. So with Stankes home and supped, and after telling my father
how things went, I went to bed with my mind in good temper, because I
see the matter and manner of the Court and the bottom of my business,
wherein I was before and should always have been ignorant.

21st. All the morning pleasing myself with my father, going up and
down the house and garden with my father and my wife, contriving some
alterations. After dinner (there coming this morning my aunt Hanes
and her son from London, that is to live with my father) I rode to
Huntingdon, where I met Mr. Philips, and there put my Bugden

     [Bugden, or Buckden, a village and parish in the St. Neots district
     of Huntingdonshire, four miles S.W. of Huntingdon.]

matter in order against the Court, and so to Hinchingbroke, where
Mr. Barnwell shewed me the condition of the house, which is yet very
backward, and I fear will be very dark in the cloyster when it is done.
So home and to supper and to bed, very pleasant and quiet.

22nd (Lord's day). Before church time walking with my father in the
garden contriving. So to church, where we had common prayer, and a dull
sermon by one Mr. Case, who yet I heard sing very well. So to dinner,
and busy with my father about his accounts all the afternoon, and people
came to speak with us about business. Mr. Barnwell at night came and
supped with us. So after setting matters even with my father and I, to
bed.

23rd. Up, and sad to hear my father and mother wrangle as they used
to do in London, of which I took notice to both, and told them that I
should give over care for anything unless they would spend what they
have with more love and quiet. So (John Bowles coming to see us before
we go) we took horse and got early to Baldwick; where there was a fair,
and we put in and eat a mouthfull of pork, which they made us pay 14d.
for, which vexed us much. And so away to Stevenage, and staid till a
showre was over, and so rode easily to Welling, where we supped well,
and had two beds in the room and so lay single, and still remember it
that of all the nights that ever I slept in my life I never did pass a
night with more epicurism of sleep; there being now and then a noise of
people stirring that waked me, and then it was a very rainy night, and
then I was a little weary, that what between waking and then sleeping
again, one after another, I never had so much content in all my life,
and so my wife says it was with her.

24th. We rose, and set forth, but found a most sad alteration in the
road by reason of last night's rains, they being now all dirty and
washy, though not deep. So we rode easily through, and only drinking at
Holloway, at the sign of a woman with cakes in one hand and a pot of ale
in the other, which did give good occasion of mirth, resembling her to
the maid that served us, we got home very timely and well, and finding
there all well, and letters from sea, that speak of my Lord's
being well, and his action, though not considerable of any side, at
Argier.--[Algiers]--I went straight to my Lady, and there sat and talked
with her, and so home again, and after supper we to bed somewhat weary,
hearing of nothing ill since my absence but my brother Tom, who is
pretty well though again.

25th. By coach with Sir W. Pen to Covent Garden. By the way, upon my
desire, he told me that I need not fear any reflection upon my Lord for
their ill success at Argier, for more could not be done than was done.
I went to my cozen, Thos. Pepys, there, and talked with him a good
while about our country business, who is troubled at my uncle Thomas
his folly, and so we parted; and then meeting Sir R. Slingsby in St.
Martin's Lane, he and I in his coach through the Mewes, which is the
way that now all coaches are forced to go, because of a stop at Charing
Cross, by reason of a drain there to clear the streets. To Whitehall,
and there to Mr. Coventry, and talked with him, and thence to my Lord
Crew's and dined with him, where I was used with all imaginable kindness
both from him and her. And I see that he is afraid that my Lord's
reputacon will a little suffer in common talk by this late success; but
there is no help for it now. The Queen of England (as she is now owned
and called) I hear doth keep open Court, and distinct at Lisbon. Hence,
much against my nature and will, yet such is the power of the Devil over
me I could not refuse it, to the Theatre, and saw "The Merry Wives of
Windsor," ill done. And that ended, with Sir W. Pen and Sir G. More to
the tavern, and so home with him by coach, and after supper to prayers
and to bed. In full quiet of mind as to thought, though full of
business, blessed be God.

26th. At the office all the morning, so dined at home, and then abroad
with my wife by coach to the Theatre to shew her "King and no King,"
it being very well done. And so by coach, though hard to get it, being
rainy, home. So to my chamber to write letters and the journal for these
six last days past.

27th. By coach to Whitehall with my wife (where she went to see Mrs.
Pierce, who was this day churched, her month of childbed being out). I
went to Mrs. Montagu and other businesses, and at noon met my wife at
the Wardrobe; and there dined, where we found Captain Country (my little
Captain that I loved, who carried me to the Sound), come with some
grapes and millons

     [The antiquity of the cultivation of the melon is very remote.  Both
     the melon (cucaimis melo) and the water-melon (cucumis citrullus)
     were introduced into England at the end of the sixteenth century.
     See vol. i., p. 228.]

from my Lord at Lisbon, the first that ever I saw any, and my wife and
I eat some, and took some home; but the grapes are rare things. Here we
staid; and in the afternoon comes Mr. Edwd. Montagu (by appointment
this morning) to talk with my Lady and me about the provisions fit to
be bought, and sent to my Lord along with him. And told us, that we need
not trouble ourselves how to buy them, for the King would pay for all,
and that he would take care to get them: which put my Lady and me into a
great deal of ease of mind. Here we staid and supped too, and, after
my wife had put up some of the grapes in a basket for to be sent to the
King, we took coach and home, where we found a hampire of millons sent
to me also.

28th. At the office in the morning, dined at home, and then Sir W.
Pen and his daughter and I and my wife to the Theatre, and there saw
"Father's own Son," a very good play, and the first time I ever saw
it, and so at night to my house, and there sat and talked and drank and
merrily broke up, and to bed.

29th (Lord's day). To church in the morning, and so to dinner, and Sir
W. Pen and daughter, and Mrs. Poole, his kinswoman, Captain Poole's
wife, came by appointment to dinner with us, and a good dinner we had
for them, and were very merry, and so to church again, and then to Sir
W. Pen's and there supped, where his brother, a traveller, and one that
speaks Spanish very well, and a merry man, supped with us, and what
at dinner and supper I drink I know not how, of my own accord, so much
wine, that I was even almost foxed, and my head aked all night; so home
and to bed, without prayers, which I never did yet, since I came to the
house, of a Sunday night: I being now so out of order that I durst not
read prayers, for fear of being perceived by my servants in what case I
was. So to bed.

30th. This morning up by moon-shine, at 5 o'clock, to White Hall, to
meet Mr. Moore at the Privy Seal, but he not being come as appointed,
I went into King Street to the Red Lyon' to drink my morning draft, and
there I heard of a fray between the two Embassadors of Spain and France;
and that, this day, being the day of the entrance of an Embassador from
Sweden, they intended to fight for the precedence! Our King, I heard,
ordered that no Englishman should meddle in the business,

     [The Comte de Brienne insinuates, in his "Memoirs," that Charles
     purposely abstained from interfering, in the belief that it was for
     his interest to let France and Spain quarrel, in order to further
     his own designs in the match with Portugal.  Louis certainly held
     that opinion; and he afterwards instructed D'Estrades to solicit
     from the English court the punishment of those Londoners who had
     insulted his ambassador, and to demand the dismissal of De
     Batteville.  Either no Londoner had interfered, or Louis's demand
     had not in England the same force as in Spain; for no one was
     punished.  The latter part of his request it was clearly not for
     Charles to entertain, much less enforce.--B.]

but let them do what they would. And to that end all the soldiers in the
town were in arms all the day long, and some of the train-bands in the
City; and a great bustle through the City all the day. Then I to the
Privy Seal, and there Mr. Moore and a gentleman being come with him,
we took coach (which was the business I come for) to Chelsy, to my
Lord Privy Seal, and there got him to seal the business. Here I saw by
day-light two very fine pictures in the gallery, that a little while ago
I saw by night; and did also go all over the house, and found it to be
the prettiest contrived house that ever I saw in my life. So to coach
back again; and at White Hall light, and saw the soldiers and people
running up and down the streets. So I went to the Spanish Embassador's
and the French, and there saw great preparations on both sides; but
the French made the most noise and vaunted most, the other made no stir
almost at all; so that I was afraid the other would have had too great
a conquest over them. Then to the Wardrobe, and dined there, end then
abroad and in Cheapside hear that the Spanish hath got the best of it,
and killed three of the French coach-horses and several men, and is gone
through the City next to our King's coach; at which, it is strange to
see how all the City did rejoice. And indeed we do naturally all love
the Spanish, and hate the French. But I, as I am in all things curious,
presently got to the water-side, and there took oars to Westminster
Palace, thinking to have seen them come in thither with all the coaches,
but they being come and returned, I ran after them with my boy after me
through all the dirt and the streets full of people; till at last, at
the Mewes, I saw the Spanish coach go, with fifty drawn swords at least
to guard it, and our soldiers shouting for joy. And so I followed the
coach, and then met it at York House, where the embassador lies; and
there it went in with great state. So then I went to the French house,
where I observe still, that there is no men in the world of a more
insolent spirit where they do well, nor before they begin a matter, and
more abject if they do miscarry, than these people are; for they all
look like dead men, and not a word among them, but shake their heads.
The truth is, the Spaniards were not only observed to fight most
desperately, but also they did outwitt them; first in lining their own
harness with chains of iron that they could not be cut, then in setting
their coach in the most advantageous place, and to appoint men to guard
every one of their horses, and others for to guard the coach, and others
the coachmen. And, above all, in setting upon the French horses and
killing them, for by that means the French were not able to stir. There
were several men slain of the French, and one or two of the Spaniards,
and one Englishman by a bullet. Which is very observable, the French
were at least four to one in number, and had near 100 case of pistols
among them, and the Spaniards had not one gun among them; which is for
their honour for ever, and the others' disgrace. So, having been very
much daubed with dirt, I got a coach, and home where I vexed my wife in
telling of her this story, and pleading for the Spaniards against the
French. So ends this month; myself and family in good condition
of health, but my head full of my Lord's and my own and the office
business; where we are now very busy about the business of sending
forces to Tangier,

     [This place so often mentioned, was first given up to the English
     fleet under Lord Sandwich, by the Portuguese, January 30th, 1662;
     and Lord Peterborough left governor, with a garrison.  The greatest
     pains were    afterwards taken to preserve the fortress, and a fine
     mole was constructed at a vast expense, to improve the harbour.  At
     length, after immense sums of money had been wasted there, the House
     of Commons expressed a dislike to the management of the garrison,
     which they suspected to be a nursery for a popish army, and seemed
     disinclined to maintain it any longer.  The king consequently, in
     1683, sent Lord Dartmouth to bring home the troops, and destroy the
     works; which he performed so effectually, that it would puzzle all
     our engineers to restore the harbour.  It were idle to speculate on
     the benefits which might have accrued to England, by its
     preservation and retention; Tangier fell into the hands of the
     Moors, its importance having ceased, with the demolition of the
     mole.  Many curious views of Tangier were taken by Hollar, during
     its occupation by the English; and his drawings are preserved in the
     British Museum.  Some have been engraved by himself; but the
     impressions are of considerable rarity.--B.]

and the fleet to my Lord of Sandwich, who is now at Lisbon to bring over
the Queen, who do now keep a Court as Queen of England. The business of
Argier hath of late troubled me, because my Lord hath not done what he
went for, though he did as much as any man in the world could have done.
The want of money puts all things, and above all things the Nary, out
of order; and yet I do not see that the King takes care to bring in any
money, but thinks of new designs to lay out money.




OCTOBER 1661

October 1st. This morning my wife and I lay long in bed, and among other
things fell into talk of musique, and desired that I would let her learn
to sing, which I did consider, and promised her she should. So before
I rose, word was brought me that my singing master, Mr. Goodgroome, was
come to teach me and so she rose and this morning began to learn also.
To the office, where busy all day. So to dinner and then to the office
again till night, and then to my study at home to set matters and papers
in order, which, though I can hardly bring myself to do, yet do please
me much when it is done. So eat a bit of bread and cheese, and to bed.

2nd. All this morning at Pegg Kite's with my uncle Fenner, and two
friends of his, appraising her goods that her mother has left; but
the slut is like to prove so troublesome that I am out of heart with
troubling myself in her business. After we had done we all went to a
cook's shop in Bishopsgate Street and dined, and then I took them to the
tavern and did give them a quart of sack, and so parted. I home and then
took my wife out, and in a coach of a gentlewoman's that had been to
visit my Lady Batten and was going home again our way, we went to the
Theatre, but coming late, and sitting in an ill place, I never had so
little pleasure in a play in my life, yet it was the first time that
ever I saw it, "Victoria Corombona." Methinks a very poor play. Then at
night troubled to get my wife home, it being very dark, and so we were
forced to have a coach. So to supper and to bed.

3rd. At the office all the morning; dined at home, and in the afternoon
Mr. Moore came to me, and he and I went to Tower Hill to meet with a
man, and so back all three to my house, and there I signed a bond to Mr.
Battersby, a friend of Mr. Moore's, who lends me L50, the first money
that ever I borrowed upon bond for my own occasion, and so I took them
to the Mitre and a Portugal millon with me; there sat and discoursed in
matters of religion till night with great pleasure, and so parted, and
I home, calling at Sir W. Batten's, where his son and his wife were, who
had yesterday been at the play where we were, and it was good sport to
hear how she talked of it with admiration like a fool. So home, and my
head was not well with the wine that I drank to-day.

4th. By coach to White Hall with Sir W. Pen. So to Mr. Montagu, where
his man, Mons. Eschar, makes a great com plaint against the English,
that they did help the Spaniards against the French the other day; and
that their Embassador do demand justice of our King, and that he do
resolve to be gone for France the next week; which I, and all that I
met with, are very glad of. Thence to Paternoster Row, where my Will did
receive the L50 I borrowed yesterday. I to the Wardrobe to dinner,
and there staid most of the afternoon very merry with the ladies. Then
Captain Ferrers and I to the Theatre, and there came too late, so we
staid and saw a bit of "Victoria," which pleased me worse than it did
the other day. So we staid not to see it out, but went out and drank a
bottle or two of China ale, and so home, where I found my wife vexed at
her people for grumbling to eat Suffolk cheese, which I also am vexed
at. So to bed.

5th. At the office all the morning, then dined at home, and so staid at
home all the afternoon putting up my Lord's model of the Royal James,
which I borrowed of him long ago to hang up in my room. And at night Sir
W. Pen and I alone to the Dolphin, and there eat some bloat-herrings

     [To bloat is to dry by smoke, a method chiefly used to cure herrings
     or bloaters.  "I have more smoke in my mouth than would blote a
     hundred herrings."--Beaumont and Fletcher, Island Princess.  "Why,
     you stink like so many bloat-herrings newly taken out of the
     chimney."--Ben Jonson, "Masque of Augurs."]

and drank good sack. Then came in Sir W. Warren and another and staid a
while with us, and then Sir Arnold Brames, with whom we staid late and
till we had drank too much wine. So home and I to bed pleased at my
afternoon's work in hanging up the shipp. So to bed.

6th (Lord's day). To church in the morning; Mr. Mills preached, who,
I expect, should take in snuffe [anger] that my wife not come to his
child's christening the other day. The winter coming on, many of parish
ladies are come home and appear at church again; among others, the three
sisters the Thornbury's, a very fine, and the most zealous people that
ever I saw in my life, even to admiration, if it were true zeal. There
was also my pretty black girl, Mrs. Dekins, and Mrs. Margaret Pen, this
day come to church in a new flowered satin suit that my wife helped to
buy her the other day. So me to dinner, and to church in the afternoon
to St. Gregory's, by Paul's, where I saw Mr. Moose in the gallery and
went up to him and heard a good sermon of Dr. Buck's, one I never
heard before, a very able man. So home, and in the evening I went to
my Valentine, her father and mother being out of town, to fetch her to
supper to my house, and then came Sir W. Pen and would have her to his,
so with much sport I got them all to mine, and we were merry, and so
broke up and to bed.

7th. Up in the morning and to my uncle Fenner's, thinking to have
met Peg Kite about her business but she comes not, so I went to Dr.
Williams, where I found him sick in bed and was sorry for it. So about
business all day, troubled in my mind till I can hear from Brampton, how
things go on at Sturtlow, at the Court, which I was cleared in at night
by a letter, which tells me that my cozen Tom was there to be admitted,
in his father's name, as heir-at-law, but that he was opposed, and I was
admitted by proxy, which put me out of great trouble of mind.

8th. At the office all the morning. After office done, went and eat some
Colchester oysters with Sir W. Batten at his house, and there, with some
company; dined and staid there talking all the afternoon; and late after
dinner took Mrs. Martha out by coach, and carried her to the Theatre
in a frolique, to my great expense, and there shewed her part of the
"Beggar's Bush," without much pleasure, but only for a frolique, and so
home again.

9th. This morning went out about my affairs, among others to put my
Theorbo out to be mended, and then at noon home again, thinking to go
with Sir Williams both to dinner by invitation to Sir W. Rider's, but at
home I found Mrs. Pierce, la belle, and Madam Clifford, with whom I was
forced to stay, and made them the most welcome I could; and I was (God
knows) very well pleased with their beautiful company, and after dinner
took them to the Theatre, and shewed them "The Chances;" and so saw
them both at home and back to the Fleece tavern, in Covent Garden, where
Luellin and Blurton, and my old friend Frank Bagge, was to meet me, and
there staid till late very merry. Frank Bagge tells me a story of Mrs.
Pepys that lived with my Lady Harvy, Mr. Montagu's sister, a good woman;
that she had been very ill, and often asked for me; that she is in good
condition, and that nobody could get her to make her will; but that she
did still enquire for me, and that now she is well she desires to have
a chamber at my house. Now I do not know whether this is a trick of
Bagge's, or a good will of hers to do something for me; but I will not
trust her, but told him I should be glad to see her, and that I would be
sure to do all that I could to provide a place for her. So by coach home
late.

10th. At the office all the morning; dined at home, and after dinner
Sir W. Pen and my wife and I to the Theatre (she first going into Covent
Garden to speak a word with a woman to enquire of her mother, and I in
the meantime with Sir W. Pen's coach staying at W. Joyce's), where the
King came to-day, and there was "The Traytor" most admirably acted; and
a most excellent play it is. So home, and intended to be merry, it being
my sixth wedding night; but by a late bruise.... I am in so much pain
that I eat my supper and in pain to bed, yet my wife and I pretty merry.

11th: All day in bed with a cataplasm.... and at night rose a little,
and to bed again in more ease than last night. This noon there came my
brother and Dr. Tom and Snow to dinner, and by themselves were merry.

12th. In bed the greatest part of this day also, and my swelling in some
measure gone. I received a letter this day from my father, that Sir
R. Bernard do a little fear that my uncle has not observed exactly the
custom of Brampton in his will about his lands there, which puts me to a
great trouble in mind, and at, night wrote to him and to my father about
it, being much troubled at it.

13th (Lord's day). Did not stir out all day, but rose and dined below,
and this day left off half skirts and put on a wastecoate, and my false
taby wastecoate with gold lace; and in the evening there came Sir W.
Batten to see me, and sat and supped very kindly with me, and so to
prayers and to bed.

14th. This morning I ventured by water abroad to Westminster, but lost
my labour, for Mr. Montagu was not in town. So to the Wardrobe, and
there dined with my Lady, which is the first time I have seen her dine
abroad since her being brought to bed of my Lady Katherine. In the
afternoon Captain Ferrers and I walked abroad to several places, among
others to Mr. Pim's, my Lord's Taylour's, and there he went out with us
to the Fountain tavern and did give us store of wine, and it being the
Duke of York's birthday, we drank the more to his health. But, Lord!
what a sad story he makes of his being abused by a Dr. of Physique who
is in one part of the tenement wherein he dwells. It would make one
laugh, though I see he is under a great trouble in it. Thence home by
link and found a good answer from my father that Sir R. Bernard do clear
all things as to us and our title to Brampton, which puts my heart in
great ease and quiet.

15th. At the office all the morning, and in the afternoon to Paul's
Churchyard to a blind place, where Mrs. Goldsborough was to meet me (who
dare not be known where she lives) to treat about the difference which
remains between my uncle and her. But, Lord! to hear how she talks and
how she rails against my uncle would make one mad. But I seemed not to
be troubled at it, but would indeed gladly have an agreement with her.
So I appoint Mr. Moore and she another against Friday next to look into
our papers and to see what can be done to conclude the matter. So home
in much pain by walking too much yesterday.... which much troubles me.

16th. In bed till 12 o'clock. This morning came several maids to my wife
to be hired, and at last she pitched upon one Nell, whose mother, an old
woman, came along with her, but would not be hired under half a year,
which I am pleased at their drollness. This day dined by appointment
with me, Dr. Thos. Pepys and my Coz: Snow, and my brother Tom, upon a
fin of ling and some sounds, neither of which did I ever know before,
but most excellent meat they are both, that in all my life I never eat
the like fish. So after dinner came in W. Joyce and eat and drank and
were merry. So up to my chamber, and put all my papers, at rights, and
in the evening our maid Mary. (who was with us upon trial for a month)
did take leave of us, going as we suppose to be married, for the maid
liked us and we her, but all she said was that she had a mind to live
in a tradesman's house where there was but one maid. So to supper and to
bed.

17th. At the office all the morning, at noon my wife being gone to my
coz Snow's with Dr. Thomas Pepys and my brother Tom to a venison pasty
(which proved a pasty of salted pork); by appointment I went with
Captain David Lambert to the Exchequer, and from thence by appointment
he and I were to meet at a cook's shop to dine. But before I went to
him Captain. Cock, a merchant I had not long known, took me to the Sun
tavern and gave me a glass of sack, and being a man of great observation
and repute, did tell me that he was confident that the Parliament, when
it comes the next month to sit again, would bring trouble with it, and
enquire how the King had disposed of offices and money, before they will
raise more; which, I fear, will bring all things to ruin again.
Thence to the Cook's and there dined with Captain Lambert and his
father-in-law, and had much talk of Portugall; from whence he is lately
come, and he tells me it is a very poor dirty place; I mean the City and
Court of Lisbon; that the King is a very rude and simple fellow; and,
for reviling of somebody a little while ago, and calling of him cuckold,
was run into.... with a sword and had been killed, had he not told them
that he was their king. That there are there no glass windows, nor will
they have any; which makes sport among our merchants there to talk of
an English factor that, being newly come thither, writ into England that
glass would be a good commodity to send thither, &c. That the King has
his meat sent up by a dozen of lazy guards and in pipkins, sometimes, to
his own table; and sometimes nothing but fruits, and, now and then, half
a hen. And now that the Infanta is become our Queen, she is come to have
a whole hen or goose to her table, which is not ordinary. So home and
to look over my papers that concern the difference between Mrs.
Goldsborough and us; which cost me much pains, but contented me much
after it was done. So at home all the evening and to supper and to bed.

18th. To White Hall, to Mr. Montagu's, where I met with Mr. Pierce, the
purser, to advise about the things to be sent to my Lord for the Queen's
provision, and was cleared in it, and now there is all haste made, for
the fleet's going. At noon to my Lord's to dinner, and in the afternoon,
leaving my wife there, Mr. Moore and I to Mrs. Goldsborough, who
sent for a friend to meet with us, and so we were talking about the
difference between us till 10 at night. I find it very troublesome, and
have brought it into some hopes of an agreement, I offering to forgive
her L10 that is yet due according to my uncle's accounts to us. So we
left her friend to advise about it, and I hope to hear of her, for I
would not by any means go to law with a woman of so devilish a tongue as
she has. So to my Lady's, where I left my wife to lie with Mademoiselle
all night, and I by link home and to bed. This night lying alone, and
the weather cold, and having this last 7 or 8 days been troubled with
a tumor... which is now abated by a poultice of a good handful of bran
with half a pint of vinegar and a pint of water boiled till it be thick,
and then a spoonful of honey put to it and so spread in a cloth and laid
to it, I first put on my waistcoat to lie in all night this year, and
do not intend to put it off again till spring. I met with complaints at
home that my wife left no victuals for them all this day.

19th. At the office all the morning, and at noon Mr. Coventry, who sat
with us all the morning, and Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Pen, and myself,.
by coach to Captain Marshe's, at Limehouse, to a house that hath been
their ancestors for this 250 years, close by the lime-house which gives
the name to the place. Here they have a design to get the King to hire
a dock for the herring busses, which is now the great design on foot, to
lie up in. We had a very good and handsome dinner, and excellent wine.
I not being neat in clothes, which I find a great fault in me, could not
be so merry as otherwise, and at all times I am and can be, when I am
in good habitt, which makes me remember my father Osborne's' rule for a
gentleman to spare in all things rather than in that. So by coach home,
and so to write letters by post, and so to bed.

20th (Lord's day). At home in bed all the morning to ease my late
tumour, but up to dinner and much offended in mind at a proud trick my
man Will hath got, to keep his hat on in the house, but I will not speak
of it to him to-day; but I fear I shall be troubled with his pride and
laziness, though in other things he is good enough. To church in the
afternoon, where a sleepy Presbyter preached, and then to Sir W. Batten
who is to go to Portsmouth to-morrow to wait upon the Duke of York, who
goes to take possession and to set in order the garrison there. Supped
at home and to bed.

21st. Early with Mr. Moore by coach to Chelsy, to my Lord Privy Seal's,
but have missed of coming time enough; and having taken up Mr. Pargiter,
the goldsmith (who is the man of the world that I do most know and
believe to be a cheating rogue), we drank our morning draft there
together of cake and ale, and did make good sport of his losing so much
by the King's coming in, he having bought much of Crown lands, of which,
God forgive me! I am very glad. At Whitehall, at the Privy Seal, did
with Sir W. Pen take advice about passing of things of his there that
concern his matters of Ireland. Thence to the Wardrobe and dined, and so
against my judgment and conscience (which God forgive, for my very heart
knows that I offend God in breaking my vows herein) to the Opera, which
is now newly begun to act again, after some alteracion of their scene,
which do make it very much worse; but the play, "Love and Honour," being
the first time of their acting it, is a very good plot, and well done.
So on foot home, and after a little business done in my study and
supper, to bed.

22nd. At the office all the morning, where we had a deputation from the
Duke in his absence, he being gone to Portsmouth, for us to have
the whole disposal and ordering of the Fleet. In the afternoon about
business up and down, and at night to visit Sir R. Slingsby, who is
fallen sick of this new disease, an ague and fever. So home after
visiting my aunt Wight and Mrs. Norbury (who continues still a very
pleasant lady), and to supper, and so to bed.

23rd. To Whitehall, and there, to drink our morning, Sir W. Pen and I to
a friend's lodging of his (Col. Pr. Swell), and at noon he and I dined
together alone at the Legg in King Street, and so by coach to Chelsy to
my Lord Privy Seal's about business of Sir William's, in which we had a
fair admittance to talk with my Lord, and had his answer, and so back to
the Opera, and there I saw again "Love and Honour," and a very good play
it is. And thence home, calling by the way to see Sir Robert Slingsby,
who continues ill, and so home. This day all our office is invited
against Tuesday next, my Lord Mayor's day, to dinner with him at
Guildhall. This evening Mr. Holliard came and sat with us, and gave us
both directions to observe.

24th. At the office all morning, at noon Luellin dined with me, and then
abroad to Fleet Street, leaving my wife at Tom's while I went out
and did a little business. So home again, and went to see Sir Robert
[Slingsby], who continues ill, and this day has not spoke at all, which
makes them all afeard of him. So home.

25th. To Whitehall, and so to dinner at the Wardrobe, where my wife met
me, and there we met with a venison pasty, and my Lady very merry and
very handsome, methought. After dinner my wife and I to the Opera, and
there saw again "Love and Honour," a play so good that it has been acted
but three times and I have seen them all, and all in this week; which is
too much, and more than I will do again a good while. Coming out of the
house we met Mrs. Pierce and her comrade Mrs. Clifford, and I seeming
willing to stay with them to talk my wife grew angry, and whether she be
jealous or no I know, not, but she loves not that I should speak of
Mrs. Pierce. Home on foot very discontented, in my way I calling at the
Instrument maker, Hunt's, and there saw my lute, which is now almost
done, it being to have a new neck to it and to be made to double
strings. So home and to bed. This day I did give my man Will a sound
lesson about his forbearing to give us the respect due to a master and
mistress.

26th. This morning Sir W. Pen and I should have gone out of town with
my Lady Batten, to have met Sir William coming back from Portsmouth; at
Kingston, but could not, by reason that my Lord of Peterborough (who is
to go Governor of Tangier) came this morning, with Sir G. Carteret, to
advise with us about completing of the affairs and preparacions for that
place. So at the office all the morning, and in the afternoon Sir W.
Pen, my wife and I to the Theatre, and there saw "The Country Captain,"
the first time it hath been acted this twenty-five years, a play of my
Lord Newcastle's, but so silly a play as in all my life I never saw, and
the first that ever I was weary of in my life. So home again, and in the
evening news was brought that Sir R. Slingsby, our Comptroller (who
hath this day been sick a week), is dead; which put me into so great a
trouble of mind, that all the night I could not sleep, he being a man
that loved me, and had many qualitys that made me to love him above all
the officers and commissioners in the Navy. Coming home we called at Dan
Rawlinson's; and there drank good sack, and so home.

27th (Lord's day). At church in the morning; where in the pew both
Sir Williams and I had much talk about the death of Sir Robert, which
troubles me much; and them in appearance, though I do not believe it;
because I know that he was a cheque to their engrossing the whole trade
of the Navy office. Home to dinner, and in the afternoon to church
again, my wife with me, whose mourning is now grown so old that I am
ashamed to go to church with her. And after church to see my uncle and
aunt Wight, and there staid and talked and supped with them, and were
merry as we could be in their company. Among other things going up into
their chamber to see their two pictures, which I am forced to commend
against my judgment, and also she showed us her cabinet, where she had
very pretty medals and good jewels. So home and to prayers and to bed.

28th. At the office all the morning, and dined at home, and so to Paul's
Churchyard to Hunt's, and there found my Theorbo done, which pleases me
very well, and costs me 26s. to the altering. But now he tells me it
is as good a lute as any is in England, and is worth well L10. Hither I
sent for Captain Ferrers to me, who comes with a friend of his, and they
and I to the Theatre, and there saw "Argalus and Parthenia," where
a woman acted Parthenia, and came afterwards on the stage in men's
clothes, and had the best legs that ever I saw, and I was very well
pleased with it. Thence to the Ringo alehouse, and thither sent for a
belt-maker, and bought of him a handsome belt for second mourning, which
cost me 24s., and is very neat.

29th. This day I put on my half cloth black stockings and my new coat
of the fashion, which pleases me well, and with my beaver I was (after
office was done) ready to go to my Lord Mayor's feast, as we are all
invited; but the Sir Williams were both loth to go, because of the
crowd, and so none of us went, and I staid and dined with them, and so
home, and in evening, by consent, we met at the Dolphin, where other
company came to us, and should have been merry, but their wine was so
naught, and all other things out of order, that we were not so, but
staid long at night, and so home and to bed. My mind not pleased
with the spending of this day, because I had proposed a great deal of
pleasure to myself this day at Guildhall. This Lord Mayor, it seems,
brings up again the Custom of Lord Mayors going the day of their
installment to Paul's, and walking round about the Cross, and offering
something at the altar.

30th. All the morning at the office. At noon played on my Theorbo,
and much pleased therewith; it is now altered with a new neck. In the
afternoon Captain Lambert called me out by appointment, and we walked
together to Deptford, and there in his ship, the Norwich, I got him to
shew me every hole and corner of the ship, much to my information, and
the purpose of my going. So home again, and at Sir W. Batten's heard how
he had been already at Sir R. Slingsby's, as we were all invited, and I
intended this night to go, and there he finds all things out of order,
and no such thing done to-night, but pretending that the corps stinks,
they will bury it to-night privately, and so will unbespeak all their
guests, and there shall be no funerall, which I am sorry for, that there
should be nothing done for the honour of Sir Robert, but I fear he hath
left his family in great distraction. Here I staid till late at cards
with my Lady and Mrs. Martha, and so home. I sent for a bottle or two
of wine thither. At my coming home I am sorry to find my wife displeased
with her maid Doll, whose fault is that she cannot keep her peace, but
will always be talking in an angry manner, though it be without
any reason and to no purpose, which I am sorry for and do see the
inconvenience that do attend the increase of a man's fortune by being
forced to keep more servants, which brings trouble. Sir Henry Vane,
Lambert, and others, are lately sent suddenly away from the Tower,
prisoners to Scilly; but I do not think there is any plot as is said,
but only a pretence; as there was once pretended often against the
Cavaliers.

31st. This morning comes Prior of Brampton to me about the house he has
to buy of me, but I was forced to be at the office all the morning, and
so could not talk with him. And so, after the office was done, and dined
at home, I went to my brother Tom's, and there met him. He demanded
some abatement, he having agreed with my father for Barton's house, at a
price which I told him I could not meddle with, but that as for anything
to secure his title to them I was ready, and so we parted. Thence to
Sir Robert Bernard, and as his client did ask his advice about my uncle
Thomas's case and ours as to Gravely, and in short he tells me that
there is little hopes of recovering it or saving his annuity, which do
trouble me much, but God's will be done. Hence, with my mind full of
trouble, to my uncle Fenner's, when at the alehouse I found him drinking
and very jolly and youthsome, and as one that I believe will in a little
time get a wife. So home.




NOVEMBER 1661

November 1st. I went this morning with Sir W. Pen by coach to
Westminster, and having done my business at Mr. Montagu's, I went back
to him at Whitehall, and from thence with him to the 3 Tun Tavern, at
Charing Cross, and there sent for up the maister of the house's dinner,
and dined very well upon it, and afterwards had him and his fayre sister
(who is very great with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen in mirth) up to us,
and looked over some medals that they shewed us of theirs; and so went
away to the Theatre, to "The Joviall Crew," and from hence home, and
at my house we were very merry till late, having sent for his son, Mr.
William Pen,

     [The celebrated Quaker, and founder of Pennsylvania.]

lately come from Oxford. And after supper parted, and to bed.

2d. At the office all the morning; where Sir John Minnes, our new
comptroller, was fetched by Sir Wm. Pen and myself from Sir Wm.
Batten's, and led to his place in the office. The first time that he had
come hither, and he seems a good fair condition man, and one that I
am glad hath the office. After the office done, I to the Wardrobe, and
there dined, and in the afternoon had an hour or two's talk with my Lady
with great pleasure. And so with the two young ladies by coach to my
house, and gave them some entertainment, and so late at night sent them
home with Captain Ferrers by coach. This night my boy Wayneman, as I was
in my chamber, I overheard him let off some gunpowder; and hearing my
wife chide him below for it, and a noise made, I call him up, and find
that it was powder that he had put in his pocket, and a match carelessly
with it, thinking that it was out, and so the match did give fire to the
powder, and had burnt his side and his hand that he put into his pocket
to put out the fire. But upon examination, and finding him in a lie
about the time and place that he bought it, I did extremely beat him,
and though it did trouble me to do it, yet I thought it necessary to do
it. So to write by the post, and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day). This day I stirred not out, but took physique, and it
did work very well, and all the day as I was at leisure I did read in
Fuller's Holy Warr, which I have of late bought, and did try to make a
song in the praise of a liberall genius (as I take my own to be) to all
studies and pleasures, but it not proving to my mind I did reject it
and so proceeded not in it. At night my wife and I had a good supper by
ourselves of a pullet hashed, which pleased me much to see my condition
come to allow ourselves a dish like that, and so at night to bed.

4th. In the morning, being very rainy, by coach with Sir W. Pen and
my wife to Whitehall, and sent her to Mrs. Bunt's, and he and I to Mr.
Coventry's about business, and so sent for her again, and all three
home again, only I to the Mitre (Mr. Rawlinson's), where Mr. Pierce,
the Purser, had got us a most brave chine of beef, and a dish of
marrowbones. Our company my uncle Wight, Captain Lambert, one Captain
Davies, and purser Barter, Mr. Rawlinson, and ourselves; and very merry.
After dinner I took coach, and called my wife at my brother's, where I
left her, and to the Opera, where we saw "The Bondman," which of old we
both did so doat on, and do still; though to both our thinking not
so well acted here (having too great expectations), as formerly at
Salisbury-court. But for Betterton he is called by us both the best
actor in the world. So home by coach, I lighting by the way at my uncle
Wight's and staid there a little, and so home after my wife, and to bed.

5th. At the office all the morning. At noon comes my brother Tom and Mr.
Armiger to dine with me, and did, and we were very merry. After dinner,
I having drunk a great deal of wine, I went away, seeming to go about
business with Sir W. Pen, to my Lady Batten's (Sir William being at
Chatham), and there sat a good while, and then went away (before I went
I called at home to see whether they were gone, and found them there,
and Armiger inviting my wife to go to a play, and like a fool would be
courting her, but he is an ass, and lays out money with Tom, otherwise
I should not think him worth half this respect I shew him). To the
Dolphin, where he and I and Captain Cocke sat late and drank much,
seeing the boys in the streets flying their crackers, this day being
kept all the day very strictly in the City. At last broke up, and called
at my Lady Batten's again and would have gone to cards, but Sir W.
Pen was so fuddled that we could not try him to play, and therefore we
parted, and I home and to bed.

6th. Going forth this morning I met Mr. Davenport and a friend of his,
one Mr. Furbisher, to drink their morning draft with me, and I did give
it them in good wine, and anchovies, and pickled oysters, and took them
to the Sun in Fish Street, there did give them a barrel of good ones,
and a great deal of wine, and sent for Mr. W. Bernard (Sir Robert's
son), a grocer thereabouts, and were very merry, and cost me a good
deal of money, and at noon left them, and with my head full of wine, and
being invited by a note from Luellin, that came to my hands this morning
in bed, I went to Nick Osborne's at the Victualling Office, and there
saw his wife, who he has lately married, a good sober woman, and new
come to their home. We had a good dish or two of marrowbones and another
of neats' tongues to dinner, and that being done I bade them adieu and
hastened to Whitehall (calling Mr. Moore by the way) to my Lord Privy
Seal, who will at last force the clerks to bring in a table of their
fees, which they have so long denied, but I do not join with them, and
so he is very respectful to me. So he desires me to bring in one which I
observe in making of fees, which I will speedily do. So back again,
and endeavoured to speak with Tom Trice (who I fear is hatching some
mischief), but could not, which vexed me, and so I went home and sat
late with pleasure at my lute, and so to bed.

7th. This morning came one Mr. Hill (sent by Mr. Hunt, the Instrument
maker), to teach me to play on the Theorbo, but I do not like his play
nor singing, and so I found a way to put him off. So to the office. And
then to dinner, and got Mr. Pett the Commissioner to dinner with me, he
and I alone, my wife not being well, and so after dinner parted. And I
to Tom Trice, who in short shewed me a writt he had ready for my father,
and I promised to answer it. So I went to Dr. Williams (who is now
pretty well got up after his sickness), and after that to Mr. Moore to
advise, and so returned home late on foot, with my mind cleared, though
not satisfied. I met with letters at home from my Lord from Lisbone,
which speak of his being well; and he tells me he had seen at the court
there the day before he wrote this letter, the Juego de Toro.--[A bull
fight. See May 24th, 1662.--B:]--So fitted myself for bed. Coming home
I called at my uncle Fenner's, who tells that Peg Kite now hath declared
she will have the beggarly rogue the weaver, and so we are resolved
neither to meddle nor make with her.

8th. This morning up early, and to my Lord Chancellor's with a letter
to him from my Lord, and did speak with him; and he did ask me whether
I was son to Mr. Talbot Pepys or no (with whom he was once acquainted
in the Court of Requests), and spoke to me with great respect. Thence
to Westminster Hall (it being Term time) and there met with Commissioner
Pett, and so at noon he and I by appointment to the Sun in New Fish
Street, where Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and we all were to dine, at
an invitation of Captain Stoaks and Captain Clerk, and were very merry,
and by discourse I found Sir J. Minnes a fine gentleman and a very good
scholler. After dinner to the Wardrobe, and thence to Dr. Williams, who
went with me (the first time that he has been abroad a great while) to
the Six Clerks Office to find me a clerk there able to advise me in my
business with Tom Trice, and after I had heard them talk, and had given
me some comfort, I went to my brother Tom's, and took him with me to
my coz. Turner at the Temple, and had his opinion that I should not
pay more than the principal L200, with which I was much pleased, and so
home.

9th. At the office all the morning. At noon Mr. Davenport, Phillips, and
Mr. Wm. Bernard and Furbisher, came by appointment and dined with me,
and we were very merry. After dinner I to the Wardrobe, and there staid
talking with my Lady all the afternoon till late at night. Among other
things my Lady did mightily urge me to lay out money upon my wife, which
I perceived was a little more earnest than ordinary, and so I seemed to
be pleased with it, and do resolve to bestow a lace upon her, and what
with this and other talk, we were exceeding merry. So home at night.

10th (Lord's day). At our own church in the morning, where Mr. Mills
preached. Thence alone to the Wardrobe to dinner with my Lady, where my
Lady continues upon yesterday's discourse still for me to lay out money
upon my wife, which I think it is best for me to do for her honour and
my own. Last night died Archibald, my Lady's butler and Mrs. Sarah's
brother, of a dropsy, which I am troubled at. In the afternoon went and
sat with Mr. Turner in his pew at St. Gregory's, where I hear our Queen
Katherine, the first time by name as such, publickly prayed for, and
heard Dr. Buck upon "Woe unto thee, Corazin," &c., where he started
a difficulty, which he left to another time to answer, about why God
should give means of grace to those people which he knew would not
receive them, and deny to others which he himself confesses, if they had
had them, would have received them, and they would have been effectual
too. I would I could hear him explain this, when he do come to it.
Thence home to my wife, and took her to my Aunt Wight's, and there sat a
while with her (my uncle being at Katharine hill), and so home, and I to
Sir W. Batten's, where Captain Cock was, and we sent for two bottles
of Canary to the Rose, which did do me a great deal of hurt, and did
trouble me all night, and, indeed, came home so out of order that I was
loth to say prayers to-night as I am used ever to do on Sundays, which
my wife took notice of and people of the house, which I was sorry for.

11th. To the Wardrobe, and with Mr. Townsend and Moore to the Saracen's
Head to a barrel of oysters, and so Mr. Moore and I to Tom Trice's, with
whom I did first set my hand to answer to a writt of his this tearm.
Thence to the Wardrobe to dinner, and there by appointment met my wife,
who had by my direction brought some laces for my Lady to choose one for
her. And after dinner I went away, and left my wife and ladies together,
and all their work was about this lace of hers. Captain Ferrers and
I went together, and he carried me the first time that ever I saw any
gaming house, to one, entering into Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, at the end of
Bell Yard, where strange the folly of men to lay and lose so much money,
and very glad I was to see the manner of a gamester's life, which I see
is very miserable, and poor, and unmanly. And thence he took me to a
dancing school in Fleet Street, where we saw a company of pretty girls
dance, but I do not in myself like to have young girls exposed to so
much vanity. So to the Wardrobe, where I found my Lady had agreed upon a
lace for my wife of L6, which I seemed much glad of that it was no more,
though in my mind I think it too much, and I pray God keep me so to
order myself and my wife's expenses that no inconvenience in purse or
honour follow this my prodigality. So by coach home.

12th. At the office all the morning. Dined at home alone. So abroad with
Sir W. Pen. My wife and I to "Bartholomew Fayre," with puppets which I
had seen once before, and Ate play without puppets often, but though I
love the play as much as ever I did, yet I do not like the puppets at
all, but think it to be a lessening to it. Thence to the Greyhound in
Fleet Street, and there drank some raspberry sack and eat some sasages,
and so home very merry. This day Holmes come to town; and we do expect
hourly to hear what usage he hath from the Duke and the King about
this late business of letting the Swedish Embassador go by him without
striking his flag.

     [And that, too, in the river Thames itself.  The right of obliging
     ships of all nations to lower topsails, and strike their flag to the
     English, whilst in the British seas, and even on the French coasts,
     had, up to this time, been rigidly enforced.  When Sully was sent by
     Henry IV., in 1603, to congratulate James I. on his accession, and
     in a ship commanded by a vice-admiral of France, he was fired upon
     by the English Admiral Mansel, for daring to hoist the flag of
     France in the presence of that of England, although within sight of
     Calais.  The French flag was lowered, and all Sully's remonstrances
     could obtain no redress for the alleged injury.  According to Rugge,
     Holmes had insisted upon the Swede's lowering his flag, and had even
     fired a shot to enforce the observance of the usual tribute of
     respect, but the ambassador sent his secretary and another gentleman
     on board the English frigate, to assure the captain, upon the word
     and honour of an ambassador, that the king, by a verbal order, had
     given him leave and a dispensation in that particular, and upon this
     false representation he was allowed to proceed on his voyage without
     further question.  This want of caution, and disobedience of orders,
     fell heavily on Holmes, who was imprisoned for two months, and not
     re-appointed to the same ship.  Brahe afterwards made a proper
     submission for the fault he had committed, at his own court.  His
     conduct reminds us of Sir Henry Wotton's definition of an
     ambassador--that he is an honest man sent to lie abroad for the good
     of his country.  A pun upon the term lieger--ambassador.--B.]

13th. By appointment, we all went this morning to wait upon the Duke
of York, which we did in his chamber, as he was dressing himself in his
riding suit to go this day by sea to the Downs. He is in mourning for
his wife's grandmother, which is thought a great piece of fondness.

     [Fondness, foolishness.

              "Fondness it were for any, being free,
               To covet fetters, tho' they golden be."
                                   Spenser, Sonnet 37,--M. B.]

After we had given him our letter relating the bad condition of the Navy
for want of money, he referred it to his coming back and so parted, and
I to Whitehall and to see la belle Pierce, and so on foot to my Lord
Crew's, where I found him come to his new house, which is next to that
he lived in last; here I was well received by my Lord and Sir Thomas,
with whom I had great talk: and he tells me in good earnest that he do
believe the Parliament (which comes to sit again the next week), will
be troublesome to the Court and Clergy, which God forbid! But they see
things carried so by my Lord Chancellor and some others, that get money
themselves, that they will not endure it. From thence to the Theatre,
and there saw "Father's own Son" again, and so it raining very hard
I went home by coach, with my mind very heavy for this my expensefull
life, which will undo me, I fear, after all my hopes, if I do not take
up, for now I am coming to lay out a great deal of money in clothes for
my wife, I must forbear other expenses. To bed, and this night began to
lie in the little green chamber, where the maids lie, but we could not a
great while get Nell to lie there, because I lie there and my wife, but
at last, when she saw she must lie there or sit up, she, with much ado,
came to bed.

4th. At the office all the morning. At noon I went by appointment to the
Sun in Fish Street to a dinner of young Mr. Bernard's for myself, Mr.
Phillips, Davenport, Weaver, &c., where we had a most excellent dinner,
but a pie of such pleasant variety of good things, as in all my life I
never tasted. Hither came to me Captain Lambert to take his leave of me,
he being this day to set sail for the Straights. We drank his farewell
and a health to all our friends, and were very merry, and drank wine
enough. Hence to the Temple to Mr. Turner about drawing up my bill in
Chancery against T. Trice, and so to Salisbury Court, where Mrs. Turner
is come to town to-night, but very ill still of an ague, which I was
sorry to see. So to the Wardrobe and talked with my Lady, and so home
and to bed.

15th. At home all the morning, and at noon with my wife to the Wardrobe
to dinner, and there, did shew herself to my Lady in the handkercher
that she bought the lace for the other day, and indeed it is very
handsome. Here I left my wife and went to my Lord Privy Seal to
Whitehall, and there did give him a copy of the Fees of the office as
I have received them, and he was well pleased with it. So to the Opera,
where I met my wife and Captain Ferrers and Madamoiselle Le Blanc, and
there did see the second part of "The Siege of Rhodes" very well done;
and so by coach set her home, and the coach driving down the hill
through Thames Street, which I think never any coach did before from
that place to the bridge-foot, but going up Fish Street Hill his horses
were so tired, that they could not be got to go up the hill, though all
the street boys and men did beat and whip them. At last I was fain to
send my boy for a link, and so light out of the coach till we got to
another at the corner of Fenchurch Street, and so home, and to bed.

16th. At the office all the morning. Dined at home, and so about my
business in the afternoon to the Temple, where I found my Chancery bill
drawn against T. Trice, which I read and like it, and so home.

17th (Lord's day). To our own church, and at noon, by invitation, Sir W.
Pen dined with me, and I took Mrs. Hester, my Lady Batten's kinswoman,
to dinner from church with me, and we were very merry. So to church
again, and heard a simple fellow upon the praise of Church musique,
and exclaiming against men's wearing their hats on in the church, but
I slept part of the sermon, till latter prayer and blessing and all was
done without waking which I never did in my life. So home, and by and
by comes my uncle Wight and my aunt and Mr. Norbury and his lady, and we
drank hard and were very merry till supper time, and then we parted, my
wife and I being invited to Sir W. Pen's, where we also were very merry,
and so home to prayers and to bed.

18th. By coach with Sir W. Pen; my wife and I toward Westminster,
but seeing Mr. Moore in the street I light and he and I went to Mr.
Battersby's the minister, in my way I putting in at St. Paul's, where I
saw the quiristers in their surplices going to prayers, and a few idle
poor people and boys to hear them, which is the first time I have seen
them, and am sorry to see things done so out of order, and there I
received L50 more, which make up L100 that I now have borrowed of him,
and so I did burn the old bond for L50, and paying him the use of it did
make a new bond for the whole L100. Here I dined and had a good dinner,
and his wife a good pretty woman. There was a young Parson at the table
that had got himself drunk before dinner, which troubled me to see.
After dinner to Mr. Bowers at Westminster for my wife, and brought her
to the Theatre to see "Philaster," which I never saw before, but I found
it far short of my expectations. So by coach home.

19th. At the office all the morning, and coming home found Mr. Hunt with
my wife in the chamber alone, which God forgive me did trouble my head,
but remembering that it was washing and that there was no place else
with a fire for him to be in, it being also cold weather, I was at ease
again. He dined with us, and after dinner took coach and carried him
with us as far as my cozen Scott's, where we set him down and parted,
and my wife and I staid there at the christening of my cozens boy, where
my cozen Samuel Pepys, of Ireland, and I were godfathers, and I did
name the child Samuel. There was a company of pretty women there in the
chamber, but we staid not, but went with the minister into another room
and eat and drank, and at last, when most of the women were gone, Sam
and I went into my cozen Scott, who was got off her bed, and so we
staid and talked and were very merry, my she-cozen, Stradwick, being
godmother. And then I left my wife to go home by coach, and I walked to
the Temple about my law business, and there received a subpoena for T.
Trice. I carried it myself to him at the usual house at Doctors Commons
and did give it him, and so home and to bed. It cost me 20s, between the
midwife and the two nurses to-day.

20th. To Westminster Hall by water in the morning, where I saw the King
going in his barge to the Parliament House; this being the first day of
their meeting again. And the Bishops, I hear, do take their places in
the Lords House this day. I walked long in the Hall, but hear nothing of
news, but what Ned Pickering tells me, which I am troubled at, that Sir
J. Minnes should send word to the King, that if he did not remove all my
Lord Sandwich's captains out of this fleet, he believed the King would
not be master of the fleet at its coming again: and so do endeavour to
bring disgrace upon my Lord. But I hope all that will not do, for the
King loves him. Hence by water to the Wardrobe, and dined with my Lady,
my Lady Wright being there too, whom I find to be a witty but very
conceited woman and proud. And after dinner Mr. Moore and I to the
Temple, and there he read my bill and likes it well enough, and so we
came back again, he with me as far as the lower end of Cheapside,
and there I gave him a pint of sack and parted, and I home, and went
seriously to look over my papers touching T. Trice, and I think I have
found some that will go near to do me more good in this difference of
ours than all I have before. So to bed with my mind cheery upon it, and
lay long reading "Hobbs his Liberty and Necessity," and a little but
very shrewd piece, and so to sleep.

21st. In the morning again at looking over my last night's papers, and
by and by comes Mr. Moore, who finds that my papers may do me much good.
He staid and dined with me, and we had a good surloyne of rost beefe,
the first that ever I had of my own buying since I kept house; and after
dinner he and I to the Temple, and there showed Mr. Smallwood my papers,
who likes them well, and so I left them with him, and went with Mr.
Moore to Gray's Inn to his chamber, and there he shewed me his old
Camden's "Britannica", which I intend to buy of him, and so took it away
with me, and left it at St. Paul's Churchyard to be bound, and so home
and to the office all the afternoon; it being the first afternoon that
we have sat, which we are now to do always, so long as the Parliament
sits, who this day have voted the King L 120,000

     [A mistake.  According to the journals, L1,200,000.  And see Diary,
     February 29th, 1663-64.--M. B.]

to be raised to pay his debts. And after the office with Sir W. Batten
to the Dolphin, and drank and left him there, and I again to the Temple
about my business, and so on foot home again and to bed.

22nd. Within all the morning, and at noon with my wife, by appointment
to dinner at the Dolphin, where Sir W. Batten, and his lady and daughter
Matt, and Captain Cocke and his lady, a German lady, but a very great
beauty, and we dined together, at the spending of some wagers won and
lost between him and I; and there we had the best musique and very good
songs, and were very merry and danced, but I was most of all taken with
Madam Cocke and her little boy, which in mirth his father had given to
me. But after all our mirth comes a reckoning of L4, besides 40s. to
the musicians, which did trouble us, but it must be paid, and so I took
leave and left them there about eight at night. And on foot went to
the Temple, and then took my cozen Turner's man Roger, and went by his
advice to Serjeant Fountaine and told him our case, who gives me good
comfort in it, and I gave him 30s. fee. So home again and to bed. This
day a good pretty maid was sent my wife by Mary Bowyer, whom my wife has
hired.

23rd. To Westminster with my wife (she to her father's), and about 10
o'clock back again home, and there I to the office a little, and thence
by coach with Commissioner Pett to Cheapside to one Savill, a painter,
who I intend shall do my picture and my wife's. Thence I to dinner at
the Wardrobe, and so home to the office, and there all the afternoon
till night, and then both Sir Williams to my house, and in comes
Captain Cock, and they to cards. By and by Sir W. Batten and Cock, after
drinking a good deal of wine, went away, and Sir W. Pen staid with my
wife and I to supper, very pleasant, and so good night. This day I have
a chine of beef sent home, which I bespoke to send, and did send it as a
present to my uncle Wight.

24th (Lord's day). Up early, and by appointment to St. Clement Danes
to church, and there to meet Captain Cocke, who had often commended Mr.
Alsopp, their minister, to me, who is indeed an able man, but as all
things else did not come up to my expectations. His text was that all
good and perfect gifts are from above. Thence Cocke and I to the Sun
tavern behind the Exchange, and there met with others that are come from
the same church, and staid and drank and talked with them a little, and
so broke up, and I to the Wardrobe and there dined, and staid all the
afternoon with my Lady alone talking, and thence to see Madame Turner,
who, poor lady, continues very ill, and I begin to be afraid of her.
Thence homewards, and meeting Mr. Yong, the upholster, he and I to the
Mitre, and with Mr. Rawlinson sat and drank a quart of sack, and so I to
Sir W. Batten's and there staid and supped, and so home, where I found
an invitation sent my wife and I to my uncle Wight's on Tuesday next to
the chine of beef which I presented them with yesterday. So to prayers
and to bed.

25th. To Westminster Hall in the morning with Captain Lambert, and there
he did at the Dog give me and some other friends of his, his foy, he
being to set sail to-day towards the Streights. Here we had oysters
and good wine. Having this morning met in the Hall with Mr. Sanchy, we
appointed to meet at the play this afternoon. At noon, at the rising of
the House, I met with Sir W. Pen and Major General Massy,

     [Major-General Edward Massey (or Massie), son of John Massie, was
     captain of one of the foot companies of the Irish Expedition, and
     had Oliver Cromwell as his ensign (see Peacock's "Army Lists in
     1642," p. 65).  He was Governor of Gloucester in its obstinate
     defence against the royal forces, 1643; dismissed by the self-
     denying ordinance when he entered Charles II's service.  He was
     taken prisoner at the battle of Worcester, September 3rd, 1651, but
     escaped abroad.]

who I find by discourse to be a very ingenious man, and among other
things a great master in the secresys of powder and fireworks, and
another knight to dinner, at the Swan, in the Palace yard, and our meat
brought from the Legg; and after dinner Sir W. Pen and I to the Theatre,
and there saw "The Country Captain," a dull play, and that being done, I
left him with his Torys

     [This is a strange use of the word Tory, and an early one also.  The
     word originally meant bogtrotters or wild Irish, and as Penn was
     Governor of Kildare these may have been some of his Irish followers.
     The term was not used politically until about 1679.]

and went to the Opera, and saw the last act of "The Bondman," and there
found Mr. Sanchy and Mrs. Mary Archer, sister to the fair Betty, whom
I did admire at Cambridge, and thence took them to the Fleece in Covent
Garden, there to bid good night to Sir W. Pen who staid for me; but Mr.
Sanchy could not by any argument get his lady to trust herself with
him into the tavern, which he was much troubled at, and so we returned
immediately into the city by coach, and at the Mitre in Cheapside there
light and drank, and then yet her at her uncle's in the Old Jewry. And
so he and I back again thither, and drank till past 12 at night, till I
had drank something too much. He all the while telling me his intention
to get a girl who is worth L1000, and many times we had her sister
Betty's health, whose memory I love. At last parted, and I well home,
only had got cold and was hoarse and so to bed.

27th. This morning our maid Dorothy and my wife parted, which though she
be a wench for her tongue not to be borne with, yet I was loth to part
with her, but I took my leave kindly of her and went out to Savill's,
the painter, and there sat the first time for my face with him; thence
to dinner with my Lady; and so after an hour or two's talk in divinity
with my Lady, Captain Ferrers and Mr. Moore and I to the Theatre, and
there saw "Hamlett" very well done, and so I home, and found that my
wife had been with my aunt Wight and Ferrers to wait on my Lady to-day
this afternoon, and there danced and were very merry, and my Lady very
fond as she is always of my wife. So to bed.

28th. At home all the morning; at noon Will brought me from Whitehall,
whither I had sent him, some letters from my Lord Sandwich, from
Tangier; where he continues still, and hath done some execution upon
the Turks, and retaken an Englishman from them, of one Mr. Parker's,
a merchant in Marke-lane. In the afternoon Mr. Pett and I met at the
office; there being none more there than we two I saw there was not the
reverence due to us observed, and so I took occasion to break up and
took Mr. Gawdon along with me, and he and I (though it rained) were
resolved to go, he to my Lord Treasurer's and I to the Chancellor's with
a letter from my Lord to-day. So to a tavern at the end of Mark Lane,
and there we staid till with much ado we got a coach, and so to my Lord
Treasurer's and lost our labours, then to the Chancellor's, and there
met with Mr. Dugdale, and with him and one Mr. Simons, I think that
belongs to my Lord Hatton, and Mr. Kipps and others, to the Fountain
tavern, and there staid till twelve at night drinking and singing, Mr.
Simons and one Mr. Agar singing very well. Then Mr. Gawdon being almost
drunk had the wit to be gone, and so I took leave too, and it being a
fine moonshine night he and I footed it all the way home, but though
he was drunk he went such a pace as I did admire how he was able to go.
When I came home I found our new maid Sarah--[Sarah did not stay long
with Mrs. Pepys, who was continually falling out with her. She left to
enter Sir William Penn's service.]--come, who is a tall and a very well
favoured wench, and one that I think will please us. So to bed.

29th. I lay long in bed, till Sir Williams both sent me word that we
were to wait upon the Duke of York to-day; and that they would have me
to meet them at Westminster Hall, at noon: so I rose and went thither;
and there I understand that they are gone to Mr. Coventry's lodgings, in
the Old Palace Yard, to dinner (the first time I knew he had any); and
there I met them two and Sir G. Carteret, and had a very fine dinner,
and good welcome, and discourse; and so, by water, after dinner to White
Hall to the Duke, who met us in his closet; and there he did discourse
to us the business of Holmes, and did desire of us to know what hath
been the common practice about making of forrayne ships to strike sail
to us, which they did all do as much as they could; but I could say
nothing to it, which I was sorry for. So indeed I was forced to study a
lie, and so after we were gone from the Duke, I told Mr. Coventry that
I had heard Mr. Selden often say, that he could prove that in Henry the
7th's time, he did give commission to his captains to make the King of
Denmark's ships to strike to him in the Baltique. From thence Sir W. Pen
and I to the Theatre, but it was so full that we could hardly get any
room, so he went up to one of the boxes, and I into the 18d. places,
and there saw "Love at first sight," a play of Mr. Killigrew's, and the
first time that it hath been acted since before the troubles, and great
expectation there was, but I found the play to be a poor thing, and so I
perceive every body else do. So home, calling at Paul's Churchyard for
a "Mare Clausum," having it in my mind to write a little matter, what I
can gather, about the business of striking sayle, and present it to the
Duke, which I now think will be a good way to make myself known. So home
and to bed.

30th. In the morning to the Temple, Mr. Philips and Dr. Williams about
my several law matters, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner, and after
dinner stole away, my Lady not dining out of her chamber, and so home
and then to the office all the afternoon, and that being done Sir W.
Batten and I and Captain Cock got a bottle of sack into the office, and
there we sat late and drank and talked, and so home and to bed. I am
this day in very good health, only got a little cold. The Parliament has
sat a pretty while. The old condemned judges of the late King have
been brought before the Parliament, and like to be hanged. I am deep
in Chancery against Tom Trice, God give a good issue; and myself under
great trouble for my late great expending of money vainly, which God
stop for the future. This is the last day for the old State's coyne

     [In a speech of Lord Lucas in the House of Lords, the 22nd February,
     1670-1 (which speech was burnt by the common hangman), he thus
     adverted to that coin: "It is evident that there is scarcity of
     money; for all the parliament's money called breeches (a fit stamp
     for the coin of the Rump) is wholly vanished--the king's
     proclamation and the Dutch have swept it all away, and of his now
     majesty's coin there appears but very little; so that in effect we
     have none left for common use, but a little old lean coined money of
     the late three former princes.  And what supply is preparing for it,
     my lords?  I hear of none, unless it be of copper farthings, and
     this is the metal that is to vindicate, according to the inscription
     on it, the dominion of the four seas."--Quoted in Penn's "Memorials
     of Sir Wm. Penn," ii.  264.]

to pass in common payments, but they say it is to pass in publique
payments to the King three months still.




DECEMBER 1661

December 1st (Lord's day). In the morning at church and heard Mr. Mills.
At home dined and with me by appointment Mr. Sanchy, who should have
brought his mistress, Mrs. Mary Archer, of Cambridge, but she could not
come, but we had a good dinner for him. And so in the afternoon my wife
went to church, and he and I stayed at home and drank and talked, and
he stayed with me till night and supped with me, when I expected to have
seen Jack Cole and Lem. Wagstaffe, but they did not come. We this day
cut a brave collar of brawn from Winchcombe which proves very good, and
also opened the glass of girkins which Captain Cocke did give my wife
the other day, which are rare things. So at night to bed. There hath
lately been great clapping up of some old statesmen, such as Ireton,
Moyer, and others, and they say, upon a great plot, but I believe no
such thing; but it is but justice that they should be served as they
served the poor Cavaliers; and I believe it will oftentimes be so as
long as I live, whether there be cause or no. This evening my brother
Tom was with me, and I did talk again to him about Mr. Townsend's
daughter, and I do intend to put the business in hand. I pray God give a
good end to it.

2nd. To Savill the painter's, but he not being well I could do nothing
there, and so I returned home, and in my way met Mr. Moore and took him
with me home; where we staid and talked all the morning, and he dined
with me, and after dinner went away to the Privy Seal, this being
our first day this month. By and by called on by Mr. Sanchy and his
mistress, and with them by coach to the Opera, to see "The Mad Lover,"
but not much pleased with the play. That done home all to my house,
where they staid and supped and were merry, and at last late bid good
night and so we to bed.

3rd. To the Paynter's and sat and had more of my picture done; but it do
not please me, for I fear it will not be like me. At noon from thence to
the Wardrobe, where dinner not being ready Mr. Moore and I to the Temple
about my little business at Mr. Turner's, and so back again, and dinner
being half done I went in to my Lady, where my Lady Wright was at dinner
with her, and all our talk about the great happiness that my Lady Wright
says there is in being in the fashion and in variety of fashions,
in scorn of others that are not so, as citizens' wives and country
gentlewomen, which though it did displease me enough, yet I said nothing
to it. Thence by water to the office through bridge, being carried by
him in oars that the other day rowed in a scull faster than my oars to
the Towre, and I did give him 6d. At the office all the afternoon, and
at night home to read in "Mare Clausum" till bedtime, and so to bed, but
had a very bad night by dreams of my wife's riding with me and her horse
throwing her and breaking her leg, and then I dreamed that I.. [was]
in such pain that I waked with it, and had a great deal of pain there a
very great while till I fell asleep again, and such apprehension I had
of it that when I rose and trussed up myself thinking that it had been
no dream. Till in the daytime I found myself very well at ease, and
remembered that I did dream so, and that Mr. Creed was with me, and that
I did complain to him of it, and he said he had the same pain in his
left that I had in my right... which pleased me much to remember.

4th. To Whitehall with both Sir Williams, thence by water, where I saw a
man lie dead upon Westminster Stairs that had been drowned yesterday.
To the Temple, and thence to Mr. Phillips and got my copy of Sturtlow
lands. So back to the 3 Tuns at Charing Cross, and there met the two Sir
Williams and Col. Treswell and Mr. Falconer, and dined there at Sir W.
Pen's cost, and after dinner by water to Cheapside to the painter's, and
there found my wife, and having sat a little she and I by coach to
the Opera and Theatre, but coming too late to both, and myself being a
little out of tune we returned, and I settled to read in "Mare Clausum
"till bedtime, and so to bed.

5th. This morning I went early to the Paynter's and there sat for my
picture the fourth time, but it do not yet please me, which do much
trouble me. Thence to the Treasury Office, where I found Sir W. Batten
come before me, and there we sat to pay off the St. George. By and by
came Sir W. Pen, and he and I staid while Sir W. Batten went home to
dinner, and then he came again, and Sir W. Pen and I went and dined
at my house, and had two mince pies sent thither by our order from the
messenger Slater, that had dressed some victuals for us, and so we were
very merry, and after dinner rode out in his coach, he to Whitehall, and
my wife and I to the Opera, and saw "Hamlett" well performed. Thence to
the Temple and Mrs. Turner's (who continues still very ill), and so home
and to bed.

6th. Lay long in bed, and then to Westminster Hall and there walked, and
then with Mr. Spicer, Hawly, Washington, and little Mr. Ashwell (my old
friends at the Exchequer) to the Dog, and gave them two or three quarts
of wine, and so away to White Hall, where, at Sir G. Carteret's,
Sir Williams both and I dined very pleasantly; and after dinner, by
appointment, came the Governors of the East India Company, to sign and
seal the contract between us

     [Charles II.'s charter to the Company, confirming and extending the
     former charter, is dated April 3rd, 1661.  Bombay, just acquired as
     part of Queen Katherine's dowry, was made over to the Company by
     Letters Patent dated March 27th, 1669.]

(in the King's name) and them. And that done, we all went to the King's
closet, and there spoke with the King and the Duke of York, who promise
to be very careful of the India trade to the utmost. So back to Sir G.
Carteret's and ended our business, and so away homewards, but Sir W.
Batten offering to go to the 3 Tuns at Charing Cross, where the pretty
maid the daughter of the house is; I was saying that, that tickled Sir
W. Pen, he seemed to take these words very captiously and angrily, which
I saw, and seemed indifferent to go home in his coach with them, and
so took leave to go to the Council Chamber to speak with my Lord Privy
Seal, which I did, but they did stay for me, which I was pleased at, but
no words passed between him and me in all our way home. So home and to
bed.

7th. This morning comes Captain Ferrers and the German, Emanuel Luffe,
who goes as one of my Lord's footmen, though he deserves a much better
preferment, to take their leave of me, and here I got the German to play
upon my theorbo, which he did both below and in my wife's chamber,
who was in bed. He plays bravely. I find by him that my lute is a most
excellent lute. I did give them a mince pie and a collar of brawn and
some wine for their breakfast, and were very merry, and sent for Mr.
Adamson's neighbour to drink Mr. Shepley's health. At last we all
parted, but within a quarter of an hour after they were gone, and my
wife and I were talking about buying of a fine scallop which is brought
her this morning by a woman to be sold, which is to cost her 45s., in
comes the German back again, all in a goare of blood, which I wondered
at, and tells me that he is afeard that the Captain is killed by the
watermen at Towre Stayres; so I presently went thither, and found that
upon some rude pressing of the watermen to ply the Captain, he struck
one of them with his cane, which they would not take, but struck him
again, and then the German drew his sword and ran at one of them, but
they were both soundly beaten.

     [See a similar outrage, committed by Captain Ferrers, September
     12th, 1662.  Swords were usually worn by footmen.  See May 4th,
     1662, host.--B.]

The Captain is, however, got to the boy that carries him and the pages
to the Downs, and I went into the alehouse at the Stayres and got them
to deliver the Captain's feathers, which one from the Captain was come
to demand, and went home again, and there found my wife dressing of the
German's head, and so did [give] him a cravett for his neck, and a crown
in his purse, and sent him away again. Then came Mr. Moore, and he and I
to Westminster and to Worcester House to see Mr. Montagu before he goes
away (this night), but could not see him, nor do I think he has a mind
to see us for fear of our demanding of money of him for anything. So
back to Whitehall, and eat a bit of meat at Wilkinson's, and then to the
Privy Seal, and sealed there the first time this month; and, among other
things that passed, there was a patent for Roger Palmer (Madam Palmer's
husband) to be Earl of Castlemaine and Baron of Limbricke in Ireland;
but the honour is tied up to the males got of the body of this wife, the
Lady Barbary: the reason whereof every body knows. That done, by water
to the office, when I found Sir W. Pen had been alone all the night and
was just rose, and so I to him, and with him I found Captain Holmes,
who had wrote his case, and gives me a copy, as he hath many among his
friends, and presented the same to the King and Council. Which I shall
make use of in my attempt of writing something concerning the business
of striking sail, which I am now about. But he do cry out against Sir
John Minnes, as the veriest knave and rogue and coward in the world,
which I was glad to hear, because he has given out bad words concerning
my Lord, though I am sorry it is so. Here Captain Cox then came in, and
he and I staid a good while and so good night. Home and wrote by the
post to my father, and so to bed.

8th (Lord's day). In bed all the morning thinking to take physique,
but it being a frost my wife would not have me. So to dinner at the
Wardrobe, and after a great deal of good discourse with my Lady after
dinner, and among other things of the great christening yesterday at Mr.
Rumbell's, and courtiers and pomp that was there, which I wonder at, I
went away up and down into all the churches almost between that place
and my house, and so home. And then came my brother Tom, and staid and
talked with me, and I hope he will do very well and get money. So
to supper and to bed. This morning as I was in bed, one brings me T.
Trice's answer to my bill in chancery from Mr. Smallwood, which I am
glad to see, though I am afraid it will do me hurt.

9th. To Whitehall, and thence to the Rhenish wine-house, where I met
Mons. Eschar and there took leave of him, he being to go this night to
the Downs towards Portugall, and so spent all the morning. At noon to
dinner to the Wardrobe; where my Lady Wright was, who did talk much upon
the worth and the desert of gallantry; and that there was none fit to
be courtiers, but such as have been abroad and know fashions. Which I
endeavoured to oppose; and was troubled to hear her talk so, though she
be a very wise and discreet lady in other things. From thence Mr. Moore
and I to the Temple about my law business with my cozen Turner, and
there we read over T. Trice's answer to my bill and advised thereupon
what to do in his absence, he being to go out of town to-morrow. Thence
he and I to Mr. Walpole, my attorney, whom I never saw before, and we
all to an alehouse hard by, and there we talked of our business, and
he put me into great hopes, but he is but a young man, and so I do not
depend so much upon his encouragement. So by coach home, and to supper,
and to bed, having staid up till 12 at night writing letters to my Lord
Sandwich and all my friends with him at sea, to send to-morrow by Mons.
Eschar, who goes tomorrow post to the Downs to go along with the fleet
to Portugall.

10th. To Whitehall, and there finding Mons. Eschar to be gone, I sent my
letters by a porter to the posthouse in Southwark to be sent by despatch
to the Downs. So to dinner to my Lord Crew's by coach, and in my way
had a stop of above an hour and a half, which is a great trouble this
Parliament time, but it cannot be helped. However I got thither before
my Lord come from the House, and so dined with him, and dinner done,
home to the office, and there sat late and so home.

11th. My brother Tom and then Mr. Moore came to me this morning, and
staid a while with me, and then I went out, and in my way met with Mr.
Howell the Turner, who invited me to dine this day at Mr. Rawlinson's
with some friends of his, officers of the Towre, at a venison pasty,
which I promised him, and so I went to the Old Bayly, and there staid
and drank with him, who told me the whole story how Pegg Kite has
married herself to a weaver, an ugly fellow, to her undoing, of which I
am glad that I have nothing to do in it. From thence home and put on my
velvet coat, and so to the Mitre to dinner according to my promise this
morning, but going up into the room I found at least 12 or more persons,
and knew not the face of any of them, so I went down again, and though
I met Mr. Yong the upholster yet I would not be persuaded to stay, but
went away and walked to the Exchequer, and up and down, and was very
hungry, and from thence home, when I understand Mr. Howell was come for
me to go thither, but I am glad I was not at home, and my wife was gone
out by coach to Clerkenwell to see Mrs. Margaret Pen, who is at school
there. So I went to see Sir W. Pen, who for this two or three days has
not been well, and he and I after some talk took a coach and went to
Moorfields, and there walked, though it was very cold, an hour or two,
and went into an alehouse, and there I drank some ale and eat some bread
and cheese, but he would not eat a bit, and so being very merry we went
home again. He to his lodgings and I by promise to Sir W. Batten's,
where he and my lady have gone out of town, and so Mrs. Martha was at
home alone, and Mrs. Moore and there I supped upon some good things left
of yesterday's dinner there, where dined a great deal of company--Sir R.
Browne and others--and by and by comes in Captain Cox who promised to
be here with me, but he staid very late, and had been drinking somewhere
and was very drunk, and so very capricious, which I was troubled to see
in a man that I took for a very wise and wary man. So I home and left
him there, and so to bed.

12th. We lay long in bed, then up and made me ready, and by and by come
Will Bowyer and Mr. Gregory, my old Exchequer friend, to see me, and I
took them to the Dolphin and there did give them a good morning draft,
and so parted, and invited them and all my old Exchequer acquaintance
to come and dine with me there on Wednesday next. From thence to the
Wardrobe and dined with my Lady, where her brother, Mr. John Crew, dined
also, and a strange gentlewoman dined at the table as a servant of my
Lady's; but I knew her not, and so I am afeard that poor Madamoiselle
was gone, but I since understand that she is come as housekeeper to my
Lady, and is a married woman. From thence to Westminster to my Lord's
house to meet my Lord Privy Seal, who appointed to seal there this
afternoon, but by and by word is brought that he is come to Whitehall,
and so we are fain to go thither to him, and there we staid to seal till
it was so late that though I got leave to go away before he had done,
yet the office was done before I could get thither, and so to Sir W.
Pen's, and there sat and talked and drank with him, and so home.

13th. At home all the morning, being by the cold weather, which for
these two days has been frost, in some pain in my bladder. Dined at home
and then with my wife to the Paynter's, and there she sat the first
time to be drawn, while I all the while stood looking on a pretty lady's
picture, whose face did please me extremely. At last, he having done,
I found that the dead colour of my wife is good, above what I expected,
which pleased me exceedingly. So home and to the office about some
special business, where Sir Williams both were, and from thence with
them to the Steelyard, where my Lady Batten and others came to us, and
there we drank and had musique and Captain Cox's company, and he paid
all, and so late back again home by coach, and so to bed.

14th. All the morning at home lying in bed with my wife till 11 o'clock.
Such a habit we have got this winter of lying long abed. Dined at home,
and in the afternoon to the office. There sat late, and so home and to
bed.

15th (Lord's day). To church in the morning, where our young Reader
begun the first day to read. Sir W. Pen dined with me and we were merry.
Again to church and so home, and all alone read till bedtime, and so
to prayers and to bed. I have been troubled this day about a difference
between my wife and her maid Nell, who is a simple slut, and I am afeard
we shall find her a cross-grained wench. I am now full of study about
writing something about our making of strangers strike to us at sea; and
so am altogether reading Selden and Grotius, and such other authors to
that purpose.

16th. Up by five o'clock this morning by candlelight (which I have
not done for many a day), being called upon by one Mr. Bollen by
appointment, who has business to be done with my Lord Privy Seal this
morning, and so by coach, calling Mr. Moore at the Wardrobe, to Chelsy,
and there did get my Lord to seal it. And so back again to Westminster
Hall, and thence to my Lord Sandwich's lodging, where I met my wife
(who had been to see Mrs. Hunt who was brought to bed the other day of a
boy), and got a joint of meat thither from the Cook's, and she and I and
Sarah dined together, and after dinner to the Opera, where there was a
new play ("Cutter of Coleman Street"),

     [Cutter, an old word for a rough swaggerer: hence the title of
     Cowley's play.  It was originally called "The Guardian," when acted
     before Prince Charles at Trinity College, Cambridge, on March 12th,
     1641.]

made in the year 1658, with reflections much upon the late times; and it
being the first time, the pay was doubled, and so to save money, my wife
and I went up into the gallery, and there sat and saw very well; and a
very good play it is. It seems of Cowly's making. From thence by coach
home, and to bed.

17th. Up and to the Paynter's to see how he went forward in our picture.
So back again to dinner at home, and then was sent for to the Privy
Seal, whither I was forced to go and stay so long and late that I was
much vexed. At last we got all done, and then made haste to the office,
where they were sat, and there we sat late, and so home to supper and to
Selden, "Mare Clausum," and so to bed.

18th. At the office upon business extraordinary all the morning, then
to my Lady Sandwich's to dinner, whither my wife, who had been at the
painter's, came to me, and there dined, and there I left her, and to the
Temple my brother and I to see Mrs. Turner, who begins to be better, and
so back to my Lady's, where much made of, and so home to my study till
bed-time, and so to bed.

19th. This morning my wife dressed herself fine to go to the christening
of Mrs. Hunt's child, and so she and I in the way in the morning went to
the Paynter s, and there she sat till noon, and I all the while looking
over great variety of good prints which he had, and by and by comes my
boy to tell us that Mrs. Hunt has been at our house to tell us that the
christening is not till Saturday next. So after the Paynter had done I
did like the picture pretty well, and my wife and I went by coach home,
but in the way I took occasion to fall out with my wife very highly
about her ribbands being ill matched and of two colours, and to very
high words, so that, like a passionate fool, I did call her whore,
for which I was afterwards sorry. But I set her down at home, and went
myself by appointment to the Dolphin, where Sir W. Warren did give us
all a good dinner, and that being done, to the office, and there sat
late, and so home.

20th. Lay long in bed, and then up, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner,
and from thence out with Mr. Moore towards my house, and in our way met
with Mr. Swan (my old acquaintance), and we to a tavern, where we had
enough of his old simple religious talk, and he is still a coxcomb
in these things as he ever was, and tells me he is setting out a book
called "The unlawfull use of lawfull things;" but a very simple fellow
he is, and so I leave him. So we drank and at last parted, and Mr. Moore
and I into Cornhill, it being dark night, and in the street and on the
Exchange discoursed about Dominion of the Sea, wherein I am lately so
much concerned, and so I home and sat late up reading of Mr. Selden, and
so to bed.

21st. To White Hall to the Privy Seal, where my Lord Privy Seal did tell
us he could seal no more this month, for that he goes thirty miles out
of town to keep his Christmas. At which I was glad, but only afeard lest
any thing of the King's should force us to go after him to get a seal
in the country. Thence to Westminster Hall (having by the way drank with
Mrs. Sarah and Mrs. Betty at my Lord's lodgings), and thence taken by
some Exchequer men to the Dogg, where, being St. Thomas's day, by custom
they have a general meeting at dinner. There I was and all very merry,
and there I spoke to Mr. Falconberge to look whether he could out of
Domesday Book, give me any thing concerning the sea, and the dominion
thereof; which he says he will look after. Thence taking leave to my
brother's, and there by appointment met with Prior of Brampton who had
money to pay me, but desiring some advice he stays till Monday. So by
coach home to the office, where I was vexed to see Sir Williams both
seem to think so much that I should be a little out of the way, saying
that without their Register they were not a Committee, which I took
in some dudgeon, and see clearly that I must keep myself at a little
distance with them and not crouch, or else I shall never keep myself up
even with them. So home and wrote letters by the post. This evening my
wife come home from christening Mrs. Hunt's son, his name John, and
a merchant in Mark Lane came along with her, that was her partner. So
after my business was done, and read something in Mr. Selden, I went to
bed.

22nd. To church in the morning, where the Reader made a boyish young
sermon. Home to dinner, and there I took occasion, from the blacknesse
of the meat as it came out of the pot, to fall out with my wife and my
maid for their sluttery, and so left the table, and went up to read in
Mr. Selden till church time, and then my wife and I to church, and there
in the pew, with the rest of the company, was Captain Holmes, in his
gold-laced suit, at which I was troubled because of the old business
which he attempted upon my wife. So with my mind troubled I sat still,
but by and by I took occasion from the rain now holding up (it raining
when we came into the church) to put my wife in mind of going to the
christening (which she was invited to) of N. Osborne's child, which she
did, and so went out of the pew, and my mind was eased. So home after
sermon and there came by appointment Dr. T. Pepys, Will. Joyce, and my
brother Tom, and supped with me, and very merry they were, and I seemed
to be, but I was not pleased at all with their company. So they being
gone we went to bed.

23rd. Early up and by coach (before daylight) to the Wardrobe, and took
up Mr. Moore, and he and I to Chelsy to my Lord Privy Seal, and there
sealed some things, he being to go out of town for all Christmas
to-morrow. So back again to Westminster, and from thence by water to
the Treasury Office, where I found Sir W. Pen paying off the Sophia and
Griffen, and there I staid with him till noon, and having sent for some
collar of beef and a mince pie, we eat and drank, and so I left him
there and to my brother's by appointment to meet Prior, but he came not,
so I went and saw Mrs. Turner who continues weak, and by and by word was
brought me that Prior's man was come to Tom's, and so I went and told
out L128 which I am to receive of him, but Prior not coming I went away
and left the money by his desire with my brother all night, and they
to come to me to-morrow morning. So I took coach, and lighting at my
bookseller's in Paul's Churchyard, I met with Mr. Crumlum and the second
master of Paul's School, and thence I took them to the Starr, and there
we sat and talked, and I had great pleasure in their company, and very
glad I was of meeting him so accidentally, I having omitted too long to
go to see him. Here in discourse of books I did offer to give the school
what books he would choose of L5. So we parted, and I home, and to Mr.
Selden, and then to bed.

24th. Home all the morning and dined at home, and in the afternoon to
the office. So home.

25th. In the morning to church, where at the door of our pew I was fain
to stay, because that the sexton had not opened the door. A good sermon
of Mr. Mills. Dined at home all alone, and taking occasion from some
fault in the meat to complain of my maid's sluttery, my wife and I fell
out, and I up to my chamber in a discontent. After dinner my wife comes
up to me and all friends again, and she and I to walk upon the leads,
and there Sir W. Pen called us, and we went to his house and supped with
him, but before supper Captain Cock came to us half drunk, and began to
talk, but Sir W. Pen knowing his humour and that there was no end of his
talking, drinks four great glasses of wine to him, one after another,
healths to the king, and by that means made him drunk, and so he went
away, and so we sat down to supper, and were merry, and so after supper
home and to bed.

26th. This morning Sir W. Pen and I to the Treasury office, and there
we paid off the Amity (Captain Stokes's ship that was at Guinny) and
another ship, and so home, and after dinner Sir William came to me, and
he and his son and Aaugliter, and I and my wife, by coach to Moorfields
to walk; but it was most foul weather, and so we went into an alehouse
and there eat some cakes and ale, and a washeallbowle

             ["The wenches with their wassall bowls
               About the streets are singing."
                         --Wither's Christmas Carol.

     The old custom of carrying the wassail bowl from door to door, with
     songs and merriment, in Christmas week, is still observed in some of
     our rural districts.--B.]

woman and girl came to us and sung to us. And after all was done I
called my boy (Wayneman) to us to eat some cake that was left, and the
woman of the house told us that he had called for two cakes and a pot
of ale for himself, at which I was angry, and am resolved to correct him
for it. So home, and Sir W. Pen and his son and daughter to supper to me
to a good turkey, and were merry at cards, and so to bed.

27th. In the morning to my Bookseller's to bespeak a Stephens's
Thesaurus, for which I offer L4, to give to Paul's School; and from
thence to Paul's Church; and there I heard Dr. Gunning preach a good
sermon upon the day (being St. John's day), and did hear him tell a
story, which he did persuade us to believe to be true, that St. John and
the Virgin Mary did appear to Gregory, a Bishopp, at his prayer to be
confirmed in the faith, which I did wonder to hear from him. Here I
met with Mr. Crumlum (and told him of my endeavour to get Stephens's
Thesaurus for the school), and so home, and after dinner comes Mr.
Faulconberge to see me, and at his desire I sent over for his kinsman
Mr. Knightly, the merchant, and so he came over and sat and drank with
us, and at his request I went over with him, and there I sat till the
evening, and till both Mr. Knightly and Mr. Faulconberge (for whom I
sent my boy to get a coach to carry him to Westminster) were both drunk,
and so home, but better wine I never drank in all my life. So home, and
finding my wife gone to Sir W. Pen's, I went thither, and there I sat
and played at cards and supped, and so home and to bed.

28th. At home all the morning; and in the afternoon all of us at the
office, upon a letter from the Duke for the making up of a speedy
estimate of all the debts of the Navy, which is put into good
forwardness. I home and Sir W. Pen to my house, who with his children
staid playing cards late, and so to bed.

29th (Lord's day). Long in bed with my wife, and though I had determined
to go to dine with my wife at my Lady's, (chiefly to put off dining with
Sir W. Pen to-day because Holmes dined there), yet I could not get a
coach time enough to go thither, and so I dined at home, and my brother
Tom with me, and then a coach came and I carried my wife to Westminster,
and she went to see Mrs. Hunt, and I to the Abbey, and there meeting
with Mr. Hooper, he took me in among the quire, and there I sang with
them their service, and so that being done, I walked up and down till
night for that Mr. Coventry was not come to Whitehall since dinner
again. At last I went thither and he was come, and I spoke with him
about some business of the office, and so took leave of him, and sent
for my wife and the coach, and so to the Wardrobe and supped, and staid
very long talking with my Lady, who seems to doat every day more and
more upon us. So home and to prayers, and to bed.

30th. At the office about this estimate and so with my wife and Sir W.
Pen to see our pictures, which do not much displease us, and so back
again, and I staid at the Mitre, whither I had invited all my old
acquaintance of the Exchequer to a good chine of beef, which with three
barrels of oysters and three pullets, and plenty of wine and mirth, was
our dinner, and there was about twelve of us, among others Mr. Bowyer,
the old man, and Mr. Faulconberge, Shadwell, Taylor, Spicer, Woodruffe
(who by reason of some friend that dined with him came to us after
dinner), Servington, &c., and here I made them a foolish promise to give
them one this day twelvemonth, and so for ever while I live, but I do
not intend it. Mere I staid as long as I could keep them, and so home to
Sir W. Pen, who with his children and my wife has been at a play to-day
and saw "D'Ambois," which I never saw. Here we staid late at supper and
playing at cards, and so home and

31st. My wife and I this morning to the Paynter's, and there she sat
the last time, and I stood by and did tell him some little things to do,
that now her picture I think will please me very well; and after her,
her little black dogg sat in her lap; and was drawn, which made us very
merry; so home to dinner, and so to the office; and there late finishing
our estimate of the debts of the Navy to this day; and it come to near
L374,000. So home, and after supper, and my barber had trimmed me, I sat
down to end my journell for this year, and my condition at this time,
by God's blessing, is thus: my health (only upon catching cold, which
brings great pain in my back... as it used to be when I had the stone)
is very good, and so my wife's in all respects: my servants, W. Hewer,
Sarah, Nell, and Wayneman: my house at the Navy Office. I suppose myself
to be worth about L500 clear in the world, and my goods of my house my
own, and what is coming to me from Brampton, when my father dies, which
God defer. But, by my uncle's death, the whole care and trouble of
all, and settling of all lies upon me, which is very great, because of
law-suits, especially that with T. Trice, about the interest of L200,
which will, I hope, be ended soon. My chiefest thought is now to get
a good wife for Tom, there being one offered by the Joyces, a cozen
of theirs, worth L200 in ready money. I am also upon writing a little
treatise to present to the Duke, about our privilege in the seas, as to
other nations striking their flags to us. But my greatest trouble is,
that I have for this last half year been a very great spendthrift in all
manner of respects, that I am afeard to cast up my accounts, though I
hope I am worth what I say above. But I will cast them up very shortly.
I have newly taken a solemn oath about abstaining from plays and wine,
which I am resolved to keep according to the letter of the oath which
I keep by me. The fleet hath been ready to sail for Portugall, but hath
lacked wind this fortnight, and by that means my Lord is forced to keep
at sea all this winter, till he brings home the Queen, which is the
expectation of all now, and the greatest matter of publique talk.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS FOR PEPYS DIARY OF 1961:

     A most tedious, unreasonable, and impertinent sermon
     A play not very good, though commended much
     A great baboon, but so much like a man in most things
     A little while since a very likely man to live as any I knew
     A lady spit backward upon me by a mistake
     After dinner my wife comes up to me and all friends again
     Ambassador--that he is an honest man sent to lie abroad
     And so by coach, though hard to get it, being rainy, home
     As all things else did not come up to my expectations
     Begun to smell, and so I caused it to be set forth (corpse)
     Being sure never to see the like again in this world
     Believe that England and France were once the same continent
     Bleeding behind by leeches will cure him
     But she loves not that I should speak of Mrs. Pierce
     By chewing of tobacco is become very fat and sallow
     Cannot bring myself to mind my business
     Chocolate was introduced into England about the year 1652
     Comely black woman.--[The old expression for a brunette.]
     Coming to lay out a great deal of money in clothes for my wife
     Cruel custom of throwing at cocks on Shrove Tuesday
     Day I first begun to go forth in my coat and sword
     Did extremely beat him, and though it did trouble me to do it
     Did trouble me very much to be at charge to no purpose
     Difference there will be between my father and mother about it
     Discontented that my wife do not go neater now she has two maids
     Dominion of the Sea
     Durst not take notice of her, her husband being there
     Eat of the best cold meats that ever I eat on in all my life
     Exclaiming against men's wearing their hats on in the church
     Faced white coat, made of one of my wife's pettycoates
     Family being all in mourning, doing him the greatest honour
     Fear I shall not be able to wipe my hands of him again
     Fell to dancing, the first time that ever I did in my life
     Finding my wife not sick, but yet out of order
     Foolery to take too much notice of such things
     Found my brother John at eight o'clock in bed, which vexed me
     Found him not so ill as I thought that he had been ill
     Frogs and many insects do often fall from the sky, ready formed
     From some fault in the meat to complain of my maid's sluttery
     Gamester's life, which I see is very miserable, and poor
     Get his lady to trust herself with him into the tavern
     God! what an age is this, and what a world is this
     Good God! how these ignorant people did cry her up for it!
     Good wine, and anchovies, and pickled oysters (for breakfast)
     Greedy to see the will, but did not ask to see it till to-morrow
     Have been so long absent that I am ashamed to go
     His company ever wearys me
     I could not forbear to love her exceedingly
     I took occasion to be angry with him
     I had the opportunity of kissing Mrs. Rebecca very often
     I would fain have stolen a pretty dog that followed me
     I broke wind and so came to some ease
     I was as merry as I could counterfeit myself to be
     I went in and kissed them, demanding it as a fee due
     In men's clothes, and had the best legs that ever I saw
     Inconvenience that do attend the increase of a man's fortune
     Instructed by Shakespeare himself
     Jealousy of him and an ugly wench that lived there lately
     Justice of God in punishing men for the sins of their ancestors
     King, Duke and Duchess, and Madame Palmer, were
     Lady Batten how she was such a man's whore
     Lady Batten to give me a spoonful of honey for my cold
     Lately too much given to seeing of plays, and expense
     Lay with her to-night, which I have not done these eight(days)
     Lewdness and beggary of the Court
     Like a passionate fool, I did call her whore
     Look askew upon my wife, because my wife do not buckle to them
     Made a lazy sermon, like a Presbyterian
     Man cannot live without playing the knave and dissimulation
     My head was not well with the wine that I drank to-day
     My great expense at the Coronacion
     My wife and I fell out
     None will sell us any thing without our personal security given
     Oliver Cromwell as his ensign
     Quakers do still continue, and rather grow than lessen
     Sat before Mrs. Palmer, the King's mistress, and filled my eyes
     Seemed much glad of that it was no more
     She hath got her teeth new done by La Roche
     She would not let him come to bed to her out of jealousy
     She is a very good companion as long as she is well
     Sir W. Pen was so fuddled that we could not try him to play
     So the children and I rose and dined by ourselves
     So home and to bed, where my wife had not lain a great while
     So much wine, that I was even almost foxed
     Sorry in some respect, glad in my expectations in another respec
     Still in discontent with my wife, to bed, and rose so this morn
     Strange the folly of men to lay and lose so much money
     That I might not seem to be afeared
     The Lords taxed themselves for the poor--an earl, s.
     The unlawfull use of lawfull things
     The barber came to trim me and wash me
     "The Alchymist,"--[Comedy by Ben Jonson
     The monkey loose, which did anger me, and so I did strike her
     This week made a vow to myself to drink no wine this week
     This day churched, her month of childbed being out
     Those absent from prayers were to pay a forfeit
     To be so much in love of plays
     Took occasion to fall out with my wife very highly
     Took physique, and it did work very well
     Tory--The term was not used politically until about 1679
     Troubled to see my father so much decay of a suddain
     Vices of the Court, and how the pox is so common there
     Was kissing my wife, which I did not like
     We do naturally all love the Spanish, and hate the French
     We are to go to law never to revenge, but only to repayre
     We had a good surloyne of rost beefe
     What they all, through profit or fear, did promise
     What people will do tomorrow
     Who seems so inquisitive when my house will be made an end of
     Who we found ill still, but he do make very much of it
     Woman with a rod in her hand keeping time to the musique
     Wronged by my over great expectations





End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1661, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1661 ***

***** This file should be named 4131.txt or 4131.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/3/4131/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
