The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1662, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1662
       Transcribed From The Shorthand Manuscript In The Pepysian
       Library Magdalene College Cambridge By The Rev. Mynors
       Bright

Author: Samuel Pepys

Commentator: Lord Braybrooke

Editor: Henry B. Wheatley

Release Date: October 7, 2006 [EBook #4138]
Posting Date: March 22, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1662 ***




Produced by David Widger





THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

(Unabridged)

WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

1962

By Samuel Pepys

Edited With Additions By

Henry B. Wheatley F.S.A.




    LONDON
    GEORGE BELL & SONS YORK ST.  COVENT GARDEN
    CAMBRIDGE DEIGHTON BELL & CO.


    1893



JANUARY 1661-1662

January 1st. Waking this morning out of my sleep on a sudden, I did with
my elbow hit my wife a great blow over her face and nose, which waked
her with pain, at which I was sorry, and to sleep again. Up and went
forth with Sir W. Pen by coach towards Westminster, and in my way seeing
that the "Spanish Curate" was acted today, I light and let him go alone,
and I home again and sent to young Mr. Pen and his sister to go anon
with my wife and I to the Theatre. That done, Mr. W. Pen came to me
and he and I walked out, and to the Stacioner's, and looked over some
pictures and traps for my house, and so home again to dinner, and by and
by came the two young Pens, and after we had eat a barrel of oysters we
went by coach to the play, and there saw it well acted, and a good play
it is, only Diego the Sexton did overdo his part too much. From thence
home, and they sat with us till late at night at cards very merry, but
the jest was Mr. W. Pen had left his sword in the coach, and so my boy
and he run out after the coach, and by very great chance did at the
Exchange meet with the coach and got his sword again. So to bed.

2nd. An invitation sent us before we were up from my Lady Sandwich's,
to come and dine with her: so at the office all the morning, and at
noon thither to dinner, where there was a good and great dinner, and the
company, Mr. William Montagu and his Lady (but she seemed so far from
the beauty that I expected her from my Lady's talk to be, that it put
me into an ill humour all the day, to find my expectation so lost), Mr.
Rurttball and Townsend and their wives. After dinner, borne by water,
and so to the office till night, and then I went forth, by appointment,
to meet with Mr. Grant, who promised to meet me at the Coffee-house to
bring me acquainted with Cooper the great limner in little, but they
deceived me, and so I went home, and there sat at my lute and singing
till almost twelve at night, and so to bed. Sir Richd. Fanshaw is come
suddenly from Portugall, but nobody knows what his business is.

3rd. Lay long in bed, and so up and abroad to several places about petty
businesses. Among others to Tom's, who I find great hopes of that he
will do well, which I am glad of, and am not now so hasty to get a wife
for him as I was before. So to dinner to my Lord Crew's with him and his
Lady, and after dinner to Faithorne's, and there bought some pictures
of him; and while I was there, comes by the King's life-guard, he being
gone to Lincoln's Inn this afternoon to see the Revells there; there
being, according to an old custom, a prince and all his nobles, and
other matters of sport and charge. So home, and up to my chamber to look
over my papers and other things, my mind being much troubled for these
four or five days because of my present great expense, and will be so
till I cast up and see how my estate stands, and that I am loth to do
for fear I have spent too much, and delay it the rather that I may pay
for my pictures and my wife's, and the book that I am buying for Paul's
School before I do cast up my accompts.

4th. At home most of the morning hanging up pictures, and seeing how my
pewter sconces that I have bought will become my stayres and entry, and
then with my wife by water to Westminster, whither she to her father's
and I to Westminster Hall, and there walked a turn or two with Mr.
Chetwin (who had a dog challenged of him by another man that said it was
his, but Mr. Chetwin called the dog, and the dog at last would follow
him, and not his old master, and so Chetwin got the dog) and W. Symons,
and thence to my wife, who met me at my Lord's lodgings, and she and I
and old East to Wilkinson's to dinner, where we had some rost beef and
a mutton pie, and a mince-pie, but none of them pleased me. After dinner
by coach my wife and I home, and I to the office, and there till late,
and then I and my wife to Sir W. Pen's to cards and supper, and were
merry, and much correspondence there has been between our two families
all this Christmas. So home and to bed.

5th (Lord's day). Left my wife in bed not well... and I to church, and
so home to dinner, and dined alone upon some marrow bones, and had a
fine piece of rost beef, but being alone I eat none. So after dinner
comes in my brother Tom, and he tells me how he hath seen the father and
mother of the girl which my cozen Joyces would have him to have for a
wife, and they are much for it, but we are in a great quandary what to
do therein, L200 being but a little money; and I hope, if he continues
as he begins, he may look out for one with more. To church, and before
sermon there was a long psalm, and half another sung out while the
Sexton gathered what the church would give him for this last year. I
gave him 3s., and have the last week given the Clerk 2s., which I set
down that I may know what to do the next year, if it please the Lord
that I live so long; but the jest was, the Clerk begins the 25th psalm,
which hath a proper tune to it, and then the 116th, which cannot be sung
with that tune, which seemed very ridiculous. After church to Sir W.
Batten's, where on purpose I have not been this fortnight, and I am
resolved to keep myself more reserved to avoyd the contempt which
otherwise I must fall into, and so home and six and talked and supped
with my wife, and so up to prayers and to bed, having wrote a letter
this night to Sir J. Mennes in the Downs for his opinion in the business
of striking of flags.

6th (Twelfth day). This morning I sent my lute to the Paynter's, and
there I staid with him all the morning to see him paint the neck of
my lute in my picture, which I was not pleased with after it was done.
Thence to dinner to Sir W. Pen's, it being a solemn feast day with him,
his wedding day, and we had, besides a good chine of beef and other good
cheer, eighteen mince pies in a dish, the number of the years that he
hath been married, where Sir W. Batten and his Lady, and daughter was,
and Colonel Treswell and Major Holmes, who I perceive would fain get
to be free and friends with my wife, but I shall prevent it, and she
herself hath also a defyance against him. After dinner they set in
to drinking, so that I would stay no longer, but went away home, and
Captain Cock, who was quite drunk, comes after me, and there sat awhile
and so away, and anon I went again after the company was gone, and
sat and played at cards with Sir W. Pen and his children, and so after
supper home, and there I hear that my man Gull was gone to bed, and upon
enquiry I hear that he did vomit before he went to bed, and complained
his head ached, and thereupon though he was asleep I sent for him out
of his bed, and he rose and came up to me, and I appeared very angry and
did tax him with being drunk, and he told me that he had been with Mr.
Southerne and Homewood at the Dolphin, and drank a quart of sack, but
that his head did ache before he went out. But I do believe he has drunk
too much, and so I did threaten him to bid his uncle dispose of him some
other way, and sent him down to bed and do resolve to continue to be
angry with him. So to bed to my wife, and told her what had passed.

7th. Long in bed, and then rose and went along with Sir W. Pen on foot
to Stepny to Mrs. Chappell's (who has the pretty boy to her son), and
there met my wife and Sir W. Pen's children all, and Mrs. Poole and her
boy, and there dined and' were very merry, and home again by coach and
so to the office. In the afternoon and at night to Sir W. Pen's, there
supped and played at cards with them and were merry, the children being
to go all away to school again to-morrow. Thence home and to bed.

8th. I rose and went to Westminster Hall, and there walked up and down
upon several businesses, and among others I met with Sir W. Pen, who
told me that he had this morning heard Sir G. Carteret extremely angry
against my man Will that he is every other day with the Commissioners of
Parliament at Westminster, and that his uncle was a rogue, and that
he did tell his uncle every thing that passes at the office, and Sir
William, though he loves the lad, did advise me to part with him, which
did with this surprise mightily trouble me, though I was already angry
with him, and so to the Wardrobe by water, and all the way did examine
Will about the business, but did not tell him upon what score, but I
find that the poor lad do suspect something. To dinner with my Lady, and
after dinner talked long with her, and so home, and to Sir W. Batten's,
and sat and talked with him, and so home troubled in mind, and so up to
my study and read the two treaties before Mr. Selden's "Mare Clausum,"
and so to bed. This night come about L100 from Brampton by carrier to
me, in holsters from my father, which made me laugh.

9th. At the office all the morning private with Sir G. Carteret (who
I expected something from about yesterday's business, but he said
nothing), Sir W. Batten, and Sir W. Pen, about drawing; up an answer
to several demands of my Lord Treasurer, and late at it till 2 o'clock.
Then to dinner, and my wife to Sir W. Pen's, and so to the office again
and sat till late; and so home, where I found Mr. Armiger below talking
with my wife, but being offended with him for his leaving of my brother
Tom I shewed him no countenance, but did take notice of it to him
plainly, and I perceive he was troubled at it, but I am glad I told him
of it. Then (when he was gone) up to write several letters by the post,
and so to set my papers and things in order, and to bed. This morning
we agreed upon some things to answer to the Duke about the practice
of striking of the flags, which will now put me upon finishing my
resolution of writing something upon the subject.

10th. To White Hall, and there spoke with Sir Paul Neale' about a
mathematical request of my Lord's to him, which I did deliver to
him, and he promised to employ somebody to answer it, something about
observation of the moon and stars, but what I did not mind. Here I met
with Mr. Moore, who tells me that an injuncon is granted in Chancery
against T. Trice, at which I was very glad, being before in some trouble
for it. With him to Westminster Hall, where I walked till noon talking
with one or other, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner, where tired with
Mr. Pickering's company I returned to Westminster, by appointment, to
meet my wife at Mrs. Hunt's to gossip with her, which we did alone,
and were very merry, and did give her a cup and spoon for my wife's
god-child, and so home by coach, and I late reading in my chamber and
then to bed, my wife being angry that I keep the house so late up.

11th. My brother Tom came to me, and he and I to Mr. Turner the
Draper's, and paid L15 to him for cloth owing to him by my father for
his mourning for my uncle, and so to his house, and there invited all
the Honiwood's to dinner on Monday next. So to the Exchange, and there
all the news is of the French and Dutch joyning against us; but I do
not think it yet true. So home to dinner, and in the afternoon to the
office, and so to Sir W. Batten's, where in discourse I heard the custom
of the election of the Dukes of Genoa, who for two years are every day
attended in the greatest state; and four or five hundred men always
waiting upon him as a king; and when the two years are out, and another
is chose, a messenger is, sent to him, who stands at the bottom of the
stairs, and he at the top, and says, "Va. Illustrissima Serenita sta
finita, et puede andar en casa."--"Your serenity is now ended; and
now you may be going home," and so claps on his hat. And the old Duke
(having by custom sent his goods home before), walks away, it may be but
with one man at his heels; and the new one brought immediately in his
room, in the greatest state in the world. Another account was told us,
how in the Dukedom of Ragusa, in the Adriatique (a State that is little,
but more ancient, they say, than Venice, and is called the mother of
Venice, and the Turks lie round about it), that they change all the
officers of their guard, for fear of conspiracy, every twenty-four
hours, so that nobody knows who shall be captain of the guard to-night;
but two men come to a man, and lay hold of him as a prisoner, and carry
him to the place; and there he hath the keys of the garrison given him,
and he presently issues his orders for that night's watch: and so always
from night to night. Sir Win. Rider told the first of his own knowledge;
and both he and Sir W. Batten confirm the last. Hence home and to read,
and so to bed, but very late again.

12th (Lord's day). To church, where a stranger made a very good sermon.
At noon Sir W. Pen and my good friend Dean Fuller, by appointment, and
my wife's brother by chance, dined with me very merry and handsomely.
After dinner the Dean, my wife and I by Sir W. Pen's coach left us, he
to Whitehall, and my wife and I to visit Mrs. Pierce and thence Mrs.
Turner, who continues very ill still, and The. is also fallen sick,
which do trouble me for the poor mother. So home and to read, I being
troubled to hear my wife rate though not without cause at her mayd Nell,
who is a lazy slut. So to prayers and to bed.

13th. All the morning at home, and Mr. Berkenshaw (whom I have not seen
a great while, came to see me), who staid with me a great while talking
of musique, and I am resolved to begin to learn of him to compose, and
to begin to-morrow, he giving of me so great hopes that I shall soon do
it. Before twelve o'clock comes, by appointment, Mr. Peter and the Dean,
and Collonel Noniwood, brothers, to dine with me; but so soon that I was
troubled at it. But, however, I entertained them with talk and oysters
till one o'clock, and then we sat down to dinner, not staying for my
uncle and aunt Wight, at which I was troubled, but they came by and by,
and so we dined very merry, at least I seemed so, but the dinner does
not please me, and less the Dean and Collonel, whom I found to be
pitiful sorry gentlemen, though good-natured, but Mr. Peter above them
both, who after dinner did show us the experiment (which I had heard
talk of) of the chymicall glasses, which break all to dust by breaking
off a little small end; which is a great mystery to me. They being gone,
my aunt Wight and my wife and I to cards, she teaching of us how to play
at gleeke, which is a pretty game; but I have not my head so free as
to be troubled with it. By and by comes my uncle Wight back, and so to
supper and talk, and then again to cards, when my wife and I beat them
two games and they us one, and so good night and to bed.

14th. All the morning at home, Mr. Berkenshaw by appointment yesterday
coming to me, and begun composition of musique, and he being gone I to
settle my papers and things in my chamber, and so after dinner in
the afternoon to the office, and thence to my chamber about several
businesses of the office and my own, and then to supper and to bed. This
day my brave vellum covers to keep pictures in, come in, which pleases
me very much.

15th. This morning Mr. Berkenshaw came again, and after he had examined
me and taught me something in my work, he and I went to breakfast in my
chamber upon a collar of brawn, and after we had eaten, asked me whether
we had not committed a fault in eating to-day; telling me that it is a
fast day ordered by the Parliament, to pray for more seasonable weather;
it having hitherto been summer weather, that it is, both as to warmth
and every other thing, just as if it were the middle of May or June,
which do threaten a plague (as all men think) to follow, for so it was
almost the last winter; and the whole year after hath been a very sickly
time to this day. I did not stir out of my house all day, but conned my
musique, and at night after supper to bed.

16th. Towards Cheapside; and in Paul's Churchyard saw the funeral of
my Lord Cornwallis, late Steward of the King's House, a bold profane
talking man, go by, and thence I to the Paynter's, and there paid him L6
for the two pictures, and 36s. for the two frames. From thence home, and
Mr. Holliard and my brother Tom dined with me, and he did give me good
advice about my health. In the afternoon at the office, and at night
to Sir W. Batten, and there saw him and Captain Cock and Stokes play
at cards, and afterwards supped with them. Stokes told us, that
notwithstanding the country of Gambo is so unhealthy, yet the people of
the place live very long, so as the present king there is 150 years old,
which they count by rains: because every year it rains continually four
months together. He also told us, that the kings there have above 100
wives a-piece, and offered him the choice of any of his wives to lie
with, and so he did Captain Holmes. So home and to bed.

17th. To Westminster with Mr. Moore, and there, after several walks up
and down to hear news, I met with Lany, the Frenchman, who told me that
he had a letter from France last night, that tells him that my Lord
Hinchingbroke is dead,--[proved false]--and that he did die yesterday
was se'nnight, which do surprise me exceedingly (though we know that he
hath been sick these two months), so I hardly ever was in my life; but
being fearfull that my Lady should come to hear it too suddenly, he
and I went up to my Lord Crew's, and there I dined with him, and after
dinner we told him, and the whole family is much disturbed by it: so we
consulted what to do to tell my Lady of it; and at last we thought of my
going first to Mr. George Montagu's to hear whether he had any news of
it, which I did, and there found all his house in great heaviness for
the death of his son, Mr. George Montagu, who did go with our young
gentlemen into France, and that they hear nothing at all of our young
Lord; so believing that thence comes the mistake, I returned to my
Lord Crew (in my way in the Piazza seeing a house on fire, and all the
streets full of people to quench it), and told them of it, which they
are much glad of, and conclude, and so I hope, that my Lord is well; and
so I went to my Lady Sandwich, and told her all, and after much talk I
parted thence with my wife, who had been there all the day, and so home
to my musique, and then to bed.

18th. This morning I went to Dr. Williams, and there he told me how
T. Trice had spoke to him about getting me to meet that our difference
might be made up between us by ourselves, which I am glad of, and have
appointed Monday next to be the day. Thence to the Wardrobe, and there
hearing it would be late before they went to dinner, I went and spent
some time in Paul's Churchyard among some books, and then returned
thither, and there dined with my Lady and Sir H. Wright and his lady,
all glad of yesterday's mistake, and after dinner to the office, and
then home and wrote letters by the post to my father, and by and by
comes Mr. Moore to give me an account how Mr. Montagu was gone away of
a sudden with the fleet, in such haste that he hath left behind some
servants, and many things of consequence; and among others, my Lord's
commission for Embassador. Whereupon he and I took coach, and to White
Hall to my Lord's lodgings, to have spoke with Mr. Ralph Montagu, his
brother (and here we staid talking with Sarah and the old man); but by
and by hearing that he was in Covent Garden, we went thither: and at
my Lady Harvy's, his sister, I spoke with him, and he tells me that the
commission is not left behind. And so I went thence by the same coach
(setting down Mr. Moore) home, and after having wrote a letter to my
Lord at 12 o'clock at night by post I went to bed.

19th (Lord's day). To church in the morning, where Mr. Mills preached
upon Christ's being offered up for our sins, and there proving the
equity with what justice God would lay our sins upon his Son, he did
make such a sermon (among other things pleading, from God's universal
sovereignty over all his creatures, the power he has of commanding what
he would of his Son by the same rule as that he might have made us all,
and the whole world from the beginning to have been in hell, arguing
from the power the potter has over his clay), that I could have wished
he had let it alone; and speaking again, the Father is now so satisfied
by our security for our debt, that we might say at the last day as many
of us as have interest in Christ's death: Lord, we owe thee nothing, our
debt is paid. We are not beholden to, thee for anything, for thy debt is
paid to thee to the full; which methinks were very bold words. Home to
dinner, and then my wife and I on foot to see Mrs. Turner, who continues
still sick, and thence into the Old Bayly by appointment to speak with
Mrs. Norbury who lies at (it falls out) next door to my uncle Fenner's;
but as God would have it, we having no desire to be seen by his people,
he having lately married a midwife that is old and ugly, and that hath
already brought home to him a daughter and three children, we were let
in at a back door. And here she offered me the refusall of some lands of
her's at Brampton, if I have a mind to buy, which I answered her I was
not at present provided to do. She took occasion to talk of her sister
Wight's making much of the Wights, who for namesake only my uncle do
shew great kindness to, so I fear may do us that are nearer to him a
great deal of wrong, if he should die without children, which I am sorry
for. Thence to my uncle Wight's, and there we supped and were merry,
though my uncle hath lately lost 200 or 300 at sea, and I am troubled to
hear that the Turks do take more and more of our ships in the Straights,
and that our merchants here in London do daily break, and are still
likely to do so. So home, and I put in at Sir W. Batten's, where Major
Holmes was, and in our discourse and drinking I did give Sir J. Mennes'
health, which he swore he would not pledge, and called him knave and
coward (upon the business of Holmes with the Swedish ship lately), which
we all and I particularly did desire him to forbear, he being of our
fraternity, which he took in great dudgeon, and I was vexed to hear him
persist in calling him so, though I believe it to be true, but however
he is to blame and I am troubled at it. So home and to prayers, and to
bed.

20th. This morning Sir Win. Batten and Pen and I did begin the examining
the Treasurer's accounts, the first time ever he had passed in the
office, which is very long, and we were all at it till noon, and then
to dinner, he providing a fine dinner for us, and we eat it at Sir W.
Batten's, where we were very merry, there being at table the Treasurer
and we three, Mr. Wayth, Ferrer, Smith, Turner, and Mr. Morrice, the
wine cooper, who this day did divide the two butts, which we four did
send for, of sherry from Cales, and mine was put into a hogshead, and
the vessel filled up with four gallons of Malaga wine, but what it will
stand us in I know not: but it is the first great quantity of wine that
I ever bought. And after dinner to the office all the afternoon till
late at night, and then home, where my aunt and uncle Wight and Mrs.
Anne Wight came to play at cards (at gleek which she taught me and my
wife last week) and so to supper, and then to cards and so good night.
Then I to my practice of musique and then at 12 o'clock to bed. This day
the workmen began to make me a sellar door out of the back yard, which
will much please me.

21st. To the finishing of the Treasurer's accounts this morning, and
then to dinner again, and were merry as yesterday, and so home, and
then to the office till night, and then home to write letters, and
to practise my composition of musique, and then to bed. We have heard
nothing yet how far the fleet hath got toward Portugall, but the wind
being changed again, we fear they are stopped, and may be beat back
again to the coast of Ireland.

22d. After musique-practice, to White Hall, and thence to Westminster,
in my way calling at Mr. George Montagu's, to condole him the loss of
his son, who was a fine gentleman, and it is no doubt a great discomfort
to our two young gentlemen, his companions in France. After this
discourse he told me, among other news, the great jealousys that are now
in the Parliament House. The Lord Chancellor, it seems, taking occasion
from this late plot to raise fears in the people, did project the
raising of an army forthwith, besides the constant militia, thinking to
make the Duke of York General thereof. But the House did, in very open
terms, say, they were grown too wise to be fooled again into another
army; and said they had found how that man that hath the command of an
army is not beholden to any body to make him King. There are factions
(private ones at Court) about Madam Palmer; but what it is about I know
not. But it is something about the King's favour to her now that the
Queen is coming. He told me, too, what sport the King and Court do
make at Mr. Edward Montagu's leaving his things behind him. But the
Chancellor (taking it a little more seriously) did openly say to my Lord
Chamberlain, that had it been such a gallant as my Lord Mandeville his
son, it might have; been taken as a frolique; but for him that would be
thought a grave coxcomb, it was very strange. Thence to the Hall, where
I heard the House had ordered all the King's murderers, that remain,
to be executed, but Fleetwood and Downes. So to the Wardrobe and there
dined, meeting my wife there, who went after dinner with my Lady to see
Mr. George Montagu's lady, and I to have a meeting by appointment with
Tho. Trice and Dr. Williams in order to a treating about the difference
between us, but I find there is no hopes of ending it but by law, and
so after a pint or two of wine we parted. So to the Wardrobe for my wife
again, and so home, and after writing and doing some things to bed.

23rd. All the morning with Mr. Berkenshaw, and after him Mr. Moore in
discourse of business, and in the afternoon by coach by invitacon to
my uncle Fenner's, where I found his new wife, a pitiful, old, ugly,
illbred woman in a hatt, a midwife. Here were many of his, and as many
of her relations, sorry, mean people; and after choosing our gloves, we
all went over to the Three Crane Tavern,' and though the best room in
the house, in such a narrow dogg-hole we were crammed, and I believe we
were near forty, that it made me loathe my company and victuals; and
a sorry poor dinner it was too. After dinner, I took aside the two
Joyce's, and took occasion to thank them for their kind thoughts for a
wife for Tom: but that considering the possibility there is of my having
no child, and what then I shall be able to leave him, I do think he may
expect in that respect a wife with more money, and so desired them to
think no more of it. Now the jest was Anthony mistakes and thinks that I
did all this while encourage him (from my thoughts of favour to Tom) to
pursue the match till Will Joyce tells him that he was mistaken. But
how he takes it I know not, but I endeavoured to tell it him in the most
respectful way that I could. This done with my wife by coach to my aunt
Wight's, where I left her, and I to the office, and that being done to
her again, and sat playing at cards after supper till 12 at night, and
so by moonshine home and to bed.

24th. This morning came my cozen Thos. Pepys the Executor, to speak with
me, and I had much talk with him both about matters of money which my
Lord Sandwich has of his and I am bond for, as also of my uncle Thomas,
who I hear by him do stand upon very high terms. Thence to my painter's,
and there I saw our pictures in the frames, which please me well. Thence
to the Wardrobe, where very merry with my Lady, and after dinner I
seat for the pictures thither, and mine is well liked; but she is much
offended with my wife's, and I am of her opinion, that it do much wrong
her; but I will have it altered. So home, in my way calling at Pope's
Head alley, and there bought me a pair of scissars and a brass square.
So home and to my study and to bed.

25th. At home and the office all the morning. Walking in the garden to
give the gardener directions what to do this year (for I intend to have
the garden handsome), Sir W. Pen came to me, and did break a business
to me about removing his son from Oxford to Cambridge to some private
college. I proposed Magdalene, but cannot name a tutor at present; but I
shall think and write about it. Thence with him to the Trinity-house to
dinner; where Sir Richard Brown (one of the clerks of the Council, and
who is much concerned against Sir N. Crisp's project of making a great
sasse

     [A kind of weir with flood-gate, or a navigable sluice.  This
     project is mentioned by Evelyn, January 16th, 1661-62, and Lysons'
     "Environs" vol. iv., p.  392.--B.]

in the King's lands about Deptford, to be a wett-dock to hold 200 sail
of ships. But the ground, it seems, was long since given by the King
to Sir Richard) was, and after the Trinity-house men had done their
business, the master, Sir William Rider, came to bid us welcome; and so
to dinner, where good cheer and discourse, but I eat a little too much
beef, which made me sick, and so after dinner we went to the office,
and there in a garden I went in the dark and vomited, whereby I did
much ease my stomach. Thence to supper with my wife to Sir W. Pen's, his
daughter being come home to-day, not being very well, and so while
we were at supper comes Mr. Moore with letters from my Lord Sandwich,
speaking of his lying still at Tangier, looking for the fleet; which, we
hope, is now in a good way thither. So home to write letters by the post
to-night, and then again to Sir W. Pen's to cards, where very merry, and
so home and to bed.

26th (Lord's day). To church in the morning, and then home to dinner
alone with my wife, and so both to church in the afternoon and home
again, and so to read and talk with my wife, and to supper and to
bed. It having been a very fine clear frosty day-God send us more of
them!--for the warm weather all this winter makes us fear a sick summer.
But thanks be to God, since my leaving drinking of wine, I do find
myself much better and do mind my business better, and do spend less
money, and less time lost in idle company.

27th. This morning, both Sir Williams and I by barge to Deptford-yard
to give orders in businesses there; and called on several ships, also
to give orders, and so to Woolwich, and there dined at Mr. Falconer's
of victuals we carried ourselves, and one Mr. Dekins, the father of my
Morena, of whom we have lately bought some hemp. That being done we went
home again. This morning, going to take water upon Tower-hill, we met
with three sleddes standing there to carry my Lord Monson and Sir H.
Mildmay and another, to the gallows and back again, with ropes about
their necks; which is to be repeated every year, this being the day of
their sentencing the King.

28th. This morning (after my musique practice with Mr. Berkenshaw) with
my wife to the Paynter's, where we staid very late to have her picture
mended, which at last is come to be very like her, and I think well
done; but the Paynter, though a very honest man, I found to be very
silly as to matter of skill in shadows, for we were long in discourse,
till I was almost angry to hear him talk so simply. So home to dinner
and then to the office, and so home for all night.

29th. To Westminster, and at the Parliament door spoke with Mr. Coventry
about business, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner, and thence to several
places, and so home, where I found Mrs. Pen and Mrs. Rooth and Smith,
who played at cards with my wife, and I did give them a barrel of
oysters, and had a pullet to supper for them, and when it was ready to
come to table, the foolish girl had not the manners to stay and sup with
me, but went away, which did vex me cruelly. So I saw her home, and then
to supper, and so to musique practice, and to bed.

30th. Fast-day for the murthering of the late King. I went to church,
and Mr. Mills made a good sermon upon David's words, "Who can lay his
hands upon the Lord's Anoynted and be guiltless?" So home and to dinner,
and employed all the afternoon in my chamber, setting things and papers
to rights, which pleased me very well, and I think I shall begin to take
pleasure in being at home and minding my business. I pray God I may, for
I find a great need thereof. At night to supper and to bed.

31st. All the morning, after musique practice, in my cellar, ordering
some alteracons therein, being much pleased with my new door into the
back yard. So to dinner, and all the afternoon thinking upon business.
I did by night set many things in order, which pleased me well, and puts
me upon a resolution of keeping within doors and minding my business and
the business of the office, which I pray God I may put in practice. At
night to bed.




FEBRUARY 1661-1662

February 1st. This morning within till 11 o'clock, and then with
Commissioner Pett to the office; and he staid there writing, while I and
Sir W. Pen walked in the garden talking about his business of putting
his son to Cambridge; and to that end I intend to write to-night to Dr.
Fairebrother, to give me an account of Mr. Burton of Magdalene. Thence
with Mr. Pett to the Paynter's; and he likes our pictures very well, and
so do I. Thence he and I to the Countess of Sandwich, to lead him to her
to kiss her hands: and dined with her, and told her the news (which Sir
W. Pen told me to-day) that express is come from my Lord with letters,
that by a great storm and tempest the mole of Argier is broken down, and
many of their ships sunk into the mole. So that God Almighty hath now
ended that unlucky business for us; which is very good news. After
dinner to the office, where we staid late, and so I home, and late
writing letters to my father and Dr. Fairebrother, and an angry letter
to my brother John for not writing to me, and so to bed.

2nd (Lord's day). To church in the morning, and then home and dined with
my wife, and so both of us to church again, where we had an Oxford man
give us a most impertinent sermon upon "Cast your bread upon the waters,
&c. So home to read, supper, and to prayers, and then to bed.

3rd. After musique practice I went to the office, and there with the two
Sir Williams all the morning about business, and at noon I dined with
Sir W. Batten with many friends more, it being his wedding-day, and
among other froliques, it being their third year, they had three pyes,
whereof the middlemost was made of an ovall form, in an ovall hole
within the other two, which made much mirth, and was called the
middle piece; and above all the rest, we had great striving to steal a
spooneful out of it; and I remember Mrs. Mills, the minister's wife, did
steal one for me and did give it me; and to end all, Mrs. Shippman did
fill the pye full of white wine, it holding at least a pint and a half,
and did drink it off for a health to Sir William and my Lady, it being
the greatest draft that ever I did see a woman drink in my life. Before
we had dined came Sir G. Carteret, and we went all three to the office
and did business there till night, and then to Sir W. Batten again,
and I went along with my lady and the rest of the gentlewomen to Major
Holmes's, and there we had a fine supper, among others, excellent
lobsters, which I never eat at this time of the year before. The Major
bath good lodgings at the Trinity House. Here we staid, and at last
home, and, being in my chamber, we do hear great noise of mirth at Sir
William Batten's, tearing the ribbands from my Lady and him.--[As if
they were a newly-married couple.]--So I to bed.

4th. To Westminster Hall, where it was full term. Here all the morning,
and at noon to my Lord Crew's, where one Mr. Tempter (an ingenious man
and a person of honour he seems to be) dined; and, discoursing of
the nature of serpents, he told us some that in the waste places of
Lancashire do grow to a great bigness, and that do feed upon larks,
which they take thus: They observe when the lark is soared to the
highest, and do crawl till they come to be just underneath them; and
there they place themselves with their mouths uppermost, and there,
as is conceived, they do eject poyson up to the bird; for the bird do
suddenly come down again in its course of a circle, and falls directly
into the mouth of the serpent; which is very strange. He is a great
traveller; and, speaking of the tarantula, he says that all the harvest
long (about which times they are most busy) there are fidlers go up and
down the fields every where, in expectation of being hired by those that
are stung. Thence to the office, where late, and so to my chamber and
then to bed, my mind a little troubled how to put things in order to my
advantage in the office in readiness to the Duke's orders lately sent to
us, and of which we are to treat at the office to-morrow morning. This
afternoon, going into the office, one met me and did serve a subpoena
upon me for one Field, whom we did commit to prison the other day for
some ill words he did give the office. The like he had for others, but
we shall scour him for it.

5th. Early at the office. Sir G. Carteret, the two Sir Williams and
myself all alone reading of the Duke's institutions for the settlement
of our office, whereof we read as much as concerns our own duties, and
left the other officers for another time. I did move several things for
my purpose, and did ease my mind. At noon Sir W. Pen dined with me, and
after dinner he and I and my wife to the Theatre, and went in, but being
very early we went out again to the next door, and drank some Rhenish
wine and sugar, and so to the House again, and there saw "Rule a Wife
and have a Wife" very well done. And here also I did look long upon my
Lady Castlemaine, who, notwithstanding her late sickness, continues a
great beauty. Home and supped with Sir W. Pen and played at cards with
him, and so home and to bed, putting some cataplasm to my.... which
begins to swell again.

6th. At my musique practice, and so into my cellar to my workmen, and I
am very much pleased with my alteracon there. About noon comes my uncle
Thomas to me to ask for his annuity, and I did tell him my mind freely.
We had some high words, but I was willing to end all in peace, and so I
made him' dine with me, and I have hopes to work my end upon him. After
dinner the barber trimmed me, and so to the office, where I do begin to
be exact in my duty there and exacting my privileges, and shall continue
to do so. None but Sir W. Batten and me here to-night, and so we broke
up early, and I home and to my chamber to put things in order, and so to
bed. My swelling I think do begin to go away again.

7th. Among my workmen this morning. By and by by water to Westminster
with Commissioner Pett (landing my wife at Black Friars) where I
hear the prisoners in the Tower that are to die are come to the
Parliament-house this morning. To the Wardrobe to dinner with my Lady;
where a civitt cat, parrot, apes, and many other things are come from my
Lord by Captain Hill, who dined with my Lady with us to-day. Thence to
the Paynter's, and am well pleased with our pictures. So by coach
home, where I found the joyners putting up my chimney-piece in the
dining-room, which pleases me well, only the frame for a picture they
have made so massy and heavy that I cannot tell what to do with it. This
evening came my she cozen Porter to see us (the first time that we had
seen her since we came to this end of the town) and after her Mr. Hart,
who both staid with us a pretty while and so went away. By and by,
hearing that Mr. Turner was much troubled at what I do in the office,
and do give ill words to Sir W. Pen and others of me, I am much troubled
in my mind, and so went to bed; not that I fear him at all, but the
natural aptness I have to be troubled at any thing that crosses me.

8th. All the morning in the cellar with the colliers, removing the coles
out of the old cole hole into the new one, which cost me 8s. the doing;
but now the cellar is done and made clean, it do please me exceedingly,
as much as any thing that was ever yet done to my house. I pray God keep
me from setting my mind too much upon it. About 3 o'clock the colliers
having done I went up to dinner (my wife having often urged me to come,
but my mind is so set upon these things that I cannot but be with the
workmen to see things done to my mind, which if I am not there is seldom
done), and so to the office, and thence to talk with Sir W. Pen,
walking in the dark in the garden some turns, he telling me of the ill
management of our office, and how Wood the timber merchant and others
were very knaves, which I am apt to believe. Home and wrote letters to
my father and my brother John, and so to bed. Being a little chillish,
intending to take physique to-morrow morning.

9th (Lord's day). I took physique this day, and was all day in my
chamber, talking with my wife about her laying out of L20, which I
had long since promised her to lay out in clothes against Easter for
herself, and composing some ayres, God forgive me! At night to prayers
and to bed.

10th. Musique practice a good while, then to Paul's Churchyard, and
there I met with Dr. Fuller's "England's Worthys," the first time that
I ever saw it; and so I sat down reading in it, till it was two o'clock
before I, thought of the time going, and so I rose and went home to
dinner, being much troubled that (though he had some discourse with me
about my family and arms) he says nothing at all, nor mentions us either
in Cambridgeshire or Norfolk. But I believe, indeed, our family were
never considerable. At home all the afternoon, and at night to bed.

11th. Musique, then my brother Tom came, and spoke to him about selling
of Sturtlow, he consents to, and I think will be the best for him,
considering that he needs money, and has no mind to marry. Dined at
home, and at the office in the afternoon. So home to musique, my mind
being full of our alteracons in the garden, and my getting of things
in the office settled to the advantage of my clerks, which I found Mr.
Turner much troubled at, and myself am not quiet in mind. But I hope by
degrees to bring it to it. At night begun to compose songs, and begin
with "Gaze not on Swans." So to bed.

12th. This morning, till four in the afternoon, I spent abroad, doing of
many and considerable businesses at Mr. Phillips the lawyer, with Prior,
Westminster, my Lord Crew's, Wardrobe, &c., and so home about the time
of day to dinner with my mind very highly contented with my day's work,
wishing I could do so every day. Then to my chamber drawing up writings,
in expectation of my uncle Thomas corning. So to my musique and then to
bed. This night I had half a 100 poor Jack--[The "poor john" is a hake
salted and dried. It is frequently referred to in old authors as poor
fare.]--sent me by Mr. Adis.

13th. After musique comes my cozen Tom Pepys the executor, and he did
stay with me above two hours discoursing about the difference between my
uncle Thomas and me, and what way there may be to make it up, and I have
hopes we may do good of it for all this. Then to dinner, and then came
Mr. Kennard, and he and I and Sir W. Pen went up and down his house
to view what may be the contrivance and alterations there to the best
advantage. So home, where Mr. Blackburne (whom I have not seen a long
time) was come to speak with me, and among other discourse he do tell me
plain of the corruption of all our Treasurer's officers, and that they
hardly pay any money under ten per cent.; and that the other day, for a
mere assignation of L200 to some counties, they took L15 which is very
strange. So to the office till night, and then home and to write by the
post about many businesses, and so to bed. Last night died the Queen of
Bohemia.

14th (Valentine's day). I did this day purposely shun to be seen at Sir
W. Batten's, because I would not have his daughter to be my Valentine,
as she was the last year, there being no great friendship between us
now, as formerly. This morning in comes W. Bowyer, who was my wife's
Valentine, she having, at which I made good sport to myself, held her
hands all the morning, that she might not see the paynters that were at
work in gilding my chimney-piece and pictures in my diningroom. By and
by she and I by coach with him to Westminster, by the way leaving at
Tom's and my wife's father's lodgings each of them some poor Jack, and
some she carried to my father Bowyer's, where she staid while I walked
in the Hall, and there among others met with Serj'. Pierce, and I took
him aside to drink a cup of ale, and he told me the basest thing of Mr.
Montagu's and his man Eschar's going away in debt, that I am troubled
and ashamed, but glad to be informed of. He thinks he has left L1000 for
my Lord to pay, and that he has not laid out L3,000 Out of the L5,000
for my Lord's use, and is not able to make an account of any of the
money. My wife and I to dinner to the Wardrobe, and then to talk with my
Lady, and so by coach, it raining hard, home, and so to do business and
to bed.

15th. With the two Sir Williams to the Trinity-house; and there in
their society had the business debated of Sir Nicholas Crisp's sasse
at Deptford. Then to dinner, and after dinner I was sworn a Younger
Brother; Sir W. Rider being Deputy Master for my Lord of Sandwich; and
after I was sworn, all the Elder Brothers shake me by the hand: it is
their custom, it seems. Hence to the office, and so to Sir Wm. Batten's
all three, and there we staid till late talking together in complaint
of the Treasurer's instruments. Above all Mr. Waith, at whose child's
christening our wives and we should have been to-day, but none of them
went and I am glad of it, for he is a very rogue, So home, and drew up
our report for Sir N. Crispe's sasse, and so to bed. No news yet of our
fleet gone to Tangier, which we now begin to think long.

16th (Lord's day). To church this morning, and so home and to dinner.
In the afternoon I walked to St. Bride's to church, to hear Dr. Jacomb
preach upon the recovery, and at the request of Mrs. Turner, who came
abroad this day, the first time since her long sickness. He preached
upon David's words, "I shall not die, but live, and declare the works
of the Lord," and made a pretty good sermon, though not extraordinary.
After sermon I led her home, and sat with her, and there was the Dr. got
before us; but strange what a command he hath got over Mrs. Turner, who
was so carefull to get him what he would, after his preaching, to drink,
and he, with a cunning gravity, knows how to command, and had it, and
among other things told us that he heard more of the Common Prayer this
afternoon (while he stood in the vestry, before he went up into the
pulpitt) than he had heard this twenty years. Thence to my uncle Wight
to meet my wife, and with other friends of hers and his met by chance we
were very merry, and supped, and so home, not being very well through my
usual pain got by cold. So to prayers and to bed, and there had a good
draft of mulled ale brought me.

17th. This morning, both Sir Williams, myself, and Captain Cocke and
Captain Tinker of the Convertine, which we are going to look upon (being
intended to go with these ships fitting for the East Indys), down to
Deptford; and thence, after being on shipboard, to Woolwich, and there
eat something. The Sir Williams being unwilling to eat flesh,

     [In Lent, of which the observance, intermitted for nineteen years,
     was now reviving.  We have seen that Pepys, as yet, had not cast off
     all show of Puritanism.  "In this month the Fishmongers' Company
     petitioned the King that Lent might be kept, because they had
     provided abundance of fish for this season, and their prayer was
     granted."--Rugge.--B.]

Captain Cocke and I had a breast of veal roasted. And here I drank wine
upon necessity, being ill for want of it, and I find reason to fear that
by my too sudden leaving off wine, I do contract many evils upon myself.
Going and coming we played at gleeke, and I won 9s. 6d. clear, the
most that ever I won in my life. I pray God it may not tempt me to play
again. Being come home again we went to the Dolphin, where Mr. Alcock
and my Lady and Mrs. Martha Batten came to us, and after them many
others (as it always is where Sir W. Batten goes), and there we had some
pullets to supper. I eat though I was not very well, and after that left
them, and so home and to bed.

18th. Lay long in bed, then up to the office (we having changed our days
to Tuesday and Saturday in the morning and Thursday at night), and by
and by with Sir W. Pen, Mr. Kennard, and others to survey his house
again, and to contrive for the alterations there, which will be handsome
I think. After we had done at the office, I walked to the Wardrobe,
where with Mr. Moore and Mr. Lewis Phillips after dinner we did agree
upon the agreement between us and Prior and I did seal and sign it.
Having agreed with Sir Wm. Pen and my wife to meet them at the Opera,
and finding by my walking in the streets, which were every where full
of brick-battes and tyles flung down by the extraordinary wind the last
night (such as hath not been in memory before, unless at the death
of the late Protector), that it was dangerous to go out of doors; and
hearing how several persons had been killed to-day by the fall of things
in the streets, and that the pageant in Fleetstreet is most of it blown
down, and hath broke down part of several houses, among others Dick
Brigden's; and that one Lady Sanderson, a person of quality in Covent
Garden, was killed by the fall of the house, in her bed, last night;
I sent my boy home to forbid them to go forth. But he bringing me
word that they are gone, I went thither and there saw "The Law against
Lovers," a good play and well performed, especially the little girl's
(whom I never saw act before) dancing and singing; and were it not for
her, the loss of Roxalana would spoil the house. So home and to musique,
and so to bed.

19th. Musique practice: thence to the Trinity House to conclude upon our
report of Sir N. Crisp's project, who came to us to answer objections,
but we did give him no ear, but are resolved to stand to our report;
though I could wish we had shewn him more justice and had heard him.
Thence to the Wardrobe and dined with my Lady, and talked after dinner
as I used to do, and so home and up to my chamber to put things in order
to my good content, and so to musique practice.

20th. This morning came Mr. Child to see me, and set me something to my
Theorbo, and by and by come letters from Tangier from my Lord, telling
me how, upon a great defete given to the Portuguese there by the Moors,
he had put in 300 men into the town, and so he is in possession, of
which we are very glad, because now the Spaniard's designs of hindering
our getting the place are frustrated. I went with the letter inclosed
to my Lord Chancellor to the House of Lords, and did give it him in the
House. And thence to the Wardrobe with my Lady's, and there could not
stay dinner, but went by promise to Mr. Savill's, and there sat the
first time for my picture in little, which pleaseth me well. So to the
office till night and then home.

     ["Sunday, Jan.  12.  This morning, the Portuguese, 140 horse in
     Tangier, made a salley into the country for booty, whereof they had
     possessed about 400 cattle, 30 camels, and some horses, and 35 women
     and girls, and being six miles distant from Tangier, were
     intercepted by 100 Moors with harquebusses, who in the first charge
     killed the Aidill with a shot in the head, whereupon the rest of the
     Portuguese ran, and in the pursuit 51 were slain, whereof were 11 of
     the knights, besides the Aidill.  The horses of the 51 were also
     taken by the Moors, and all the booty relieved.

     "Tuesday, Jan. 14.  This morning, Mr. Mules came to me from the
     Governor, for the assistance of some of our men into the castle.

     "Thursday, Jan. 16.  About 80 men out of my own ship, and the
     Princess, went into Tangier, into the lower castle, about four of
     the clock in the afternoon.

     "Friday, Jan. 17.  In the morning, by eight o'clock, the 'Martyr'
     came in from Cales (Cadiz) with provisions, and about ten a clock I
     sent Sir Richard Stayner, with 120 men, besides officers, to the
     assistance of the Governor, into Tangier."--Lord Sandwich's Journal,
     in Kennet's Register.

     On the 23rd, Lord Sandwich put one hundred more men into Tangier; on
     the 29th and 30th, Lord Peterborough and his garrison arrived from
     England, and received possession from the Portuguese; and, on the
     31st, Sir Richard Stayner and the seamen re-embarked on board Lord
     Sandwich's fleet.--B.]

21st, All the morning putting things in my house in order, and packing
up glass to send into the country to my father, and books to my brother
John, and then to my Lord Crew's to dinner; and thence to Mr. Lewes
Philip's chamber, and there at noon with him for business, and received
L80 upon Jaspar Trice's account, and so home with it, and so to my
chamber for all this evening, and then to bed.

22nd. At the office busy all the morning, and thence to dinner to my
Lady Sandwich's, and thence with Mr. Moore to our Attorney, Wellpoole's,
and there found that Godfry has basely taken out a judgment against us
for the L40, for which I am vexed. And thence to buy a pair of stands
and a hanging shelf for my wife's chamber, and so home, and thither came
Mr. Savill with the pictures, and we hung them up in our dining-room. It
comes now to appear very handsome with all my pictures. This evening I
wrote letters to my father; among other things acquainting him with the
unhappy accident which hath happened lately to my Lord of Dorset's
two oldest sons, who, with two Belasses and one Squire Wentworth, were
lately apprehended for killing and robbing of a tanner about Newington'
on Wednesday last, and are all now in Newgate. I am much troubled
for it, and for the grief and disgrace it brings to their familys and
friends. After this, having got a very great cold, I got something warm
to-night, and so to bed.

23rd (Lord's day). My cold being increased, I staid at home all day,
pleasing myself with my dining-room, now graced with pictures, and
reading of Dr. Fuller's "Worthys." So I spent the day, and at night
comes Sir W. Pen and supped and talked with me. This day by God's mercy
I am 29 years of age, and in very good health, and like to live and get
an estate; and if I have a heart to be contented, I think I may reckon
myself as happy a man as any is in the world, for which God be praised.
So to prayers and to bed.

24th. Long with Mr. Berkenshaw in the morning at my musique practice;
finishing my song of "Gaze not on Swans," in two parts, which pleases
me well, and I did give him L5 for this month or five weeks that he hath
taught me, which is a great deal of money and troubled me to part with
it. Thence to the Paynter s, and set again for my picture in little, and
thence over the water to Southwark to Mr. Berkenshaw's house, and there
sat with him all the afternoon, he showing me his great card of the body
of musique, which he cries up for a rare thing, and I do believe it cost
much pains, but is not so useful as he would have it. Then we sat down
and set "Nulla, nulla sit formido," and he has set it very finely. So
home and to supper, and then called Will up, and chid him before my wife
for refusing to go to church with the maids yesterday, and telling his
mistress that he would not be made a slave of, which vexes me. So to
bed.

25th. All the morning at the office. At noon with Mr. Moore to the
Coffee-house, where among other things the great talk was of the effects
of this late great wind; and I heard one say that he had five great
trees standing together blown down; and, beginning to lop them, one of
them, as soon as the lops were cut off, did, by the weight of the root,
rise again and fasten. We have letters from the forest of Deane, that
above 1000 Oakes and as many beeches are blown down in one walk there.
And letters from my father tell me of L20 hurt done to us at Brampton.
This day in the news-book I find that my Lord Buckhurst and his fellows
have printed their case as they did give it in upon examination to a
justice of Peace, wherein they make themselves a very good tale that
they were in pursuit of thieves, and that they took this man for one of
them, and so killed him; and that he himself confessed it was the first
time of his robbing; and that he did pay dearly for it, for he was a
dead man. But I doubt things will be proved otherwise, as they say. Home
to dinner, and by and by comes Mr. Hunt and his wife to see us and staid
a good, while with us. Then parted, and I to my study in the office. The
first time since the alteracon that I have begun to do business myself
there, and I think I shall be well pleased with it. At night home to
supper and to bed.

26th. Mr. Berkenshaw with me all the morning composing of musique to
"This cursed jealousy, what is it," a song of Sir W. Davenant's. After
dinner I went to my Bookseller's, W. Joyce's, and several other places
to pay my debts and do business, I being resolved to cast up my accounts
within a day or two, for I fear I have run out too far. In coming home
I met with a face I knew and challenged him, thinking it had been one of
the Theatre musicians, and did enquire for a song of him, but finding
it a mistake, and that it was a gentleman that comes sometimes to the
office, I was much ashamed, but made a pretty good excuse that I took
him for a gentleman of Gray's Inn who sings well, and so parted. Home
for all night and set things in order and so to bed.

27th. This morning came Mr. Berkenshaw to me and in our discourse I,
finding that he cries up his rules for most perfect (though I do grant
them to be very good, and the best I believe that ever yet were made),
and that I could not persuade him to grant wherein they were somewhat
lame, we fell to angry words, so that in a pet he flung out of my
chamber and I never stopped him, having intended to put him off today,
whether this had happened or no, because I think I have all the rules
that he hath to give. And so there remains not the practice now to do me
good, and it is not for me to continue with him at; L5 per month. So I
settled to put all his rules in fair order in a book, which was my work
all the morning till dinner. After dinner to the office till late at
night, and so home to write by the post, and so to bed.

28th. The boy failing to call us up as I commanded, I was angry, and
resolved to whip him for that and many other faults, to-day. Early with
Sir W. Pen by coach to Whitehall, to the Duke of York's chamber, and
there I presented him from my Lord a fine map of Tangier, done by one
Captain Beckman, a Swede, that is with my Lord. We staid looking it over
a great while with the Duke after he was ready. Thence I by water to the
Painter's, and there sat again for my face in little, and thence home to
dinner, and so at home all the afternoon. Then came Mr. Moore and
staid and talked with me, and then I to the office, there being all the
Admiralty papers brought hither this afternoon from Mr. Blackburne's,
where they have lain all this while ever since my coming into this
office. This afternoon Mr. Hater received half a year's salary for me,
so that now there is not owing me but this quarter, which will be out
the next month. Home, and to be as good as my word, I bade Will get me
a rod, and he and I called the boy up to one of the upper rooms of the
Comptroller's house towards the garden, and there I reckoned all his
faults, and whipped him soundly, but the rods were so small that I fear
they did not much hurt to him, but only to my arm, which I am already,
within a quarter of an hour, not able to stir almost. After supper to
bed.




MARCH 1661-1662

March 1st. This morning I paid Sir W. Batten L40, which I have owed him
this half year, having borrowed it of him. Then to the office all the
morning, so dined at home, and after dinner comes my uncle Thomas, with
whom I had some high words of difference, but ended quietly, though I
fear I shall do no good by fair means upon him. Thence my wife and I by
coach, first to see my little picture that is a drawing, and thence to
the Opera, and there saw "Romeo and Juliet," the first time it was ever
acted; but it is a play of itself the worst that ever I heard in my
life, and the worst acted that ever I saw these people do, and I am
resolved to go no more to see the first time of acting, for they were
all of them out more or less. Thence home, and after supper and wrote by
the post, I settled to what I had long intended, to cast up my accounts
with myself, and after much pains to do it and great fear, I do find
that I am 1500 in money beforehand in the world, which I was afraid I
was not, but I find that I had spent above L250 this last half year,
which troubles me much, but by God's blessing I am resolved to take up,
having furnished myself with all things for a great while, and to-morrow
to think upon some rules and obligations upon myself to walk by. So with
my mind eased of a great deal of trouble, though with no great content
to find myself above L100 worse now than I was half a year ago, I went
to bed.

2nd (Lord's day). With my mind much eased talking long in bed with my
wife about our frugall life for the time to come, proposing to her what
I could and would do if I were worth L2,000, that is, be a knight, and
keep my coach, which pleased her,

     [Lord Braybrooke wrote, "This reminds me of a story of my father's,
     when he was of Merton College, and heard Bowen the porter wish that
     he had L100 a-year, to enable him to keep a couple of hunters and a
     pack of foxhounds."]

and so I do hope we shall hereafter live to save something, for I
am resolved to keep myself by rules from expenses. To church in the
morning: none in the pew but myself. So home to dinner, and after
dinner came Sir William and talked with me till church time, and then to
church, where at our going out I was at a loss by Sir W. Pen's putting
me upon it whether to take my wife or Mrs. Martha (who alone was there),
and I began to take my wife, but he jogged me, and so I took Martha, and
led her down before him and my wife. So set her at home, and Sir William
and my wife and I to walk in the garden, and anon hearing that Sir G.
Carteret had sent to see whether we were at home or no, Sir William
and I went to his house, where we waited a good while, they being at
prayers, and by and by we went up to him; there the business was about
hastening the East India ships, about which we are to meet to-morrow in
the afternoon. So home to my house, and Sir William supped with me, and
so to bed.

3rd. All the morning at home about business with my brother Tom, and
then with Mr. Moore, and then I set to make some strict rules for my
future practice in my expenses, which I did bind myself in the presence
of God by oath to observe upon penalty therein set down, and I do not
doubt but hereafter to give a good account of my time and to grow rich,
for I do find a great deal more of content in these few days, that I do
spend well about my business, than in all the pleasure of a whole week,
besides the trouble which I remember I always have after that for the
expense of my money. Dined at home, and then up to my chamber again
about business, and so to the office about despatching of the East India
ships, where we staid till 8 at night, and then after I had been at Sir
W. Pen's awhile discoursing with him and Mr. Kenard the joiner about
the new building in his house, I went home, where I found a vessel of
oysters sent me from Chatham, so I fell to eat some and then to supper,
and so after the barber had done to bed. I am told that this day the
Parliament hath voted 2s. per annum for every chimney in England, as a
constant revenue for ever to the Crown.

     [Although fumage or smoke money was as old as the Conquest, the
     first parliamentary levy of hearth or chimney money was by statute
     13 and 14 Car. II., c. 10, which gave the king an hereditary revenue
     of two shillings annually upon every hearth in all houses paying
     church or poor rate.  This act was repealed by statute I William and
     Mary, c. 10, it being declared in the preamble as "not only a great
     oppression to the poorer sort, but a badge of slavery upon the whole
     people, exposing every man's house to be entered into and searched
     at pleasure by persons unknown to him."]

4th. At the office all the morning, dined at home at noon, and then to
the office again in the afternoon to put things in order there, my mind
being very busy in settling the office to ourselves, I having now got
distinct offices for the other two. By and by Sir W. Pen and I and my
wife in his coach to Moore Fields, where we walked a great while, though
it was no fair weather and cold; and after our walk we went to the
Pope's Head, and eat cakes and other fine things, and so home, and I up
to my chamber to read and write, and so to bed.

5th. In the morning to the Painter's about my little picture. Thence to
Tom's about business, and so to the pewterer's, to buy a poore's-box to
put my forfeits in, upon breach of my late vows. So to the Wardrobe and
dined, and thence home and to my office, and there sat looking over my
papers of my voyage, when we fetched over the King, and tore so many of
these that were worth nothing, as filled my closet as high as my knees.
I staid doing this till 10 at night, and so home and to bed.

6th. Up early, my mind full of business, then to the office, where
the two Sir Williams and I spent the morning passing the victualler's
accounts, the first I have had to do withal. Then home, where my Uncle
Thomas (by promise and his son Tom) were come to give me his answer
whether he would have me go to law or arbitracon with him, but he is
unprovided to answer me, and desires two days more. I left them to dine
with my wife, and myself to Mr. Gauden and the two knights at dinner
at the Dolphin, and thence after dinner to the office back again till
night, we having been these four or five days very full of business, and
I thank God I am well pleased with it, and hope I shall continue of that
temper, which God grant. So after a little being at Sir W. Batten's with
Sir G. Carteret talking, I went home, and so to my chamber, and then to
bed, my mind somewhat troubled about Brampton affairs. This night my
new camelott riding coat to my coloured cloth suit came home. More news
to-day of our losses at Brampton by the late storm.

7th. Early to White Hall to the chappell, where by Mr. Blagrave's means
I got into his pew, and heard Dr. Creeton, the great Scotchman, preach
before the King, and Duke and Duchess, upon the words of Micah:--"Roule
yourselves in dust." He made a most learned sermon upon the words; but,
in his application, the most comical man that ever I heard in my life.
Just such a man as Hugh Peters; saying that it had been better for the
poor Cavalier never to have come with the King into England again; for
he that hath the impudence to deny obedience to the lawful magistrate,
and to swear to the oath of allegiance, &c., was better treated
now-a-days in Newgate, than a poor Royalist, that hath suffered all his
life for the King, is at White Hall among his friends. He discoursed
much against a man's lying with his wife in Lent, saying that he might
be as incontinent during that time with his own wife as at another time
in another man's bed. Thence with Mr. Moore to Whitehall and walked
a little, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner, and so home to the office
about business till late at night by myself, and so home and to bed.

8th. By coach with both Sir Williams to Westminster; this being a great
day there in the House to pass the business for chimney-money, which was
done. In the Hall I met with Serjeant Pierce; and he and I to drink
a cup of ale at the Swan, and there he told me how my Lady Monk hath
disposed of all the places which Mr. Edwd. Montagu hoped to have had,
as he was Master of the Horse to the Queen; which I am afraid will undo
him, because he depended much upon the profit of what he should make by
these places. He told me, also, many more scurvy stories of him and his
brother Ralph, which troubles me to hear of persons of honour as they
are. About one o'clock with both Sir Williams and another, one Sir Rich.
Branes, to the Trinity House, but came after they had dined, so we had
something got ready for us. Here Sir W. Batten was taken with a fit of
coughing that lasted a great while and made him very ill, and so he went
home sick upon it. Sir W. Pen. and I to the office, whither afterward
came Sir G. Carteret; and we sent for Sir Thos. Allen, one of the
Aldermen of the City, about the business of one Colonel Appesley, whom
we had taken counterfeiting of bills with all our hands and the officers
of the yards, so well counterfeited that I should never have mistrusted
them. We staid about this business at the office till ten at night,
and at last did send him with a constable to the Counter; and did give
warrants for the seizing of a complice of his, one Blinkinsopp. So home
and wrote to my father, and so to bed.

9th (Lord's day). Church in the morning: dined at home, then to Church
again and heard Mr. Naylor, whom I knew formerly of Keye's College, make
a most eloquent sermon. Thence to Sir W. Batten's to see how he did,
then to walk an hour with Sir W. Pen in the garden: then he in to supper
with me at my house, and so to prayers and to bed.

10th. At the office doing business all the morning, and my wife being
gone to buy some things in the city I dined with Sir W. Batten, and in
the afternoon met Sir W. Pen at the Treasury Office, and there paid off
the Guift, where late at night, and so called in and eat a bit at Sir W.
Batten's again, and so home and to bed, to-morrow being washing day.

11th. At the office all the morning, and all the afternoon rummaging of
papers in my chamber, and tearing some and sorting others till late
at night, and so to bed, my wife being not well all this day. This
afternoon Mrs. Turner and The. came to see me, her mother not having
been abroad many a day before, but now is pretty well again and has made
me one of the first visits.

12th. At the office from morning till night putting of papers in order,
that so I may have my office in an orderly condition. I took much pains
in sorting and folding of papers. Dined at home, and there came Mrs.
Goldsborough about her old business, but I did give her a short answer
and sent away. This morning we had news from Mr. Coventry, that Sir
G. Downing (like a perfidious rogue, though the action is good and of
service to the King,

     [("And hail the treason though we hate the traitor.") On the 21st
     Charles returned his formal thanks to the States for their
     assistance in the matter.--B.]

yet he cannot with any good conscience do it) hath taken Okey,
Corbet, and Barkestead at Delfe, in Holland, and sent them home in the
Blackmore. Sir W. Pen, talking to me this afternoon of what a strange
thing it is for Downing to do this, he told me of a speech he made
to the Lords States of Holland, telling them to their faces that he
observed that he was not received with the respect and observance now,
that he was when he came from the traitor and rebell Cromwell: by whom,
I am sure, he hath got all he hath in the world,--and they know it too.

     [Charles, when residing at Brussels, went to the Hague at night to
     pay a secret visit to his sister, the Princess of Orange.  After his
     arrival, "an old reverend-like man, with a long grey beard and
     ordinary grey clothes," entered the inn and begged for a private
     interview.  He then fell on his knees, and pulling off his disguise,
     discovered himself to be Mr. Downing, then ambassador from Cromwell
     to the States-General.  He informed Charles that the Dutch had
     guaranteed to the English Commonwealth to deliver him into their
     hands should he ever set foot in their territory.  This warning
     probably saved Charles's liberty.--M. B.]

13th. All day, either at the office or at home, busy about business till
late at night, I having lately followed my business much, I find great
pleasure in it, and a growing content.

14th. At the office all the morning. At noon Sir W. Pen and I making a
bargain with the workmen about his house, at which I did see things not
so well contracted for as I would have, and I was vexed and made him
so too to see me so critical in the agreement. Home to dinner. In the
afternoon came the German Dr. Kuffler,

     [This is the secret of Cornelius van Drebbel (1572-1634), which is
     referred to again by Pepys on November 11th, 1663.  Johannes
     Siberius Kuffler was originally a dyer at Leyden, who married
     Drebbel's daughter. In the "Calendar of State Papers, Domestic,"
     1661-62 (p. 327), is the following entry: "Request of Johannes
     Siberius Kuffler and Jacob Drebble for a trial of their father
     Cornelius Drebble's secret of sinking or destroying ships in a
     moment; and if it succeed, for a reward of L10,000. The secret was
     left them by will, to preserve for the English crown before any
     other state."  Cornelius van Drebbel settled in London, where he
     died. James I.  took some interest in him, and is said to have
     interfered when he was in prison in Austria and in danger of
     execution.]

to discourse with us about his engine to blow up ships. We doubted not
the matter of fact, it being tried in Cromwell's time, but the safety
of carrying them in ships; but he do tell us, that when he comes to tell
the King his secret (for none but the Kings, successively, and their
heirs must know it), it will appear to be of no danger at all. We
concluded nothing; but shall discourse with the Duke of York to-morrow
about it. In the afternoon, after we had done with him, I went to speak
with my uncle Wight and found my aunt to have been ill a good while of
a miscarriage, I staid and talked with her a good while. Thence home,
where I found that Sarah the maid had been very ill all day, and my wife
fears that she will have an ague, which I am much troubled for. Thence
to my lute, upon which I have not played a week or two, and trying over
the two songs of "Nulla, nulla," &c., and "Gaze not on Swans," which Mr.
Berkenshaw set for me a little while ago, I find them most incomparable
songs as he has set them, of which I am not a little proud, because I
am sure none in the world has them but myself, not so much as he himself
that set them. So to bed.

15th. With Sir G. Carteret and both the Sir Williams at Whitehall to
wait on the Duke in his chamber, which we did about getting money for
the Navy and other things. So back again to the office all the morning.
Thence to the Exchange to hire a ship for the Maderas, but could get
none. Then home to dinner, and Sir G. Carteret and I all the afternoon
by ourselves upon business in the office till late at night. So to write
letters and home to bed. Troubled at my maid's being ill.

16th (Lord's day). This morning, till churches were done, I spent going
from one church to another and hearing a bit here and a bit there. So
to the Wardrobe to dinner with the young Ladies, and then into my Lady's
chamber and talked with her a good while, and so walked to White Hall,
an hour or two in the Park, which is now very pleasant. Here the King
and Duke came to see their fowl play. The Duke took very civil notice of
me. So walked home, calling at Tom's, giving him my resolution about
my boy's livery. Here I spent an hour walking in the garden with Sir W.
Pen, and then my wife and I thither to supper, where his son William is
at home not well. But all things, I fear, do not go well with them; they
look discontentedly, but I know not what ails them. Drinking of cold
small beer here I fell ill, and was forced to go out and vomit, and so
was well again and went home by and by to bed. Fearing that Sarah would
continue ill, wife and I removed this night to our matted chamber and
lay there.

17th. All the morning at the office by myself about setting things in
order there, and so at noon to the Exchange to see and be seen, and so
home to dinner and then to the office again till night, and then home
and after supper and reading a while to bed. Last night the Blackmore
pink

     [A "pink" was a form of vessel now obsolete, and had a very narrow
     stern. The "Blackmoor" was a sixth-rate of twelve guns, built at
     Chatham by Captain Tayler in 1656.]

brought the three prisoners, Barkestead, Okey, and Corbet, to the Tower,
being taken at Delfe in Holland; where, the Captain tells me, the Dutch
were a good while before they could be persuaded to let them go, they
being taken prisoners in their land. But Sir G. Downing would not
be answered so: though all the world takes notice of him for a most
ungrateful villain for his pains.

18th. All the morning at the office with Sir W. Pen. Dined at home, and
Luellin and Blurton with me. After dinner to the office again, where Sir
G. Carteret and we staid awhile, and then Sir W. Pen and I on board some
of the ships now fitting for East Indys and Portugall, to see in what
forwardness they are, and so back home again, and I write to my father
by the post about Brampton Court, which is now coming on. But that
which troubles me is that my Father has now got an ague that I fear may
endanger his life. So to bed.

19th. All the morning and afternoon at my office putting things in
order, and in the evening I do begin to digest my uncle the Captain's
papers into one book, which I call my Brampton book, for the clearer
understanding things how they are with us. So home and supper and to
bed. This noon came a letter from T. Pepys, the turner, in answer to one
of mine the other day to him, wherein I did cheque him for not coming to
me, as he had promised, with his and his father's resolucion about the
difference between us. But he writes to me in the very same slighting
terms that I did to him, without the least respect at all, but word for
word as I did him, which argues a high and noble spirit in him, though
it troubles me a little that he should make no more of my anger, yet I
cannot blame him for doing so, he being the elder brother's son, and not
depending upon me at all.

20th. At my office all the morning, at noon to the Exchange, and so home
to dinner, and then all the afternoon at the office till late at night,
and so home and to bed, my mind in good ease when I mind business, which
methinks should be a good argument to me never to do otherwise.

21st. With Sir W. Batten by water to Whitehall, and he to Westminster. I
went to see Sarah and my Lord's lodgings, which are now all in dirt, to
be repaired against my Lord's coming from sea with the Queen. Thence
to Westminster Hall; and there walked up and down and heard the great
difference that hath been between my Lord Chancellor and my Lord of
Bristol, about a proviso that my Lord Chancellor would have brought into
the Bill for Conformity, that it shall be in the power of the King, when
he sees fit, to dispense with the Act of Conformity; and though it be
carried in the House of Lords, yet it is believed it will hardly pass
in the Commons. Here I met with Chetwind, Parry, and several others, and
went to a little house behind the Lords' house to drink some wormwood
ale, which doubtless was a bawdy house, the mistress of the house having
the look and dress: Here we staid till noon and then parted, I by water
to the Wardrobe to meet my wife, but my Lady and they had dined, and so
I dined with the servants, and then up to my Lady, and there staid and
talked a good while, and then parted and walked into Cheapside, and
there saw my little picture, for which I am to sit again the next week.
So home, and staid late writing at my office, and so home and to bed,
troubled that now my boy is also fallen sick of an ague we fear.

22nd. At the office all the morning. At noon Sir Williams both and I by
water down to the Lewes, Captain Dekins, his ship, a merchantman, where
we met the owners, Sir John Lewes and Alderman Lewes, and several
other great merchants; among others one Jefferys, a merry man that is a
fumbler, and he and I called brothers, and he made all the mirth in the
company. We had a very fine dinner, and all our wives' healths, with
seven or nine guns apiece; and exceeding merry we were, and so home by
barge again, and I vexed to find Griffin leave the office door open, and
had a design to have carried away the screw or the carpet in revenge to
him, but at last I would not, but sent for him and chid him, and so to
supper and to bed, having drank a great deal of wine.

23rd (Lord's day). This morning was brought me my boy's fine livery,
which is very handsome, and I do think to keep to black and gold lace
upon gray, being the colour of my arms, for ever. To church in the
morning, and so home with Sir W. Batten, and there eat some boiled great
oysters, and so home, and while I was at dinner with my wife I was sick,
and was forced to vomit up my oysters again, and then I was well. By
and by a coach came to call me by my appointment, and so my wife and
I carried to Westminster to Mrs. Hunt's, and I to Whitehall, Worcester
House, and to my Lord Treasurer's to have found Sir G. Carteret, but
missed in all these places. So back to White Hall, and there met with
Captn. Isham, this day come from Lisbon, with letters from the Queen to
the King. And he did give me letters which speak that our fleet is all
at Lisbon;

     [One of these letters was probably from John Creed.  Mr. S. J.
     Davey, of 47, Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, in 1889 had in his
     possession nine long letters from Creed to Pepys.  In the first of
     these, dated from Lisbon, March, 1662, Creed wrote: "My Lord
     Embassador doth all he can to hasten the Queen's Majestie's
     embarquement, there being reasons enough against suffering any
     unnecessary delay."  There appear to have been considerable delays
     in the arrangements for the following declaration of Charles II.
     was dated June 22nd, 1661: "Charles R.  Whereas his Maj. is resolved
     to declare, under his Royall hand and seale, the most illustrious
     Lady Infanta of Portugall to be his lawfull wife, before the Treaty
     shall be signed by the King of Portugall; which is to be done only
     for the better expediting the marriage, without sending to Rome for
     a dispensation, which the laws of Portugall would require if the
     said most Illustrious Infanta were to be betrothed in that
     Kingdome," &c.]

and that the Queen do not intend to embarque sooner than tomorrow come
fortnight. So having sent for my wife, she and I to my Lady Sandwich,
and after a short visit away home. She home, and I to Sir G. Carteret's
about business, and so home too, and Sarah having her fit we went to
bed.

24th. Early Sir G. Carteret, both Sir Williams and I on board the
Experiment, to dispatch her away, she being to carry things to the
Madeiras with the East Indy fleet. Here (Sir W. Pen going to Deptford to
send more hands) we staid till noon talking, and eating and drinking
a good ham of English bacon, and having put things in very good order
home, where I found Jane, my old maid, come out of the country, and I
have a mind to have her again. By and by comes La Belle Pierce to see my
wife, and to bring her a pair of peruques of hair, as the fashion now is
for ladies to wear; which are pretty, and are of my wife's own hair, or
else I should not endure them. After a good whiles stay, I went to see
if any play was acted, and I found none upon the post, it being Passion
week. So home again, and took water with them towards Westminster; but
as we put off with the boat Griffin came after me to tell me that Sir
G. Carteret and the rest were at the office, so I intended to see them
through the bridge and come back again, but the tide being against us,
when we were almost through we were carried back again with much danger,
and Mrs. Pierce was much afeard and frightened. So I carried them to
the other side and walked to the Beare, and sent them away, and so back
again myself to the office, but finding nobody there I went again to the
Old Swan, and thence by water to the New Exchange, and there found them,
and thence by coach carried my wife to Bowes to buy something, and while
they were there went to Westminster Hall, and there bought Mr. Grant's
book of observations upon the weekly bills of mortality, which appear to
me upon first sight to be very pretty. So back again and took my wife,
calling at my brother Tom's, whom I found full of work, which I am
glad of, and thence at the New Exchange and so home, and I to Sir
W. Batten's, and supped there out of pure hunger and to save getting
anything ready at home, which is a thing I do not nor shall not use to
do. So home and to bed.

26th. Up early. This being, by God's great blessing, the fourth solemn
day of my cutting for the stone this day four years, and am by God's
mercy in very good health, and like to do well, the Lord's name be
praised for it. To the office and Sir G. Carteret's all the morning
about business. At noon come my good guests, Madame Turner, The., and
Cozen Norton, and a gentleman, one Mr. Lewin of the King's Life-Guard;
by the same token he told us of one of his fellows killed this morning
in a duel. I had a pretty dinner for them, viz., a brace of stewed
carps, six roasted chickens, and a jowl of salmon, hot, for the first
course; a tanzy

     [Tansy (tanacetum), a herb from which puddings were made.  Hence any
     pudding of the kind.  Selden ("Table Talk") says: "Our tansies at
     Easter have reference to the bitter herbs."  See in Wordsworth's
     "University Life in the Eighteenth Century" recipes for "an apple
     tansey," "a bean tansey," and "a gooseberry tansey."--M. B.]

and two neats' tongues, and cheese the second; and were very merry all
the afternoon, talking and singing and piping upon the flageolette. In
the evening they went with great pleasure away, and I with great content
and my wife walked half an hour in the garden, and so home to supper and
to bed. We had a man-cook to dress dinner to-day, and sent for Jane to
help us, and my wife and she agreed at L3 a year (she would not serve
under) till both could be better provided, and so she stays with us, and
I hope we shall do well if poor Sarah were but rid of her ague.

27th. Early Sir G. Carteret, both Sir Williams and I by coach to
Deptford, it being very windy and rainy weather, taking a codd and some
prawnes in Fish Street with us. We settled to pay the Guernsey, a small
ship, but come to a great deal of money, it having been unpaid ever
since before the King came in, by which means not only the King pays
wages while the ship has lain still, but the poor men have most of them
been forced to borrow all the money due for their wages before they
receive it, and that at a dear rate, God knows, so that many of them
had very little to receive at the table, which grieved me to see it. To
dinner, very merry. Then Sir George to London, and we again to the
pay, and that done by coach home again and to the office, doing some
business, and so home and to bed.

28th (Good Friday). At home all the morning, and dined with my wife, a
good dinner. At my office all the afternoon. At night to my chamber to
read and sing, and so to supper and to bed.

29th. At the office all the morning. Then to the Wardrobe, and there
coming late dined with the people below. Then up to my Lady, and staid
two hours talking with her about her family business with great content
and confidence in me. So calling at several places I went home, where
my people are getting the house clean against to-morrow. I to the office
and wrote several letters by post, and so home and to bed.

30th (Easter day). Having my old black suit new furbished, I was pretty
neat in clothes to-day, and my boy, his old suit new trimmed, very
handsome. To church in the morning, and so home, leaving the two
Sir Williams to take the Sacrament, which I blame myself that I have
hitherto neglected all my life, but once or twice at Cambridge.

     [This does not accord with the certificate which Dr. Mines wrote in
     1681, where he says that Pepys was a constant communicant.  See Life
     of Pepys in vol. i.]

Dined with my wife, a good shoulder of veal well dressed by Jane, and
handsomely served to table, which pleased us much, and made us hope
that she will serve our turn well enough. My wife and I to church in
the afternoon, and seated ourselves, she below me, and by that means the
precedence of the pew, which my Lady Batten and her daughter takes, is
confounded; and after sermon she and I did stay behind them in the pew,
and went out by ourselves a good while after them, which we judge a very
fine project hereafter to avoyd contention. So my wife and I to walk an
hour or two on the leads, which begins to be very pleasant, the garden
being in good condition. So to supper, which is also well served in.
We had a lobster to supper, with a crabb Pegg Pen sent my wife this
afternoon, the reason of which we cannot think; but something there is
of plot or design in it, for we have a little while carried ourselves
pretty strange to them. After supper to bed.

31st. This morning Mr. Coventry and all our company met at the office
about some business of the victualling, which being dispatched we
parted. I to my Lord Crew's to dinner (in my way calling upon my brother
Tom, with whom I staid a good while and talked, and find him a man like
to do well, which contents me much), where used with much respect, and
talking with him about my Lord's debts, and whether we should make use
of an offer of Sir G. Carteret's to lend my Lady 4 or L500, he told me
by no means, we must not oblige my Lord to him, and by the by he made a
question whether it was not my Lord's interest a little to appear to the
King in debt, and for people to clamor against him as well as others for
their money, that by that means the King and the world may see that he
do lay out for the King's honour upon his own main stock, which many he
tells me do, that in fine if there be occasion he and I will be bound
for it. Thence to Sir Thomas Crew's lodgings. He hath been ill, and
continues so, under fits of apoplexy. Among other things, he and I did
discourse much of Mr. Montagu's base doings, and the dishonour that he
will do my Lord, as well as cheating him of 2 or L3,000, which is too
true. Thence to the play, where coming late, and meeting with Sir W.
Pen, who had got room for my wife and his daughter in the pit, he and I
into one of the boxes, and there we sat and heard "The Little Thiefe,"
a pretty play and well done. Thence home, and walked in the garden with
them, and then to the house to supper and sat late talking, and so to
bed.




APRIL 1662

April 1st. Within all the morning and at the office. At noon my wife and
I (having paid our maid Nell her whole wages, who has been with me half
a year, and now goes away for altogether) to the Wardrobe, where my
Lady and company had almost dined. We sat down and dined. Here was Mr.
Herbert, son to Sir Charles Herbert, that lately came with letters from
my Lord Sandwich to the King. After some discourse we remembered one
another to have been together at the tavern when Mr. Fanshaw took his
leave of me at his going to Portugall with Sir Richard. After dinner he
and I and the two young ladies and my wife to the playhouse, the Opera,
and saw "The Mayde in the Mill," a pretty good play. In the middle of
the play my Lady Paulina, who had taken physique this morning, had need
to go forth, and so I took the poor lady out and carried her to the
Grange, and there sent the maid of the house into a room to her, and
she did what she had a mind to, and so back again to the play; and that
being done, in their coach I took them to Islington, and then, after
a walk in the fields, I took them to the great cheese-cake house and
entertained them, and so home, and after an hour's stay with my Lady,
their coach carried us home, and so weary to bed.

2nd. Mr. Moore came to me, and he and I walked to the Spittle an hour or
two before my Lord Mayor and the blewcoat boys come, which at last they
did, and a fine sight of charity it is indeed. We got places and staid
to hear a sermon; but, it being a Presbyterian one, it was so long, that
after above an hour of it we went away, and I home and dined; and then
my wife and I by water to the Opera, and there saw "The Bondman" most
excellently acted; and though we had seen it so often, yet I never
liked it better than to-day, Ianthe acting Cleora's part very well now
Roxalana is gone. We are resolved to see no more plays till Whitsuntide,
we having been three days together. Met Mr. Sanchy, Smithes; Gale, and
Edlin at the play, but having no great mind to spend money, I left them
there. And so home and to supper, and then dispatch business, and so to
bed.

3rd. At home and at the office all day. At night to bed.

4th. By barge Sir George, Sir Williams both and I to Deptford, and there
fell to pay off the Drake and Hampshire, then to dinner, Sir George to
his lady at his house, and Sir Wm. Pen to Woolwich, and Sir W. Batten
and I to the tavern, where much company came to us and our dinner, and
somewhat short by reason of their taking part away with them. Then to
pay the rest of the Hampshire and the Paradox, and were at it till 9 at
night, and so by night home by barge safe, and took Tom Hater with some
that the clerks had to carry home along with us in the barge, the rest
staying behind to pay tickets, but came home after us that night. So
being come home, to bed. I was much troubled to-day to see a dead man
lie floating upon the waters, and had done (they say) these four days,
and nobody takes him up to bury him, which is very barbarous.

5th. At the office till almost noon, and then broke up. Then came Sir
G. Carteret, and he and I walked together alone in the garden, taking
notice of some faults in the office, particularly of Sir W. Batten's,
and he seemed to be much pleased with me, and I hope will be the ground
of a future interest of mine in him, which I shall be glad of. Then
with my wife abroad, she to the Wardrobe and there dined, and I to the
Exchange and so to the Wardrobe, but they had dined. After dinner my
wife and the two ladies to see my aunt Wight, and thence met me at home.
From thence (after Sir W. Batten and I had viewed our houses with a
workman in order to the raising of our roofs higher to enlarge our
houses) I went with them by coach first to Moorfields and there walked,
and thence to Islington and had a fine walk in the fields there, and so,
after eating and drinking, home with them, and so by water with my wife
home, and after supper to bed.

6th (Lord's day). By water to White Hall, to Sir G. Carteret, to
give him an account of the backwardness of the ships we have hired to
Portugall: at which he is much troubled. Thence to the Chappell, and
there, though crowded, heard a very honest sermon before the King by a
Canon of Christ Church, upon these words, "Having a form of godliness,
but denying," &c. Among other things, did much insist upon the sin of
adultery: which methought might touch the King, and the more because he
forced it into his sermon, methinks, besides his text. So up and saw
the King at dinner; and thence with Sir G. Carteret to his lodgings
to dinner, with him and his lady, where I saluted her, and was well
received as a stranger by her; she seems a good lady, and all their
discourse, which was very much, was upon their sufferings and services
for the King. Yet not without some trouble, to see that some that had
been much bound to them, do now neglect them; and others again most
civil that have received least from them: and I do believe that he hath
been a good servant to the King. Thence to walk in the Park, where the
King and Duke did walk round the Park. After I was tired I went and took
boat to Milford stairs, and so to Graye's Inn walks, the first time
I have been there this year, and it is very pleasant and full of good
company. When tired I walked to the Wardrobe, and there staid a little
with my Lady, and so by water from Paul's Wharf (where my boat staid for
me), home and supped with my wife with Sir W. Pen, and so home and to
bed.

7th. By water to Whitehall and thence to Westminster, and staid at the
Parliament-door long to speak with Mr. Coventry, which vexed me. Thence
to the Lords' House, and stood within the House, while the Bishops and
Lords did stay till the Chancellor's coming, and then we were put out,
and they to prayers. There comes a Bishop; and while he was rigging
himself, he bid his man listen at the door, whereabout in the prayers
they were but the man told him something, but could not tell whereabouts
it was in the prayers, nor the Bishop neither, but laughed at the
conceit; so went in: but, God forgive me! I did tell it by and by to
people, and did say that the man said that they were about something of
saving their souls, but could not tell whereabouts in the prayers that
was. I sent in a note to my Lord Privy Seal, and he came out to me;
and I desired he would make another deputy for me, because of my great
business of the Navy this month; but he told me he could not do it
without the King's consent, which vexed me. So to Dr. Castle's, and
there did get a promise from his clerk that his master should officiate
for me to-morrow. Thence by water to Tom's, and there with my wife took
coach and to the old Exchange, where having bought six large Holland
bands, I sent her home, and myself found out my uncle Wight and Mr.
Rawlinson, and with them went to the tatter's house to dinner, and there
had a good dinner of cold meat and good wine, but was troubled in my
head after the little wine I drank, and so home to my office, and there
did promise to drink no more wine but one glass a meal till Whitsuntide
next upon any score. Mrs. Bowyer and her daughters being at my house I
forbore to go to them, having business and my head disturbed, but staid
at my office till night, and then to walk upon the leads with my wife,
and so to my chamber and thence to bed. The great talk is, that the
Spaniards and the Hollanders do intend to set upon the Portuguese by
sea, at Lisbon, as soon as our fleet is come away; and by that means our
fleet is not likely to come yet these two months or three; which I hope
is not true.

8th. Up very early and to my office, and there continued till noon. So
to dinner, and in comes uncle Fenner and the two Joyces. I sent for a
barrel of oysters and a breast of veal roasted, and were very merry; but
I cannot down with their dull company and impertinent. After dinner to
the office again. So at night by coach to Whitehall, and Mr. Coventry
not being there I brought my business of the office to him, it being
almost dark, and so came away and took up my wife. By the way home and
on Ludgate Hill there being a stop I bought two cakes, and they were our
supper at home.

9th. Sir George Carteret, Sir Williams both and myself all the morning
at the office passing the Victualler's accounts, and at noon to dinner
at the Dolphin, where a good chine of beef and other good cheer. At
dinner Sir George showed me an account in French of the great famine,
which is to the greatest extremity in some part of France at this day,
which is very strange.

     [On the 5th of June following, Louis, notwithstanding the scarcity,
     gave that splendid carousal in the court before the Tuileries, from
     which the place has ever since taken its name.--B.]

So to the Exchange, Mrs. Turner (who I found sick in bed), and several
other places about business, and so home. Supper and to bed.

10th. To Westminster with the two Sir Williams by water, and did several
businesses, and so to the Wardrobe with Mr. Moore to dinner. Yesterday
came Col. Talbot with letters from Portugall, that the Queen is
resolved to embarque for England this week. Thence to the office all the
afternoon. My Lord Windsor came to us to discourse of his affairs, and
to take his leave of us; he being to go Governor of Jamaica with this
fleet that is now going. Late at the office. Home with my mind full of
business. So to bed.

11th. Up early to my lute and a song, then about six o'clock with Sir
W. Pen by water to Deptford; and among the ships now going to Portugall
with men and horse, to see them dispatched. So to Greenwich; and had
a fine pleasant walk to Woolwich, having in our company Captn. Minnes,
with whom I was much pleased to hear him talk in fine language, but
pretty well for all that. Among other things, he and the other Captains
that were with us tell me that negros drowned look white and lose their
blackness, which I never heard before. At Woolwich, up and down to do
the same business; and so back to Greenwich by water, and there while
something is dressing for our dinner, Sir William and I walked into the
Park, where the King hath planted trees and made steps in the hill up to
the Castle, which is very magnificent. So up and down the house, which
is now repayring in the Queen's lodgings. So to dinner at the Globe, and
Captain Lambert of the Duke's pleasure boat came to us and dined with
us, and were merry, and so home, and I in the evening to the Exchange,
and spoke with uncle Wight, and so home and walked with my wife on the
leads late, and so the barber came to me, and so to bed very weary,
which I seldom am.

12th. At the office all the morning, where, among other things,
being provoked by some impertinence of Sir W. Batten's, I called him
unreasonable man, at which he was very angry and so was I, but I think
we shall not much fall out about it. After dinner to several places
about business, and so home and wrote letters at my office, and one to
Mr. Coventry about business, and at the close did excuse my not waiting
on him myself so often as others do for want of leisure. So home and to
bed.

13th (Lord's day). In the morning to Paul's, where I heard a pretty good
sermon, and thence to dinner with my Lady at the Wardrobe; and after
much talk with her after dinner, I went to the Temple to Church, and
there heard another: by the same token a boy, being asleep, fell down
a high seat to the ground, ready to break his neck, but got no hurt.
Thence to Graye's Inn walkes; and there met Mr. Pickering and walked
with him two hours till 8 o'clock till I was quite weary. His discourse
most about the pride of the Duchess of York; and how all the ladies envy
my Lady Castlemaine. He intends to go to Portsmouth to meet the Queen
this week; which is now the discourse and expectation of the town. So
home, and no sooner come but Sir W. Warren comes to me to bring me a
paper of Field's (with whom we have lately had a great deal of trouble
at the office), being a bitter petition to the King against our office
for not doing justice upon his complaint to us of embezzlement of the
King's stores by one Turpin. I took Sir William to Sir W. Pen's (who was
newly come from Walthamstow), and there we read it and discoursed, but
we do not much fear it, the King referring it to the Duke of York. So we
drank a glass or two of wine, and so home and I to bed, my wife being in
bed already.

14th. Being weary last night I lay very long in bed to-day, talking with
my wife, and persuaded her to go to Brampton, and take Sarah with her,
next week, to cure her ague by change of ayre, and we agreed all things
therein. We rose, and at noon dined, and then we to the Paynter's, and
there sat the last time for my little picture, which I hope will please
me. Then to Paternoster Row to buy things for my wife against her
going. So home and walked upon the leads with my wife, and whether she
suspected anything or no I know not, but she is quite off of her going
to Brampton, which something troubles me, and yet all my design was that
I might the freer go to Portsmouth when the rest go to pay off the yards
there, which will be very shortly. But I will get off if I can. So to
supper and to bed.

15th. At the office all the morning. Dined at home. Again at the office
in the afternoon to despatch letters and so home, and with my wife, by
coach, to the New Exchange, to buy her some things; where we saw some
new-fashion pettycoats of sarcenett, with a black broad lace printed
round the bottom and before, very handsome, and my wife had a mind to
one of them, but we did not then buy one. But thence to Mr. Bowyer's,
thinking to have spoke to them for our Sarah to go to Huntsmore for a
while to get away her ague, but we had not opportunity to do it, and so
home and to bed.

16th. Up early and took my physique; it wrought all the morning well. At
noon dined, and all the afternoon, Mr. Hater to that end coming to
me, he and I did go about my abstracting all the contracts made in the
office since we came into it. So at night to bed.

17th. To Mr. Holliard's in the morning, thinking to be let blood, but
he was gone out. So to White Hall, thinking to have had a Seal at Privy
Seal, but my Lord did not come, and so I walked back home and staid
within all the afternoon, there being no office kept to-day, but in the
evening Sir W. Batten sent for me to tell me that he had this day spoke
to the Duke about raising our houses, and he hath given us leave to do
it, at which, being glad, I went home merry, and after supper to bed.

18th. This morning sending the boy down into the cellar for some beer
I followed him with a cane, and did there beat him for his staying of
awards and other faults, and his sister came to me down and begged for
him. So I forebore, and afterwards, in my wife's chamber, did there talk
to Jane how much I did love the boy for her sake, and how much it do
concern to correct the boy for his faults, or else he would be undone.
So at last she was well pleased. This morning Sir G. Carteret, Sir
W. Batten and I met at the office, and did conclude of our going to
Portsmouth next week, in which my mind is at a great loss what to do
with my wife, for I cannot persuade her to go to Brampton, and I am loth
to leave her at, home. All the afternoon in several places to put things
in order for my going. At night home and to bed.

19th. This morning, before we sat, I went to Aldgate; and at the corner
shop, a draper's, I stood, and did see Barkestead, Okey, and Corbet,
drawn towards the gallows at Tiburne; and there they were hanged and
quartered. They all looked very cheerful; but I hear they all die
defending what they did to the King to be just; which is very strange.
So to the office and then home to dinner, and Captain David Lambert came
to take his leave of me, he being to go back to Tangier there to lie.
Then abroad about business, and in the evening did get a bever, an old
one, but a very good one, of Sir W. Batten, for which I must give him
something; but I am very well pleased with it. So after writing by the
post to bed.

20th (Lord's day). My intention being to go this morning to White Hall
to hear South, my Lord Chancellor's chaplain, the famous preacher and
oratour of Oxford, (who the last Lord's day did sink down in the pulpit
before the King, and could not proceed,) it did rain, and the wind
against me, that I could by no means get a boat or coach to carry me;
and so I staid at Paul's, where the judges did all meet, and heard a
sermon, it being the first Sunday of the term; but they had a very
poor sermon. So to my Lady's and dined, and so to White Hall to Sir G.
Carteret, and so to the Chappell, where I challenged my pew as Clerk of
the Privy Seal and had it, and then walked home with Mr. Blagrave to
his old house in the Fishyard, and there he had a pretty kinswoman that
sings, and we did sing some holy things, and afterwards others came in
and so I left them, and by water through the bridge (which did trouble
me) home, and so to bed.

21st: This morning I attempted to persuade my wife in bed to go to
Brampton this week, but she would not, which troubles me, and seeing
that I could keep it no longer from her, I told her that I was resolved
to go to Portsmouth to-morrow. Sir W. Batten goes to Chatham to-day, and
will be back again to come for Portsmouth after us on Thursday next.
I went to Westminster and several places about business. Then at noon
dined with my Lord Crew; and after dinner went up to Sir Thos. Crew's
chamber, who is still ill. He tells me how my Lady Duchess of Richmond
and Castlemaine had a falling out the other day; and she calls the
latter Jane Shore, and did hope to see her come to the same end that she
did. Coming down again to my Lord, he told me that news was come that
the Queen is landed; at which I took leave, and by coach hurried to
White Hall, the bells ringing in several places; but I found there no
such matter, nor anything like it. So I went by appointment to Anthony
Joyce's, where I sat with his wife and Matt. Joyce an hour or two, and
so her husband not being at home, away I went and in Cheapside spied him
and took him into the coach. Home, and there I found my Lady Jemimah,
and Anne, and Madamoiselle come to see my wife, whom I left, and to talk
with Joyce about a project I have of his and my joyning, to get some
money for my brother Tom and his kinswoman to help forward with her
portion if they should marry. I mean in buying of tallow of him at a low
rate for the King, and Tom should have the profit; but he tells me the
profit will be considerable, at which I was troubled, but I have agreed
with him to serve some in my absence. He went away, and then came Mr.
Moore and sat late with me talking about business, and so went away and
I to bed.

22nd. After taking leave of my wife, which we could hardly do kindly,
because of her mind to go along with me, Sir W. Pen and I took coach and
so over the bridge to Lambeth, W. Bodham and Tom Hewet going as clerks
to Sir W. Pen, and my Will for me. Here we got a dish of buttered eggs,
and there staid till Sir G. Carteret came to us from White Hall, who
brought Dr. Clerke with him, at which I was very glad, and so we set
out, and I was very much pleased with his company, and were very merry
all the way .... We came to Gilford and there passed our time in the
garden, cutting of sparagus for supper, the best that ever I eat in my
life but in the house last year. Supped well, and the Doctor and I to
bed together, calling cozens from his name and my office.

23d. Up early, and to Petersfield, and there dined well; and thence got
a countryman to guide us by Havant, to avoid going through the Forest;
but he carried us much out of the way, and upon our coming we sent away
an express to Sir W. Batten to stop his coming, which I did project to
make good my oath, that my wife should come if any of our wives came,
which my Lady Batten did intend to do with her husband. The Doctor and
I lay together at Wiard's, the chyrurgeon's, in Portsmouth, his wife
a very pretty woman. We lay very well and merrily; in the morning,
concluding him to be of the eldest blood and house of the Clerkes,
because that all the fleas came to him and not to me.

24th. Up and to Sir G. Carteret's lodgings at Mrs. Stephens's, where
we keep our table all the time we are here. Thence all of us to the
Pay-house; but the books not being ready, we went to church to the
lecture, where there was my Lord Ormond and Manchester, and much London
company, though not so much as I expected. Here we had a very good
sermon upon this text: "In love serving one another;" which pleased me
very well. No news of the Queen at all. So to dinner; and then to the
Pay all the afternoon. Then W. Pen and I walked to the King's Yard, and
there lay at Mr. Tippets's, where exceeding well treated.

25th. All the morning at Portsmouth, at the Pay, and then to dinner,
and again to the Pay; and at night got the Doctor to go lie with me, and
much pleased with his company; but I was much troubled in my eyes, by
reason of the healths I have this day been forced to drink.

26th. Sir George' and I, and his clerk Mr. Stephens, and Mr. Holt our
guide, over to Gosport; and so rode to Southampton. In our way, besides
my Lord Southampton's' parks and lands, which in one view we could see
L6,000 per annum, we observed a little church-yard, where the graves are
accustomed to be all sowed with sage.

     [Gough says, "It is the custom at this day all over Wales to strew
     the graves, both within and without the church, with green herbs,
     branches of box, flowers, rushes, and flags, for one year, after
     which such as can afford it lay down a stone."--Brand's Popular
     Antiquities, edited W. C. Hazlitt, vol. ii., p. 218.]

At Southampton we went to the Mayor's and there dined, and had sturgeon
of their own catching the last week, which do not happen in twenty
years, and it was well ordered. They brought us also some caveare, which
I attempted to order, but all to no purpose, for they had neither given
it salt enough, nor are the seedes of the roe broke, but are all in
berryes. The towne is one most gallant street, and is walled round with
stone, &c., and Bevis's picture upon one of the gates; many old walls of
religious houses, and the key, well worth seeing. After dinner to horse
again, being in nothing troubled but the badness of my hat, which I
borrowed to save my beaver. Home by night and wrote letters to London,
and so with Sir W. Pen to the Dock to bed.

27th (Sunday). Sir W. Pen got trimmed before me, and so took the coach
to Portsmouth to wait on my Lord Steward to church, and sent the coach
for me back again. So I rode to church, and met my Lord Chamberlain upon
the walls of the garrison, who owned and spoke to me. I followed him
in the crowd of gallants through the Queen's lodgings to chappell; the
rooms being all rarely furnished, and escaped hardly being set on fire
yesterday. At chappell we had a most excellent and eloquent sermon. And
here I spoke and saluted Mrs. Pierce, but being in haste could not learn
of her where her lodgings are, which vexes me. Thence took Ned Pickering
to dinner with us, and the two Marshes, father and Son, dined with us,
and very merry. After dinner Sir W. Batten and I, the Doctor, and Ned
Pickering by coach to the Yard, and there on board the Swallow in the
dock hear our navy chaplain preach a sad sermon, full of nonsense and
false Latin; but prayed for the Right Honourable the principal officers.

     [Principal officers of the navy, of which body Pepys was one as
     Clerk of the Acts.]

After sermon took him to Mr. Tippets's to drink a glass of wine, and so
at 4 back again by coach to Portsmouth, and then visited the Mayor, Mr.
Timbrell, our anchor-smith, who showed us the present they have for the
Queen; which is a salt-sellar of silver, the walls christall, with four
eagles and four greyhounds standing up at the top to bear up a dish;
which indeed is one of the neatest pieces of plate that ever I saw, and
the case is very pretty also.

     [A salt-cellar answering this description is preserved at the
     Tower.]

This evening came a merchantman in the harbour, which we hired at London
to carry horses to Portugall; but, Lord! what running there was to the
seaside to hear what news, thinking it had come from the Queen. In the
evening Sir George, Sir W. Pen and I walked round the walls, and thence
we two with the Doctor to the yard, and so to supper and to bed.

28th. The Doctor and I begun philosophy discourse exceeding pleasant.
He offers to bring me into the college of virtuosoes--[The Royal
Society.]--and my Lord Brouncker's acquaintance, and to show me some
anatomy, which makes me very glad; and I shall endeavour it when I come
to London. Sir W. Pen much troubled upon letters came last night. Showed
me one of Dr. Owen's

     [John Owen, D.D., a learned Nonconformist divine, and a voluminous
     theological writer, born 1616, made Dean of Christ Church in 1653 by
     the Parliament, and ejected in 1659-60.  He died at Ealing in 1683.]

to his son,--[William Penn, the celebrated Quaker.]--whereby it appears
his son is much perverted in his opinion by him; which I now perceive is
one thing that hath put Sir William so long off the hooks. By coach
to the Pay-house, and so to work again, and then to dinner, and to it
again, and so in the evening to the yard, and supper and bed.

29th. At the pay all the morning, and so to dinner; and then to it again
in the afternoon, and after our work was done, Sir G. Carteret, Sir W.
Pen and I walked forth, and I spied Mrs. Pierce and another lady passing
by. So I left them and went to the ladies, and walked with them up
and down, and took them to Mrs. Stephens, and there gave them wine
and sweetmeats, and were very merry; and then comes the Doctor, and we
carried them by coach to their lodging, which was very poor, but
the best they could get, and such as made much mirth among us. So I
appointed one to watch when the gates of the town were ready to be shut,
and to give us notice; and so the Doctor and I staid with them playing
and laughing, and at last were forced to bid good night for fear
of being locked into the town all night. So we walked to the yard,
designing how to prevent our going to London tomorrow, that we might be
merry with these ladies, which I did. So to supper and merrily to bed.

30th. This morning Sir G. Carteret came down to the yard, and there
we mustered over all the men and determined of some regulations in the
yard, and then to dinner, all the officers of the yard with us, and
after dinner walk to Portsmouth, there to pay off the Success, which we
did pretty early, and so I took leave of Sir W. Pen, he desiring to
know whither I went, but I would not tell him. I went to the ladies, and
there took them and walked to the Mayor's to show them the present, and
then to the Dock, where Mr. Tippets made much of them, and thence back
again, the Doctor being come to us to their lodgings, whither came
our supper by my appointment, and we very merry, playing at cards and
laughing very merry till 12 o'clock at night, and so having staid so
long (which we had resolved to stay till they bade us be gone), which
yet they did not do but by consent, we bade them good night, and so past
the guards, and went to the Doctor's lodgings, and there lay with him,
our discourse being much about the quality of the lady with Mrs. Pierce,
she being somewhat old and handsome, and painted and fine, and had a
very handsome maid with her, which we take to be the marks of a bawd.
But Mrs. Pierce says she is a stranger to her and met by chance in the
coach, and pretends to be a dresser. Her name is Eastwood. So to sleep
in a bad bed about one o'clock in the morning. This afternoon after
dinner comes Mr. Stephenson, one of the burgesses of the town, to
tell me that the Mayor and burgesses did desire my acceptance of a
burgess-ship, and were ready at the Mayor's to make me one. So I went,
and there they were all ready, and did with much civility give me my
oath, and after the oath, did by custom shake me all by the hand. So
I took them to a tavern and made them drink, and paying the reckoning,
went away. They having first in the tavern made Mr. Waith also a
burgess, he coming in while we were drinking. It cost me a piece in gold
to the Town Clerk, and 10s. to the Bayliffes, and spent 6s.




MAY 1662

May 1st. Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Pen, and myself, with our clerks,
set out this morning from Portsmouth very early, and got by noon to
Petersfield; several officers of the Yard accompanying us so far.
Here we dined and were merry. At dinner comes my Lord Carlingford
from London, going to Portsmouth: tells us that the Duchess of York
is brought to bed of a girl,--[Mary, afterwards Queen of England.]--at
which I find nobody pleased; and that Prince Rupert and the Duke of
Buckingham are sworn of the Privy Councell. He himself made a dish with
eggs of the butter of the Sparagus, which is very fine meat, which
I will practise hereafter. To horse again after dinner, and got to
Gilford, where after supper I to bed, having this day been offended by
Sir W. Pen's foolish talk, and I offending him with my answers. Among
others he in discourse complaining of want of confidence, did ask me to
lend him a grain or two, which I told him I thought he was better stored
with than myself, before Sir George. So that I see I must keep a
greater distance than I have done, and I hope I may do it because of
the interest which I am making with Sir George. To bed all alone, and my
Will in the truckle bed.

     [According to the original Statutes of Corpus Christi Coll. Oxon,
     a Scholar slept in a truckle bed below each Fellow.  Called also
     "a trindle bed."  Compare Hall's description of an obsequious tutor:

                              "He lieth in a truckle bed
                    While his young master lieth o'er his head."

                                                  Satires, ii.  6, 5.

     The bed was drawn in the daytime under the high bed of the tutor.
     See Wordsworth's "University Life in the Eighteenth Century."--M. B.]

2nd. Early to coach again and to Kingston, where we baited a little, and
presently to coach again and got early to London, and I found all well
at home, and Mr. Hunt and his wife had dined with my wife to-day, and
been very kind to my wife in my absence. After I had washed myself, it
having been the hottest day that has been this year, I took them all
by coach to Mrs. Hunt's, and I to Dr. Clerke's lady, and gave her her
letter and token. She is a very fine woman, and what with her person
and the number of fine ladies that were with her, I was much out of
countenance, and could hardly carry myself like a man among them; but
however, I staid till my courage was up again, and talked to them, and
viewed her house, which is most pleasant, and so drank and good-night.
And so to my Lord's lodgings, where by chance I spied my Lady's coach,
and found her and my Lady Wright there, and so I spoke to them, and they
being gone went to Mr. Hunt's for my wife, and so home and to bed.

3rd. Sir W. Pen and I by coach to St. James's, and there to the Duke's
Chamber, who had been a-hunting this morning and is come back again.
Thence to Westminster, where I met Mr. Moore, and hear that Mr. Watkins'
is suddenly dead since my going. To dinner to my Lady Sandwich, and Sir
Thomas Crew's children coming thither, I took them and all my Ladys to
the Tower and showed them the lions

     [The Tower Menagerie was not abolished until the reign of
     William IV.]

and all that was to be shown, and so took them to my house, and there
made much of them, and so saw them back to my Lady's. Sir Thomas Crew's
children being as pretty and the best behaved that ever I saw of their
age. Thence, at the goldsmith's, took my picture in little,--[Miniature
by Savill]--which is now done, home with me, and pleases me exceedingly
and my wife. So to supper and to bed, it being exceeding hot.

4th (Lord's day). Lay long talking with my wife, then Mr. Holliard came
to me and let me blood, about sixteen ounces, I being exceedingly full
of blood and very good. I begun to be sick; but lying upon my back I
was presently well again, and did give him 5s. for his pains, and so
we parted, and I, to my chamber to write down my journall from the
beginning of my late journey to this house. Dined well, and after
dinner, my arm tied up with a black ribbon, I walked with my wife to my
brother Tom's; our boy waiting on us with his sword, which this day
he begins to wear, to outdo Sir W. Pen's boy, who this day, and Six W.
Batten's too, begin to wear new livery; but I do take mine to be the
neatest of them all. I led my wife to Mrs. Turner's pew, and the church
being full, it being to hear a Doctor who is to preach a probacon
sermon, I went out to the Temple and there walked, and so when church
was done went to Mrs. Turner's, and after a stay there, my wife and I
walked to Grays Inn, to observe fashions of the ladies, because of my
wife's making some clothes. Thence homewards, and called in at Antony
Joyce's, where we found his wife brought home sick from church, and was
in a convulsion fit. So home and to Sir W. Pen's and there supped, and
so to prayers at home and to bed.

5th. My arme not being well, I staid within all the morning, and dined
alone at home, my wife being gone out to buy some things for herself,
and a gown for me to dress myself in. And so all the afternoon looking
over my papers, and at night walked upon the leads, and so to bed.

6th. This morning I got my seat set up on the leads, which pleases me
well. So to the office, and thence to the Change, but could not meet
with my uncle Wight. So home to dinner and then out again to several
places to pay money and to understand my debts, and so home and walked
with my wife on the leads, and so to supper and to bed. I find it a hard
matter to settle to business after so much leisure and pleasure.

7th. Walked to Westminster; where I understand the news that Mr. Montagu
is this last night come to the King with news, that he left the Queen
and fleet in the Bay of Biscay, coming this wayward; and that he
believes she is now at the Isle of Scilly. So at noon to my Lord Crew's
and there dined, and after dinner Sir Thos. Crew and I talked together,
and among other instances of the simple light discourse that sometimes
is in the Parliament House, he told me how in the late business of
Chymny money, when all occupiers were to pay, it was questioned whether
women were under that name to pay, and somebody rose and said that they
were not occupiers, but occupied. Thence to Paul's Church Yard; where
seeing my Lady's Sandwich and Carteret, and my wife (who this day made
a visit the first time to my Lady Carteret), come by coach, and going to
Hide Park, I was resolved to follow them; and so went to Mrs. Turner's:
and thence found her out at the Theatre, where I saw the last act of
the "Knight of the Burning Pestle," which pleased me not at all. And so
after the play done, she and The. Turner and Mrs. Lucin and I, in her
coach to the Park; and there found them out, and spoke to them; and
observed many fine ladies, and staid till all were gone almost. And so
to Mrs. Turner's, and there supped, and so walked home, and by and by
comes my wife home, brought by my Lady Carteret to the gate, and so to
bed.

8th. At the office all the morning doing business alone, and then to the
Wardrobe, where my Lady going out with the children to dinner I staid
not, but returned home, and was overtaken in St. Paul's Churchyard by
Sir G. Carteret in his coach, and so he carried me to the Exchange,
where I staid awhile. He told me that the Queen and the fleet were in
Mount's Bay on Monday last, and that the Queen endures her sickness
pretty well. He also told me how Sir John Lawson hath done some
execution upon the Turks in the Straight, of which I am glad, and told
the news the first on the Exchange, and was much followed by merchants
to tell it. So home and to dinner, and by and by to the office, and
after the rest gone (my Lady Albemarle being this day at dinner at Sir
W. Batten's) Sir G. Carteret comes, and he and I walked in the garden,
and, among other discourse, tells me that it is Mr. Coventry that is to
come to us as a Commissioner of the Navy; at which he is much vexed, and
cries out upon Sir W. Pen, and threatens him highly. And looking upon
his lodgings, which are now enlarging, he in passion cried, "Guarda
mi spada; for, by God, I may chance to keep him in Ireland, when he is
there:" for Sir W. Pen is going thither with my Lord Lieutenant. But it
is my design to keep much in with Sir George; and I think I have
begun very well towards it. So to the office, and was there late doing
business, and so with my head full of business I to bed.

9th. Up and to my office, and so to dinner at home, and then to several
places to pay my debts, and then to Westminster to Dr. Castle, who
discoursed with me about Privy Seal business, which I do not much mind,
it being little worth, but by Watkins's--[clerk of the Privy Seal]--late
sudden death we are like to lose money. Thence to Mr. de Cretz, and
there saw some good pieces that he hath copyed of the King's pieces,
some of Raphael and Michael Angelo; and I have borrowed an Elizabeth
of his copying to hang up in my house, and sent it home by Will. Thence
with Mr. Salisbury, who I met there, into Covent Garden to an alehouse,
to see a picture that hangs there, which is offered for 20s., and I
offered fourteen--but it is worth much more money--but did not buy it,
I having no mind to break my oath. Thence to see an Italian puppet play
that is within the rayles there, which is very pretty, the best that
ever I saw, and great resort of gallants. So to the Temple and by water
home, and so walk upon the leads, and in the dark there played upon my
flageolette, it being a fine still evening, and so to supper and to bed.
This day I paid Godfrey's debt of 40 and odd pounds. The Duke of York
went last night to Portsmouth; so that I believe the Queen is near.

10th. By myself at the office all the morning drawing up instructions
for Portsmouth yard in those things wherein we at our late being there
did think fit to reform, and got them signed this morning to send away
to-night, the Duke being now there. At noon to the Wardrobe; there
dined. My Lady told me how my Lady Castlemaine do speak of going to lie
in at Hampton Court; which she and all our ladies are much troubled at,
because of the King's being forced to show her countenance in the sight
of the Queen when she comes. Back to the office and there all afternoon,
and in the evening comes Sir G. Carteret, and he and I did hire a ship
for Tangier, and other things together; and I find that he do single
me out to join with me apart from the rest, which I am much glad of. So
home, and after being trimmed, to bed.

11th (Lord's day). To our church in the morning, where, our Minister
being out of town, a dull, flat Presbiter preached. Dined at home,
and my wife's brother with us, we having a good dish of stewed beef of
Jane's own dressing, which was well done, and a piece of sturgeon of
a barrel sent me by Captain Cocke. In the afternoon to White Hall; and
there walked an hour or two in the Park, where I saw the King now out
of mourning, in a suit laced with gold and silver, which it was said
was out of fashion. Thence to the Wardrobe; and there consulted with the
ladies about our going to Hampton Court to-morrow, and thence home, and
after settled business there my wife and I to the Wardrobe, and there we
lay all night in Captain Ferrers' chambers, but the bed so soft that I
could not sleep that hot night.

12th. Mr. Townsend called us up by four o'clock; and by five the three
ladies, my wife and I, and Mr. Townsend, his son and daughter, were got
to the barge and set out. We walked from Mortlake to Richmond, and so
to boat again. And from Teddington to Hampton Court Mr. Townsend and I
walked again. And then met the ladies, and were showed the whole house
by Mr. Marriott; which is indeed nobly furnished, particularly the
Queen's bed, given her by the States of Holland; a looking-glass sent by
the Queen-mother from France, hanging in the Queen's chamber, and many
brave pictures. So to Mr. Marriott's, and there we rested ourselves and
drank. And so to barge again, and there we had good victuals and wine,
and were very merry; and got home about eight at night very well. So
my wife and I took leave of my Ladies, and home by a hackney-coach, the
easiest that ever I met with, and so to bed.

14th. All the morning at Westminster and elsewhere about business, and
dined at the Wardrobe; and after dinner, sat talking an hour or two
alone with my Lady. She is afeard that my Lady Castlemaine will keep
still with the King, and I am afeard she will not, for I love her well.
Thence to my brother's, and finding him in a lie about the lining of my
new morning gown, saying that it was the same with the outside, I was
very angry with him and parted so. So home after an hour stay at Paul's
Churchyard, and there came Mr. Morelock of Chatham, and brought me a
stately cake, and I perceive he has done the same to the rest, of which
I was glad; so to bed.

15th. To Westminster; and at the Privy Seal I saw Mr. Coventry's seal
for his being Commissioner with us, at which I know not yet whether to
be glad or otherwise. So doing several things by the way, I walked home,
and after dinner to the office all the afternoon. At night, all the
bells of the town rung, and bonfires made for the joy of the Queen's
arrival, who came and landed at Portsmouth last night. But I do not see
much thorough joy, but only an indifferent one, in the hearts of people,
who are much discontented at the pride and luxury of the Court, and
running in debt.

16th. Up early, Mr. Hater and I to the office, and there I made an end
of my book of contracts which I have been making an abstract of. Dined
at home, and spent most of the day at the office. At night to supper and
bed.

17th. Upon a letter this morning from Mr. Moore, I went to my cozen
Turner's chamber, and there put him drawing a replication to Tom Trice's
answer speedily. So to Whitehall and there met Mr. Moore, and I walked
long in Westminster Hall, and thence with him to the Wardrobe to dinner,
where dined Mrs. Sanderson, the mother of the maids, and after dinner
my Lady and she and I on foot to Pater Noster Row to buy a petticoat
against the Queen's coming for my Lady, of plain satin, and other
things; and being come back again, we there met Mr. Nathaniel Crew

     [Nathaniel Crew, born 1633, fifth son of John, first Lord Crew; he
     himself became third Lord Crew in 1697.  Sub-Rector of Lincoln
     College, Oxford, 1659.  Took orders in 1664, and was Rector of
     Lincoln College in 1668; Dean of Chichester, 1669; Bishop of Oxford,
     1671; Bishop of Durham, 1674; sworn of the Privy Council in 1676.
     He was very subservient to James II., and at the Revolution was
     excepted from the general pardon of May, 1690, but he was allowed to
     keep possession of the bishopric of Durham.]

at the Wardrobe with a young gentleman, a friend and fellow student of
his, and of a good family, Mr. Knightly, and known to the Crews, of whom
my Lady privately told me she hath some thoughts of a match for my
Lady Jemimah. I like the person very well, and he hath L2000 per annum.
Thence to the office, and there we sat, and thence after writing letters
to all my friends with my Lord at Portsmouth, I walked to my brother
Tom's to see a velvet cloak, which I buy of Mr. Moore. It will cost me
L8 10s.; he bought it for L6 10s., but it is worth my money. So home and
find all things made clean against to-morrow, which pleases me well. So
to bed.

18th (Whitsunday). By water to White Hall, and thereto chappell in my
pew belonging to me as Clerk of the Privy Seal; and there I heard a most
excellent sermon of Dr. Hacket, Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, upon
these words: "He that drinketh this water shall never thirst." We had an
excellent anthem, sung by Captain Cooke and another, and brave musique.
And then the King came down and offered, and took the sacrament upon his
knees; a sight very well worth seeing. Hence with Sir G. Carteret to his
lodging to dinner with his Lady and one Mr. Brevin, a French Divine, we
were very merry, and good discourse, and I had much talk with my Lady.
After dinner, and so to chappell again; and there had another good
anthem of Captain Cooke's. Thence to the Councell-chamber; where the
King and Councell sat till almost eleven o'clock at night, and I forced
to walk up and down the gallerys till that time of night. They were
reading all the bills over that are to pass to-morrow at the House,
before the King's going out of town and proroguing the House. At last
the Councell risen, and Sir G. Carteret telling me what the Councell
hath ordered about the ships designed to carry horse from Ireland to
Portugall, which is now altered. I got a coach and so home, sending the
boat away without me. At home I found my wife discontented at my being
abroad, but I pleased her. She was in her new suit of black sarcenet and
yellow petticoat very pretty. So to bed.

19th. Long in bed, sometimes scolding with my wife, and then pleased
again, and at last up, and put on my riding cloth suit, and a camelott
coat new, which pleases me well enough. To the Temple about my
replication, and so to my brother Tom's, and there hear that my father
will be in town this week. So home, the shops being but some shut and
some open. I hear that the House of Commons do think much that they
should be forced to huddle over business this morning against the
afternoon, for the King to pass their Acts, that he may go out of town.

     [To ears accustomed to the official words of speeches from the
     throne at the present day, the familiar tone of the following
     extracts from Charles's speech to the Commons, on the 1st of March;
     will be amusing: "I will conclude with putting you in mind of the
     season of the year, and the convenience of your being in the
     country, in many respects, for the good and welfare of it; for you
     will find much tares have been sowed there in your absence.  The
     arrival of my wife, who I expect some time this month, and the
     necessity of my own being out of town to meet her, and to stay some
     time before she comes hither, makes it very necessary that the
     Parliament be adjourned before Easter, to meet again in the winter.
 ....  The mention of my wife's arrival puts me in mind to
     desire you to put that compliment upon her, that her entrance into
     the town may be with more decency than the ways will now suffer it
     to be; and, to that purpose, I pray you would quickly pass such laws
     as are before you, in order to the amending those ways, and that she
     may not find Whitehall surrounded with water."  Such a bill passed
     the Commons on the 24th June.  From Charles's Speech, March 1st,
     1662.--B.]

But he, I hear since, was forced to stay till almost nine o'clock at
night before he could have done, and then he prorogued them; and so
to Gilford, and lay there. Home, and Mr. Hunt dined with me, and were
merry. After dinner Sir W. Pen and his daughter, and I and my wife by
coach to the Theatre, and there in a box saw "The Little Thief" well
done. Thence to Moorefields, and walked and eat some cheesecake and
gammon of bacon, but when I was come home I was sick, forced to vomit it
up again. So my wife walking and singing upon the leads till very late,
it being pleasant and moonshine, and so to bed.

10th. Sir W. Pen and I did a little business at the office, and so home
again. Then comes Dean Fuller after we had dined, but I got something
for him, and very merry we were for an hour or two, and I am most
pleased with his company and goodness. At last parted, and my wife and
I by coach to the Opera, and there saw the 2nd part of "The Siege of
Rhodes," but it is not so well done as when Roxalana was there, who, it
is said, is now owned by my Lord of Oxford.

     [For note on Mrs. Davenport, who was deceived by a pretended
     marriage with the Earl of Oxford, see ante.  Lord Oxford's first
     wife died in 1659.  He married, in 1672, his second wife, Diana
     Kirke, of whom nothing more need be said than that she bore an
     inappropriate Christian name.]

Thence to Tower-wharf, and there took boat, and we all walked to
Halfeway House, and there eat and drank, and were pleasant, and so
finally home again in the evening, end so good night, this being a very
pleasant life that we now lead, and have long done; the Lord be blessed,
and make us thankful. But, though I am much against too much spending,
yet I do think it best to enjoy some degree of pleasure now that we have
health, money, and opportunity, rather than to leave pleasures to old
age or poverty, when we cannot have them so properly.

21st. My wife and I by water to Westminster, and after she had seen her
father (of whom lately I have heard nothing at all what he does or her
mother), she comes to me to my Lord's lodgings, where she and I staid
walking in White Hall garden. And in the Privy-garden saw the finest
smocks and linnen petticoats of my Lady Castlemaine's, laced with rich
lace at the bottom, that ever I saw; and did me good to look upon them.
So to Wilkinson's, she and I and Sarah to dinner, where I had a good
quarter of lamb and a salat. Here Sarah told me how the King dined at my
Lady Castlemaine's, and supped, every day and night the last week;
and that the night that the bonfires were made for joy of the Queen's
arrivall, the King was there; but there was no fire at her door, though
at all the rest of the doors almost in the street; which was much
observed: and that the King and she did send for a pair of scales and
weighed one another; and she, being with child, was said to be heaviest.
But she is now a most disconsolate creature, and comes not out of
doors, since the King's going. But we went to the Theatre to "The French
Dancing Master," and there with much pleasure gazed upon her (Lady
Castlemaine); but it troubles us to see her look dejectedly and slighted
by people already. The play pleased us very well; but Lacy's part, the
Dancing Master, the best in the world. Thence to my brother Tom's, in
expectation to have met my father to-night come out of the country, but
he is not yet come, but here we found my uncle Fenner and his old wife,
whom I had not seen since the wedding dinner, nor care to see her. They
being gone, my wife and I went and saw Mrs. Turner, whom we found not
well, and her two boys Charles and Will come out of the country, grown
very plain boys after three years being under their father's care in
Yorkshire. Thence to Tom's again, and there supped well, my she cozen
Scott being there and my father being not come, we walked home and to
bed.

22d. This morning comes an order from the Secretary of State, Nicholas,
for me to let one Mr. Lee, a Councellor, to view what papers I have
relating to passages of the late times, wherein Sir H. Vane's hand is
employed, in order to the drawing up his charge; which I did, and at
noon he, with Sir W. Pen and his daughter, dined with me, and he to his
work again, and we by coach to the Theatre and saw "Love in a Maze." The
play hath little in it but Lacy's part of a country fellow, which he did
to admiration. So home, and supped with Sir W. Pen, where Sir W.
Batten and Captn. Cocke came to us, to whom I have lately been a great
stranger. This night we had each of us a letter from Captain Teddiman
from the Streights, of a peace made upon good terms, by Sir J. Lawson,
with the Argier men, which is most excellent news? He hath also sent
each of us some anchovies, olives, and muscatt; but I know not yet what
that is, and am ashamed to ask. After supper home, and to bed, resolving
to make up this week in seeing plays and pleasure, and so fall to
business next week again for a great while.

23rd. At the office good part of the morning, and then about noon with
my wife on foot to the Wardrobe. My wife went up to the dining room to
my Lady Paulina, and I staid below talking with Mr. Moore in the parley,
reading of the King's and Chancellor's late speeches at the proroguing
of the Houses of Parliament. And while I was reading, news was brought
me that my Lord Sandwich is come and gone up to my Lady, which put me
into great suspense of joy, so I went up waiting my Lord's coming out of
my Lady's chamber, which by and by he did, and looks very well, and my
soul is glad to see him. He very merry, and hath left the King and Queen
at Portsmouth, and is come up to stay here till next Wednesday, and then
to meet the King and Queen at Hampton Court. So to dinner, Mr. Browne,
Clerk of the House of Lords, and his wife and brother there also; and my
Lord mighty merry; among other things, saying that the Queen is a very
agreeable lady, and paints still. After dinner I showed him my letter
from Teddiman about the news from Argier, which pleases him exceedingly;
and he writ one to the Duke of York about it, and sent it express. There
coming much company after dinner to my Lord, my wife and I slunk away to
the Opera, where we saw "Witt in a Constable," the first time that it is
acted; but so silly a play I never saw I think in my life. After it was
done, my wife and I to the puppet play in Covent Garden, which I saw
the other day, and indeed it is very pleasant. Here among the fidlers I
first saw a dulcimere

     [The dulcimer (or psaltery) consisted of a flat box, acting as a
     resonating chamber, over which strings of wire were stretched: These
     were struck by little hammers.]

played on with sticks knocking of the strings, and is very pretty. So by
water home, and supped with Sir William Pen very merry, and so to bed.

24th. To the Wardrobe, and there again spoke with my Lord, and saw W.
Howe, who is grown a very pretty and is a sober fellow. Thence abroad
with Mr. Creed, of whom I informed myself of all I had a mind to know.
Among other things, the great difficulty my Lord hath been in all this
summer for lack of good and full orders from the King; and I doubt our
Lords of the Councell do not mind things as the late powers did, but
their pleasures or profit more. That the Juego de Toros is a simple
sport, yet the greatest in Spain. That the Queen hath given no rewards
to any of the captains or officers, but only to my Lord Sandwich; and
that was a bag of gold, which was no honourable present, of about L1400
sterling. How recluse the Queen hath ever been, and all the voyage never
come upon the deck, nor put her head out of her cabin; but did love my
Lord's musique, and would send for it down to the state-room, and she
sit in her cabin within hearing of it. That my Lord was forced to
have some clashing with the Council of Portugall about payment of the
portion, before he could get it; which was, besides Tangier and a free
trade in the Indys, two millions of crowns, half now, and the other half
in twelve months. But they have brought but little money; but the rest
in sugars and other commoditys, and bills of exchange. That the King of
Portugall is a very fool almost, and his mother do all, and he is a very
poor Prince. After a morning draft at the Star in Cheapside, I took him
to the Exchange, thence home, but my wife having dined, I took him to
Fish Street, and there we had a couple of lobsters, and dined upon them,
and much discourse. And so I to the office, and that being done, Sir W.
Pen and I to Deptford by water to Captain Rooth's to see him, he being
very sick, and by land home, calling at Halfway house, where we eat and
drank. So home and to bed.

25th (Lord's day). To trimming myself, which I have this week done every
morning, with a pumice stone,--[Shaving with pumice stone.]--which I
learnt of Mr. Marsh, when I was last at Portsmouth; and I find it very
easy, speedy, and cleanly, and shall continue the practice of it. To
church, and heard a good sermon of Mr. Woodcocke's at our church; only
in his latter prayer for a woman in childbed, he prayed that God would
deliver her from the hereditary curse of child-bearing, which seemed a
pretty strange expression. Dined at home, and Mr. Creed with me. This
day I had the first dish of pease I have had this year. After discourse
he and I abroad, and walked up and down, and looked into many churches,
among others Mr. Baxter's at Blackfryers. Then to the Wardrobe, where
I found my Lord takes physic, so I did not see him, but with Captn.
Ferrers in Mr. George Montagu's coach to Charing Cross; and there at the
Triumph tavern he showed me some Portugall ladys, which are come to
town before the Queen. They are not handsome, and their farthingales a
strange dress.

     [Farthingales had gone out of fashion in England during the reign of
     Charles I., and therefore their use by the Portuguese ladies
     astonished the English.  Evelyn also remarks in his Diary on this
     ugly custom (May 30th, 1662).]

Many ladies and persons of quality come to see them. I find nothing
in them that is pleasing; and I see they have learnt to kiss and look
freely up and down already, and I do believe will soon forget the
recluse practice of their own country. They complain much for lack of
good water to drink. So to the Wardrobe back on foot and supped with
my Lady, and so home, and after a walk upon the leads with my wife, to
prayers and bed. The King's guards and some City companies do walk up
and down the town these five or six days; which makes me think, and they
do say, there are some plots in laying. God keep us.

26th. Up by four o'clock in the morning, and fell to the preparing of
some accounts for my Lord of Sandwich. By and by, by appointment comes
Mr. Moore, and, by what appears to us at present, we found that my Lord
is above L7,000 in debt, and that he hath money coming into him that
will clear all, and so we think him clear, but very little money in his
purse. So to my Lord's, and after he was ready, we spent an hour with
him, giving him an account thereof; and he having some L6,000 in his
hands, remaining of the King's, he is resolved to make use of that, and
get off of it as well as he can, which I like well of, for else I fear
he will scarce get beforehand again a great while. Thence home, and
to the Trinity House; where the Brethren (who have been at Deptford
choosing a new Maister; which is Sir J. Minnes, notwithstanding Sir W.
Batten did contend highly for it: at which I am not a little pleased,
because of his proud lady) about three o'clock came hither, and so to
dinner. I seated myself close by Mr. Prin, who, in discourse with me,
fell upon what records he hath of the lust and wicked lives of the
nuns heretofore in England, and showed me out of his pocket one wherein
thirty nuns for their lust were ejected of their house, being not fit
to live there, and by the Pope's command to be put, however, into
other nunnerys. I could not stay to end dinner with them, but rose, and
privately went out, and by water to my brother's, and thence to take my
wife to the Redd Bull, where we saw "Doctor Faustus," but so wretchedly
and poorly done, that we were sick of it, and the worse because by
a former resolution it is to be the last play we are to see till
Michaelmas. Thence homewards by coach, through Moorefields, where we
stood awhile, and saw the wrestling. At home, got my lute upon the
leads, and there played, and so to bed.

27th. To my Lord this morning, and thence to my brother's, where I found
my father, poor man, come, which I was glad to see. I staid with him
till noon, and then he went to my cozen Scott's to dinner, who had
invited him. He tells me his alterations of the house and garden at
Brampton, which please me well. I could not go with him, and so we
parted at Ludgate, and I home to dinner, and to the office all the
afternoon, and musique in my chamber alone at night, and so to bed.

28th. Up early to put things in order in my chamber, and then to my
Lord's, with whom I spoke about several things, and so up and down
in several places about business with Mr. Creed, among others to Mr.
Wotton's the shoemaker, and there drank our morning draft, and then home
about noon, and by and by comes my father by appointment to dine with
me, which we did very merrily, I desiring to make him as merry as I can,
while the poor man is in town. After dinner comes my uncle Wight and
sat awhile and talked with us, and thence we three to the Mum House at
Leadenhall, and there sat awhile. Then I left them, and to the Wardrobe,
where I found my Lord gone to Hampton Court. Here I staid all the
afternoon till late with Creed and Captain Ferrers, thinking whether
we should go to-morrow together to Hampton Court, but Ferrers his wife
coming in by and by to the house with the young ladies (with whom she
had been abroad), she was unwilling to go, whereupon I was willing to
put off our going, and so home, but still my mind was hankering after
our going to-morrow. So to bed.

29th. At home all the morning. At noon to the Wardrobe, and dined with
my Lady, and after dinner staid long talking with her; then homeward,
and in Lumbard Street was called out of a window by Alderman Backwell,
where I went, and saluted his lady, a very pretty woman. Here was Mr.
Creed, and it seems they have been under some disorder in fear of a fire
at the next door, and had been removing their goods, but the fire was
over before I came. Thence home, and with my wife and the two maids, and
the boy, took boat and to Foxhall,

     [Foxhall, Faukeshall, or Vauxhall, a manor in Surrey, properly
     Fulke's.  Hall, and so called from Fulke de Breaute, the notorious
     mercenary follower of King John.  The manor house was afterwards
     known as Copped or Copt Hall.  Sir Samuel Morland obtained a lease
     of the place, and King Charles made him Master of Mechanics, and
     here "he (Morland), anno 1667, built a fine room," says Aubrey, "the
     inside all of looking-glass and fountains, very pleasant to behold."
     The gardens were formed about 1661, and originally called the "New
     Spring Gardens," to distinguish them from the "Old Spring Gardens"
     at Charing Cross, but according to the present description by Pepys
     there was both an Old and a New Spring Garden at Vauxhall.
     Balthazar Monconys, who visited England early in the reign of
     Charles II., describes the 'Jardins Printemps' at Lambeth as having
     lawns and gravel walks, dividing squares of twenty or thirty yards
     enclosed with hedges of gooseberry trees, within which were planted
     roses.]

where I had not been a great while. To the Old Spring Garden, and there
walked long, and the wenches gathered pinks. Here we staid, and seeing
that we could not have anything to eat, but very dear, and with long
stay, we went forth again without any notice taken of us, and so we
might have done if we had had anything. Thence to the New one, where I
never was before, which much exceeds the other; and here we also walked,
and the boy crept through the hedge and gathered abundance of roses,
and, after a long walk, passed out of doors as we did in the other
place, and here we had cakes and powdered beef--[salt beef]--and ale,
and so home again by water with much pleasure. This day, being the
King's birth-day, was very solemnly observed; and the more, for that
the Queen this day comes to Hampton Court. In the evening, bonfires were
made, but nothing to the great number that was heretofore at the burning
of the Rump. So to bed.

30th. This morning I made up my accounts, and find myself 'de claro'
worth about L530, and no more, so little have I increased it since my
last reckoning; but I confess I have laid out much money in clothes.
Upon a suddaine motion I took my wife, and Sarah and Will by water, with
some victuals with us, as low as Gravesend, intending to have gone into
the Hope to the Royal James, to have seen the ship and Mr. Shepley, but
meeting Mr. Shepley in a hoy, bringing up my Lord's things, she and I
went on board, and sailed up with them as far as half-way tree, very
glad to see Mr. Shepley. Here we saw a little Turk and a negroe, which
are intended for pages to the two young ladies. Many birds and other
pretty noveltys there was, but I was afeard of being louzy, and so
took boat again, and got to London before them, all the way, coming and
going, reading in the "Wallflower" with great pleasure. So home, and
thence to the Wardrobe, where Mr. Shepley was come with the things.
Here I staid talking with my Lady, who is preparing to go to-morrow to
Hampton Court. So home, and at ten o'clock at night Mr. Shepley came to
sup with me. So we had a dish of mackerell and pease, and so he bid us
good night, going to lie on board the hoy, and I to bed.

31st. Lay long in bed, and so up to make up my Journall for these two or
three days past. Then came Anthony Joyce, who duns me for money for the
tallow which he served in lately by my desire, which vexes me, but I
must get it him the next by my promise. By and by to White Hall, hearing
that Sir G. Carteret was come to town, but I could not find him, and
so back to Tom's, and thence I took my father to my house, and there he
dined with me, discoursing of our businesses with uncle Thomas and T.
Trice. After dinner he departed and I to the office where we met, and
that being done I walked to my Brother's and the Wardrobe and other
places about business, and so home, and had Sarah to comb my head clean,
which I found so foul with powdering and other troubles, that I am
resolved to try how I can keep my head dry without powder; and I did
also in a suddaine fit cut off all my beard, which I had been a great
while bringing up, only that I may with my pumice-stone do my whole
face, as I now do my chin, and to save time, which I find a very easy
way and gentile. So she also washed my feet in a bath of herbs, and
so to bed. This month ends with very fair weather for a great while
together. My health pretty well, but only wind do now and then torment
me... extremely. The Queen is brought a few days since to Hampton Court;
and all people say of her to be a very fine and handsome lady, and very
discreet; and that the King is pleased enough with her which, I fear,
will put Madam Castlemaine's nose out of joynt. The Court is wholly now
at Hampton. A peace with Argier is lately made; which is also good news.
My father is lately come to town to see us, and though it has cost and
will cost more money, yet I am pleased with the alteraeons on my house
at Brampton. My Lord Sandwich is lately come with the Queen from sea,
very well and in good repute. Upon an audit of my estate I find myself
worth about L530 'de claro'. The Act for Uniformity is lately printed,

     ["An Act for the Uniformity of public prayers and administration of
     sacraments and other rites and ceremonies, and for establishing the
     form of making, ordaining, and consecrating bishops, priests, and
     deacons in the Church of England."]

which, it is thought, will make mad work among the Presbyterian
ministers. People of all sides are very much discontented; some thinking
themselves used, contrary to promise, too hardly; and the other, that
they are not rewarded so much as they expected by the King. God keep us
all. I have by a late oath obliged myself from wine and plays, of which
I find good effect.




JUNE 1662

June 1st (Lord's day). At church in the morning. A stranger made a very
good sermon. Dined at home, and Mr. Spong came to see me; so he and I
sat down a little to sing some French psalms, and then comes Mr. Shepley
and Mr. Moore, and so we to dinner, and after dinner to church again,
where a Presbyter made a sad and long sermon, which vexed me, and so
home, and so to walk on the leads, and supper and to prayers and bed.

2nd. Up early about business and then to the Wardrobe with Mr. Moore,
and spoke to my Lord about the exchange of the crusados

     [Cruzado, a Portuguese coin of 480 reis.  It is named from a cross
     which it bears on one side, the arms of Portugal being on the other.
     It varied in value at different periods from 2s. 3d. to 4s.]

into sterling money, and other matters. So to my father at Tom's, and
after some talk with him away home, and by and by comes my father to
dinner with me, and then by coach, setting him down in Cheapside, my
wife and I to Mrs. Clarke's at Westminster, the first visit that ever
we both made her yet. We found her in a dishabille, intending to go to
Hampton Court to-morrow. We had much pretty discourse, and a very fine
lady she is. Thence by water to Salisbury Court, and Mrs. Turner not
being at home, home by coach, and so after walking on the leads and
supper to bed. This day my wife put on her slasht wastecoate, which is
very pretty.

3rd. Up by four o'clock and to my business in my chamber, to even
accounts with my Lord and myself, and very fain I would become master
of L1000, but I have not above L530 toward it yet. At the office all the
morning, and Mr. Coventry brought his patent and took his place with
us this morning. Upon our making a contract, I went, as I use to do,
to draw the heads thereof, but Sir W. Pen most basely told me that the
Comptroller is to do it, and so begun to employ Mr. Turner about it, at
which I was much vexed, and begun to dispute; and what with the letter
of the Duke's orders, and Mr. Barlow's letter, and the practice of our
predecessors, which Sir G. Carteret knew best when he was Comptroller,
it was ruled for me. What Sir J. Minnes will do when he comes I know
not, but Sir W. Pen did it like a base raskall, and so I shall remember
him while I live. After office done, I went down to the Towre Wharf,
where Mr. Creed and Shepley was ready with three chests of the crusados,
being about L6000, ready to bring to shore to my house, which they did,
and put it in my further cellar, and Mr. Shepley took the key. I to my
father and Dr. Williams and Tom Trice, by appointment, in the Old Bayly,
to Short's, the alehouse, but could come to no terms with T. Trice.
Thence to the Wardrobe, where I found my Lady come from Hampton Court,
where the Queen hath used her very civilly; and my Lady tells me is a
most pretty woman, at which I am glad. Yesterday (Sir R. Ford told me)
the Aldermen of the City did attend her in their habits, and did present
her with a gold Cupp and L1000 in gold therein. But, he told me, that
they are so poor in their Chamber, that they were fain to call two or
three Aldermen to raise fines to make up this sum, among which was Sir
W. Warren. Home and to the office, where about 8 at night comes Sir G.
Carteret and Sir W. Batten, and so we did some business, and then home
and to bed, my mind troubled about Sir W. Pen, his playing the rogue
with me to-day, as also about the charge of money that is in my house,
which I had forgot; but I made the maids to rise and light a candle, and
set it in the dining-room, to scare away thieves, and so to sleep.

4th. Up early, and Mr. Moore comes to me and tells me that Mr. Barnwell
is dead, which troubles me something, and the more for that I believe we
shall lose Mr. Shepley's company. By and by Sir W. Batten and I by water
to Woolwich; and there saw an experiment made of Sir R. Ford's Holland's
yarn (about which we have lately had so much stir; and I have much
concerned myself for our ropemaker, Mr. Hughes, who has represented it
as bad), and we found it to be very bad, and broke sooner than, upon a
fair triall, five threads of that against four of Riga yarn; and also
that some of it had old stuff that had been tarred, covered over with
new hemp, which is such a cheat as hath not been heard of. I was glad of
this discovery, because I would not have the King's workmen discouraged
(as Sir W. Batten do most basely do) from representing the faults of
merchants' goods, where there is any. After eating some fish that we
had bought upon the water at Falconer's, we went to Woolwich, and there
viewed our frames of our houses, and so home, and I to my Lord's, who I
find resolved to buy Brampton Manor of Sir Peter Ball,

     [Sir Peter Ball was the Queen's Attorney-General, and Evelyn
     mentions, in his Diary (January 11th, 1661-62), having received from
     him the draft of an act against the nuisance of the smoke of
     London.]

at which I am glad. Thence to White Hall, and showed Sir G. Carteret the
cheat, and so to the Wardrobe, and there staid and supped with my Lady.
My Lord eating nothing, but writes letters to-night to several places,
he being to go out of town to-morrow. So late home and to bed.

5th. To the Wardrobe, and there my Lord did enquire my opinion of Mr.
Moore, which I did give to the best advantage I could, and by that means
shall get him joined with Mr. Townsend in the Wardrobe business. He did
also give me all Mr. Shepley's and Mr. Moore's accounts to view, which
I am glad of, as being his great trust in me, and I would willingly keep
up a good interest with him. So took leave of him (he being to go this
day) and to the office, where they were just sat down, and I showed them
yesterday's discovery, and have got Sir R. Ford to be my enemy by it;
but I care not, for it is my duty, and so did get his bill stopped for
the present. To dinner, and found Dr. Thos. Pepys at my house; but I was
called from dinner by a note from Mr. Moore to Alderman Backwell's, to
see some thousands of my Lord's crusados weighed, and we find that
3,000 come to about L530 or 40 generally. Home again and found my father
there; we talked a good while and so parted. We met at the office in the
afternoon to finish Mr. Gauden's accounts, but did not do them quite. In
the evening with Mr. Moore to Backwell's with another 1,200 crusados and
saw them weighed, and so home and to bed.

6th. At my office all alone all the morning, and the smith being with me
about other things, did open a chest that hath stood ever since I came
to the office, in my office, and there we found a modell of a fine ship,
which I long to know whether it be the King's or Mr. Turner's. At noon
to the Wardrobe by appointment to meet my father, who did come and was
well treated by my Lady, who tells me she has some thoughts to send her
two little boys to our house at Brampton, but I have got leave for them
to go along with me and my wife to Hampton Court to-morrow or Sunday.
Thence to my brother Tom's, where we found a letter from Pall that my
mother is dangerously ill in fear of death, which troubles my father
and me much, but I hope it is otherwise, the letter being four days old
since it was writ. Home and at my office, and with Mr. Hater set things
in order till evening, and so home and to bed by daylight. This day at
my father's desire I lent my brother Tom L20, to be repaid out of the
proceeds of Sturtlow when we can sell it. I sent the money all in new
money by my boy from Alderman Backwell's.

7th. To the office, where all the morning, and I find Mr. Coventry is
resolved to do much good, and to enquire into all the miscarriages of
the office. At noon with him and Sir W. Batten to dinner at Trinity
House; where, among others, Sir J. Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower,
was, who says that yesterday Sir H. Vane had a full hearing at the
King's Bench, and is found guilty; and that he did never hear any man
argue more simply than he in all his life, and so others say. My mind
in great trouble whether I should go as I intended to Hampton Court
to-morrow or no. At last resolved the contrary, because of the charge
thereof, and I am afraid now to bring in any accounts for journeys, and
so will others I suppose be, because of Mr. Coventry's prying into them.
Thence sent for to Sir G. Carteret's, and there talked with him a good
while. I perceive, as he told me, were it not that Mr. Coventry had
already feathered his nest in selling of places, he do like him very
well, and hopes great good from him. But he complains so of lack of
money, that my heart is very sad, under the apprehension of the fall of
the office. At my office all the afternoon, and at night hear that my
father is gone into the country, but whether to Richmond as he intended,
and thence to meet us at Hampton Court on Monday, I know not, or to
Brampton. At which I am much troubled. In the evening home and to bed.

8th (Lord's day). Lay till church-time in bed, and so up and to church,
and there I found Mr. Mills come home out of the country again, and
preached but a lazy sermon. Home and dined with my wife, and so to
church again with her. Thence walked to my Lady's, and there supped with
her, and merry, among other things, with the parrott which my Lord
hath brought from the sea, which speaks very well, and cries Pall so
pleasantly, that made my Lord give it my Lady Paulina; but my Lady, her
mother, do not like it. Home, and observe my man Will to walk with his
cloak flung over his shoulder, like a Ruffian, which, whether it was
that he might not be seen to walk along with the footboy, I know not,
but I was vexed at it; and coming home, and after prayers, I did ask him
where he learned that immodest garb, and he answered me that it was not
immodest, or some such slight answer, at which I did give him two
boxes on the ears, which I never did before, and so was after a little
troubled at it.

9th. Early up and at the office with Mr. Hater, making my alphabet of
contracts, upon the dispatch of which I am now very intent, for that
I am resolved much to enquire into the price of commodities. Dined at
home, and after dinner to Greatorex's, and with him and another stranger
to the Tavern, but I drank no wine. He recommended Bond, of our end of
the town, to teach me to measure timber, and some other things that I
would learn, in order to my office. Thence back again to the office,
and there T. Hater and I did make an end of my alphabet, which did much
please me. So home to supper and to bed.

10th. At the office all the morning, much business; and great hopes of
bringing things, by Mr. Coventry's means, to a good condition in the
office. Dined at home, Mr. Hunt with us; to the office again in the
afternoon, but not meeting, as was intended, I went to my brother's
and bookseller's, and other places about business, and paid off all for
books to this day, and do not intend to buy any more of any kind a good
while, though I had a great mind to have bought the King's works, as
they are new printed in folio, and present it to my Lord; but I think it
will be best to save the money. So home and to bed.

     [There is a beautiful copy of "The Workes of King Charles the
     Martyr, and Collections of Declarations, Treaties, &c."  (2 vols.
     folio, 1662), in the Pepysian Library, with a very interesting note
     in the first volume by Pepys (dated October 7th, 1700), to the
     effect that he had collated it with a copy in Lambeth Library,
     presented by Dr. Zachary Cradock, Provost of Eton.  "This book being
     seized on board an English ship was delivered, by order of the
     Inquisition of Lisbon, to some of the English Priests to be perused
     and corrected according to the Rules of the 'Index Expurgatorius.'
     Thus corrected it was given to Barnaby Crafford, English merchant
     there, and by him it was given to me, the English preacher resident
     there A.D. 1670, and by me as I then received it to the Library at
     Lambeth to be there preserved.  Nov. 2, 1678.  'Ita testor', Zach.
     Cradock.--From which (through the favour of the most Reverend Father
     in God and my most honoured Friend his Grace the present Archbishop
     of Canterbury) I have this 7th of October, 1700, had an opportunity
     given me there (assisted by my clerk, Thomas Henderson), leisurely to
     overlook, and with my uttermost attention to note the said
     Expurgations through each part of this my own Book."  Whole
     sentences in the book are struck through, as well as such words as
     Martyr, Defender of the Faith, More than Conqueror, &c.]

11th. At the office all the morning, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, and I
about the Victualler's accounts. Then home to dinner and to the office
again all the afternoon, Mr. Hater and I writing over my Alphabet
fair, in which I took great pleasure to rule the lines and to have the
capitall words wrote with red ink. So home and to supper. This evening
Savill the Paynter came and did varnish over my wife's picture and mine,
and I paid him for my little picture L3, and so am clear with him. So
after supper to bed. This day I had a letter from my father that he is
got down well, and found my mother pretty well again. So that I am
vexed with all my heart at Pall for writing to him so much concerning my
mother's illness (which I believe was not so great), so that he should
be forced to hasten down on the sudden back into the country without
taking leave, or having any pleasure here.

12th. This morning I tried on my riding cloth suit with close knees, the
first that ever I had; and I think they will be very convenient, if not
too hot to wear any other open knees after them. At the office all the
morning, where we had a full Board, viz., Sir G. Carteret, Sir John
Mennes, Sir W. Batten, Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Pen, Mr. Pett, and myself.
Among many other businesses, I did get a vote signed by all, concerning
my issuing of warrants, which they did not smell the use I intend to
make of it; but it is to plead for my clerks to have their right of
giving out all warrants, at which I am not a little pleased. But a great
difference happened between Sir G. Carteret and Mr. Coventry, about
passing the Victualler's account, and whether Sir George is to pay the
Victualler his money, or the Exchequer; Sir George claiming it to be
his place to save his threepences. It ended in anger, and I believe will
come to be a question before the King and Council. I did what I could to
keep myself unconcerned in it, having some things of my own to do before
I would appear high in anything. Thence to dinner, by Mr. Gauden's
invitation, to the Dolphin, where a good dinner; but what is to myself a
great wonder; that with ease I past the whole dinner without drinking a
drop of wine. After dinner to the office, my head full of business, and
so home, and it being the longest day in the year,--[That is, by the
old style. The new style was not introduced until 1752]--I made all my
people go to bed by daylight. But after I was a-bed and asleep, a
note came from my brother Tom to tell me that my cozen Anne Pepys, of
Worcestershire, her husband is dead, and she married again, and her
second husband in town, and intends to come and see me to-morrow.

13th. Up by 4 o'clock in the morning, and read Cicero's Second Oration
against Catiline, which pleased me exceedingly; and more I discern
therein than ever I thought was to be found in him; but I perceive it
was my ignorance, and that he is as good a writer as ever I read in my
life. By and by to Sir G. Carteret's, to talk with him about yesterday's
difference at the office; and offered my service to look into any old
books or papers that I have, that may make for him. He was well pleased
therewith, and did much inveigh against Mr. Coventry; telling me how he
had done him service in the Parliament, when Prin had drawn up things
against him for taking of money for places; that he did at his desire,
and upon his, letters, keep him off from doing it. And many other things
he told me, as how the King was beholden to him, and in what a miserable
condition his family would be, if he should die before he hath cleared
his accounts. Upon the whole, I do find that he do much esteem of me,
and is my friend, and I may make good use of him. Thence to several
places about business, among others to my brother's, and there Tom
Beneere the barber trimmed me. Thence to my Lady's, and there dined with
her, Mr. Laxton, Gibbons, and Goldgroove with us, and after dinner some
musique, and so home to my business, and in the evening my wife and I,
and Sarah and the boy, a most pleasant walk to Halfway house, and so
home and to bed.

14th. Up by four o'clock in the morning and upon business at my office.
Then we sat down to business, and about 11 o'clock, having a room got
ready for us, we all went out to the Tower-hill; and there, over against
the scaffold, made on purpose this day, saw Sir Henry Vane brought.

     [Sir Harry Vane the younger was born 1612.  Charles signed on June
     12th a warrant for the execution of Vane by hanging at Tyburn on the
     14th, which sentence on the following day "upon humble suit made" to
     him, Charles was "graciously pleased to mitigate," as the warrant
     terms it, for the less ignominious punishment of beheading on Tower
     Hill, and with permission that the head and body should be given to
     the relations to be by them decently and privately interred.--
     Lister's Life of Clarendon, ii, 123.]

A very great press of people. He made a long speech, many times
interrupted by the Sheriff and others there; and they would have taken
his paper out of his hand, but he would not let it go. But they caused
all the books of those that writ after him to be given the Sheriff; and
the trumpets were brought under the scaffold that he might not be heard.
Then he prayed, and so fitted himself, and received the blow; but the
scaffold was so crowded that we could not see it done. But Boreman, who
had been upon the scaffold, came to us and told us, that first he began
to speak of the irregular proceeding against him; that he was, against
Magna Charta, denied to have his exceptions against the indictment
allowed; and that there he was stopped by the Sheriff. Then he drew out
his, paper of notes, and begun to tell them first his life; that he
was born a gentleman, that he was bred up and had the quality of a
gentleman, and to make him in the opinion of the world more a gentleman,
he had been, till he was seventeen years old, a good fellow, but then it
pleased God to lay a foundation of grace in his heart, by which he was
persuaded, against his worldly interest, to leave all preferment and go
abroad, where he might serve God with more freedom. Then he was called
home, and made a member of the Long Parliament; where he never did, to
this day, any thing against his conscience, but all for the glory of
God. Here he would have given them an account of the proceedings of the
Long Parliament, but they so often interrupted him, that at last he was
forced to give over: and so fell into prayer for England in generall,
then for the churches in England, and then for the City of London:
and so fitted himself for the block, and received the blow. He had a
blister, or issue, upon his neck, which he desired them not hurt:
he changed not his colour or speech to the last, but died justifying
himself and the cause he had stood for; and spoke very confidently of
his being presently at the right hand of Christ; and in all, things
appeared the most resolved man that ever died in that manner, and showed
more of heat than cowardize, but yet with all humility and gravity. One
asked him why he did not pray for the King. He answered, "Nay," says he,
"you shall see I can pray for the King: I pray God bless him!" The King
had given his body to his friends; and, therefore, he told them that he
hoped they would be civil to his body when dead; and desired they
would let him die like a gentleman and a Christian, and not crowded
and pressed as he was. So to the office a little, and so to the
Trinity-house all of us to dinner; and then to the office again all
the afternoon till night. So home and to bed. This day, I hear, my
Lord Peterborough is come unexpected from Tangier, to give the King an
account of the place, which, we fear, is in none of the best condition.
We had also certain news to-day that the Spaniard is before Lisbon with
thirteen sail; six Dutch, and the rest his own ships; which will,
I fear, be ill for Portugall. I writ a letter of all this day's
proceedings to my Lord, at Hinchingbroke, who, I hear, is very well
pleased with the work there.

15th (Lord's day). To church in the morning and home to dinner, where
come my brother Tom and Mr. Fisher, my cozen, Nan Pepys's second
husband, who, I perceive, is a very good-humoured man, an old cavalier.
I made as much of him as I could, and were merry, and am glad she hath
light of so good a man. They gone, to church again; but my wife not
being dressed as I would have her, I was angry, and she, when she was
out of doors in her way to church, returned home again vexed. But I to
church, Mr. Mills, an ordinary sermon. So home, and found my wife and
Sarah gone to a neighbour church, at which I was not much displeased. By
and by she comes again, and, after a word or two, good friends. And
then her brother came to see her, and he being gone she told me that
she believed he was married and had a wife worth L500 to him, and did
inquire how he might dispose the money to the best advantage, but I
forbore to advise her till she could certainly tell me how things are
with him, being loth to meddle too soon with him. So to walk upon the
leads, and to supper, and to bed.

16th. Up before four o'clock, and after some business took Will forth,
and he and I walked over the Tower Hill, but the gate not being open
we walked through St. Catharine's and Ratcliffe (I think it is) by the
waterside above a mile before we could get a boat, and so over the water
in a scull (which I have not done a great while), and walked finally
to Deptford, where I saw in what forwardness the work is for Sir W.
Batten's house and mine, and it is almost ready. I also, with Mr. Davis,
did view my cozen Joyce's tallow, and compared it with the Irish tallow
we bought lately, and found ours much more white, but as soft as it; now
what is the fault, or whether it be or no a fault, I know not. So walked
home again as far as over against the Towre, and so over and home,
where I found Sir W. Pen and Sir John Minnes discoursing about Sir John
Minnes's house and his coming to live with us, and I think he intends to
have Mr. Turner's house and he to come to his lodgings, which I shall be
very glad of. We three did go to Mr. Turner's to view his house, which
I think was to the end that Sir John Minnes might see it. Then by water
with my wife to the Wardrobe, and dined there; and in the afternoon with
all the children by water to Greenwich, where I showed them the King's
yacht, the house, and the park, all very pleasant; and so to the tavern,
and had the musique of the house, and so merrily home again. Will and
I walked home from the Wardrobe, having left my wife at the Tower Wharf
coming by, whom I found gone to bed not very well.... So to bed.

17th. Up, and Mr. Mayland comes to me and borrowed 30s. of me to be paid
again out of the money coming to him in the James and Charles for his
late voyage. So to the office, where all the morning. So home to dinner,
my wife not being well, but however dined with me. So to the office,
and at Sir W. Batten's, where we all met by chance and talked, and
they drank wine; but I forebore all their healths. Sir John Minnes,
I perceive, is most excellent company. So home and to bed betimes by
daylight.

18th. Up early; and after reading a little in Cicero, I made me ready
and to my office, where all the morning very busy. At noon Mr. Creed
came to me about business, and he and I walked as far as Lincoln's Inn
Fields together. After a turn or two in the walks we parted, and I to my
Lord Crew's and dined with him; where I hear the courage of Sir H. Vane
at his death is talked on every where as a miracle. Thence to Somerset
House to Sir J. Winter's chamber by appointment, and met Mr. Pett, where
he and I read over his last contract with the King for the Forest of
Dean, whereof I took notes because of this new one that he is now in
making. That done he and I walked to Lilly's, the painter's, where
we saw among other rare things, the Duchess of York, her whole body,
sitting instate in a chair, in white sattin, and another of the King,
that is not finished; most rare things. I did give the fellow something
that showed them us, and promised to come some other time, and he would
show me Lady Castlemaine's, which I could not then see, it being locked
up! Thence to Wright's, the painter's: but, Lord! the difference that is
between their two works. Thence to the Temple, and there spoke with my
cozen Roger, who gives me little hopes in the business between my Uncle
Tom and us. So Mr. Pett (who staid at his son's chamber) and I by coach
to the old Exchange, and there parted, and I home and at the office till
night. My windows at my office are made clean to-day and a casement in
my closet. So home, and after some merry discourse in the kitchen with
my wife and maids as I now-a-days often do, I being well pleased with
both my maids, to bed.

19th. Up by five o'clock, and while my man Will was getting himself
ready to come up to me I took and played upon my lute a little. So to
dress myself, and to my office to prepare things against we meet this
morning. We sat long to-day, and had a great private business before us
about contracting with Sir W. Rider, Mr. Cutler, and Captain Cocke,
for 500 ton of hemp, which we went through, and I am to draw up the
conditions. Home to dinner, where I found Mr. Moore, and he and I cast
up our accounts together and evened them, and then with the last chest
of crusados to Alderman Backwell's, by the same token his lady going to
take coach stood in the shop, and having a gilded glassfull of perfumed
comfits given her by Don Duarte de Silva, the Portugall merchant, that
is come over with the Queen, I did offer at a taste, and so she poured
some out into my hand, and, though good, yet pleased me the better
coming from a pretty lady. So home and at the office preparing papers
and things, and indeed my head has not been so full of business a great
while, and with so much pleasure, for I begin to see the pleasure it
gives. God give me health. So to bed.

20th. Up by four or five o'clock, and to the office, and there drew up
the agreement between the King and Sir John Winter about the Forrest of
Deane; and having done it, he came himself (I did not know him to be the
Queen's Secretary before, but observed him to be a man of fine parts);
and we read it, and both liked it well. That done, I turned to the
Forrest of Deane, in Speede's Mapps, and there he showed me how it lies;
and the Lea-bayly, with the great charge of carrying it to Lydny, and
many other things worth my knowing; and I do perceive that I am very
short in my business by not knowing many times the geographical part
of my business. At my office till Mr. Moore took me out and at my house
looked over our papers again, and upon our evening accounts did give
full discharges one to the other, and in his and many other accounts I
perceive I shall be better able to give a true balance of my estate to
myself within a day or two than I have been this twelve months. Then
he and I to Alderman Backwell's and did the like there, and I gave one
receipt for all the money I have received thence upon the receipt of
my Lord's crusados. Then I went to the Exchange, and hear that the
merchants have a great fear of a breach with the Spaniard; for they
think he will not brook our having Tangier, Dunkirk, and Jamaica; and
our merchants begin to draw home their estates as fast as they can. Then
to Pope's Head Ally, and there bought me a pair of tweezers, cost me
14s., the first thing like a bawble I have bought a good while, but I do
it with some trouble of mind, though my conscience tells me that I do
it with an apprehension of service in my office to have a book to write
memorandums in, and a pair of compasses in it; but I confess myself the
willinger to do it because I perceive by my accounts that I shall be
better by L30 than I expected to be. But by tomorrow night I intend to
see to the bottom of all my accounts. Then home to dinner, where Mr.
Moore met me. Then he went away, and I to the office and dispatch much
business. So in the evening, my wife and I and Jane over the water to
the Halfway-house, a pretty, pleasant walk, but the wind high. So home
again and to bed.

21st. Up about four o'clock, and settled some private business of my
own, then made me ready and to the office to prepare things for our
meeting to-day. By and by we met, and at noon Sir W. Pen and I to the
Trinity House; where was a feast made by the Wardens, when great good
cheer, and much, but ordinary company. The Lieutenant of the Tower, upon
my demanding how Sir H. Vane died, told me that he died in a passion;
but all confess with so much courage as never man died. Thence to
the office, where Sir W. Rider, Capt. Cocke, and Mr. Cutler came by
appointment to meet me to confer about the contract between us and them
for 500 tons of hemp. That being done, I did other business and so went
home, and there found Mr. Creed, who staid talking with my wife and me
an hour or two, and I put on my riding cloth suit, only for him to
see how it is, and I think it will do very well. He being gone, and I
hearing from my wife and the maids' complaints made of the boy, I called
him up, and with my whip did whip him till I was not able to stir, and
yet I could not make him confess any of the lies that they tax him with.
At last, not willing to let him go away a conqueror, I took him in task
again, and pulled off his frock to his shirt, and whipped him till he
did confess that he did drink the whey, which he had denied, and pulled
a pink, and above all did lay the candlestick upon the ground in his
chamber, which he had denied this quarter of a year. I confess it is one
of the greatest wonders that ever I met with that such a little boy as
he could possibly be able to suffer half so much as he did to maintain
a lie. I think I must be forced to put him away. So to bed, with my arm
very weary.

22nd (Lord's day). This day I first put on my slasht doublet, which I
like very well. Mr. Shepley came to me in the morning, telling me that
he and my Lord came to town from Hinchinbroke last night. He and I spend
an hour in looking over his account, and then walked to the Wardrobe,
all the way discoursing of my Lord's business. He tells me to my great
wonder that Mr. Barnwell is dead L500 in debt to my Lord. By and by my
Lord came from church, and I dined, with some others, with him, he very
merry, and after dinner took me aside and talked of state and other
matters. By and by to my brother Tom's and took him out with me
homewards (calling at the Wardrobe to talk a little with Mr. Moore), and
so to my house, where I paid him all I owed him, and did make the L20 I
lately lent him up to L40, for which he shall give bond to Mr. Shepley,
for it is his money. So my wife and I to walk in the garden, where all
our talk was against Sir W. Pen, against whom I have lately had cause to
be much prejudiced. By and by he and his daughter came out to walk, so
we took no notice of them a great while, at last in going home spoke
a word or two, and so good night, and to bed. This day I am told of
a Portugall lady, at Hampton Court, that hath dropped a child already
since the Queen's coming, but the king would not have them searched
whose it is; and so it is not commonly known yet. Coming home to-night,
I met with Will. Swan, who do talk as high for the Fanatiques as ever he
did in his life; and do pity my Lord Sandwich and me that we should be
given up to the wickedness of the world; and that a fall is coming upon
us all; for he finds that he and his company are the true spirit of the
nation, and the greater part of the nation too, who will have liberty of
conscience in spite of this "Act of Uniformity," or they will die; and
if they may not preach abroad, they will preach in their own houses. He
told me that certainly Sir H. Vane must be gone to Heaven, for he died
as much a martyr and saint as ever man did; and that the King hath lost
more by that man's death, than he will get again a good while. At all
which I know not what to think; but, I confess, I do think that the
Bishops will never be able to carry it so high as they do.

23rd. Up early, this morning, and my people are taking down the hangings
and things in my house because of the great dust that is already made by
the pulling down of Sir W. Batten's house, and will be by my own when
I come to it. To my office, and there hard at work all the morning.
At noon to the Exchange to meet Dr. Williams, who sent me this morning
notice of his going into the country tomorrow, but could not find him,
but meeting with Frank Moore, my Lord Lambeth's man formerly, we, and
two or three friends of his did go to a tavern, and there they drank,
but I nothing but small beer. In the next room one was playing very
finely of the dulcimer, which well played I like well, but one of our
own company, a talking fellow, did in discourse say much of this Act
against Seamen,

     [In 1662 was passed "An Act for providing of carriage by land and by
     water for the use of His Majesty's Navy and Ordinance" (13-14 Gar.
     II., cap. 20), which gave power for impressing seamen, &c.]

for their being brought to account; and that it was made on purpose for
my Lord Sandwich, who was in debt L100,000, and hath been forced to have
pardon oftentimes from Oliver for the same: at which I was vexed at him,
but thought it not worth my trouble to oppose what he said, but took
leave and went home, and after a little dinner to my office again, and
in the evening Sir W. Warren came to me about business, and that being
done, discoursing of deals, I did offer to go along with him among
his deal ships, which we did to half a score, where he showed me the
difference between Dram, Swinsound, Christiania, and others, and told me
many pleasant notions concerning their manner of cutting and sawing them
by watermills, and the reason how deals become dearer and cheaper, among
others, when the snow is not so great as to fill up the values that they
may pass from hill to hill over the snow, then it is dear carriage. From
on board he took me to his yard, where vast and many places of deals,
sparrs, and bulks, &c., the difference between which I never knew
before, and indeed am very proud of this evening's work. He had me into
his house, which is most pretty and neat and well furnished. After a
glass, not of wine, for I would not be tempted to drink any, but a glass
of mum, I well home by water, but it being late was forced to land at
the Custom House, and so home and to bed, and after I was a-bed, letters
came from the Duke for the fitting out of four ships forthwith from
Portsmouth (I know not yet for what) so I was forced to make Will get
them wrote, and signed them in bed and sent them away by express. And so
to sleep.

24th (Midsummer day). Up early and to my office, putting things in order
against we sit. There came to me my cozen Harry Alcocke, whom I much
respect, to desire (by a letter from my father to me, where he had been
some days) my help for him to some place. I proposed the sea to him, and
I think he will take it, and I hope do well. Sat all the morning, and I
bless God I find that by my diligence of late and still, I do get ground
in the office every day. At noon to the Change, where I begin to be
known also, and so home to dinner, and then to the office all the
afternoon dispatching business. At night news is brought me that
Field the rogue hath this day cast me at Guildhall in L30 for his
imprisonment, to which I signed his commitment with the rest of the
officers; but they having been parliament-men, that he hath begun the
law with me; and threatens more, but I hope the Duke of York will bear
me out. At night home, and Mr. Spong came to me, and so he and I sat
singing upon the leads till almost ten at night and so he went away
(a pretty, harmless, and ingenious man), and I to bed, in a very great
content of mind, which I hope by my care still in my business will
continue to me.

25th. Up by four o'clock, and put my accounts with my Lord into a very
good order, and so to my office, where having put many things in order
I went to the Wardrobe, but found my Lord gone to Hampton Court. After
discourse with Mr. Shepley we parted, and I into Thames Street, beyond
the Bridge, and there enquired among the shops the price of tarre and
oyle, and do find great content in it, and hope to save the King money
by this practice. So home to dinner, and then to the Change, and so home
again, and at the office preparing business against to-morrow all the
afternoon. At night walked with my wife upon the leads, and so to supper
and to bed. My wife having lately a great pain in her ear, for which
this night she begins to take physique, and I have got cold and so have
a great deal of my old pain.

26th. Up and took physique, but such as to go abroad with, only to
loosen me, for I am bound. So to the office, and there all the morning
sitting till noon, and then took Commissioner Pett home to dinner with
me, where my stomach was turned when my sturgeon came to table, upon
which I saw very many little worms creeping, which I suppose was through
the staleness of the pickle. He being gone, comes Mr. Nicholson, my old
fellow-student at Magdalene, and we played three or four things upon
the violin and basse, and so parted, and I to my office till night, and
there came Mr. Shepley and Creed in order to settling some accounts of
my Lord to-night, and so to bed.

27th. Up early, not quite rid of my pain. I took more physique, and so
made myself ready to go forth. So to my Lord, who rose as soon as he
heard I was there; and in his nightgown and shirt stood talking with me
alone two hours,. I believe, concerning his greatest matters of state
and interest. Among other things, that his greatest design is, first,
to get clear of all debts to the King for the Embassy money, and then a
pardon. Then, to get his land settled; and then to, discourse and advise
what is best for him, whether to keep his sea employment longer or no.
For he do discern that the Duke would be willing to have him out, and
that by Coventry's means. And here he told me, how the terms at Argier
were wholly his; and that he did plainly tell Lawson and agree with him,
that he would have the honour of them, if they should ever be agreed
to; and that accordingly they did come over hither entitled, "Articles
concluded on by Sir J. Lawson, according to instructions received from
His Royal Highness James Duke of York, &c., and from His Excellency
the Earle of Sandwich." (Which however was more than needed; but Lawson
tells my Lord in his letter, that it was not he, but the Council of Warr
that would have "His Royal Highness" put into the title, though he
did not contribute one word to it.) But the Duke of York did yesterday
propose them to the Council, to be printed with this title: "Concluded
on, by Sir J. Lawson, Knt." and my Lord quite left out. Here I find my
Lord very politique; for he tells me, that he discerns they design to
set up Lawson as much as they can and that he do counterplot them by
setting him up higher still; by which they will find themselves spoiled
of their design, and at last grow jealous of Lawson. This he told me
with much pleasure; and that several of the Duke's servants, by name my
Lord Barkeley [of Stratton], Mr. Talbot, and others, had complained to
my Lord, of Coventry, and would have him out. My Lord do acknowledge
that his greatest obstacle is Coventry. He did seem to hint such a
question as this: "Hitherto I have been supported by the King and
Chancellor against the Duke; but what if it should come about, that it
should be the Duke and Chancellor against the King?" which, though he
said it in these plain words, yet I could not fully understand it; but
may more here after. My Lord did also tell me, that the Duke himself
at Portsmouth did thank my Lord for all his pains and care; and that
he perceived it must be the old Captains that must do the business; and
that the new ones would spoil all. And that my Lord did very discreetly
tell the Duke (though quite against his judgement and inclination),
that, however, the King's new captains ought to be borne with a little
and encouraged. By which he will oblige that party, and prevent, as much
as may be, their envy; but he says that certainly things will go to rack
if ever the old captains should be wholly out, and the new ones only
command. Then we fell to talk of Sir J. Minnes, of whom my Lord hath
a very slight opinion, and that at first he did come to my Lord very
displeased and sullen, and had studied and turned over all his books to
see whether it had ever been that two flags should ride together in the
main-top, but could not find it, nay, he did call his captains on board
to consult them. So when he came by my Lord's side, he took down his
flag, and all the day did not hoist it again, but next day my Lord did
tell him that it was not so fit to ride without a flag, and therefore
told him that he should wear it in the fore-top, for it seems my Lord
saw his instructions, which were that he should not wear his flag in the
maintop in the presence of the Duke or my Lord. But that after that my
Lord did caress him, and he do believe him as much his friend as his
interest will let him. I told my Lord of the late passage between Swan
and me, and he told me another lately between Dr. Dell and himself when
he was in the country. At last we concluded upon dispatching all his
accounts as soon as possible, and so I parted, and to my office, where
I met Sir W. Pen, and he desired a turn with me in the garden, where
he told me the day now was fixed for his going into Ireland;--[Penn was
Governor of Kinsale.-B.]--and that whereas I had mentioned some service
he could do a friend of mine there, Saml. Pepys,

     [Mentioned elsewhere as "My cousin in Ireland."  He was son of Lord
     Chief Justice Richard Pepys.]

he told me he would most readily do what I would command him, and then
told me we must needs eat a dish of meat together before he went, and
so invited me and my wife on Sunday next. To all which I did give a cold
consent, for my heart cannot love or have a good opinion of him since
his last playing the knave with me, but he took no notice of our
difference at all, nor I to him, and so parted, and I by water to
Deptford, where I found Sir W. Batten alone paying off the yard three
quarters pay. Thence to dinner, where too great a one was prepared, at
which I was very much troubled, and wished I had not been there. After
dinner comes Sir J. Minnes and some captains with him, who had been at
a Councill of Warr to-day, who tell us they have acquitted Captain
Hall, who was accused of cowardice in letting of old Winter, the Argier
pyrate, go away from him with a prize or two; and also Captain Diamond
of the murder laid to him of a man that he had struck, but he lived many
months after, till being drunk, he fell into the hold, and there broke
his jaw and died, but they say there are such bawdy articles against
him as never were heard of .... To the pay again, where I left them, and
walked to Redriffe, and so home, and there came Mr. Creed and Shepley to
me, and staid till night about my Lord's accounts, our proceeding to set
them in order, and so parted and I to bed. Mr. Holliard had been with my
wife to-day, and cured her of her pain in her ear by taking out a most
prodigious quantity of hard wax that had hardened itself in the bottom
of the ear, of which I am very glad.

28th. Up to my Lord's and my own accounts, and so to the office, where
all the forenoon sitting, and at noon by appointment to the Mitre, where
Mr. Shepley gave me and Mr. Creed, and I had my uncle Wight with us, a
dish of fish. Thence to the office again, and there all the afternoon
till night, and so home, and after talking with my wife to bed. This day
a genteel woman came to me, claiming kindred of me, as she had once done
before, and borrowed 10s. of me, promising to repay it at night, but I
hear nothing of her. I shall trust her no more. Great talk there is of
a fear of a war with the Dutch; and we have order to pitch upon twenty
ships to be forthwith set out; but I hope it is but a scarecrow to the
world, to let them see that we can be ready for them; though, God knows!
the King is not able to set out five ships at this present without great
difficulty, we neither having money, credit, nor stores. My mind is now
in a wonderful condition of quiet and content, more than ever in all my
life, since my minding the business of my office, which I have done most
constantly; and I find it to be the very effect of my late oaths against
wine and plays, which, if God please, I will keep constant in, for now
my business is a delight to me, and brings me great credit, and my purse
encreases too.

29th (Lord's day). Up by four o'clock, and to the settling of my
own accounts, and I do find upon my monthly ballance, which I have
undertaken to keep from month to month, that I am worth L650, the
greatest sum that ever I was yet master of. I pray God give me a
thankfull, spirit, and care to improve and encrease it. To church with
my wife, who this day put on her green petticoat of flowred satin, with
fine white and gimp lace of her own putting on, which is very pretty.
Home with Sir W. Pen to dinner by appointment, and to church again in
the afternoon, and then home, Mr. Shepley coming to me about my Lord's
accounts, and in the evening parted, and we to supper again to Sir W.
Pen. Whatever the matter is, he do much fawn upon me, and I perceive
would not fall out with me, and his daughter mighty officious to my
wife, but I shall never be deceived again by him, but do hate him and
his traitorous tricks with all my heart. It was an invitation in order
to his taking leave of us to-day, he being to go for Ireland in a few
days. So home and prayers, and to bed.

30th. Up betimes, and to my office, where I found Griffen's girl making
it clean, but, God forgive me! what a mind I had to her, but did not
meddle with her. She being gone, I fell upon boring holes for me to see
from my closet into the great office, without going forth, wherein I
please myself much. So settled to business, and at noon with my wife to
the Wardrobe, and there dined, and staid talking all the afternoon with
my Lord, and about four o'clock took coach with my wife and Lady, and
went toward my house, calling at my Lady Carteret's, who was within by
chance (she keeping altogether at Deptford for a month or two), and so
we sat with her a little. Among other things told my Lady how my Lady
Fanshaw is fallen out with her only for speaking in behalf of the
French, which my Lady wonders at, they having been formerly like
sisters, but we see there is no true lasting friendship in the world.
Thence to my house, where I took great pride to lead her through the
Court by the hand, she being very fine, and her page carrying up her
train. She staid a little at my house, and then walked through the
garden, and took water, and went first on board the King's pleasure
boat, which pleased her much. Then to Greenwich Park; and with much ado
she was able to walk up to the top of the hill, and so down again, and
took boat, and so through bridge to Blackfryers, and home, she being
much pleased with the ramble in every particular of it. So we supped
with her, and then walked home, and to bed.

                              OBSERVATIONS.

This I take to be as bad a juncture as ever I observed. The King and
his new Queen minding their pleasures at Hampton Court. All people
discontented; some that the King do not gratify them enough; and the
others, Fanatiques of all sorts, that the King do take away their
liberty of conscience; and the height of the Bishops, who I fear will
ruin all again. They do much cry up the manner of Sir H. Vane's death,
and he deserves it. They clamour against the chimney-money, and say they
will not pay it without force. And in the mean time, like to have war
abroad; and Portugall to assist, when we have not money to pay for any
ordinary layings-out at home. Myself all in dirt about building of my
house and Sir W. Batten's a story higher. Into a good way, fallen on
minding my business and saving money, which God encrease; and I do take
great delight in it, and see the benefit of it. In a longing mind of
going to see Brampton, but cannot get three days time, do what I can. In
very good health, my wife and myself.




JULY 1662

July 1st. To the office, and there we sat till past noon, and then
Captain Cuttance and I by water to Deptford, where the Royal James (in
which my Lord went out the last voyage, though [he] came back in the
Charles) was paying off by Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen. So to dinner,
where I had Mr. Sheply to dine with us, and from thence I sent to my
Lord to know whether she should be a first rate, as the men would have
her, or a second. He answered that we should forbear paying the officers
and such whose pay differed upon the rate of the ship, till he could
speak with his Royal Highness. To the Pay again after dinner, and seeing
of Cooper, the mate of the ship, whom I knew in the Charles, I spoke
to him about teaching the mathematiques, and do please myself in my
thoughts of learning of him, and bade him come to me in a day or two.
Towards evening I left them, and to Redriffe by land, Mr. Cowly, the
Clerk of the Cheque, with me, discoursing concerning the abuses of the
yard, in which he did give me much light. So by water home, and after
half an hour sitting talking with my wife, who was afeard I did intend
to go with my Lord to fetch the Queen mother over, in which I did clear
her doubts, I went to bed by daylight, in order to my rising early
to-morrow.

2nd. Up while the chimes went four, and to put down my journal, and so
to my office, to read over such instructions as concern the officers of
the Yard; for I am much upon seeing into the miscarriages there. By and
by, by appointment, comes Commissioner Pett; and then a messenger from
Mr. Coventry, who sits in his boat expecting us, and so we down to
him at the Tower, and there took water all, and to Deptford (he in
our passage taking notice how much difference there is between the old
Captains for obedience and order, and the King's new Captains, which
I am very glad to hear him confess); and there we went into the
Store-house, and viewed first the provisions there, and then his books,
but Mr. Davis himself was not there, he having a kinswoman in the house
dead, for which, when by and by I saw him, he do trouble himself most
ridiculously, as if there was never another woman in the world; in which
so much laziness, as also in the Clerkes of the Cheque and Survey (which
after one another we did examine), as that I do not perceive that there
is one-third of their duties performed; but I perceive, to my great
content, Mr. Coventry will have things reformed. So Mr. Coventry to
London, and Pett and I to the Pay, where Sir Williams both were paying
off the Royal James still, and so to dinner, and to the Pay again, where
I did relieve several of my Lord Sandwich's people, but was sorry to see
them so peremptory, and at every word would, complain to my Lord, as if
they shall have such a command over my Lord. In the evening I went forth
and took a walk with Mr. Davis, and told him what had passed at his
office to-day, and did give him my advice, and so with the rest by barge
home and to bed

3rd. Up by four o'clock and to my office till 8 o'clock, writing over
two copies of our contract with Sir W. Rider, &c., for 500 ton of hempe,
which, because it is a secret, I have the trouble of writing over as
well as drawing. Then home to dress myself, and so to the office, where
another fray between Sir R. Ford and myself about his yarn, wherein
I find the board to yield on my side, and was glad thereof, though
troubled that the office should fall upon me of disobliging Sir Richard.
At noon we all by invitation dined at the Dolphin with the Officers
of the Ordnance; where Sir W. Compton, Mr. O'Neale,'and other great
persons, were, and a very great dinner, but I drank as I still do but my
allowance of wine. After dinner, was brought to Sir W. Compton a gun to
discharge seven times, the best of all devices that ever I saw, and
very serviceable, and not a bawble; for it is much approved of, and many
thereof made. Thence to my office all the afternoon as long as I could
see, about setting many businesses in order. In the evening came Mr.
Lewis to me, and very ingeniously did enquire whether I ever did look
into the business of the Chest at Chatham;

     [Pepys gives some particulars about the Chest on November 13th,
     1662.  "The Chest at Chatham was originally planned by Sir Francis
     Drake and Sir John Hawkins in 1588, after the defeat of the Armada;
     the seamen voluntarily agreed to have 'defalked' out of their wages
     certain sums to form a fund for relief.  The property became
     considerable, as well as the abuses, and in 1802 the Chest was
     removed to Greenwich.  In 1817, the stock amounted to L300,000
     Consols."--Hist.  of Rochester, p. 346.--B.]

and after my readiness to be informed did appear to him, he did produce
a paper, wherein he stated the government of the Chest to me; and upon
the whole did tell me how it hath ever been abused, and to this day
is; and what a meritorious act it would be to look after it; which I am
resolved to do, if God bless me; and do thank him very much for it.
So home, and after a turn or two upon the leads with my wife, who
has lately had but little of my company, since I begun to follow my
business, but is contented therewith since she sees how I spend my time,
and so to bed.

4th. Up by five o'clock, and after my journall put in order, to my
office about my business, which I am resolved to follow, for every day
I see what ground I get by it. By and by comes Mr. Cooper, mate of the
Royall Charles, of whom I intend to learn mathematiques, and do begin
with him to-day, he being a very able man, and no great matter,
I suppose, will content him. After an hour's being with him at
arithmetique (my first attempt being to learn the multiplication-table);
then we parted till to-morrow. And so to my business at my office again
till noon, about which time Sir W. Warren did come to me about business,
and did begin to instruct me in the nature of fine timber and deals,
telling me the nature of every sort; and from that we fell to discourse
of Sir W. Batten's corruption and the people that he employs, and
from one discourse to another of the kind. I was much pleased with his
company, and so staid talking with him all alone at my office till 4 in
the afternoon, without eating or drinking all day, and then parted,
and I home to eat a bit, and so back again to my office; and toward the
evening came Mr. Sheply, who is to go out of town to-morrow, and so he
and I with much ado settled his accounts with my Lord, which, though
they be true and honest, yet so obscure, that it vexes me to see in what
manner they are kept. He being gone, and leave taken of him as of a man
likely not to come to London again a great while, I eat a bit of bread
and butter, and so to bed. This day I sent my brother Tom, at his
request, my father's old Bass Viall which he and I have kept so long,
but I fear Tom will do little good at it.

5th. To my office all the morning, to get things ready against our
sitting, and by and by we sat and did business all the morning, and
at noon had Sir W. Pen, who I hate with all my heart for his base
treacherous tricks, but yet I think it not policy to declare it yet, and
his son William, to my house to dinner, where was also Mr. Creed and my
cozen Harry Alcocke. I having some venison given me a day or two ago,
and so I had a shoulder roasted, another baked, and the umbles

     [The umbles are the liver, kidneys, and other portions of the inside
     of the deer.  They were usually made into pies, and old cookery
     books contain directions for the making of 'umble pies.']

baked in a pie, and all very well done. We were merry as I could be in
that company, and the more because I would not seem otherwise to Sir W.
Pen, he being within a day or two to go for Ireland. After dinner he
and his son went away, and Mr. Creed would, with all his rhetoric,
have persuaded me to have gone to a play; and in good earnest I find
my nature desirous to have gone, notwithstanding my promise and my
business, to which I have lately kept myself so close, but I did refuse
it, and I hope shall ever do so, and above all things it is considerable
that my mind was never in my life in so good a condition of quiet as
it has been since I have followed my business and seen myself to get
greater and greater fitness in my employment, and honour every day more
than other. So at my office all the afternoon, and then my mathematiques
at night with Mr. Cooper, and so to supper and to bed.

6th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed to-day with my wife merry and
pleasant, and then rose and settled my accounts with my wife for
housekeeping, and do see that my kitchen, besides wine, fire, candle,
sope, and many other things, comes to about 30s. a week, or a little
over. To church, where Mr. Mills made a lazy sermon. So home to dinner,
where my brother Tom dined with me, and so my wife and I to church again
in the afternoon, and that done I walked to the Wardrobe and spent
my time with Mr. Creed and Mr. Moore talking about business; so up to
supper with my Lady [Sandwich], who tells me, with much trouble, that
my Lady Castlemaine is still as great with the King, and that the King
comes as often to her as ever he did, at which, God forgive me, I am
well pleased. It began to rain, and so I borrowed a hat and cloak of Mr.
Moore and walked home, where I found Captain Ferrer with my wife, and
after speaking a matter of an hour with him he went home and we all to
bed. Jack Cole, my old friend, found me out at the Wardrobe; and, among
other things, he told me that certainly most of the chief ministers of
London would fling up their livings; and that, soon or late, the issue
thereof would be sad to the King and Court.

7th. Up and to my office early, and there all the morning alone till
dinner, and after dinner to my office again, and about 3 o'clock with
my wife by water to Westminster, where I staid in the Hall while my wife
went to see her father and mother, and she returning we by water home
again, and by and by comes Mr. Cooper, so he and I to our mathematiques,
and so supper and to bed. My morning's work at the office was to put
the new books of my office into order, and writing on the backsides what
books they be, and transcribing out of some old books some things into
them.

8th. At the office all the morning and dined at home, and after dinner
in all haste to make up my accounts with my Lord, which I did with some
trouble, because I had some hopes to have made a profit to myself in
this account and above what was due to me (which God forgive me in), but
I could not, but carried them to my Lord, with whom they passed well. So
to the Wardrobe, where alone with my Lord above an hour; and he do seem
still to have his old confidence in me; and tells me to boot, that Mr.
Coventry hath spoke of me to him to great advantage; wherein I am much
pleased. By and by comes in Mr. Coventry to visit my Lord; and so my
Lord and he and I walked together in the great chamber a good while; and
I found him a most ingenuous man and good company. He being gone I
also went home by water, Mr. Moore with me for discourse sake, and then
parted from me, Cooper being there ready to attend me, so he and I to
work till it was dark, and then eat a bit and by daylight to bed.

9th. Up by four o'clock, and at my multiplicacion-table hard, which is
all the trouble I meet withal in my arithmetique. So made me ready and
to the office, where all the morning busy, and Sir W. Pen came to my
office to take his leave of me, and desiring a turn in the garden, did
commit the care of his building to me, and offered all his services to
me in all matters of mine. I did, God forgive me! promise him all my
service and love, though the rogue knows he deserves none from me, nor
do I intend to show him any; but as he dissembles with me, so must I
with him. Dined at home, and so to the office again, my wife with me,
and while I was for an hour making a hole behind my seat in my closet to
look into the office, she was talking to me about her going to Brampton,
which I would willingly have her to do but for the cost of it, and to
stay here will be very inconvenient because of the dirt that I must have
when my house is pulled down. Then to my business till night, then Mr.
Cooper and I to our business, and then came Mr. Mills, the minister, to
see me, which he hath but rarely done to me, though every day almost
to others of us; but he is a cunning fellow, and knows where the good
victuals is, and the good drink, at Sir W. Batten's. However, I used him
civilly, though I love him as I do the rest of his coat. So to supper
and to bed.

10th. Up by four o'clock, and before I went to the office I practised my
arithmetique, and then, when my wife was up, did call her and Sarah, and
did make up a difference between them, for she is so good a servant as
I am loth to part with her. So to the office all the morning, where very
much business, but it vexes me to see so much disorder at our table,
that, every man minding a several business, we dispatch nothing. Dined
at home with my wife, then to the office again, and being called by
Sir W. Batten, walked to the Victualler's office, there to view all the
several offices and houses to see that they were employed in order to
give the Council an account thereof. So after having taken an oath or
two of Mr. Lewes and Captain Brown and others I returned to the office,
and there sat despatching several businesses alone till night, and so
home and by daylight to bed.

11th. Up by four o'clock, and hard at my multiplicacion-table, which I
am now almost master of, and so made me ready and to my office, where by
and by comes Mr. Pett, and then a messenger from Mr. Coventry, who stays
in his boat at the Tower for us. So we to him, and down to Deptford
first, and there viewed some deals lately served in at a low price,
which our officers, like knaves, would untruly value in their worth, but
we found them good. Then to Woolwich, and viewed well all the houses and
stores there, which lie in very great confusion for want of storehouses,
and then to Mr. Ackworth's and Sheldon's to view their books, which we
found not to answer the King's service and security at all as to the
stores. Then to the Ropeyard, and there viewed the hemp, wherein we
found great corruption, and then saw a trial between Sir R. Ford's yarn
and our own, and found great odds. So by water back again. About five in
the afternoon to Whitehall, and so to St. James's; and at Mr. Coventry's
chamber, which is very neat and fine, we had a pretty neat dinner, and
after dinner fell to discourse of business and regulation, and do think
of many things that will put matters into better order, and upon the
whole my heart rejoices to see Mr. Coventry so ingenious, and able, and
studious to do good, and with much frankness and respect to Mr. Pett and
myself particularly. About 9 o'clock we broke up after much discourse
and many things agreed on in order to our business of regulation, and so
by water (landing Mr. Pett at the Temple) I went home and to bed.

12th. Up by five o'clock, and put things in my house in order to be laid
up, against my workmen come on Monday to take down the top of my house,
which trouble I must go through now, but it troubles me much to think of
it. So to my office, where till noon we sat, and then I to dinner and to
the office all the afternoon with much business. At night with Cooper at
arithmetique, and then came Mr. Creed about my Lord's accounts to even
them, and he gone I to supper and to bed.

13th (Lord's day).... I had my old pain all yesterday and this morning,
and so kept my bed all this morning. So up and after dinner and some
of my people to church, I set about taking down my books and papers and
making my chamber fit against to-morrow to have the people come to work
in pulling down the top of my house. In the evening I walked to the
garden and sent for Mr. Turner (who yesterday did give me occasion of
speaking to him about the difference between him and me), and I told him
my whole mind, and how it was in my power to do him a discourtesy about
his place of petty purveyance, and at last did make him see (I think)
that it was his concernment to be friendly to me and what belongs to me.
After speaking my mind to him and he to me, we walked down and took boat
at the Tower and to Deptford, on purpose to sign and seal a couple of
warrants, as justice of peace in Kent, against one Annis, who is to be
tried next Tuesday, at Maidstone assizes, for stealing some lead out of
Woolwich Yard. Going and coming I did discourse with Mr. Turner about
the faults of our management of the business of our office, of which he
is sensible, but I believe is a very knave. Come home I found a rabbit
at the fire, and so supped well, and so to my journall and to bed.

14th. Up by 4 o'clock and to my arithmetique, and so to my office till
8, then to Thames Street along with old Mr. Green, among the tarr-men,
and did instruct myself in the nature and prices of tarr, but could not
get Stockholm for the use of the office under L10 15s. per last, which
is a great price. So home, and at noon Dr. T. Pepys came to me, and he
and I to the Exchequer, and so back to dinner, where by chance comes Mr.
Pierce, the chyrurgeon, and then Mr. Battersby, the minister, and then
Mr. Dun, and it happened that I had a haunch of venison boiled, and so
they were very wellcome and merry; but my simple Dr. do talk so like a
fool that I am weary of him. They being gone, to my office again, and
there all the afternoon, and at night home and took a few turns with my
wife in the garden and so to bed. My house being this day almost quite
untiled in order to its rising higher. This night I began to put on my
waistcoat also. I found the pageant in Cornhill taken down, which was
pretty strange.

15th. Up by 4 o'clock, and after doing some business as to settling my
papers at home, I went to my office, and there busy till sitting time.
So at the office all the morning, where J. Southern, Mr. Coventry's
clerk, did offer me a warrant for an officer to sign which I desired,
claiming it for my clerk's duty, which however did trouble me a little
to be put upon it, but I did it. We broke up late, and I to dinner at
home, where my brother Tom and Mr. Cooke came and dined with me, but I
could not be merry for my business, but to my office again after dinner,
and they two and my wife abroad. In the evening comes Mr. Cooper, and I
took him by water on purpose to tell me things belonging to ships, which
was time well spent, and so home again, and my wife came home and tells
me she has been very merry and well pleased with her walk with them.
About bedtime it fell a-raining, and the house being all open at top, it
vexed me; but there was no help for it.

16th. In the morning I found all my ceilings, spoiled with rain last
night, so that I fear they must be all new whited when the work is done.
Made me ready and to my office, and by and by came Mr. Moore to me, and
so I went home and consulted about drawing up a fair state of all
my Lord's accounts, which being settled, he went away, and I fell to
writing of it very neatly, and it was very handsome and concisely done.
At noon to my Lord's with it, but found him at dinner, and some great
company with him, Mr. Edward Montagu and his brother, and Mr. Coventry,
and after dinner he went out with them, and so I lost my labour; but
dined with Mr. Moore and the people below, who after dinner fell to talk
of Portugall rings, and Captain Ferrers offered five or six to sell, and
I seeming to like a ring made of a coco-nutt with a stone done in it,
he did offer and would give it me. By and by we went to Mr. Creed's
lodging, and there got a dish or two of sweetmeats, and I seeing a very
neat leaden standish to carry papers, pen, and ink in when one travels
I also got that of him, and that done I went home by water and to finish
some of my Lord's business, and so early to bed. This day I was told
that my Lady Castlemaine (being quite fallen out with her husband) did
yesterday go away from him, with all her plate, jewels, and other best
things; and is gone to Richmond to a brother of her's; which, I am apt
to think, was a design to get out of town, that the King might come at
her the better. But strange it is how for her beauty I am willing to
construe all this to the best and to pity her wherein it is to her hurt,
though I know well enough she is a whore.

17th. To my office, and by and by to our sitting; where much business.
Mr. Coventry took his leave, being to go with the Duke over for the
Queen-Mother. I dined at home, and so to my Lord's, where I presented
him with a true state of all his accounts to last Monday, being the 14th
of July, which did please him, and to my great joy I continue in his
great esteem and opinion. I this day took a general acquittance from my
Lord to the same day. So that now I have but very few persons to deal
withall for money in the world. Home and found much business to be upon
my hands, and was late at the office writing letters by candle light,
which is rare at this time of the year, but I do it with much content
and joy, and then I do please me to see that I begin to have people
direct themselves to me in all businesses. Very late I was forced to
send for Mr. Turner, Smith, Young, about things to be sent down early
to-morrow on board the King's pleasure boat, and so to bed with my head
full of business, but well contented in mind as ever in my life.

18th. Up very early, and got a-top of my house, seeing the design of
my work, and like it very well, and it comes into my head to have my
dining-room wainscoated, which will be very pretty. By-and-by by water
to Deptford, to put several things in order, being myself now only left
in town, and so back again to the office, and there doing business all
the morning and the afternoon also till night, and then comes Cooper for
my mathematiques, but, in good earnest, my head is so full of business
that I cannot understand it as otherwise I should do. At night to bed,
being much troubled at the rain coming into my house, the top being
open.

19th. Up early and to some business, and my wife coming to me I staid
long with her discoursing about her going into the country, and as she
is not very forward so am I at a great loss whether to have her go or
no because of the charge, and yet in some considerations I would be glad
she was there, because of the dirtiness of my house and the trouble of
having of a family there. So to my office, and there all the morning,
and then to dinner and my brother Tom dined with me only to see me. In
the afternoon I went upon the river to look after some tarr I am sending
down and some coles, and so home again; it raining hard upon the water,
I put ashore and sheltered myself, while the King came by in his barge,
going down towards the Downs to meet the Queen: the Duke being gone
yesterday. But methought it lessened my esteem of a king, that he should
not be able to command the rain. Home, and Cooper coming (after I had
dispatched several letters) to my mathematiques, and so at night to bed
to a chamber at Sir W. Pen's, my own house being so foul that I cannot
lie there any longer, and there the chamber lies so as that I come into
it over my leads without going about, but yet I am not fully content
with it, for there will be much trouble to have servants running over
the leads to and fro.

20th (Lord's day). My wife and I lay talking long in bed, and at last
she is come to be willing to stay two months in the country, for it is
her unwillingness to stay till the house is quite done that makes me at
a loss how to have her go or stay. But that which troubles me most is
that it has rained all this morning so furiously that I fear my house is
all over water, and with that expectation I rose and went into my house
and find that it is as wet as the open street, and that there is not one
dry-footing above nor below in my house. So I fitted myself for dirt,
and removed all my books to the office and all day putting up and
restoring things, it raining all day long as hard within doors as
without. At last to dinner, we had a calf's head and bacon at my chamber
at Sir W. Pen's, and there I and my wife concluded to have her go and
her two maids and the boy, and so there shall be none but Will and I
left at home, and so the house will be freer, for it is impossible to
have anybody come into my house while it is in this condition, and
with this resolution all the afternoon we were putting up things in the
further cellar against next week for them to be gone, and my wife and I
into the office and there measured a soiled flag that I had found there,
and hope to get it to myself, for it has not been demanded since I came
to the office. But my wife is not hasty to have it, but rather to stay a
while longer and see the event whether it will be missed or no. At night
to my office, and there put down this day's passages in my journall, and
read my oaths, as I am obliged every Lord's day. And so to Sir W. Pen's
to my chamber again, being all in dirt and foul, and in fear of having
catched cold today with dabbling in the water. But what has vexed me
to-day was that by carrying the key to Sir W. Pen's last night, it could
not in the midst of all my hurry to carry away my books and things, be
found, and at last they found it in the fire that we made last night. So
to bed.

21st. Up early, and though I found myself out of order and cold, and the
weather cold and likely to rain, yet upon my promise and desire to
do what I intended, I did take boat and down to Greenwich, to Captain
Cocke's, who hath a most pleasant seat, and neat. Here I drank wine, and
eat some fruit off the trees; and he showed a great rarity, which was
two or three of a great number of silver dishes and plates, which he
bought of an embassador that did lack money, in the edge or rim of which
was placed silver and gold medalls, very ancient, and I believe wrought,
by which, if they be, they are the greatest rarity that ever I saw in
my life, and I will show Mr. Crumlum them. Thence to Woolwich to the
Rope-yard; and there looked over several sorts of hemp, and did fall
upon my great survey of seeing the working and experiments of the
strength and the charge in the dressing of every sort; and I do think
have brought it to so great a certainty, as I have done the King great
service in it: and do purpose to get it ready against the Duke's coming
to town to present to him. I breakfasted at Mr. Falconer's well, and
much pleased with my inquiries. Thence to the dock, where we walked in
Mr. Shelden's garden, eating more fruit, and drinking, and eating figs,
which were very good, and talking while the Royal James was bringing
towards the dock, and then we went out and saw the manner and trouble of
docking such a ship, which yet they could not do, but only brought her
head into the Dock, and so shored her up till next tide. But, good God!
what a deal of company was there from both yards to help to do it, when
half the company would have done it as well. But I see it is impossible
for the King to have things done as cheap as other men. Thence by water,
and by and by landing at the riverside somewhere among the reeds, we
walked to Greenwich, where to Cocke's house again and walked in the
garden, and then in to his lady, who I find is still pretty, but was
now vexed and did speak very discontented and angry to the Captain for
disappointing a gentleman that he had invited to dinner, which he took
like a wise man and said little, but she was very angry, which put me
clear out of countenance that I was sorry I went in. So after I had
eat still some more fruit I took leave of her in the garden plucking
apricots for preserving, and went away and so by water home, and there
Mr. Moore coming and telling me that my Lady goes into the country
to-morrow, I carried my wife by coach to take her leave of her father,
I staying in Westminster Hall, she going away also this week, and thence
to my Lady's, where we staid and supped with her, but found that my Lady
was truly angry and discontented with us for our neglecting to see her
as we used to do, but after a little she was pleased as she was used to
be, at which we were glad. So after supper home to bed.

22d. Among my workmen early: then to the office, and there I had letters
from the Downs from Mr. Coventry; who tells me of the foul weather they
had last Sunday, that drove them back from near Boulogne, whither they
were going for the Queen, back again to the Downs, with the loss
of their cables, sayles, and masts; but are all safe, only my Lord
Sandwich, who went before with the yachts; they know not what is become
of him, which do trouble me much; but I hope he got ashore before the
storm begun; which God grant! All day at the office, only at home at
dinner, where I was highly angry with my wife for her keys being out
of the way, but they were found at last, and so friends again. All the
afternoon answering letters and writing letters, and at night to Mr.
Coventry an ample letter in answer to all his and the Duke's business.
Late at night at the office, where my business is great, being now all
alone in town, but I shall go through it with pleasure. So home and to
bed.

23rd. This morning angry a little in the morning, and my house being so
much out of order makes me a little pettish. I went to the office, and
there dispatched business by myself, and so again in the afternoon;
being a little vexed that my brother Tom, by his neglect, do fail to
get a coach for my wife and maid this week, by which she will not be at
Brampton Feast, to meet my Lady at my father's. At night home, and late
packing up things in order to their going to Brampton to-morrow, and so
to bed, quite out of sorts in my mind by reason that the weather is so
bad, and my house all full of wet, and the trouble of going from one
house to another to Sir W. Pen's upon every occasion. Besides much
disturbed by reason of the talk up and down the town, that my Lord
Sandwich is lost; but I trust in God the contrary.

24th. Up early this morning sending the things to the carrier's, and my
boy, who goes to-day, though his mistress do not till next Monday. All
the morning at the office, Sir W. Batten being come to town last night.
I hear, to my great content, that my Lord Sandwich is safe landed in
France. Dined at our chamber, where W. Bowyer with us, and after much
simple talk with him, I left him, and to my office, where all the
afternoon busy till 9 at night, among other things improving my late
experiment at Woolwich about hemp. So home and to bed.

25th. At the office all the morning, reading Mr. Holland's' discourse
of the Navy, lent me by Mr. Turner, and am much pleased with them,
they hitting the very diseases of the Navy, which we are troubled
with now-a-days. I shall bestow writing of them over and much reading
thereof. This morning Sir W. Batten came in to the office and desired
to speak with me; he began by telling me that he observed a strangeness
between him and me of late, and would know the reason of it, telling
me he heard that I was offended with merchants coming to his house and
making contracts there. I did tell him that as a friend I had spoke of
it to Sir W. Pen and desired him to take a time to tell him of it, and
not as a backbiter, with which he was satisfied, but I find that Sir W.
Pen has played the knave with me, and not told it from me as a friend,
but in a bad sense. He also told me that he heard that exceptions were
taken at his carrying his wife down to Portsmouth, saying that the King
should not pay for it, but I denied that I had spoke of it, nor did I.
At last he desired the difference between our wives might not make a
difference between us, which I was exceedingly glad to hear, and do
see every day the fruit of looking after my business, which I pray God
continue me in, for I do begin to be very happy. Dined at home, and so
to the office all the afternoon again, and at night home and to bed.

26th. Sir W. Batten, Mr. Pett, and I at the office sitting all the
morning. So dined at home, and then to my office again, causing the
model hanging in my chamber to be taken down and hung up in my office,
for fear of being spoilt by the workmen, and for my own convenience
of studying it. This afternoon I had a letter from Mr. Creed, who hath
escaped narrowly in the King's yacht, and got safe to the Downs after
the late storm; and that there the King do tell him, that he is sure
that my Lord is landed at Callis safe, of which being glad, I sent news
thereof to my Lord Crew, and by the post to my Lady into the country.
This afternoon I went to Westminster; and there hear that the King and
Queen intend to come to White Hall from Hampton Court next week, for all
winter. Thence to Mrs. Sarah, and there looked over my Lord's lodgings,
which are very pretty; and White Hall garden and the Bowling-ally (where
lords and ladies are now at bowles), in brave condition. Mrs. Sarah
told me how the falling out between my Lady Castlemaine and her Lord was
about christening of the child lately,

     [The boy was born in June at Lady Castlemaine's house in King
     Street.  By the direction of Lord Castlemaine, who had become a
     Roman Catholic, the child was baptized by a priest, and this led to
     a final separation between husband and wife.  Some days afterwards
     the child was again baptized by the rector of St. Margaret's,
     Westminster, in presence of the godparents, the King, Aubrey De
     Vere, Earl of Oxford, and Barbara, Countess of Suffolk, first Lady
     of the Bedchamber to the Queen and Lady Castlemaine's aunt.  The
     entry in the register of St. Margaret's is as follows: "1662 June
     18 Charles Palmer Ld Limbricke, s. to ye right honorble Roger Earl
     of Castlemaine by Barbara" (Steinman's "Memoir of Barbara, Duchess
     of Cleveland," 1871, p.  33).  The child was afterwards called
     Charles Fitzroy, and was created Duke of Southampton in 1674.  He
     succeeded his mother in the dukedom of Cleveland in 1709, and died
     1730.]

which he would have, and had done by a priest: and, some days after, she
had it again christened by a minister; the King, and Lord of Oxford,
and Duchesse of Suffolk, being witnesses: and christened with a proviso,
that it had not already been christened. Since that she left her Lord,
carrying away every thing in the house; so much as every dish, and
cloth, and servant but the porter. He is gone discontented into France,
they say, to enter a monastery; and now she is coming back again to her
house in Kingstreet. But I hear that the Queen did prick her out of the
list presented her by the King;

     ["By the King's command Lord Clarendon, much against his
     inclination, had twice visited his royal mistress with a view of
     inducing her, by persuasions which he could not justify, to give way
     to the King's determination to have Lady Castlemaine of her
     household....  Lord Clarendon has given a full account of all
     that transpired between himself, the King and the Queen, on this
     very unpleasant business ('Continuation of Life of Clarendon,' 1759,
     ff. 168-178)."--Steinman's Memoir of Duchess of Cleveland, p. 35.
     "The day at length arrived when Lady Castlemaine was to be formally
     admitted a Lady of the Bedchamber.  The royal warrant, addressed to
     the Lord Chamberlain, bears date June 1, 1663, and includes with
     that of her ladyship, the names of the Duchess of Buckingham, the
     Countesses of Chesterfield and Bath, and the Countess Mareshall.  A
     separate warrant of the same day directs his lordship to admit the
     Countess of Suffolk as Groom of the Stole and first Lady of the
     Bedchamber, to which undividable offices she had, with the
     additional ones of Mistress of the Robes and Keeper of the Privy
     Purse, been nominated by a warrant dated April 2, 1662, wherein the
     reception of her oath is expressly deferred until the Queen's
     household shall be established.  We here are furnished with the
     evidence that Charles would not sign the warrants for the five until
     Catherine had withdrawn her objection to his favourite one."--
     Addenda to Steinman's Memoir of Duchess of Cleveland (privately
     printed), 1874, p. i.]

desiring that she might have that favour done her, or that he would
send her from whence she come: and that the King was angry and the
Queen discontented a whole day and night upon it; but that the King hath
promised to have nothing to do with her hereafter. But I cannot believe
that the King can fling her off so, he loving her too well: and so I
writ this night to my Lady to be my opinion; she calling her my lady,
and the lady I admire. Here I find that my Lord hath lost the garden to
his lodgings, and that it is turning into a tennis-court. Hence by water
to the Wardrobe to see how all do there, and so home to supper and to
bed.

27th (Lord's day). At church alone in the pew in the morning. In the
afternoon by water I carried my wife to Westminster, where she went to
take leave of her father,

     [Mrs. Pepys's father was Alexander Marchant, Sieur de St. Michel, a
     scion of a good family in Anjou.  Having turned Huguenot at the age
     of twenty-one, his father disinherited him, and he was left
     penniless.  He came over in the retinue of Henrietta Maria, on her
     marriage with Charles I., as one of her Majesty's gentlemen carvers,
     but the Queen dismissed him on finding out he was a Protestant and
     did not go to mass.  He described himself as being captain and major
     of English troops in Italy and Flanders.--Wheatley's Pepys and the
     World he lived in, pp. 6, 250.  He was full of schemes; see
     September 22nd, 1663, for account of his patent for curing smoky
     chimneys.]

and I to walk in the Park, which is now every day more and more
pleasant, by the new works upon it. Here meeting with Laud Crispe, I
took him to the farther end, and sat under a tree in a corner, and there
sung some songs, he singing well, but no skill, and so would sing
false sometimes. Then took leave of him, and found my wife at my Lord's
lodging, and so took her home by water, and to supper in Sir W. Pen's
balcony, and Mrs. Keene with us, and then came my wife's brother, and
then broke up, and to bed.

28th. Up early, and by six o'clock, after my wife was ready, I walked
with her to the George, at Holborn Conduit, where the coach stood
ready to carry her and her maid to Bugden, but that not being ready, my
brother Tom staid with them to see them gone, and so I took a troubled
though willing goodbye, because of the bad condition of my house to have
a family in it. So I took leave of her and walked to the waterside, and
there took boat for the Tower; hearing that the Queen-Mother is come
this morning already as high as Woolwich: and that my Lord Sandwich was
with her; at which my heart was glad, and I sent the waterman, though
yet not very certain of it, to my wife to carry news thereof to my Lady.
So to my office all the morning abstracting the Duke's instructions in
the margin thereof. So home all alone to dinner, and then to the office
again, and in the evening Cooper comes, and he being gone, to my chamber
a little troubled and melancholy, to my lute late, and so to bed, Will
lying there at my feet, and the wench in my house in Will's bed.

29th. Early up, and brought all my money, which is near L300, out of my
house into this chamber; and so to the office, and there we sat all the
morning, Sir George Carteret and Mr. Coventry being come from sea. This
morning among other things I broached the business of our being abused
about flags, which I know doth trouble Sir W. Batten, but I care not.
At noon being invited I went with Sir George and Mr. Coventry to Sir W.
Batten's to dinner, and there merry, and very friendly to Sir Wm. and he
to me, and complies much with me, but I know he envies me, and I do not
value him. To the office again, and in the evening walked to Deptford
(Cooper with me talking of mathematiques), to send a fellow to prison
for cutting of buoy ropes, and to see the difference between the flags
sent in now-a-days, and I find the old ones, which were much cheaper,
to be wholly as good. So I took one of a sort with me, and Mr. Wayth
accompanying of me a good way, talking of the faults of the Navy, I
walked to Redriffe back, and so home by water, and after having done,
late, at the office, I went to my chamber and to bed.

30th. Up early, and to my office, where Cooper came to me and begun
his lecture upon the body of a ship, which my having of a modell in the
office is of great use to me, and very pleasant and useful it is. Then
by water to White Hall, and there waited upon my Lord Sandwich; and
joyed him, at his lodgings, of his safe coming home after all his
danger, which he confesses to be very great. And his people do tell me
how bravely my Lord did carry himself, while my Lord Crofts did cry; and
I perceive it is all the town talk how poorly he carried himself. But
the best was of one Mr. Rawlins, a courtier, that was with my Lord; and
in the greatest danger cried, "God damn me, my Lord, I won't give you
three-pence for your place now." But all ends in the honour of the
pleasure-boats; which, had they not been very good boats, they could
never have endured the sea as they did. Thence with Captain Fletcher,
of the Gage, in his ship's boat with 8 oars (but every ordinary oars
outrowed us) to Woolwich, expecting to find Sir W. Batten there upon his
survey, but he is not come, and so we got a dish of steaks at the White
Hart, while his clarkes and others were feasting of it in the best room
of the house, and after dinner playing at shuffleboard,

     [The game of shovelboard was played by two players (each provided
     with five coins) on a smooth heavy table.  On the table were marked
     with chalk a series of lines, and the play was to strike the coin on
     the edge of the table with the hand so that it rested between these
     lines.  Shakespeare uses the expression "shove-groat shilling," as
     does Ben Jonson.  These shillings were usually smooth and worn for
     the convenience of playing.  Strutt says ("Sports and Pastimes"), "I
     have seen a shovel-board table at a low public house in Benjamin
     Street, near Clerkenwell Green, which is about three feet in breadth
     and thirty-nine feet two inches in length, and said to be the
     longest at this time in London."]

and when at last they heard I was there, they went about their survey.
But God help the King! what surveys, shall be taken after this manner!
I after dinner about my business to the Rope-yard, and there staid till
night, repeating several trialls of the strength, wayte, waste, and
other things of hemp, by which I have furnished myself enough to finish
my intended business of stating the goodness of all sorts of hemp. At
night home by boat with Sir W. Warren, who I landed by the way, and so
being come home to bed.

31st. Up early and among my workmen, I ordering my rooms above, which
will please me very well. So to my office, and there we sat all the
morning, where I begin more and more to grow considerable there. At
noon Mr. Coventry and I by his coach to the Exchange together; and in
Lumbard-street met Captain Browne of the Rosebush: at which he was cruel
angry: and did threaten to go to-day to the Duke at Hampton Court, and
get him turned out because he was not sailed. But at the Exchange we
resolved of eating a bit together, which we did at the Ship behind the
Exchange, and so took boat to Billingsgate, and went down on board
the Rosebush at Woolwich, and found all things out of order, but after
frightening the officers there, we left them to make more haste, and so
on shore to the yard, and did the same to the officers of the yard, that
the ship was not dispatched. Here we found Sir W. Batten going about his
survey, but so poorly and unlike a survey of the Navy, that I am ashamed
of it, and so is Mr. Coventry. We found fault with many things, and
among others the measure of some timber now serving in which Mr. Day the
assistant told us of, and so by water home again, all the way talking of
the office business and other very pleasant discourse, and much proud I
am of getting thus far into his books, which I think I am very much in.
So home late, and it being the last day of the month, I did make up my
accounts before I went to bed, and found myself worth about L650, for
which the Lord God be praised, and so to bed. I drank but two glasses of
wine this day, and yet it makes my head ake all night, and indisposed me
all the next day, of which I am glad. I am now in town only with my man
Will and Jane, and because my house is in building, I do lie at Sir W.
Pen's house, he being gone to Ireland. My wife, her maid and boy gone
to Brampton. I am very well entered into the business and esteem of the
office, and do ply it close, and find benefit by it.




AUGUST 1662

August 1st. Up, my head aching, and to my office, where Cooper read me
another lecture upon my modell very pleasant. So to my business all the
morning, which increases by people coming now to me to the office. At
noon to the Exchange, where meeting Mr. Creed and Moore we three to a
house hard by (which I was not pleased with) to dinner, and after dinner
and some discourse ordinary by coach home, it raining hard, and so at
the office all the afternoon till evening to my chamber, where, God
forgive me, I was sorry to hear that Sir W. Pen's maid Betty was gone
away yesterday, for I was in hopes to have had a bout with her before
she had gone, she being very pretty. I had also a mind to my own wench,
but I dare not for fear she should prove honest and refuse and then
tell my wife. I staid up late, putting things in order for my going
to Chatham to-morrow, and so to bed, being in pain... with the little
riding in a coach to-day from the Exchange, which do trouble me.

2nd. Up early, and got me ready in my riding clothes, and so to the
office, and there wrote letters to my father and wife against night, and
then to the business of my office, which being done, I took boat with
Will, and down to Greenwich, where Captain Cocke not being at home I
was vexed, and went to walk in the Park till he come thither to me: and
Will's forgetting to bring my boots in the boat did also vex me, for I
was forced to send the boat back again for them. I to Captain Cocke's
along with him to dinner, where I find his lady still pretty, but not so
good a humour as I thought she was. We had a plain, good dinner, and I
see they do live very frugally. I eat among other fruit much mulberrys,
a thing I have not eat of these many years, since I used to be at
Ashted, at my cozen Pepys's. After dinner we to boat, and had a pleasant
passage down to Gravesend, but it was nine o'clock before we got
thither, so that we were in great doubt what to do, whether to stay
there or no; and the rather because I was afeard to ride, because of my
pain...; but at the Swan, finding Mr. Hemson and Lieutenant Carteret
of the Foresight come to meet me, I borrowed Mr. Hemson's horse, and he
took another, and so we rode to Rochester in the dark, and there at the
Crown Mr. Gregory, Barrow, and others staid to meet me. So after a glass
of wine, we to our barge, that was ready for me, to the Hill-house,
where we soon went to bed, before we slept I telling upon discourse
Captain Cocke the manner of my being cut of the stone, which pleased him
much. So to sleep.

3rd (Lord's day). Up early, and with Captain Cocke to the dock-yard, a
fine walk, and fine weather. Where we walked till Commissioner Pett
come to us, and took us to his house, and showed us his garden and
fine things, and did give us a fine breakfast of bread and butter, and
sweetmeats and other things with great choice, and strong drinks, with
which I could not avoyde making my head ake, though I drank but little.
Thither came Captain Allen of the Foresight, and the officers of
the yard to see me. Thence by and by to church, by coach, with the
Commissioner, and had a dull sermon. A full church, and some pretty
women in it; among others, Beck Allen, who was a bride-maid to a
new married couple that came to church to-day, and, which was pretty
strange, sat in a pew hung with mourning for a mother of the bride's,
which methinks should have been taken down. After dinner going out of
the church saluted Mrs. Pett, who came after us in the coach to church,
and other officers' wives. The Commissioner staid at dinner with me, and
we had a good dinner, better than I would have had, but I saw there was
no helping of it. After dinner the Commissioner and I left the company
and walked in the garden at the Hill-house, which is very pleasant, and
there talked of our businesses and matters of the navy. So to church
again, where quite weary, and so after sermon walked with him to the
yard up and down and the fields, and saw the place designed for the wet
dock. And so to his house, and had a syllabub, and saw his closet, which
come short of what I expected, but there was fine modells of ships in
it indeed, whose worth I could not judge of. At night walked home to
the Hill-house, Mr. Barrow with me, talking of the faults of the yard,
walking in the fields an hour or two, and so home to supper, and so
Captain Cocke and I to bed. This day among other stories he told me how
despicable a thing it is to be a hangman in Poland, although it be a
place of credit. And that, in his time, there was some repairs to be
made of the gallows there, which was very fine of stone; but nobody
could be got to mend it till the Burgomaster, or Mayor of the town, with
all the companies of those trades which were necessary to be used about
those repairs, did go in their habits with flags, in solemn procession
to the place, and there the Burgomaster did give the first blow with the
hammer upon the wooden work; and the rest of the Masters of the Companys
upon the works belonging to their trades; that so workmen might not be
ashamed to be employed upon doing of the gallows' works.

4th. Up by four o'clock in the morning and walked to the Dock, where
Commissioner Pett and I took barge and went to the guardships and
mustered them, finding them but badly manned; thence to the Sovereign,
which we found kept in good order and very clean, which pleased us
well, but few of the officers on board. Thence to the Charles, and were
troubled to see her kept so neglectedly by the boatswain Clements, who I
always took for a very good officer; it is a very brave ship. Thence
to Upnor Castle, and there went up to the top, where there is a fine
prospect, but of very small force; so to the yard, and there mustered
the whole ordinary, where great disorder by multitude of servants and
old decrepid men, which must be remedied. So to all the storehouses
and viewed the stores of all sorts and the hemp, where we found Captain
Cocke's (which he came down to see along with me) very bad, and some
others, and with much content (God forgive me) I did hear by the Clerk
of the Ropeyard how it was by Sir W. Batten's private letter that one
parcel of Alderman Barker's' was received. At two o'clock to dinner to
the Hill-house, and after dinner dispatched many people's business,
and then to the yard again, and looked over Mr. Gregory's and Barrow's
houses to see the matter of difference between them concerning an
alteration that Barrow would make, which I shall report to the board,
but both their houses very pretty, and deserve to be so, being well
kept. Then to a trial of several sorts of hemp, but could not perform it
here so well as at Woolwich, but we did do it pretty well. So took barge
at the dock and to Rochester, and there Captain Cocke and I and our two
men took coach about 8 at night and to Gravesend, where it was very dark
before we got thither to the Swan; and there, meeting with Doncaster,
an old waterman of mine above bridge, we eat a short supper, being very
merry with the drolling, drunken coachman that brought us, and so
took water. It being very dark, and the wind rising, and our waterman
unacquainted with this part of the river, so that we presently cast upon
the Essex shore, but got off again, and so, as well as we could, went
on, but I in such fear that I could not sleep till we came to Erith,
and there it begun to be calm, and the stars to shine, and so I began
to take heart again, and the rest too, and so made shift to slumber a
little. Above Woolwich we lost our way, and went back to Blackwall, and
up and down, being guided by nothing but the barking of a dog, which we
had observed in passing by Blackwall, and so,

5th. Got right again with much ado, after two or three circles and so
on, and at Greenwich set in Captain Cocke, and I set forward, hailing to
all the King's ships at Deptford, but could not wake any man: so that we
could have done what we would with their ships. At last waked one man;
but it was a merchant ship, the Royall Catharine: so to the Towerdock
and home, where the girl sat up for me. It was about three o'clock,
and putting Mr. Boddam out of my bed, went to bed, and lay till nine
o'clock, and so to the office, where we sat all the morning, and I did
give some accounts of my service. Dined alone at home, and was glad my
house is begun tiling. And to the office again all the afternoon, till
it was so dark that I could not see hardly what it is that I now set
down when I write this word, and so went to my chamber and to bed, being
sleepy.

6th. Up early, and, going to my office, met Sir G. Carteret in coming
through the yard, and so walked a good while talking with him about
Sir W. Batten, and find that he is going down the wind in every body's
esteem, and in that of his honesty by this letter that he wrote to
Captn. Allen concerning Alderman Barker's hemp. Thence by water to
White Hall; and so to St. James's; but there found Mr. Coventry gone to
Hampton Court. So to my Lord's; and he is also gone: this being a great
day at the Council about some business at the Council before the King.
Here I met with Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon, who told me how Mr. Edward
Montagu hath lately had a duell with Mr. Cholmely, that is first
gentleman-usher to the Queen, and was a messenger from the King to her
in Portugall, and is a fine gentleman; but had received many affronts
from Mr. Montagu, and some unkindness from my Lord, upon his score (for
which I am sorry). He proved too hard for Montagu, and drove him so far
backward that he fell into a ditch, and dropt his sword, but with honour
would take no advantage over him; but did give him his life: and the
world says Mr. Montagu did carry himself very poorly in the business,
and hath lost his honour for ever with all people in it, of which I am
very glad, in hopes that it will humble him. I hear also that he hath
sent to my Lord to borrow L400, giving his brother Harvey's' security
for it, and that my Lord will lend it him, for which I am sorry. Thence
home, and at my office all the morning, and dined at home, and can
hardly keep myself from having a mind to my wench, but I hope I shall
not fall to such a shame to myself. All the afternoon also at my office,
and did business. In the evening came Mr. Bland the merchant to me, who
has lived long in Spain, and is concerned in the business of Tangier,
who did discourse with me largely of it, and after he was gone did send
me three or four printed things that he hath wrote of trade in general
and of Tangier particularly, but I do not find much in them. This
afternoon Mr. Waith was with me, and did tell me much concerning the
Chest, which I am resolved to look into; and I perceive he is sensible
of Sir W. Batten's carriage; and is pleased to see any thing work
against him. Who, poor man, is, I perceive, much troubled, and did
yesterday morning walk in the garden with me, did tell me he did see
there was a design of bringing another man in his room, and took notice
of my sorting myself with others, and that we did business by ourselves
without him. Part of which is true, but I denied, and truly, any design
of doing him any such wrong as that. He told me he did not say it
particularly of me, but he was confident there was somebody intended
to be brought in, nay, that the trayne was laid before Sir W. Pen went,
which I was glad to hear him say. Upon the whole I see he perceives
himself tottering, and that he is suspected, and would be kind to me,
but I do my business in the office and neglect him. At night writing
in my study a mouse ran over my table, which I shut up fast under my
shelf's upon my table till to-morrow, and so home and to bed.

7th. Up by four o'clock and to my office, and by and by Mr. Cooper
comes and to our modell, which pleases me more and more. At this till
8 o'clock, and so we sat in the office and staid all the morning, my
interest still growing, for which God be praised. This morning I got
unexpectedly the Reserve for Mr. Cooper to be maister of, which was only
by taking an opportune time to motion [it], which is one good effect of
my being constant at the office, that nothing passes without me; and I
have the choice of my own time to propose anything I would have. Dined
at home, and to the office again at my business all the afternoon till
night, and so to supper and to bed. It being become a pleasure to me
now-a-days to follow my business, and the greatest part may be imputed
to my drinking no wine, and going to no plays.

8th. Up by four o'clock in the morning, and at five by water to
Woolwich, there to see the manner of tarring, and all the morning
looking to see the several proceedings in making of cordage, and other
things relating to that sort of works, much to my satisfaction. At noon
came Mr. Coventry on purpose from Hampton Court to see the same, and
dined with Mr. Falconer, and after dinner to several experiments of
Hemp, and particularly some Milan hemp that is brought over ready
dressed. Thence we walked talking, very good discourse all the way to
Greenwich, and I do find most excellent discourse from him. Among other
things, his rule of suspecting every man that proposes any thing to him
to be a knave; or, at least, to have some ends of his own in it. Being
led thereto by the story of Sir John Millicent, that would have had a
patent from King James for every man to have had leave to have given him
a shilling; and that he might take it of every man that had a mind to
give it, and being answered that that was a fair thing, but what needed
he a patent for it, and what he would do to them that would not give
him. He answered, he would not force them; but that they should come to
the Council of State, to give a reason why they would not. Another rule
is a proverb that he hath been taught, which is that a man that cannot
sit still in his chamber (the reason of which I did not understand him),
and he that cannot say no (that is, that is of so good a nature that he
cannot deny any thing, or cross another in doing any thing), is not fit
for business. The last of which is a very great fault of mine, which
I must amend in. Thence by boat; I being hot, he put the skirt of
his cloak about me; and it being rough, he told me the passage of a
Frenchman through London Bridge, where, when he saw the great fall, he
begun to cross himself and say his prayers in the greatest fear in the
world, and soon as he was over, he swore "Morbleu! c'est le plus grand
plaisir du monde," being the most like a French humour in the world.

     [When the first editions of this Diary were printed no note was
     required here.  Before the erection of the present London Bridge the
     fall of water at the ebb tide was great, and to pass at that time
     was called "Shooting the bridge".  It was very hazardous for small
     boats.  The ancient mode, even in Henry VIII.'s time, of going to
     the Tower and Greenwich, was to land at the Three Cranes, in Upper
     Thames Street, suffer the barges to shoot the bridge, and to enter
     them again at Billingsgate.  See Cavendish's "Wolsey," p. 40, ed.
     1852]

To Deptford, and there surprised the Yard, and called them to a muster,
and discovered many abuses, which we shall be able to understand
hereafter and amend. Thence walked to Redriffe, and so to London Bridge,
where I parted with him, and walked home and did a little business, and
to supper and to bed.

9th. Up by four o'clock or a little after, and to my office, whither by
and by comes Cooper, to whom I told my getting for him the Reserve, for
which he was very thankful, and fell to work upon our modell, and did a
good morning's work upon the rigging, and am very sorry that I must lose
him so soon. By and by comes Mr. Coventry, and he and I alone sat at the
office all the morning upon business. And so to dinner to Trinity House,
and thence by his coach towards White Hall; but there being a stop at
the Savoy, we 'light and took water, and my Lord Sandwich being out of
town, we parted there, all the way having good discourse, and in short I
find him the most ingenuous person I ever found in my life, and am
happy in his acquaintance and my interest in him. Home by water, and did
business at my office. Writing a letter to my brother John to dissuade
him from being Moderator of his year, which I hear is proffered him,
of which I am very glad. By and by comes Cooper, and he and I by
candlelight at my modell, being willing to learn as much of him as is
possible before he goes. So home and to bed.

10th (Lord's day). Being to dine at my brother's, I walked to St.
Dunstan's, the church being now finished; and here I heard Dr. Bates,'
who made a most eloquent sermon; and I am sorry I have hitherto had so
low an opinion of the man, for I have not heard a neater sermon a great
while, and more to my content. So to Tom's, where Dr. Fairebrother,
newly come from Cambridge, met me, and Dr. Thomas Pepys. I framed myself
as pleasant as I could, but my mind was another way. Hither came my
uncle Fenner, hearing that I was here, and spoke to me about Pegg Kite's
business of her portion, which her husband demands, but I will have
nothing to do with it. I believe he has no mind to part with the money
out of his hands, but let him do what he will with it. He told me the
new service-book--[The Common Prayer Book of 1662, now in use.]--(which
is now lately come forth) was laid upon their deske at St. Sepulchre's
for Mr. Gouge to read; but he laid it aside, and would not meddle
with it: and I perceive the Presbyters do all prepare to give over all
against Bartholomew-tide.

     [Thomas Gouge (1609-1681), an eminent Presbyterian minister, son of
     William Gouge, D.D. (lecturer at and afterwards Rector of St.
     Anne's, Blackfriars).  He was vicar of the parish of St. Sepulchre
     from 1638 until the Act of Uniformity, in 1662, forced him to resign
     his living.]

Mr. Herring, being lately turned out at St. Bride's, did read the psalm
to the people while they sung at Dr. Bates's, which methought is
a strange turn. After dinner to St. Bride's, and there heard one
Carpenter, an old man, who, they say, hath been a Jesuit priest, and is
come over to us; but he preaches very well. So home with Mrs. Turner,
and there hear that Mr. Calamy hath taken his farewell this day of his
people, and that others will do so the next Sunday. Mr. Turner, the
draper, I hear, is knighted, made Alderman, and pricked for Sheriffe,
with Sir Thomas Bluddel, for the next year, by the King, and so are
called with great honour the King's Sheriffes. Thence walked home,
meeting Mr. Moore by the way, and he home with me and walked till it was
dark in the garden, and so good night, and I to my closet in my office
to perfect my Journall and to read my solemn vows, and so to bed.

11th. All the morning at the office. Dined at home all alone, and so to
my office again, whither Dean Fuller came to see me, and having business
about a ship to carry his goods to Dublin, whither he is shortly to
return, I went with him to the Hermitage, and the ship happening to be
Captn. Holland's I did give orders for them to be well looked after, and
thence with him to the Custom House about getting a pass for them, and
so to the Dolphin tavern, where I spent 6d. on him, but drank but one
glass of wine, and so parted. He tells me that his niece, that sings
so well, whom I have long longed to see, is married to one Mr. Boys, a
wholesale man at the Three Crowns in Cheapside. I to the office again,
whither Cooper came and read his last lecture to me upon my modell, and
so bid me good bye, he being to go to-morrow to Chatham to take charge
of the ship I have got him. So to my business till 9 at night, and so
to supper and to bed, my mind a little at ease because my house is now
quite tiled.

12th. Up early at my office, and I find all people beginning to come to
me. Among others Mr. Deane, the Assistant of Woolwich, who I find will
discover to me the whole abuse that his Majesty suffers in the measuring
of timber, of which I shall be glad. He promises me also a modell of a
ship, which will please me exceedingly, for I do want one of my own.
By and by we sat, and among other things Sir W. Batten and I had a
difference about his clerk's making a warrant for a Maister, which
I would not suffer, but got another signed, which he desires may be
referred to a full board, and I am willing to it. But though I did
get another signed of my own clerk's, yet I will give it to his clerk,
because I would not be judged unkind, and though I will stand upon my
privilege. At noon home and to dinner alone, and so to the office again,
where busy all the afternoon till to o'clock at night, and so to supper
and to bed, my mind being a little disquieted about Sir W. Batten's
dispute to-day, though this afternoon I did speak with his man Norman at
last, and told him the reason of my claim.

13th. Up early, and to my office, where people come to me about
business, and by and by we met on purpose to enquire into the business
of the flag-makers, where I am the person that do chiefly manage the
business against them on the King's part; and I do find it the greatest
cheat that I have yet found; they having eightpence per yard allowed
them by pretence of a contract, where no such thing appears; and it is
threepence more than was formerly paid, and than I now offer the Board
to have them done. We did not fully end it, but refer it to another
time. At noon Commr. Pett and I by water to Greenwich, and on board the
pleasure-boats to see what they wanted, they being ordered to sea, and
very pretty things I still find them, and so on shore and at the Shipp
had a bit of meat and dined, there waiting upon us a barber of Mr.
Pett's acquaintance that plays very well upon the viollin. Thence to
Lambeth; and there saw the little pleasure-boat in building by the
King, my Lord Brunkard, and the virtuosoes of the town, according to new
lines, which Mr. Pett cries up mightily, but how it will prove we shall
soon see. So by water home, and busy at my study late, drawing a letter
to the yards of reprehension and direction for the board to sign, in
which I took great pains. So home and to bed.

14th. Up early and to look on my works, and find my house to go on
apace. So to my office to prepare business, and then we met and sat till
noon, and then Commissioner Pett and I being invited, went by Sir John
Winter's coach sent for us, to the Mitre, in Fenchurch street, to a
venison-pasty; where I found him a very worthy man; and good discourse.
Most of which was concerning the Forest of Dean, and the timber there,
and iron-workes with their great antiquity, and the vast heaps of
cinders which they find, and are now of great value, being necessary for
the making of iron at this day; and without which they cannot work: with
the age of many trees there left at a great fall in Edward the Third's
time, by the name of forbid-trees, which at this day are called vorbid
trees. Thence to my office about business till late, and so home and to
bed.

15th. Up very early, and up about seeing how my work proceeds, and am
pretty well pleased therewith; especially my wife's closet will be very
pretty. So to the office and there very busy, and many people coming
to me. At noon to the Change, and there hear of some Quakers that are
seized on, that would have blown up the prison in Southwark where they
are put. So to the Swan, in Old Fish Street, where Mr. Brigden and his
father-in-law, Blackbury, of whom we had bought timber in the office,
but have not dealt well with us, did make me a fine dinner only to
myself; and after dinner comes in a jugler, which shewed us very pretty
tricks. I seemed very pleasant, but am no friend to the man's dealings
with us in the office. After an hour or two sitting after dinner talking
about office business, where I had not spent any time a great while,
I went to Paul's Church Yard to my bookseller's; and there I hear that
next Sunday will be the last of a great many Presbyterian ministers in
town, who, I hear, will give up all. I pray God the issue may be good,
for the discontent is great. Home and to my office till 9 at night doing
business, and so to bed. My mind well pleased with a letter I found at
home from Mr. Coventry, expressing his satisfaction in a letter I writ
last night, and sent him this morning, to be corrected by him in order
to its sending down to all the Yards as a charge to them.

17th (Lord's day). Up very early, this being the last Sunday that the
Presbyterians are to preach, unless they read the new Common Prayer and
renounce the Covenant,

     [On St. Bartholomew's day, August 24th, 1662, the Act of Uniformity
     took effect, and about two hundred Presbyterian and Independent
     ministers lost their preferments.]

and so I had a mind to hear Dr. Bates's farewell sermon, and walked
thither, calling first at my brother's, where I found that he is come
home after being a week abroad with Dr. Pepys, nobody knows where, nor I
but by chance, that he was gone, which troubles me. So I called only at
the door, but did not ask for him, but went to Madam Turner's to know
whether she went to church, and to tell her that I would dine with her;
and so walked to St. Dunstan's, where, it not being seven o'clock
yet, the doors were not open; and so I went and walked an hour in the
Temple-garden, reading my vows, which it is a great content to me to
see how I am a changed man in all respects for the better, since I took
them, which the God of Heaven continue to me, and make me thankful for.
At eight o'clock I went, and crowded in at a back door among others, the
church being half-full almost before any doors were open publicly; which
is the first time that I have done so these many years since I used to
go with my father and mother, and so got into the gallery, beside the
pulpit, and heard very well. His text was, "Now the God of Peace--;" the
last Hebrews, and the 20th verse: he making a very good sermon, and very
little reflections in it to any thing of the times. Besides the sermon,
I was very well pleased with the sight of a fine lady that I have often
seen walk in Graye's Inn Walks, and it was my chance to meet her again
at the door going out, and very pretty and sprightly she is, and I
believe the same that my wife and I some years since did meet at Temple
Bar gate and have sometimes spoke of. So to Madam Turner's, and dined
with her. She had heard Parson Herring take his leave; tho' he, by
reading so much of the Common Prayer as he did, hath cast himself out of
the good opinion of both sides. After dinner to St. Dunstan's again; and
the church quite crowded before I came, which was just at one o'clock;
but I got into the gallery again, but stood in a crowd and did
exceedingly sweat all the time. He pursued his text again very well; and
only at the conclusion told us, after this manner: "I do believe that
many of you do expect that I should say something to you in reference to
the time, this being the last time that possibly I may appear here.
You know it is not my manner to speak any thing in the pulpit that is
extraneous to my text and business; yet this I shall say, that it is not
my opinion, fashion, or humour that keeps me from complying with what is
required of us; but something which, after much prayer, discourse, and
study yet remains unsatisfied, and commands me herein. Wherefore, if it
is my unhappiness not to receive such an illumination as should direct
me to do otherwise, I know no reason why men should not pardon me in
this world, and am confident that God will pardon me for it in the
next." And so he concluded. Parson Herring read a psalm and chapters
before sermon; and one was the chapter in the Acts, where the story of
Ananias and Sapphira is. And after he had done, says he, "This is just
the case of England at present. God he bids us to preach, and men bid
us not to preach; and if we do, we are to be imprisoned and further
punished. All that I can say to it is, that I beg your prayers, and the
prayers of all good Christians, for us." This was all the exposition he
made of the chapter in these very words, and no more. I was much pleased
with Dr. Bates's manner of bringing in the Lord's Prayer after his own;
thus, "In whose comprehensive words we sum up all our imperfect desires;
saying, 'Our Father,'" &c. Church being done and it raining I took a
hackney coach and so home, being all in a sweat and fearful of getting
cold. To my study at my office, and thither came Mr. Moore to me and
walked till it was quite dark. Then I wrote a letter to my Lord Privy
Seale as from my Lord for Mr.-------to be sworn directly by deputy to my
Lord, he denying to swear him as deputy together with me. So that I am
now clear of it, and the profit is now come to be so little that I am
not displeased at my getting off so well. He being gone I to my study
and read, and so to eat a bit of bread and cheese and so to bed. I hear
most of the Presbyters took their leaves to-day, and that the City is
much dissatisfied with it. I pray God keep peace among us, and make the
Bishops careful of bringing in good men in their rooms, or else all will
fly a-pieces; for bad ones will not [go] down with the City.

18th. Up very early, and up upon my house to see how work goes on, which
do please me very well. So about seven o'clock took horse and rode to
Bowe, and there staid at the King's Head, and eat a breakfast of eggs
till Mr. Deane of Woolwich came to me, and he and I rid into Waltham
Forest, and there we saw many trees of the King's a-hewing; and he
showed me the whole mystery of off square,

     [Off-square is evidently a mistake, in the shorthand MS., for half
     square.]

wherein the King is abused in the timber that he buys, which I shall
with much pleasure be able to correct. After we had been a good while in
the wood, we rode to Illford, and there, while dinner was getting ready,
he and I practised measuring of the tables and other things till I did
understand measuring of timber and board very well. So to dinner and by
and by, being sent for, comes Mr. Cooper, our officer in the Forest, and
did give me an account of things there, and how the country is backward
to come in with their carts. By and by comes one Mr. Marshall, of whom
the King has many carriages for his timber, and they staid and drank
with me, and while I am here, Sir W. Batten passed by in his coach,
homewards from Colchester, where he had been seeing his son-in-law,
Lemon, that lies a-dying, but I would take no notice of him, but let him
go. By and by I got a horseback again and rode to Barking, and there saw
the place where they ship this timber for Woolwich; and so Deane and I
home again, and parted at Bowe, and I home just before a great showre of
rayne, as God would have it. I find Deane a pretty able man, and able to
do the King service; but, I think, more out of envy to the rest of the
officers of the yard, of whom he complains much, than true love, more
than others, to the service. He would fain seem a modest man, and
yet will commend his own work and skill, and vie with other persons,
especially the Petts, but I let him alone to hear all he will say.
Whiled away the evening at my office trying to repeat the rules of
measuring learnt this day, and so to bed with my mind very well pleased
with this day's work.

19th. Up betimes and to see how my work goes on. Then Mr. Creed came
to me, and he and I walked an hour or two till 8 o'clock in the garden,
speaking of our accounts one with another and then things public. Among
other things he tells me that my Lord has put me into Commission with
himself and many noblemen and others for Tangier, which, if it be, is
not only great honour, but may be of profit too, and I am very glad of
it. By and by to sit at the office; and Mr. Coventry did tell us of
the duell between Mr. Jermyn, nephew to my Lord St. Albans, and Colonel
Giles Rawlins, the latter of whom is killed, and the first mortally
wounded, as it is thought. They fought against Captain Thomas Howard, my
Lord Carlisle's brother, and another unknown; who, they say, had armour
on that they could not be hurt, so that one of their swords went up to
the hilt against it. They had horses ready, and are fled. But what is
most strange, Howard sent one challenge, but they could not meet,
and then another, and did meet yesterday at the old Pall Mall at St.
James's, and would not to the last tell Jermyn what the quarrel was;
nor do any body know. The Court is much concerned in this fray, and I am
glad of it; hoping that it will cause some good laws against it. After
sitting, Sir G. Carteret and I walked a good while in the garden, who
told me that Sir W. Batten had made his complaint to him that some of
us had a mind to do him a bad turn, but I do not see that Sir George is
concerned for him at all, but rather against him. He professes all love
to me, and did tell me how he had spoke of me to my Lord Chancellor, and
that if my Lord Sandwich would ask my Lord Chancellor, he should know
what he had said of me to him to my advantage, of which I am very glad,
and do not doubt that all things will grow better and better every day
for me. Dined at home alone, then to my office, and there till late at
night doing business, and so home, eat a bit, and to bed.

20th. Up early, and to my office, and thence to my Lord Sandwich, whom
I found in bed, and he sent for me in. Among other talk, he do tell me
that he hath put me into commission with a great many great persons in
the business of Tangier, which is a very great honour to me, and may be
of good concernment to me. By and by comes in Mr. Coventry to us, whom
my Lord tells that he is also put into the commission, and that I am
there, of which he said he was glad; and did tell my Lord that I was
indeed the life of this office, and much more to my commendation beyond
measure. And that, whereas before he did bear me respect for his sake,
he do do it now much more for my own; which is a great blessing to me.
Sir G. Carteret having told me what he did yesterday concerning his
speaking to my Lord Chancellor about me. So that on all hands, by God's
blessing, I find myself a very rising man. By and by comes my Lord
Peterborough in, with whom we talked a good while, and he is going
tomorrow towards Tangier again. I perceive there is yet good hopes of
peace with Guyland,--[A Moorish usurper, who had put himself at the head
of an army for the purpose of attacking Tangier.--B.]--which is of
great concernment to Tangier. And many other things I heard which yet
I understand not, and so cannot remember. My Lord and Lord Peterborough
going out to the Solicitor General about the drawing up of this
Commission, I went to Westminster Hall with Mr. Moore, and there
meeting Mr. Townsend, he would needs take me to Fleet Street, to one
Mr. Barwell, squire sadler to the King, and there we and several other
Wardrobe-men dined. We had a venison pasty, and other good plain and
handsome dishes; the mistress of the house a pretty, well-carriaged
woman, and a fine hand she hath; and her maid a pretty brown lass. But
I do find my nature ready to run back to my old course of drinking
wine and staying from my business, and yet, thank God, I was not
fully contented with it, but did stay at little ease, and after dinner
hastened home by water, and so to my office till late at night. In the
evening Mr. Hayward came to me to advise with me about the business of
the Chest, which I have now a mind to put in practice, though I know it
will vex Sir W. Batten, which is one of the ends (God forgive me) that I
have in it. So home, and eat a bit, and to bed.

21st. Up early, and to my office, and by and by we sat all the morning.
At noon, though I was invited to my uncle Fenner's to dinner to a haunch
of venison I sent him yesterday, yet I did not go, but chose to go to
Mr. Rawlinson's, where my uncle Wight and my aunt, and some neighbour
couples were at a very good venison pasty. Hither came, after we were
set down, a most pretty young lady (only her hands were not white nor
handsome), which pleased me well, and I found her to be sister to Mrs.
Anne Wight that comes to my uncle Wight's. We were good company, and
had a very pretty dinner. And after dinner some talk, I with my aunt
and this young lady about their being [at] Epsom, from whence they came
to-day, and so home and to my office, and there doing business till past
9 at night, and so home and to bed. But though I drank no wine to-day,
yet how easily was I of my own accord stirred up to desire my aunt and
this pretty lady (for it was for her that I did it) to carry them to
Greenwich and see the pleasure boats. But my aunt would not go, of which
since I am much glad.

22nd. About three o'clock this morning I waked with the noise of the
rayne, having never in my life heard a more violent shower; and then the
catt was lockt in the chamber, and kept a great mewing, and leapt upon
the bed, which made me I could not sleep a great while. Then to sleep,
and about five o'clock rose, and up to my office, and about 8 o'clock
went down to Deptford, and there with Mr. Davis did look over most of
his stores; by the same token in the great storehouse, while Captain
Badily was talking to us, one from a trap-door above let fall unawares
a coyle of cable, that it was 10,000 to one it had not broke Captain
Badily's neck, it came so near him, but did him no hurt. I went on
with looking and informing myself of the stores with great delight, and
having done there, I took boat home again and dined, and after dinner
sent for some of my workmen and did scold at them so as I hope my work
will be hastened. Then by water to Westminster Hall, and there I hear
that old Mr. Hales did lately die suddenly in an hour's time. Here I
met with Will Bowyer, and had a promise from him of a place to stand
to-morrow at his house to see the show. Thence to my Lord's, and
thither sent for Mr. Creed, who came, and walked together talking about
business, and then to his lodgings at Clerke's, the confectioner's,
where he did give me a little banquet, and I had liked to have begged
a parrot for my wife, but he hath put me in a way to get a better from
Steventon; at Portsmouth. But I did get of him a draught of Tangier to
take a copy by, which pleases me very well. So home by water and to my
office, where late, and so home to bed.

23d. Up early, and about my works in my house, to see what is done and
design more. Then to my office, and by and by we sat till noon at the
office. After sitting, Mr. Coventry and I did walk together a great
while in the Garden, where he did tell me his mind about Sir G.
Carteret's having so much the command of the money, which must be
removed. And indeed it is the bane of all our business. He observed
to me also how Sir W. Batten begins to struggle and to look after his
business, which he do indeed a little, but it will come to nothing. I
also put him upon getting an order from the Duke for our inquiries
into the Chest, which he will see done. So we parted, and Mr. Creed by
appointment being come, he and I went out together, and at an ordinary
in Lumbard Streete dined together, and so walked down to the Styllyard,
and so all along Thames-street, but could not get a boat: I offered
eight shillings for a boat to attend me this afternoon, and they would
not, it being the day of the Queen's coming to town from Hampton Court.
So we fairly walked it to White Hall, and through my Lord's lodgings we
got into White Hall garden, and so to the Bowling-green, and up to the
top of the new Banqueting House there, over the Thames, which was a
most pleasant place as any I could have got; and all the show consisted
chiefly in the number of boats and barges; and two pageants, one of a
King, and another of a Queen, with her Maydes of Honour sitting at her
feet very prettily; and they tell me the Queen is Sir. Richard Ford's
daughter. Anon come the King and Queen in a barge under a canopy with
10,000 barges and boats, I think, for we could see no water for them,
nor discern the King nor Queen. And so they landed at White Hall Bridge,
and the great guns on the other side went off: But that which pleased me
best was, that my Lady Castlemaine stood over against us upon a piece of
White Hall, where I glutted myself with looking on her. But methought it
was strange to see her Lord and her upon the same place walking up and
down without taking notice one of another, only at first entry he put
off his hat, and she made him a very civil salute, but afterwards took
no notice one of another; but both of them now and then would take their
child, which the nurse held in her armes, and dandle it. One thing more;
there happened a scaffold below to fall, and we feared some hurt, but
there was none, but she of all the great ladies only run down among the
common rabble to see what hurt was done, and did take care of a child
that received some little hurt, which methought was so noble. Anon there
came one there booted and spurred that she talked long with. And by and
by, she being in her hair, she put on his hat, which was but an ordinary
one, to keep the wind off. But methinks it became her mightily, as every
thing else do. The show being over, I went away, not weary with looking
on her, and to my Lord's lodgings, where my brother Tom and Dr. Thomas
Pepys were to speak with me. So I walked with them in the garden, and
was very angry with them both for their going out of town without my
knowledge; but they told me the business, which was to see a gentlewoman
for a wife for Tom, of Mr. Cooke's providing, worth L500, of good
education, her name Hobell, and lives near Banbury, demands L40 per
annum joynter. Tom likes her, and, they say, had a very good reception,
and that Cooke hath been very serviceable therein, and that she is
committed to old Mr. Young, of the Wardrobe's, tuition. After I had told
them my mind about their folly in going so unadvisedly, I then begun to
inquire after the business, and so did give no answer as to my opinion
till I have looked farther into it by Mr. Young. By and by, as we were
walking in my Lord's walk, comes my Lord, and so we broke our discourse
and went in with him, and after I had put them away I went in to my
Lord, and he and I had half an hour's private discourse about the
discontents of the times, which we concluded would not come to anything
of difference, though the Presbyters would be glad enough of it; but we
do not think religion will so soon cause another war. Then to his own
business. He asked my advice there, whether he should go on to purchase
more land and to borrow money to pay for it, which he is willing to do,
because such a bargain as that of Mr. Buggins's, of Stukely, will not
be every day to be had, and Brampton is now perfectly granted him by the
King--I mean the reversion of it--after the Queen's death; and, in the
meantime, he buys it of Sir Peter Ball his present right. Then we fell
to talk of Navy business, and he concludes, as I do, that he needs not
put himself upon any more voyages abroad to spend money, unless a war
comes; and that by keeping his family awhile in the country, he shall be
able to gather money. He is glad of a friendship with Mr. Coventry, and
I put him upon increasing it, which he will do, but he (as Mr. Coventry
do) do much cry against the course of our payments and the Treasurer to
have the whole power in his own hands of doing what he will, but I think
will not meddle in himself. He told me also that in the Commission for
Tangier Mr. Coventry had advised him that Mr. Povy, who intended to be
Treasurer,

     [Thomas Povy, who had held, under Cromwell, a high situation in the
     Office of Plantations, was appointed in July, 1660, Treasurer and
     Receiver-General of the Rents and Revenues of James, Duke of York;
     but his royal master's affairs falling into confusion, he
     surrendered his patent on the 27th July, 1668, for a consideration
     of L2,000.  He was also First Treasurer for Tangier, which office he
     resigned to Pepys.  Povy, had apartments at Whitehall, besides his
     lodgings in Lincoln's Inn, and a villa near Hounslow, called the
     Priory, which he had inherited from Justinian Povy, who purchased it
     in 1625.  He was one of the sons of Justinian Povy, Auditor-General
     to Queen Anne of Denmark in 1614, whose father was John Povy,
     citizen and embroiderer of London.]

and it is intended him, may not be of the Commission itself, and my Lord
I think will endeavour to get him to be contented to be left out of the
Commission, and it is a very good rule indeed that the Treasurer in no
office ought to be of the Commission. Here we broke off, and I bid him
good night, and so with much ado, the streets being at nine o'clock at
night crammed with people going home to the city, for all the borders
of the river had been full of people, as the King had come, to a miracle
got to the Palace Yard, and there took boat, and so to the Old Swan, and
so walked home, and to bed very weary.

24th (Lord's day). Slept till 7 o'clock, which I have not done a very
great while, but it was my weariness last night that caused it. So
rose and to my office till church time, writing down my yesterday's
observations, and so to church, where I all alone, and found Will
Griffin and Thomas Hewett got into the pew next to our backs, where our
maids sit, but when I come, they went out; so forward some people are to
outrun themselves. Here we had a lazy, dull sermon. So home to dinner,
where my brother Tom came to me, and both before and after dinner he and
I walked all alone in the garden, talking about his late journey and his
mistress, and for what he tells me it is like to do well. He being gone,
I to church again, where Mr. Mills, making a sermon upon confession, he
did endeavour to pull down auricular confession, but did set it up by
his bad arguments against it, and advising people to come to him to
confess their sins when they had any weight upon their consciences, as
much as is possible, which did vex me to hear. So home, and after an
hour's being in my office alone, looking over the plates and globes, I
walked to my uncle Wight's, the truth is, in hopes to have seen and been
acquainted with the pretty lady that came along with them to dinner
the other day to Mr. Rawlinson, but she is gone away. But here I staid
supper, and much company there was; among others, Dr. Burnett, Mr. Cole
the lawyer, Mr. Rawlinson, and Mr. Sutton, a brother of my aunt's, that
I never saw before. Among other things they tell me that there hath been
a disturbance in a church in Friday Street; a great many young people
knotting together and crying out "Porridge"

     [A nickname given by the Dissenters to the Prayer-Book.  In Mrs.
     Behn's "City Heiress" (1682), Sir Anthony says to Sir Timothy, "You
     come from Church, too."  Sir Timothy replies, "Ay, needs must when
     the Devil drives--I go to save my bacon, as they say, once a month,
     and that too after the Porridge is served up."  Scott quotes, in his
     notes to "Woodstock," a pamphlet entitled, "Vindication of the Book
     of Common Prayer, against the contumelious Slanders of the Fanatic
     party terming it Porridge."]

often and seditiously in the church, and took the Common Prayer Book,
they say, away; and, some say, did tear it; but it is a thing which
appears to me very ominous. I pray God avert it. After supper home and
to bed.

25th. Up early, and among my workmen when they came, and set them
in good order at work on all hands, which, though it at first began
angrily, yet I pleased myself afterwards in seeing it put into a good
posture, and so I left them, and away by water to Woolwich (calling in
my way in Hamcreek, where I have never been before, and there found two
of the King's ships lie there without any living creature aboard, which
troubled me, every thing being stole away that can be), where I staid
seeing a cable of 14 inches laid, in which there was good variety. Then
to Mr. Falconer's, and there eat a bit of roast meat off of the spit,
and so away to the yard, and there among other things mustered the yard,
and did things that I perceive people do begin to value me, and that I
shall be able to be of command in all matters, which God be praised for.
Then to Mr. Pett's, and there eat some fruit and drank, and so to boat
again, and to Deptford, calling there about the business of my house
only, and so home, where by appointment I found Mr. Coventry, Sir W.
Batten, and Mr. Waith met at Sir W. Batten's, and thither I met, and so
agreed upon a way of answering my Lord Treasurer's letter. Here I found
Mr. Coventry had got a letter from the Duke, sent us for looking into
the business of the Chest, of which I am glad. After we had done here I
went home, and up among my workmen, and found they had done a good day's
work, and so to my office till late ordering of several businesses, and
so home and to bed, my mind, God be praised, full of business, but great
quiet.

26th. Up betimes and among my works and workmen, and with great pleasure
seeing them go on merrily, and a good many hands, which I perceive makes
good riddance, and so to the office, where we sat all the morning, and
at noon dined alone with Sir W. Batten, which I have not done a great
while, but his lady being out of the way I was the willinger to do it,
and after dinner he and I by water to Deptford, and there found Sir
G. Carteret and my Lady at dinner, and so we sat down and eat another
dinner of venison with them, and so we went to the payhouse, and there
staid till to o'clock at night paying off the Martin and Kinsale, being
small but troublesome ships to pay, and so in the dark by water home to
the Custom House, and so got a lanthorn to light us home, there being
Mr. Morrice the wine cooper with us, he having been at Deptford to view
some of the King's casks we have to sell. So to bed.

27th. Up and among my workmen, my work going on still very well. So to
my office all the morning, and dined again with Sir W. Batten, his Lady
being in the country. Among other stories, he told us of the Mayor of
Bristoll's reading a pass with the bottom upwards; and a barber that
could not read, that flung a letter in the kennel when one came to
desire him to read the superscription, saying, "Do you think I stand
here to read letters?" Among my workmen again, pleasing myself all the
afternoon there, and so to the office doing business till past 9 at
night, and so home and to bed. This afternoon Mrs. Hunt came to see me,
and I did give her a Muske Millon. To-day my hogshead of sherry I have
sold to Sir W. Batten, and am glad of my money instead of wine. After I
had wrote this at my office (as I have of late altogether done since my
wife has been in the country) I went into my house, and Will having been
making up books at Deptford with other clerks all day, I did not think
he was come home, but was in fear for him, it being very late, what was
become of him. But when I came home I found him there at his ease in his
study, which vexed me cruelly, that he should no more mind me, but to
let me be all alone at the office waiting for him. Whereupon I struck
him, and did stay up till 12 o'clock at night chiding him for it, and
did in plain terms tell him that I would not be served so, and that I am
resolved to look out some boy that I may have the bringing up of after
my own mind, and which I do intend to do, for I do find that he has got
a taste of liberty since he came to me that he will not leave. Having
discharged my mind, I went to bed.

28th. I observe that Will, whom I used to call two or three times in
a morning, would now wake of himself and rise without calling. Which
though angry I was glad to see. So I rose and among my workmen, in my
gown, without a doublet, an hour or two or more, till I was afraid of
getting an ague, and so to the office, and there we sat all the morning,
and at noon Mr. Coventry and I dined at Sir W. Batten's, where I have
now dined three days together, and so in the afternoon again we sat,
which we intend to do two afternoons in a week besides our other
sitting. In the evening we rose, and I to see how my work goes on, and
so to my office, writing by the post and doing other matters, and so
home and to bed late.

29th. Up betimes and among my workmen, where I did stay with them the
greatest part of the morning, only a little at the office, and so to
dinner alone at home, and so to my workmen again, finding my presence to
carry on the work both to my mind and with more haste, and I thank God
I am pleased with it. At night, the workmen being gone, I went to my
office, and among other businesses did begin to-night with Mr. Lewes
to look into the nature of a purser's account, and the business of
victualling, in which there is great variety; but I find I shall
understand it, and be able to do service there also. So being weary and
chill, being in some fear of an ague, I went home and to bed.

30th. Up betimes among my workmen, and so to the office, where we sat
all the morning, and at noon rose and had news that Sir W. Pen would be
in town from Ireland, which I much wonder at, he giving so little notice
of it, and it troubled me exceedingly what to do for a lodging, and
more what to do with my goods, that are all in his house; but at last I
resolved to let them lie there till Monday, and so got Griffin to get
a lodging as near as he could, which is without a door of our back door
upon Tower Hill, a chamber where John Pavis, one of our clerks, do lie
in, but he do provide himself elsewhere, and I am to have his chamber.
So at the office all the afternoon and the evening till past to at night
expecting Sir W. Pen's coming, but he not coming to-night I went thither
and there lay very well, and like my lodging well enough. My man Will
after he had got me to bed did go home and lay there, and my maid Jane
lay among my goods at Sir W. Pen's.

31st (Lord's day). Waked early, but being in a strange house, did not
rise till 7 o'clock almost, and so rose and read over my oaths, and
whiled away an hour thinking upon businesses till Will came to get me
ready, and so got ready and to my office, and thence to church. After
sermon home and dined alone. News is brought me that Sir W. Pen is come.
But I would take no notice thereof till after dinner, and then sent him
word that I would wait on him, but he is gone to bed. So to my office,
and there made my monthly accounts, and find myself worth in money about
L686 19s. 2 1/2d., for which God be praised; and indeed greatly I hope
to thank Almighty God, who do most manifestly bless me in my endeavours
to do the duties of my office, I now saving money, and my expenses being
little. My wife is still in the country; my house all in dirt; but my
work in a good forwardness, and will be much to my mind at last. In the
afternoon to church, and there heard a simple sermon of a stranger upon
David's words, "Blessed is the man that walketh not in the way of the
ungodly," &c., and the best of his sermon was the degrees of walking,
standing, and sitting, showing how by steps and degrees sinners do grow
in wickedness. After sermon to my brother Tom's, who I found has taken
physic to-day, and I talked with him about his country mistress, and
read Cook's letter, wherein I am well satisfied, and will appear in
promoting it; so back and to Mr. Rawlinson's, and there supped with him,
and in came my uncle Wight and my aunt. Our discourse of the discontents
that are abroad, among, and by reason of the Presbyters. Some were
clapped up to-day, and strict watch is kept in the City by the
train-bands, and letters of a plot are taken. God preserve us! for all
these things bode very ill. So home, and after going to welcome home Sir
W. Pen, who was unready, going to bed, I staid with him a little while,
and so to my lodging and to bed.




SEPTEMBER 1662

September 1st. Up betimes at my lodging and to my office and among my
workmen, and then with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen by coach to St.
James's, this being the first day of our meeting there by the Duke's
order; but when we come, we found him going out by coach with his
Duchess, and he told us he was to go abroad with the Queen to-day (to
Durdans, it seems, to dine with my Lord Barkeley, where I have been very
merry when I was a little boy); so we went and staid a little at Mr.
Coventry's chamber, and I to my Lord Sandwich's, who is gone to wait
upon the King and Queen today. And so Mr. Paget being there, Will Howe
and I and he played over some things of Locke's that we used to play at
sea, that pleased us three well, it being the first music I have heard
a great while, so much has my business of late taken me off from all
my former delights. By and by by water home, and there dined alone, and
after dinner with my brother Tom's two men I removed all my goods out of
Sir W. Pen's house into one room that I have with much ado got ready at
my house, and so I am to be quit of any further obligation to him. So to
my office, but missing my key, which I had in my hand just now, makes me
very angry and out of order, it being a thing that I hate in others, and
more in myself, to be careless of keys, I thinking another not fit to be
trusted that leaves a key behind their hole. One thing more vexes me: my
wife writes me from the country that her boy plays the rogue there, and
she is weary of him, and complains also of her maid Sarah, of which I
am also very sorry. Being thus out of temper, I could do little at my
office, but went home and eat a bit, and so to my lodging to bed.

2nd. Up betimes and got myself ready alone, and so to my office, my mind
much troubled for my key that I lost yesterday, and so to my workmen and
put them in order, and so to my office, and we met all the morning, and
then dined at Sir W. Batten's with Sir W. Pen, and so to my office again
all the afternoon, and in the evening wrote a letter to Mr. Cooke, in
the country, in behalf of my brother Tom, to his mistress, it being the
first of my appearing in it, and if she be as Tom sets her out, it may
be very well for him. So home and eat a bit, and so to my lodging to
bed.

3rd. Up betimes, but now the days begin to shorten, and so whereas I
used to rise by four o'clock, it is not broad daylight now till after
five o'clock, so that it is after five before I do rise. To my office,
and about 8 o'clock I went over to Redriffe, and walked to Deptford,
where I found Mr. Coventry and Sir W. Pen beginning the pay, it being my
desire to be there to-day because it is the first pay that Mr. Coventry
has been at, and I would be thought to be as much with Mr. Coventry as
I can. Here we staid till noon, and by that time paid off the Breda, and
then to dinner at the tavern, where I have obtained that our commons is
not so large as they used to be, which I am glad to see. After dinner by
water to the office, and there we met and sold the Weymouth, Successe,
and Fellowship hulkes, where pleasant to see how backward men are at
first to bid; and yet when the candle is going out, how they bawl and
dispute afterwards who bid the most first. And here I observed one man
cunninger than the rest that was sure to bid the last man, and to carry
it; and inquiring the reason, he told me that just as the flame goes
out the smoke descends, which is a thing I never observed before, and by
that he do know the instant when to bid last, which is very pretty. In
our discourse in the boat Mr. Coventry told us how the Fanatiques and
the Presbyters, that did intend to rise about this time, did choose this
day as the most auspicious to them in their endeavours against monarchy:
it being fatal twice to the King, and the day of Oliver's death.

     [Cromwell had considered the 3rd of September as the most fortunate
     day of his life, on account of his victories at Dunbar and
     Worcester.  It was also remarkable for the great storm that occurred
     at the time of his death; and as being the day on which the Fire of
     London, in 1666, burnt with the greatest fury.--B.]

But, blessed be God! all is likely to be quiet, I hope. After the sale I
walked to my brother's, in my way meeting with Dr. Fairbrother, of
whom I enquired what news in Church matters. He tells me, what I heard
confirmed since, that it was fully resolved by the King's new Council
that an indulgence should be granted the Presbyters; but upon the Bishop
of London's speech

     [Gilbert Sheldon, born July 19th, 1598; Fellow of All Souls, Oxford,
     1622; Warden, 1635; Bishop of London, 1660-63; Archbishop of
     Canterbury, 1663.  Died November 9th, 1677.]

(who is now one of the most powerful men in England with the King),
their minds were wholly turned. And it is said that my Lord Albemarle
did oppose him most; but that I do believe is only in appearance. He
told me also that most of the Presbyters now begin to wish they had
complied, now they see that no Indulgence will be granted them, which
they hoped for; and that the Bishop of London hath taken good care that
places are supplied with very good and able men, which is the only thing
that will keep all quiet. I took him in the tavern at Puddle dock, but
neither he nor I drank any of the wine we called for, but left it, and
so after discourse parted, and Mr. Townsend not being at home I went to
my brother's, and there heard how his love matter proceeded, which do
not displease me, and so by water to White Hall to my Lord's lodgings,
where he being to go to Hinchingbroke to-morrow morning, I staid and
fiddled with Will. Howe some new tunes very pleasant, and then my Lord
came in and had much kind talk with him, and then to bed with Mr. Moore
there alone. So having taken my leave of my Lord before I went to bed, I
resolved to rise early and be gone without more speaking to him--

4th. Which I did, and by water betimes to the Tower and so home, where
I shifted myself, being to dine abroad, and so being also trimmed, which
is a thing I have very seldom done of late, I gat to my office and then
met and sit all the morning, and at noon we all to the Trinity House,
where we treated, very dearly, I believe, the officers of the Ordnance;
where was Sir W. Compton and the rest and the Lieutenant of the Tower.
We had much and good music, which was my best entertainment. Sir Wm.
Compton I heard talk with great pleasure of the difference between the
fleet now and in Queen Elisabeth's days; where, in 88, she had but 36
sail great and small, in the world; and ten rounds of powder was their
allowance at that time against the Spaniard. After Sir W. Compton and
Mr. Coventry, and some of the best of the rest were gone, I grew weary
of staying with Sir Williams both, and the more for that my Lady Batten
and her crew, at least half a score, come into the room, and I believe
we shall pay size for it; but 'tis very pleasant to see her in her
hair under her hood, and how by little and little she would fain be a
gallant; but, Lord! the company she keeps about her are like herself,
that she may be known by them what she is. Being quite weary I stole
from them and to my office, where I did business till 9 at night, and so
to my lodgings to bed.

5th. Up by break of day at 5 o'clock, and down by water to Woolwich: in
my way saw the yacht lately built by our virtuosoes (my Lord Brunkard
and others, with the help of Commissioner Pett also) set out from
Greenwich with the little Dutch bezan, to try for mastery; and before
they got to Woolwich the Dutch beat them half-a-mile (and I hear this
afternoon, that, in coming home, it got above three miles); which all
our people are glad of. Here I staid and mustered the yard and looked
into the storehouses; and so walked all alone to Greenwich, and thence
by water to Deptford, and there examined some stores, and did some of
my own business in hastening my work there, and so walked to Redriffe,
being by this time pretty weary and all in a sweat; took boat there
for the Tower, which made me a little fearful, it being a cold, windy
morning. So to my lodgings and there rubbed myself clean, and so to Mr.
Bland's, the merchant, by invitation, I alone of all our company of this
office; where I found all the officers of the Customs, very grave fine
gentlemen, and I am very glad to know them; viz.--Sir Job Harvy,
Sir John Wolstenholme, Sir John Jacob, Sir Nicholas Crisp, Sir John
Harrison, and Sir John Shaw: very good company. And among other pretty
discourse, some was of Sir Jerom Bowes, Embassador from Queene Elizabeth
to the Emperor of Russia;

     [In 1583; the object of his mission being to persuade the Muscovite
     (Ivan IV. the Terrible) to a peace with John, King of Sweden.  He
     was also employed to confirm the trade of the English with Russia,
     and having incurred some personal danger, was received with favour
     on his return by the Queen.  He died in 1616.]

who, because some of the noblemen there would go up the stairs to the
Emperor before him, he would not go up till the Emperor had ordered
those two men to be dragged down stairs, with their heads knocking
upon every stair till they were killed. And when he was come up, they
demanded his sword of him before he entered the room. He told them, if
they would have his sword, they should have his boots too. And so
caused his boots to be pulled off, and his night-gown and night-cap and
slippers to be sent for; and made the Emperor stay till he could go in
his night-dress, since he might not go as a soldier. And lastly, when
the Emperor in contempt, to show his command of his subjects, did
command one to leap from the window down and broke his neck in the sight
of our Embassador, he replied that his mistress did set more by, and did
make better use of the necks of her subjects but said that, to show
what her subjects would do for her, he would, and did, fling down his
gantlett before the Emperor; and challenged all the nobility there to
take it up, in defence of the Emperor against his Queen: for which, at
this very day, the name of Sir Jerom Bowes is famous and honoured there.
After dinner I came home and found Sir John Minnes come this day, and I
went to him to Sir W. Batten's, where it pleased me to see how jealous
Sir Williams both are of my going down to Woolwich, &c., and doing
my duty as I nowadays do, and of my dining with the Commission of
the Customs. So to my office, and there till 9 at night, and so to my
lodgings to bed. I this day heard that Mr. Martin Noell is knighted by
the King, which I much wonder at; but yet he is certainly a very useful
man.

6th. Lay long, that is, till 6 and past before I rose, in order to sweat
a little away the cold which I was afraid I might have got yesterday,
but I bless God I am well. So up and to my office, and then we met and
sat till noon, very full of business. Then Sir John Minnes, both Sir
Williams and I to the Trinity House, where we had at dinner a couple of
venison pasties, of which I eat but little, being almost cloyed, having
been at five pasties in three days, namely, two at our own feast,
and one yesterday, and two to-day. So home and at the office all the
afternoon, busy till nine at night, and so to my lodging and to bed.
This afternoon I had my new key and the lock of my office door altered,
having lost my key the other day, which vexed me.

7th (Lord's day). Up betimes and round about by the streets to my
office, and walked in the garden and in my office till my man Will
rose, and then sent to tell Sir J. Minnes that I would go with him to
Whitehall, which anon we did, in his coach, and to the Chapell, where
I heard a good sermon of the Dean of Ely's, upon returning to the old
ways, and a most excellent anthem, with symphonys between, sung by
Captain Cooke. Then home with Mr. Fox and his lady; and there dined with
them, where much company come to them. Most of our discourse was what
ministers are flung out that will not conform: and the care of the
Bishop of London that we are here supplied with very good men. Thence
to my Lord's, where nobody at home but a woman that let me in, and Sarah
above, whither I went up to her and played and talked with her... After
I had talked an hour or two with her I went and gave Mr. Hunt a short
visit, he being at home alone, and thence walked homewards, and meeting
Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon, he took me into Somersett House; and there
carried me into the Queen-Mother's presence-chamber, where she was with
our own Queen sitting on her left hand (whom I did never see before);
and though she be not very charming, yet she hath a good, modest, and
innocent look, which is pleasing. Here I also saw Madam Castlemaine,
and, which pleased me most, Mr. Crofts, the King's bastard, a most
pretty spark of about 15 years old, who, I perceive, do hang much upon
my Lady Castlemaine, and is always with her; and, I hear, the Queens
both of them are mighty kind to him.

     [James, the son of Charles II. by Lucy Walter, daughter of William
     Walter, of Roch Castle, co.  Pembroke.  He was born April 9th, 1649,
     and landed in England with the Queen-Mother, July 28th, 1662, when
     he bore the name of Crofts, after Lord Crofts, his governor.  He was
     created Duke of Monmouth, February 14th, 1663, and married Lady Anne
     Scott, daughter and heiress of Francis, second Earl of Buccleuch, on
     April 20th following.  In 1673 he took the name of Scott, and was
     created Duke of Buccleuch.]

By and by in comes the King, and anon the Duke and his Duchess; so that,
they being all together, was such a sight as I never could almost have
happened to see with so much ease and leisure. They staid till it
was dark, and then went away; the King and his Queen, and my Lady
Castlemaine and young Crofts, in one coach and the rest in other,
coaches. Here were great store of great ladies, but very few handsome.
The King and Queen were very merry; and he would have made the
Queen-Mother believe that his Queen was with child, and said that she
said so. And the young Queen answered, "You lye;" which was the first
English word that I ever heard her say which made the King good sport;
and he would have taught her to say in English, "Confess and be hanged."
The company being gone I walked home with great content as I can be in
for seeing the greatest rarity, and yet a little troubled that I should
see them before my wife's coming home, I having made a promise that I
would not, nor did I do it industriously and by design, but by chance
only. To my office, to fit myself for waiting on the Duke to-morrow
morning with the rest of our company, and so to my lodgings and to bed.

8th. Up betimes and to my office preparing an account to give the Duke
this morning of what we have of late done at the office. About 7 o'clock
I went forth thinking to go along with Sir John Minnes and the rest, and
I found them gone, which did vex me, so I went directly to the old Swan
and took boat before them to Sir G. Carteret's lodgings at Whitehall,
and there staying till he was dressed talking with him, he and I to St.
James's, where Sir Williams both and Sir John were come, and so up with
Mr. Coventry to the Duke; who, after he was out of his bed, did send for
us in; and, when he was quite ready, took us into his closet, and there
told us that he do intend to renew the old custom for the Admirals to
have their principal officers to meet them once a-week, to give them an
account what they have done that week; which I am glad of: and so the
rest did tell his Royal Highness that I could do it best for the time
past. And so I produced my short notes, and did give him an account of
all that we have of late done; and proposed to him several things for
his commands, which he did give us, and so dismissed us. The rest to
Deptford, I to the Exchequer to meet Mr. Townsend, where I hear he
is gone to the Sun tavern, and there found him with some friends at
breakfast, which I eat with him, and so we crossed the water together,
and in walking I told him my brother Tom's intentions for a wife, which
he would do me all favour in to Mr. Young, whose kinswoman he do look
after. We took boat again at the Falcon, and there parted, and I to the
old Swan, and so to the Change, and there meeting Sir W. Warren did step
to a tavern, and there sat and talked about price of masts and other
things, and so broke up and to my office to see what business, and so
we took water again, and at the Tower I over to Redriffe, and there left
him in the boat and walked to Deptford, and there up and down the yard
speaking with people, and so Sir W. Pen coming out of the payhouse
did single me out to tell me Sir J. Minnes' dislike of my blinding his
lights over his stairs (which indeed is very bad) and blocking up the
house of office on the leads. Which did trouble me. So I went into the
payhouse and took an occasion of speaking with him alone, and did give
him good satisfaction therein, so as that I am well pleased and do hope
now to have my closet on the leads without any more trouble, for he
do not object against my having a door upon the leads, but that all my
family should not make it a thoroughfare, which I am contented with. So
to the pay, and in the evening home in the barge, and so to my office,
and after doing some business there to my lodgings, and so to bed.

9th. At my office betimes, and by and by we sat, and at noon Mr.
Coventry, Sir J. Minnes, Mr. Pett, and myself by water to Deptford,
where we met Sir G. C., Sir W. B., and Sir W. P. At the pay of a ship,
and we dined together on a haunch of good venison boiled, and after
dinner returned again to the office, and there met several tradesmen by
our appointment to know of them their lowest rates that they will take
for their several provisions that they sell to us, for I do resolve to
know that, and to buy no dearer, that so when we know the lowest rate,
it shall be the Treasurer's fault, and not ours, that we pay dearer.
This afternoon Sir John Minnes, Mr. Coventry, and I went into Sir John's
lodgings, where he showed us how I have blinded all his lights, and
stopped up his garden door, and other things he takes notice of that
he resolves to abridge me of, which do vex me so much that for all this
evening and all night in my bed, so great a fool I am, and little master
of my passion, that I could not sleep for the thoughts of my losing the
privilege of the leads, and other things which in themselves are small
and not worth half the trouble. The more fool am I, and must labour
against it for shame, especially I that used to preach up Epictetus's
rule:

     ["Some things are in our power, others are not" Pepys means,
     "I ought not to vex myself about what I cannot control."]

Late at my office, troubled in mind, and then to bed, but could hardly
sleep at night.

10th. Up and to my house, and there contrived a way how Sir John Minnes
shall come into the leads, and yet I save part of the closet I hoped
for, which, if it will not please him, I am a madman to be troubled at
it. To my office, and then at my house among my lazy workmen all day. In
the afternoon to the Wardrobe to speak with Mr. Townsend, who tells me
that he has spoke with Mr. Young about my brother Tom's business, and
finds that he has made enquiry of him, and do hear him so well spoken of
that he doubts not that the business will take with ordinary endeavours.
So to my brother's, and there finding both door and hatch open, I went
in and knocked 3 or 4 times, and nobody came to me, which troubled me
mightily; at last came Margaret, who complained of Peter, who by and
by came in, and I did rattle him soundly for it. I did afterwards
take occasion to talk seriously alone with Margaret, who I find a very
discreet, good woman, and tells me, upon my demand, that her master is a
very good husband, and minds his business well, but his fault is that he
has not command over his two men, but they do what they list, and care
not for his commands, and especially on Sundays they go whither they
please, and not to church, which vexes me mightily, and I am resolved to
school [him] soundly for it, it being so much unlike my father, that I
cannot endure it in myself or him. So walked home and in my way at the
Exchange found my uncle Wight, and he and I to an alehouse to drink a
cup of beer, and so away, and I home and at the office till 9 o'clock
and past, and so to my lodgings. I forgot that last night Mr. Cooke
came to me to make his peace for inviting my brother lately out of town
without my leave, but he do give me such a character of the lady that
he has found out for him that I do much rejoice at, and did this night
write a letter to her, which he enclosed in one of his, and by the
report that I hear of her I confess I am much pleased with the match.

11th. Up, but not so soon as I have of late practised, my little trouble
of mind and the shortness of the days making me to lie a little longer
than I used to do, but I must make it up by sitting up longer of nights.
To my office, whither my brother Tom, whom I chide sufficiently for
yesterday's work. So we sat at the office all the morning, some of us
at Deptford paying the ordinary there; at noon Sir W. Pen took me to his
lodgings to dinner, and after dinner I to my office again, and now and
then to see how my work goes on, and so to my office late, and so to my
lodgings, and after staying up till past 12 at night, at my musique upon
my lute, to bed. This night Tom came to show me a civil letter sent him
from his mistress. I am pleased well enough with the business.

12th. Up betimes and to my office, and up to my workmen, which goes on
slowly and troubles me much. Besides, my mind is troubled till I see how
Sir John Minnes will carry himself to me about my lodgings, for all my
fear is that he will get my best chamber from me, for as for the leads
I care not a farthing for them. At my office all the morning, Mr. Lewes
teaching me to understand the method of making up Purser's accounts,
which is very needful for me and very hard. Dined at home all in dirt,
and my mind weary of being thus out of order, but I hope in God it will
away, but for the present I am very melancholy, as I have been a great
while. All the afternoon till 9 at night at my office, and then home
and eat an egg or two, and so to my lodgings and to bed. This day, by
letters from my father, I hear that Captain Ferrers, who is with my Lord
in the country, was at Brampton (with Mr. Creed) to see him; and that a
day or two ago, being provoked to strike one of my Lord's footmen, the
footman drew his sword, and hath almost cut the fingers of one of his
hands off; which I am sorry for: but this is the vanity of being apt to
command and strike.

13th. Up betimes and to my office, and we sat all the morning, and then
at noon dined alone at home, and so among my work folks studying how to
get my way sure to me to go upon the leads, which I fear at last I must
be contented to go without, but, however, my mind is troubled still
about it. We met again in the afternoon to set accounts even between the
King and the masters of ships hired to carry provisions to Lisbon, and
in the evening Mr. Moore came to me and did lie with me at my lodgings.
It is great pleasure to me his company and discourse, and did talk also
about my law business, which I must now fall upon minding again, the
term coming on apace. So to bed.

14th (Lord's day). Up very early, and Mr. Moore taking leave of me the
barber came and trimmed me (I having him now to come to me again after I
have used a pumice-stone a good while, not but what I like this where
I cannot conveniently have a barber, but here I cannot keep my hair dry
without one), and so by water to White Hall, by the way hearing that the
Bishop of London had given a very strict order against boats going on
Sundays, and as I come back again, we were examined by the masters of
the company in another boat; but I told them who I was. But the door not
being open to Westminster stairs there, called in at the Legg and drank
a cup of ale and a toast, which I have not done many a month before, but
it served me for my two glasses of wine to-day. Thence to St. James's to
Mr. Coventry, and there staid talking privately with him an hour in his
chamber of the business of our office, and found him to admiration good
and industrious, and I think my most true friend in all things that
are fair. He tells me freely his mind of every man and in every thing.
Thence to White Hall chapel, where sermon almost done, and I heard
Captain Cooke's new musique. This the first day of having vialls and
other instruments to play a symphony between every verse of the anthem;
but the musique more full than it was the last Sunday, and very fine it
is.

     [Charles II. determined to form his own chapel on the model of that
     at Versailles.  Twenty-four instrumentalists were engaged, and this
     was the first day upon which they were brought into requisition.
     Evelyn alludes to the change in his Diary, but he puts the date down
     as the 21st instead of the 14th.  "Instead of the antient, grave and
     solemn wind musiq accompanying the organ, was introduc'd a concert
     of 24 violins between every pause after the French fantastical light
     way, better suiting a tavern or playhouse than a church.  This was
     the first time of change, and now we no more heard the cornet which
     gave life to the organ, that instrument quite left off in which the
     English were so skilful."  A list of the twenty-four fiddlers in
     1674, taken from an Exchequer document, "The names of the Gents of
     his Majesties Private Musick paid out of the Exchequer," is printed
     in North's "Memoires of Musick," ed.  Rimbault, 1846, p. 98 (note).]

But yet I could discern Captain Cooke to overdo his part at singing,
which I never did before. Thence up into the Queen's presence, and there
saw the Queen again as I did last Sunday, and some fine ladies with her;
but, my troth, not many. Thence to Sir G. Carteret's, and find him to
have sprained his foot and is lame, but yet hath been at chappell, and
my Lady much troubled for one of her daughters that is sick. I dined
with them, and a very pretty lady, their kinswoman, with them. My joy
is, that I do think I have good hold on Sir George and Mr. Coventry. Sir
George told me of a chest of drawers that were given Sir W. B. by Hughes
the rope-maker, whom he has since put out of his employment, and now the
fellow do cry out upon Sir W. for his cabinet. So home again by water
and to church, and from church Sir Williams both and Sir John Minnes
into the garden, and anon Sir W. Pen and I did discourse about my
lodgings and Sir J. Minnes, and I did open all my mind to him, and he
told me what he had heard, and I do see that I shall hardly keep my best
lodging chamber, which troubles me, but I did send for Goodenough the
plasterer, who tells me that it did ever belong to my lodgings, but lent
by Mr. Payles to Mr. Smith, and so I will strive hard for it before I
lose it. So to supper with them at Sir W. Batten's, and do counterfeit
myself well pleased, but my heart is troubled and offended at the whole
company. So to my office to prepare notes to read to the Duke to-morrow
morning, and so to my lodgings and to bed, my mind a little eased
because I am resolved to know the worst concerning my lodgings tomorrow.
Among other things Sir W. Pen did tell me of one of my servants looking
into Sir J. Minnes' window when my Lady Batten lay there, which do much
trouble them, and me also, and I fear will wholly occasion my loosing
the leads. One thing more he told me of my Jane's cutting off a
carpenter's long mustacho, and how the fellow cried, and his wife would
not come near him a great while, believing that he had been among some
of his wenches. At which I was merry, though I perceive they discourse
of it as a crime of hers, which I understand not.

15th. Up betimes to meet with the plasterer and bricklayer that did
first divide our lodgings, and they do both tell me that my chamber now
in dispute did ever belong to my lodgings, which do put me into good
quiet of mind. So by water with Sir Wm. Pen to White Hall; and, with
much ado, was fain to walk over the piles through the bridge, while Sir
W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes were aground against the bridge, and could
not in a great while get through. At White Hall we hear that the Duke
of York is gone a-hunting to-day; and so we returned: they going to the
Duke of Albemarle's, where I left them (after I had observed a very good
picture or two there), and so home, and there did resolve to give up
my endeavours for access to the leads, and to shut up my doors lest the
being open might give them occasion of longing for my chamber, which I
am in most fear about. So to Deptford, and took my Lady Batten and her
daughter and Mrs. Turner along with me, they being going through the
garden thither, they to Mr. Unthwayte's and I to the Pay, and then about
3 o'clock went to dinner (Sir W. Pen and I), and after dinner to the Pay
again, and at night by barge home all together, and so to my lodgings
and to bed, my mind full of trouble about my house.

16th. Up and to my workmen, and then to the office, and there we sat
till noon; then to the Exchange, and in my way met with the housekeeper
of this office, and he did give me so good an account of my chamber in
my house about which I am so much troubled that I am well at ease in my
mind. At my office all the afternoon alone. In the evening Sir J. M. and
I walked together a good while in the garden, very pleasant, and takes
no notice that he do design any further trouble to me about my house. At
night eat a bit of bread and cheese, and so to my lodgings and to bed,
my mind ill at ease for these particulars: my house in dirt, and like to
lose my best chamber. My wife writes me from the country that she is not
pleased there with my father nor mother, nor any of her servants, and
that my boy is turned a very rogue. I have L30 to pay to the cavaliers:
then a doubt about my being forced to leave all my business here, when I
am called to the court at Brampton; and lastly, my law businesses, which
vex me to my heart what I shall be able to do next term, which is near
at hand.

17th. At my office all the morning, and at noon to the Exchange, where
meeting Mr. Moore and Mr. Stucky, of the Wardrobe, we to an ordinary
to dinner, and after dinner Mr. Moore and I about 3 o'clock to Paul's
school, to wait upon Mr. Crumlum (Mr. Moore having a hopeful lad, a
kinsman of his, there at school), who we take very luckily, and went up
to his chamber with him, where there was also an old fellow student of
Mr. Crumlum's, one Mr. Newell, come to see him, of whom he made so much,
and of me, that the truth is he with kindness did drink more than I
believe he used to do, and did begin to be a little impertinent, the
more when after all he would in the evening go forth with us and give us
a bottle of wine abroad, and at the tavern met with an acquaintance of
his that did occasion impertinent discourse, that though I honour the
man, and he do declare abundance of learning and worth, yet I confess
my opinion is much lessened of him, and therefore let it be a caution
to myself not to love drink, since it has such an effect upon others of
greater worth in my own esteem. I could not avoid drinking of 5 glasses
this afternoon with him, and after I had parted with him Mr. Moore and I
to my house, and after we had eaten something to my lodgings, where the
master of the house, a very ordinary fellow, was ready to entertain
me and took me into his dining-room where his wife was, a pretty and
notable lady, too fine surely for him, and too much wit too. Here I was
forced to stay with them a good while and did drink again, there being
friends of theirs with them. At last being weary of his idle company,
I bid good-night and so to my chamber and Mr. [Moore] and I to bed,
neither of us well pleased with our afternoon's work, merely from our
being witnesses of Mr. Crumlum's weakness. This day my boy is come from
Brampton, and my wife I think the next week.

18th. At the office all the morning, and at noon Sir G. Carteret, Mr.
Coventry, and I by invitation to dinner to Sheriff Maynell's, the great
money-man; he, Alderman Backwell, and much noble and brave company,
with the privilege of their rare discourse, which is great content to me
above all other things in the world. And after a great dinner and much
discourse, we arose and took leave, and home to the business of my
office, where I thank God I take delight, and in the evening to my
lodging and to bed. Among other discourse, speaking concerning the great
charity used in Catholic countrys, Mr. Ashburnham did tell us, that this
last year, there being great want of corn in Paris, and so a collection
made for the poor, there was two pearls brought in, nobody knew from
whom (till the Queen, seeing them, knew whose they were, but did not
discover it), which were sold for 200,000 crownes.

19th. Up betimes and to my office, and at 9 o'clock, none of the rest
going, I went alone to Deptford, and there went on where they left last
night to pay Woolwich yard, and so at noon dined well, being chief
at the table, and do not see but every body begins to give me as much
respect and honour as any of the rest. After dinner to Pay again, and
so till 9 at night, my great trouble being that I was forced to begin
an ill practice of bringing down the wages of servants, for which people
did curse me, which I do not love. At night, after I had eaten a cold
pullet, I walked by brave moonshine, with three or four armed men
to guard me, to Redriffe, it being a joy to my heart to think of the
condition that I am now in, that people should of themselves provide
this for me, unspoke to. I hear this walk is dangerous to walk alone by
night, and much robbery committed here. So from thence by water home,
and so to my lodgings to bed.

20th. Up betimes and to my office, where I found my brother Tom, who
tells me that his mistress's mother has wrote a letter to Mr. Lull of
her full satisfaction about Tom, of which I was glad, and do think the
business will take. All this morning we sat at the office, Sir J. Minnes
and I. And so dined at home, and among my workmen all the afternoon, and
in the evening Tom brought Mr. Lull to me, a friend of his mistress, a
serious man, with whom I spoke, and he gives me a good account of her
and of their satisfaction in Tom, all which pleases me well. We walked
a good while in the garden together, and did give him a glass of wine
at my office, and so parted. So to write letters by the post and news
of this to my father concerning Tom, and so home to supper and to my
lodgings and to bed. To-night my barber sent me his man to trim me, who
did live in King Street in Westminster lately, and tells me that three
or four that I knew in that street, tradesmen, are lately fallen mad,
and some of them dead, and the others continue mad. They live all within
a door or two one of another.

21st (Lord's day). Got up betimes and walked to St. James's, and there
to Mr. Coventry, and sat an hour with him, talking of business of the
office with great pleasure, and I do perceive he do speak his whole mind
to me. Thence to the Park, where by appointment I met my brother Tom
and Mr. Cooke, and there spoke about Tom's business, and to good
satisfaction. The Queen coming by in her coach, going to her chappell
at St. James's' (the first time it hath been ready for her), I crowded
after her, and I got up to the room where her closet is; and there stood
and saw the fine altar, ornaments, and the fryers in their habits,
and the priests come in with their fine copes and many other very fine
things. I heard their musique too; which may be good, but it did not
appear so to me, neither as to their manner of singing, nor was it good
concord to my ears, whatever the matter was. The Queene very devout: but
what pleased me best was to see my dear Lady Castlemaine, who, tho' a
Protestant, did wait upon the Queen to chappell. By and by, after mass
was done, a fryer with his cowl did rise up and preach a sermon in
Portuguese; which I not understanding, did go away, and to the King's
chappell, but that was done; and so up to the Queen's presence-chamber,
where she and the King was expected to dine: but she staying at St.
James's, they were forced to remove the things to the King's presence
[chamber]; and there he dined alone, and I with Mr. Fox very finely; but
I see I must not make too much of that liberty for my honour sake only,
not but that I am very well received. After dinner to Tom's, and so
home, and after walking a good while in the garden I went to my uncle
Wight's, where I found my aunt in mourning and making sad stories for
the loss of her dear sister Nicholls, of which I should have been very
weary but that pretty Mrs. Margaret Wight came in and I was much
pleased with her company, and so all supper did vex my aunt talking
in commendation of the mass which I had been at to-day, but excused it
afterwards that it was only to make mirth. And so after supper broke up
and home, and after putting my notes in order against to-morrow I went
to bed.

22nd. Up betimes among my workmen, hastening to get things ready against
my wife's coming, and so with Sir J. M., Sir W. B., and Sir W. P., by
coach to St. James's, and there with the Duke. I did give him an account
of all things past of late; but I stood in great pain, having a great
fit of the colic, having catched cold yesterday by putting off my
stockings to wipe my toes, but at last it lessened, and then I was
pretty well again, but in pain all day more or less. Thence I parted
from them and walked to Greatorex's, and there with him did overlook
many pretty things, new inventions, and have bespoke a weather glass of
him. Thence to my Lord Crew's, and dined with the servants, he having
dined; and so, after dinner, up to him, and sat an hour talking with him
of publique, and my Lord's private businesses, with much content. So to
my brother Tom's, where Mr. Cooke expected me, and did go with me to see
Mr. Young and Mr. Lull in Blackfryers, kindred of Tom's mistress, where
I was very well used, and do find things to go in the business to my
good content. Thence to Mr. Townsend, and did there talk with Mr. Young
himself also, and then home and to my study, and so to my lodgings and
to bed.

23rd. Up betimes and with my workmen, taking some pleasure to see my
work come towards an end, though I am vexed every day enough with their
delay. We met and sat all the morning, dined at home alone, and with
my workmen all the afternoon, and in the evening by water and land to
Deptford to give order for things about my house, and came back again
by coach with Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten (who has been at a Pay
to-day), and to my office and did some business, and so to supper and to
my lodgings, and so to bed. In our coming home Sir G. Carteret told me
how in most cabaretts in France they have writ upon the walls in fair
letters to be read, "Dieu te regarde," as a good lesson to be in every
man's mind, and have also, as in Holland, their poor's box; in both
which places at the making all contracts and bargains they give so much,
which they call God's penny.

24th. Up betimes and among my workmen, and among them all the morning
till noon, and then to my Lord Crew's, and there dined alone with him,
and among other things he do advise me by all means to keep my Lord
Sandwich from proceeding too far in the business of Tangier. First, for
that he is confident the King will not be able to find money for the
building the Mole; and next, for that it is to be done as we propose it
by the reducing of the garrison; and then either my Lord must oppose
the Duke of York, who will have the Irish regiment under the command of
Fitzgerald continued, or else my Lord Peterborough, who is concerned to
have the English continued, and he, it seems, is gone back again
merely upon my Lord Sandwich's encouragement. Thence to Mr. Wotton, the
shoemaker's, and there bought a pair of boots, cost me 30s., and he
told me how Bird hath lately broke his leg, while he was fencing in
"Aglaura," upon the stage, and that the new theatre of all will be ready
against term. So to my brother's, and there discoursed with him and Mr.
Cooke about their journey to Tom's mistress again, and I did speak with
Mr. Croxton about measuring of silk flags. So by water home and to my
workmen, and so at night till late at my office, inditing a letter from
Tom to his mistress upon his sending her a watch for a token, and so
home and to supper, and to my lodgings and to bed. It is my content that
by several hands to-day I hear that I have the name of good-natured man
among the poor people that come to the office.

25th. Up betimes and to my workmen, and then to the office, where we
sat all the morning. So home to dinner alone and then to my workmen
till night, and so to my office till bedtime, and so after supper to my
lodgings and to bed. This evening I sat awhile at Sir W. Batten's with
Sir J. Minnes, &c., where he told us among many other things how in
Portugal they scorn to make a seat for a house of office, but they do
.... all in pots and so empty them in the river. I did also hear how
the woman, formerly nurse to Mrs. Lemon (Sir W. Batten's daughter), her
child was torn to pieces by two doggs at Walthamstow this week, and is
dead, which is very strange.

26th. Up betimes and among my workmen. By and by to Sir W. Batten, who
with Sir J. M. are going to Chatham this morning, and I was in great
pain till they were gone that I might see whether Sir John do speak any
thing of my chamber that I am afraid of losing or no. But he did not,
and so my mind is a little at more ease. So all day long till night
among my workmen, and in the afternoon did cause the partition between
the entry and the boy's room to be pulled down to lay it all into one,
which I hope will please me and make my coming in more pleasant. Late at
my office at night writing a letter of excuse to Sir G. Carteret that I
cannot wait upon him to-morrow morning to Chatham as I promised, which
I am loth to do because of my workmen and my wife's coming to town
to-morrow. So to my lodgings and to bed.

27th. Up betimes and among my workmen, and with great pleasure see the
posts in the entry taken down beyond expectation, so that now the boy's
room being laid into the entry do make my coming in very handsome, which
was the only fault remaining almost in my house. We sat all the morning,
and in the afternoon I got many jobbs done to my mind, and my wife's
chamber put into a good readiness against her coming, which she did at
night, for Will did, by my leave to go, meet her upon the road, and at
night did bring me word she was come to my brother's, by my order. So I
made myself ready and put things at home in order, and so went thither
to her. Being come, I found her and her maid and dogg very well, and
herself grown a little fatter than she was. I was very well pleased to
see her, and after supper to bed, and had her company with great content
and much mutual love, only I do perceive that there has been falling out
between my mother and she, and a little between my father and she; but I
hope all is well again, and I perceive she likes Brampton House and seat
better than ever I did myself, and tells me how my Lord hath drawn a
plot of some alteracions to be made there, and hath brought it up, which
I saw and like well. I perceive my Lord and Lady have been very kind to
her, and Captn. Ferrers so kind that I perceive I have some jealousy of
him, but I know what is the Captain's manner of carriage, and therefore
it is nothing to me. She tells me of a Court like to be in a little
time, which troubles me, for I would not willingly go out of town.

28th (Lord's day). Waked early, and fell talking one with another with
great pleasure of my house at Brampton and that here, and other matters.
She tells me what a rogue my boy is, and strange things he has been
found guilty of, not fit to name, which vexes [me], but most of all the
unquiett life that my mother makes my father and herself lead through
her want of reason. At last I rose, and with Tom to the French Church
at the Savoy, where I never was before--a pretty place it is--and there
they have the Common Prayer Book read in French, and, which I never saw
before, the minister do preach with his hat off, I suppose in further
conformity with our Church. So to Tom's to dinner with my wife, and
there came Mr. Cooke, and Joyce Norton do also dine there, and after
dinner Cooke and I did talk about his journey and Tom's within a day
or two about his mistress. And I did tell him my mind and give him my
opinion in it. So I walked home and found my house made a little clean,
and pleases me better and better, and so to church in the afternoon, and
after sermon to my study, and there did some things against to-morrow
that I go to the Duke's, and so walked to Tom's again, and there supped
and to bed with good content of mind.

29th (Michaelmas day). This day my oaths for drinking of wine and going
to plays are out, and so I do resolve to take a liberty to-day, and then
to fall to them again. Up and by coach to White Hall, in my way taking
up Mr. Moore, and walked with him, talking a good while about business,
in St. James's Park, and there left him, and to Mr. Coventry's, and so
with him and Sir W. Pen up to the Duke, where the King came also and
staid till the Duke was ready. It being Collarday, we had no time to
talk with him about any business. They went out together. So we parted,
and in the park Mr. Cooke by appointment met me, to whom I did give
my thoughts concerning Tom's match and their journey tomorrow, and did
carry him by water to Tom's, and there taking up my wife, maid, dog, and
him, did carry them home, where my wife is much pleased with my house,
and so am I fully. I sent for some dinner and there dined, Mrs. Margaret
Pen being by, to whom I had spoke to go along with us to a play this
afternoon, and then to the King's Theatre, where we saw "Midsummer's
Night's Dream," which I had never seen before, nor shall ever again,
for it is the most insipid ridiculous play that ever I saw in my life. I
saw, I confess, some good dancing and some handsome women, which was all
my pleasure. Thence set my wife down at Madam Turner's, and so by coach
home, and having delivered Pegg Pen to her father safe, went home, where
I find Mr. Deane, of Woolwich, hath sent me the modell he had promised
me; but it so far exceeds my expectations, that I am sorry almost he
should make such a present to no greater a person; but I am exceeding
glad of it, and shall study to do him a courtesy for it. So to my
office and wrote a letter to Tom's mistress's mother to send by Cooke
to-morrow. Then came Mr. Moore thinking to have looked over the business
of my Brampton papers against the Court, but my mind was so full of
other matters (as it is my nature when I have been a good while from a
business, that I have almost forgot it, I am loth to come to it again)
that I could not set upon it, and so he and I past the evening away in
discourse, and to my lodgings and to bed.

30th. We rose, and he about his business, and I to my house to look over
my workmen; but good God! how I do find myself by yesterday's liberty
hard to be brought to follow business again, but however, I must do it,
considering the great sweet and pleasure and content of mind that I have
had since I did leave drink and plays, and other pleasures, and followed
my business. So to my office, where we sat till noon, and then I to
dinner with Sir W. Pen, and while we were at it coming my wife to the
office, and so I sent for her up, and after dinner we took coach and
to the Duke's playhouse, where we saw "The Duchess of Malfy" well
performed, but Betterton and Ianthe to admiration. That being done,
home again, by coach, and my wife's chamber got ready for her to lie in
to-night, but my business did call me to my office, so that staying late
I did not lie with her at home, but at my lodgings. Strange to see how
easily my mind do revert to its former practice of loving plays and
wine, having given myself a liberty to them but these two days; but this
night I have again bound myself to Christmas next, in which I desire
God to bless me and preserve me, for under God I find it to be the best
course that ever I could take to bring myself to mind my business.
I have also made up this evening my monthly ballance, and find that,
notwithstanding the loss of L30 to be paid to the loyall and necessitous
cavaliers by act of Parliament,

     [Two acts were passed in 1662 for this purpose, viz., 13 and 14 Car.
     II. cap. 8: "An act for distribution of threescore thousand pounds
     amongst the truly loyal and indigent commission officers, and for
     assessing of offices and distributing the monies thereby raised for
     their further supply;" and cap.  9, "An act for the relief of poor
     and maimed officers and soldiers who have faithfully served his
     Majesty and his royal father in the late wars."]

yet I am worth about L680, for which the Lord God be praised. My
condition at present is this:--I have long been building, and my house
to my great content is now almost done. But yet not so but that I shall
have dirt, which troubles me too, for my wife has been in the country at
Brampton these two months, and is now come home a week or two before
the house is ready for her. My mind is somewhat troubled about my best
chamber, which I question whether I shall be able to keep or no. I am
also troubled for the journey which I must needs take suddenly to
the Court at Brampton, but most of all for that I am not provided to
understand my business, having not minded it a great while, and at the
best shall be able but to make a bad matter of it, but God, I hope, will
guide all to the best, and I am resolved to-morrow to fall hard to it.
I pray God help me therein, for my father and mother and all our
well-doings do depend upon my care therein. My Lord Sandwich has lately
been in the country, and very civil to my wife, and hath himself spent
some pains in drawing a plot of some alterations in our house there,
which I shall follow as I get money. As for the office, my late industry
hath been such, as I am become as high in reputation as any man there,
and good hold I have of Mr. Coventry and Sir G. Carteret, which I am
resolved, and it is necessary for me, to maintain by all fair means.
Things are all quiett, but the King poor, and no hopes almost of his
being otherwise, by which things will go to rack, especially in the
Navy. The late outing of the Presbyterian clergy by their not renouncing
the Covenant as the Act of Parliament commands, is the greatest piece
of state now in discourse. But for ought I see they are gone out very
peaceably, and the people not so much concerned therein as was expected.
My brother Tom is gone out of town this day, to make a second journey to
his mistress at Banbury, of which I have good expectations, and pray God
to bless him therein. My mind, I hope, is settled to follow my business
again, for I find that two days' neglect of business do give more
discontent in mind than ten times the pleasure thereof can repair again,
be it what it will.




OCTOBER 1662

October 1st. Up with my mind pretty well at rest about my accounts and
other business, and so to my house and there put my work to business,
and then down to Deptford to do the same there, and so back and with my
workmen all the afternoon, and my wife putting a chamber in order for us
to lie in. At night to look over some Brampton papers against the Court
which I expect every day to hear of, and that done home and with my
wife to bed, the first time I have lain there these two months and more,
which I am now glad to do again, and do so like the chamber as it is now
ordered that all my fear is my not keeping it. But I hope the best, for
it would vex me to the heart to lose it.

2nd. Up and to the office, where we sat till noon, and then to dinner,
and Mr. Moore came and dined with me, and after dinner to look over my
Brampton papers, which was a most necessary work, though it is not so
much to my content as I could wish. I fear that it must be as it can,
and not as I would. He being gone I to my workmen again, and at night by
coach towards Whitehall took up Mr. Moore and set him at my Lord's,
and myself, hearing that there was a play at the Cockpit (and my Lord
Sandwich, who came to town last night, at it), I do go thither, and by
very great fortune did follow four or five gentlemen who were carried to
a little private door in a wall, and so crept through a narrow place and
come into one of the boxes next the King's, but so as I could not see
the King or Queene, but many of the fine ladies, who yet are really not
so handsome generally as I used to take them to be, but that they are
finely dressed. Here we saw "The Cardinall," a tragedy I had never seen
before, nor is there any great matter in it. The company that came in
with me into the box, were all Frenchmen that could speak no English,
but Lord! what sport they made to ask a pretty lady that they got among
them that understood both French and English to make her tell them what
the actors said. Thence to my Lord's, and saw him, and staid with him
half an hour in his chamber talking about some of mine and his own
business, and so up to bed with Mr. Moore in the chamber over my Lord's.

3rd. Rose, and without taking leave or speaking to my Lord went out
early and walked home, calling at my brother's and Paul's Churchyard,
but bought nothing because of my oath, though I had a great mind to it.
At my office, and with my workmen till noon, and then dined with my
wife upon herrings, the first I have eat this year, and so to my workmen
again. By and by comes a gentleman to speak with my wife, and I found
him to be a gentleman that had used her very civilly in her coming up
out of the country, on which score I showed him great respect, and found
him a very ingenious gentleman, and sat and talked with him a great
while. He gone, to my workmen again, and in the evening comes Captain
Ferrers, and sat and talked a great while, and told me the story of
his receiving his cut in the hand by falling out with one of my Lord's
footmen. He told me also of the impertinence and mischief that Ned
Pickering has made in the country between my Lord and all his servants
almost by his finding of faults, which I am vexed to hear, it being a
great disgrace to my Lord to have the fellow seen to be so great still
with him. He brought me a letter from my father, that appoints the day
for the Court at Brampton to be the 13th of this month; but I perceive
he has kept the letter in his pocket these three days, so that if the
day had been sooner, I might have been spilt. So that it is a great
folly to send letters of business by any friend that require haste. He
being gone I to my office all the evening, doing business there till
bedtime, it being now my manner since my wife is come to spend too much
of my daytime with her and the workmen and do my office business at
night, which must not be after the work of the house is done. This night
late I had notice that Dekins, the merchant, is dead this afternoon
suddenly, for grief that his daughter, my Morena, who has long been ill,
is given over by the Doctors. For both which I am very sorry. So home
and to bed.

4th. To my office all the morning, after I was up (my wife beginning to
make me lie long a mornings), where we sat till noon, and then dined at
home, and after a little with my workmen to my office till 9 at night,
among other things examining the particulars of the miscarriage of
the Satisfaction, sunk the other day on the Dutch coast through the
negligence of the pilott.

5th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed talking with my wife, and among other
things fell out about my maid Sarah, whom my wife would fain put away,
when I think her as good a servant as ever came into a house, but it
seems my wife would have one that would dress a head well, but we were
friends at last. I to church; and this day the parson has got one to
read with a surplice on. I suppose himself will take it up hereafter,
for a cunning fellow he is as any of his coat. Dined with my wife, and
then to talk again above, chiefly about her learning to dance against
her going next year into the country, which I am willing she shall do.
Then to church to a tedious sermon, and thence walked to Tom's to see
how things are in his absence in the country, and so home and in my
wife's chamber till bedtime talking, and then to my office to put things
in order to wait on the Duke to-morrow morning, and so home and to bed.

6th. Sir W. Pen and I early to St. James's by water, where Mr. Coventry,
finding the Duke in bed, and not very well, we did not stay to speak
with him, but to White Hall, and there took boat and down to Woolwich we
went. In our way Mr. Coventry telling us how of late upon enquiry into
the miscarriages of the Duke's family, Mr. Biggs, his steward, is
found very faulty, and is turned out of his employment. Then we fell
to reading of a book which I saw the other day at my Lord Sandwich's,
intended for the late King, finely bound up, a treatise concerning the
benefit the Hollanders make of our fishing, but whereas I expected great
matters from it, I find it a very impertinent [book], and though some
things good, yet so full of tautologies, that we were weary of it. At
Woolwich we mustered the yard, and then to the Hart to dinner, and then
to the Rope-yard, where I did vex Sir W. Pen I know to appear so well
acquainted, I thought better than he, in the business of hemp; thence
to Deptford, and there looked over several businesses, and wakened the
officers there; so walked to Redriffe, and thence, landing Sir W. Pen
at the Tower, I to White Hall with Mr. Coventry, and so to my Lord
Sandwich's lodgings, but my Lord was not within, being at a ball this
night with the King at my Lady Castlemaine's at next door. But here to
my trouble I hear that Mr. Moore is gone very sick to the Wardrobe this
afternoon, which troubles me much both for his own sake and for mine,
because of my law business that he does for me and also for my Lord's
matters. So hence by water, late as it was, to the Wardrobe, and there
found him in a high fever, in bed, and much cast down by his being ill.
So thought it not convenient to stay, but left him and walked home, and
there weary went to supper, and then the barber came to me, and after he
had done, to my office to set down my journall of this day, and so home
and to bed.

7th. At the office all the morning, dined at home with my wife. After
dinner with her by coach to see Mr. Moore, who continues ill. I took his
books of accounts, and did discourse with him about my Lord's and my
own businesses, and there being Mr. Battersby by, did take notice of my
having paid him the L100 borrowed of him, which they both did confess
and promise to return me my bond. Thence by water with Will. Howe to
Westminster, and there staying a little while in the Hall (my wife's
father and mother being abroad, and so she returning presently) thence
by coach to my Lord's, and there I left money for Captain Ferrers to buy
me two bands. So towards the New Exchange, and there while my wife was
buying things I walked up and down with Dr. Williams, talking about my
law businesses, and thence took him to my brother's, and there gave him
a glass of wine, and so parted, and then by coach with my wife home, and
Sir J. M. and Sir W. B. being come from Chatham Pay I did go see them
for complaisance, and so home and to bed.

8th. Up and by water to my Lord Sandwich's, and was with him a good
while in his chamber, and among other things to my extraordinary joy,
he did tell me how much I was beholding to the Duke of York, who did
yesterday of his own accord tell him that he did thank him for one
person brought into the Navy, naming myself, and much more to my
commendation, which is the greatest comfort and encouragement that
ever I had in my life, and do owe it all to Mr. Coventry's goodness and
ingenuity. I was glad above measure of this. Thence to Mr. Moore, who, I
hope, is better than he was, and so home and dined at home, and all the
afternoon busy at my office, and at night by coach to my Lord's again,
thinking to speak with him, but he is at White Hall with the King,
before whom the puppet plays I saw this summer in Covent-garden are
acted this night. Hither this night my scallop,

     [A lace band, the edges of which were indented with segments of
     circles, so as to resemble a scallop shell.  The word "scallop" was
     used till recently for a part of a lady's dress embroidered and cut
     to resemble a scallop shell.]

bought and got made by Captain Ferrers' lady, is sent, and I brought it
home, a very neat one. It cost me about L3, and L3 more I have given him
to buy me another. I do find myself much bound to go handsome, which I
shall do in linen, and so the other things may be all the plainer. Here
I staid playing some new tunes to parts with Wm. Howe, and, my Lord not
coming home, I came home late on foot, my boy carrying a link, and so
eat a bit and to bed, my head full of ordering of businesses against
my journey to-morrow, that there may be nothing done to my wrong in
my absence. This day Sir W. Pen did speak to me from Sir J. Minnes to
desire my best chamber of me, and my great joy is that I perceive he do
not stand upon his right, which I was much afraid of, and so I hope I
shall do well enough with him for it, for I will not part with it by
fair means, though I contrive to let him have another room for it.

9th. Up early about my business to get me ready for my journey. But
first to the office; where we sat all the morning till noon, and then
broke up; and I bid them adieu for a week, having the Duke's leave got
me by Mr. Coventry. To whom I did give thanks for my newes yesterday of
the Duke's words to my Lord Sandwich concerning me, which he took well;
and do tell me so freely his love and value of me, that my mind is now
in as great a state of quiett as to my interest in the office, as I
could ever wish to be. I should this day have dined at Sir W. Pen's at
a venison pasty with the rest of our fellows, but I could not get time,
but sent for a bit home, and so between one and two o'clock got on
horseback at our back gate, with my man Will with me, both well-mounted
on two grey horses. We rode and got to Ware before night; and so
resolved to ride on to Puckeridge, which we did, though the way was bad,
and the evening dark before we got thither, by help of company riding
before us; and among others, a gentleman that took up at the same inn,
the Falcon, with me, his name Mr. Brian, with whom I supped, and was
very good company, and a scholar. He tells me, that it is believed
the Queen is with child, for that the coaches are ordered to ride very
easily through the streets. After supper we paid the reckoning together,
and so he to his chamber and I to bed, very well, but my feet being much
cramped by my new hard boots that I bought the other day of Wotton were
in much pain. Will lay in another bed in the chamber with me.

10th. Up, and between eight and nine mounted again; but my feet so
swelled with yesterday's pain, that I could not get on my boots, which
vexed me to the blood, but was forced to pay 4s. for a pair of old shoes
of my landlord's, and so rid in shoes to Cambridge; but the way so good
that but for a little rain I had got very well thither, and set up at
the Beare: and there being spied in the street passing through the town
my cozen Angier came to me, and I must needs to his house, which I did;
and there found Dr. Fairbrother, with a good dinner, a barrel of good
oysters, a couple of lobsters, and wine. But, above all, telling me that
this day there is a Congregation for the choice of some officers in the
University, he after dinner gets me a gown, cap, and hood, and carries
me to the Schooles, where Mr. Pepper, my brother's tutor, and this day
chosen Proctor, did appoint a M.A. to lead me into the Regent House,
where I sat with them, and did [vote] by subscribing papers thus: "Ego
Samuel Pepys eligo Magistrum Bernardum Skelton, (and which was more
strange, my old schoolfellow and acquaintance, and who afterwards did
take notice of me, and we spoke together), alterum e taxatoribus hujus
Academiae in annum sequentem." The like I did for one Biggs, for the
other Taxor, and for other officers, as the Vice-Proctor (Mr. Covell),
for Mr. Pepper, and which was the gentleman that did carry me into the
Regent House. This being done, and the Congregation dissolved by the
Vice-Chancellor, I did with much content return to my Cozen Angier's,
being much pleased of doing this jobb of work, which I had long wished
for and could never have had such a time as now to do it with so much
ease. Thence to Trinity Hall, and there staid a good while with Dr. John
Pepys, who tells me that [his] brother Roger has gone out of town to
keep a Court; and so I was forced to go to Impington, to take such
advice as my old uncle and his son Claxton could give me. Which I did,
and there supped and talked with them, but not of my business till by
and by after supper comes in, unlooked for, my cozen Roger, with whom by
and by I discoursed largely, and in short he gives me good counsel, but
tells me plainly that it is my best way to study a composition with my
uncle Thomas, for that law will not help us, and that it is but a folly
to flatter ourselves, with which, though much to my trouble, yet I was
well satisfied, because it told me what I am to trust to, and so to bed.

11th. Up betimes, and after a little breakfast, and a very poor one,
like our supper, and such as I cannot feed on, because of my she-cozen
Claxton's gouty hands; and after Roger had carried me up and down his
house and orchards, to show me them, I mounted, and rode to Huntingdon,
and so to Brampton; where I found my father and two brothers, and Mr.
Cooke, my mother and sister. So we are now all together, God knows when
we shall be so again. I walked up and down the house and garden, and
find my father's alteracions very handsome. But not so but that there
will be cause enough of doing more if ever I should come to live there,
but it is, however, very well for a country being as any little thing in
the country. So to dinner, where there being nothing but a poor breast
of mutton, and that ill-dressed, I was much displeased, there being Mr.
Cooke there, who I invited to come over with my brother thither, and for
whom I was concerned to make much of. I told my father and mother of it,
and so had it very well mended for the time after, as long as I staid,
though I am very glad to see them live so frugally. But now to my
business. I found my uncle Thomas come into the country, and do give out
great words, and forwarns all our people of paying us rent, and gives
out that he will invalidate the Will, it being but conditional, we
paying debts and legacies, which we have not done, but I hope we shall
yet go through well enough. I settled to look over papers, and discourse
of business against the Court till the evening; and then rode to
Hinchingbroke (Will with me), and there to my Lady's chamber and saw
her, but, it being night, and my head full of business, staid not long,
but drank a cup of ale below, and so home again, and to supper, and to
bed, being not quiet in mind till I speak with Piggott, to see how his
business goes, whose land lies mortgaged to my late uncle, but never
taken up by him, and so I fear the heire at law will do it and that we
cannot, but my design is to supplant him by pretending bonds as well as
a mortgage for the same money, and so as executor have the benefit of
the bonds.

12th (Lord's day). Made myself fine with Captain Ferrers's lace band,
being lothe to wear my own new scallop, it is so fine; and, after the
barber had done with us, to church, where I saw most of the gentry of
the parish; among others, Mrs. Hanbury, a proper lady, and Mr. Bernard
and his Lady, with her father, my late Lord St. John, who looks now like
a very plain grave man. Mr. Wells preached a pretty good sermon, and
they say he is pretty well in his witts again. So home to dinner, and
so to walk in the garden, and then to Church again, and so home, there
coming several people about business, and among others Mr. Piggott, who
gives me good assurance of his truth to me and our business, in which I
am very much pleased, and tells me what my uncle Thomas said to him and
what he designs, which (in fine) is to be admitted to the estate as well
as we, which I must endeavour to oppose as well as I can. So to supper,
but my mind is so full of our business that I am no company at all, and
then their drink do not please me, till I did send to Goody Stanks for
some of her's which is very small and fresh, with a little taste of
wormewood, which ever after did please me very well. So after supper to
bed, thinking of business, but every night getting my brother John to go
up with me for discourse sake, while I was making unready.

     [That is, "undressing."  So of the French lords leaping over the
     walls in their shirts

         "Alenc.  How now, my lords!  what all unready so?
          Bast.  Unready!  ay, and glad we 'scaped so well."
                         Henry VI., act ii., sc. i.--M. B.]

13th. Up to Hinchingbroke, and there with Mr. Sheply did look all over
the house, and I do, I confess, like well of the alteracions, and do
like the staircase, but there being nothing to make the outside more
regular and modern, I am not satisfied with it, but do think it to be
too much to be laid out upon it. Thence with Sheply to Huntingdon to
the Crown, and there did sit and talk, and eat a breakfast of cold roast
beef, and so he to St. Ives Market, and I to Sir Robert Bernard's for
council, having a letter from my Lord Sandwich to that end. He do give
it me with much kindness in appearance, and upon my desire do promise to
put off my uncle's admittance, if he can fairly, and upon the whole do
make my case appear better to me than my cozen Roger did, but not so but
that we are liable to much trouble, and that it will be best to come
to an agreement if possible. With my mind here also pretty well to see
things proceed so well I returned to Brampton, and spent the morning in
looking over papers and getting my copies ready against to-morrow. So to
dinner, and then to walk with my father and other business, when by and
by comes in my uncle Thomas and his son Thomas to see us, and very calm
they were and we to them. And after a short How do you, and drinking a
cup of beer, they went away again, and so by and by my father and I
to Mr. Phillips, and there discoursed with him in order to to-morrow's
business of the Court and getting several papers ready, when presently
comes in my uncle Thomas and his son thither also, but finding us there
I believe they were disappointed and so went forth again, and went to
the house that Prior has lately bought of us (which was Barton's) and
there did make entry and forbade paying rent to us, as now I hear they
have done everywhere else, and that that was their intent in coming
to see us this day. I perceive most of the people that do deal with us
begin to be afraid that their title to what they buy will not be good.
Which troubled me also I confess a little, but I endeavoured to remove
all as well as I could. Among other things they make me afraid that
Barton was never admitted to that that my uncle bought of him, but I
hope the contrary. Thence home, and with my father took a melancholy
walk to Portholme, seeing the country-maids milking their cows there,
they being there now at grass, and to see with what mirth they come all
home together in pomp with their milk, and sometimes they have musique
go before them. So back home again, and to supper, and in comes Piggott
with a counterfeit bond which by agreement between us (though it be very
just in itself) he has made, by which I shall lay claim to the interest
of the mortgage money, and so waiting with much impatience and doubt the
issue of to-morrow's Court, I to bed, but hardly slept half an hour the
whole night, my mind did so run with fears of to-morrow.

14th. Up, and did digest into a method all I could say in our defence,
in case there should be occasion, for I hear he will have counsel to
plead for him in the Court, and so about nine o'clock to the court at
the Lordshipp where the jury was called; and there being vacancies, they
would have had my father, in respect to him, [to] have been one of
the Homage, but he thought fit to refuse it, he not knowing enough the
customs of the town. They being sworn and the charge given them, they
fell to our business, finding the heir-at-law to be my uncle Thomas; but
Sir Robert [Bernard] did tell them that he had seen how the estate was
devised to my father by my uncle's will, according to the custom of the
manour, which they would have denied, first, that it was not according
to the custom of the manour, proposing some difficulty about the
half-acre of land which is given the heir-at-law according to custom,
which did put me into great fear lest it might not be in my uncle's
possession at his death, but mortgaged with other to T. Trice (who was
there, and was with my good will admitted to Taylor's house mortgaged
to him if not being worth the money for which it was mortgaged, which
I perceive he now, although he lately bragged the contrary, yet is now
sensible of, and would have us to redeem it with money, and he would now
resurrender it to us rather than the heir-at-law) or else that it was
part of Goody Gorum's in which she has a life, and so might not be
capable of being according to the custom given to the heir-at-law, but
Will Stanks tells me we are sure enough against all that. Then they fell
to talk of Piggott's land mortgaged to my uncle, but he never admitted
to it, which they now as heir would have admitted to. But the steward,
as he promised me, did find pretensions very kindly and readily to put
off their admittance, by which I find they are much defeated, and if
ever, I hope, will now listen to a treaty and agreement with us, at our
meeting at London. So they took their leaves of the steward and Court,
and went away, and by and by, after other business many brought in,
they broke up to dinner. So my father and I home with great content to
dinner; my mind now as full against the afternoon business, which we sat
upon after dinner at the Court, and did sue out a recovery, and cut off
the intayle; and my brothers there, to join therein. And my father and I
admitted to all the lands; he for life, and I for myself and my heirs in
reversion, and then did surrender according to bargain to Prior, Greene,
and Shepheard the three cottages with their appurtenances that they have
bought of us, and that being done and taken leave of the steward, I did
with most compleat joy of mind go from the Court with my father home,
and in a quarter of an hour did get on horseback, with my brother Tom,
Cooke, and Will, all mounted, and without eating or drinking, take leave
of father, mother, Pall, to whom I did give 10s., but have shown no
kindness since I come, for I find her so very ill-natured that I
cannot love her, and she so cruel a hypocrite that she can cry when she
pleases, and John and I away, calling in at Hinchingbroke, and taking
leave in three words of my Lady, and the young ladies; and so by
moonlight most bravely all the way to Cambridge, with great pleasure,
whither we come at about nine o'clock, and took up at the Bear, but the
house being full of guests we had very ill lodging, which troubled
me, but had a supper, and my mind at good ease, and so to bed. Will in
another bed in my chamber.

15th. My mind, though out of trouble, yet intent upon my journey home,
being desirous to know how all my matters go there, I could hardly
sleep, but waked very early; and, when it was time, did call up Will,
and we rose, and musique (with a bandore

     [A musical instrument with wire strings, and sounded with a
     plectrum; used as a bass to the cittern.  The banjo is a
     modification of the bandore, as the name is a negro corruption of
     that word.]

for the base) did give me a levett;

     [A blast of trumpets, intended as a 'reveillee', from French lever.

                   "First he that led the Cavalcade
                    Wore a Sow-gelder's Flagellet,
                    On which he blew as strong a Levet
                    As well-feed Lawyer on his breviate."

                                   Hudibras, II. ii. v. 609.]

and so we got ready; and while breakfast was providing, I went forth (by
the way finding Mr. George Mountagu and his Lady, whom I saluted, going
to take their coach thus early to proceed on their journey, they having
lodged in the chamber just under me all this night) and showed Mr. Cooke
King's College Chapel, Trinity College, and St. John's College Library;
and that being done, to our inn again: where I met Dr. Fairbrother
brought thither by my brother Tom, and he did breakfast with us, a very
good-natured man he is, and told us how the room we were in was the room
where Cromwell and his associated officers did begin to plot and act
their mischiefs in these counties. Having eat well, only our oysters
proving bad, we mounted, having a pair of boots that I borrowed and
carried with me from Impington, my own to be sent from Cambridge to
London, and took leave of all, and begun our journey about nine o'clock.
After we had rode about 10 miles we got out of our way into Royston
road, which did vex me cruelly, and the worst for that my brother's
horse, which was lame yesterday, grows worse to-day, that he could not
keep pace with us. At last with much ado we got into the road again,
having misguided also a gentleman's man who had lost his master and
thought us to be going the same way did follow us, but coming into
the road again we met with his master, by his coat a divine, but I
perceiving Tom's horse not able to keep with us, I desired Mr. Cooke and
him to take their own time, and Will and I we rode before them keeping
a good pace, and came to Ware about three o'clock in the afternoon, the
ways being every where but bad. Here I fell into acquaintance and eat
and drank with the divine, but know not who he is, and after an hour's
bait to myself and horses he, though resolved to have lodged there, yet
for company would out again, and so we remounted at four o'clock, and he
went with me as far almost as Tibbald's and there parted with us, taking
up there for all night, but finding our horses in good case and the
night being pretty light, though by reason of clouds the moon did not
shine out, we even made shift from one place to another to reach London,
though both of us very weary. And having left our horses at their
masters, walked home, found all things well, and with full joy, though
very weary, came home and went to bed, there happening nothing since our
going to my discontent in the least degree; which do so please me,
that I cannot but bless God for my journey, observing a whole course of
success from the beginning to the end of it, and I do find it to be the
reward of my diligence, which all along in this has been extraordinary,
for I have not had the least kind of divertisement imaginable since
my going forth, but merely carrying on my business which God has been
pleased to bless. So to bed very hot and feverish by being weary, but
early morning the fever was over.

16th. And so I rose in good temper, finding a good chimneypiece made
in my upper dining-room chamber, and the diningroom wainscoat in a good
forwardness, at which I am glad, and then to the office, where by T.
Hater I found all things to my mind, and so we sat at the office till
noon, and then at home to dinner with my wife. Then coming Mr. Creede
in order to some business with Sir J. Minnes about his accounts, this
afternoon I took him to the Treasury office, where Sir John and I
did stay late paying some money to the men that are saved out of the
Satisfaction that was lost the other day. The King gives them half-pay,
which is more than is used in such cases, for they never used to have
any thing, and yet the men were most outrageously discontented, and
did rail and curse us till I was troubled to hear it, and wished myself
unconcerned therein. Mr. Creede seeing us engaged took leave of us. Here
late, and so home, and at the office set down my journey-journall to
this hour, and so shut up my book, giving God thanks for my good success
therein, and so home, and to supper, and to bed. I hear Mr. Moore is in
a way of recovery. Sir H. Bennet made Secretary of State in Sir Edward
Nicholas's stead; not known whether by consent or not. My brother Tom
and Cooke are come to town I hear this morning, and he sends me word
that his mistress's mother is also come to treat with us about her
daughter's portion and her jointure, which I am willing should be out of
Sturtlow lands.

17th. This morning Tom comes to me, and I advise him how to deal with
his mistress's mother about his giving her a joynture, but I intend to
speak with her shortly, and tell her my mind. Then to my Lord Sandwich
by water, and told him how well things do go in the country with me, of
which he was very glad, and seems to concern himself much for me. Thence
with Mr. Creed to Westminster Hall, and by and by thither comes Captn.
Ferrers, upon my sending for him, and we three to Creed's chamber, and
there sat a good while and drank chocolate. Here I am told how things
go at Court; that the young men get uppermost, and the old serious lords
are out of favour; that Sir H. Bennet, being brought into Sir Edward
Nicholas's place, Sir Charles Barkeley is made Privy Purse; a most
vicious person, and one whom Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, to-day (at which I
laugh to myself), did tell me that he offered his wife L300 per annum to
be his mistress. He also told me that none in Court hath more the
King's ear now than Sir Charles Barkeley, and Sir H. Bennet, and my
Lady Castlemaine, whose interest is now as great as ever and that Mrs.
Haslerigge, the great beauty, is got with child, and now brought to bed,
and lays it to the King or the Duke of York.

     [The child was owned by neither of the royal brothers.--B.]

He tells me too that my Lord St. Albans' is like to be Lord Treasurer:
all which things do trouble me much. Here I staid talking a good while,
and so by water to see Mr. Moore, who is out of bed and in a way to
be well, and thence home, and with Commr. Pett by water to view Wood's
masts that he proffers to sell, which we found bad, and so to Deptford
to look over some businesses, and so home and I to my office, all our
talk being upon Sir J. M. and Sir W. B.'s base carriage against him at
their late being at Chatham, which I am sorry to hear, but I doubt not
but we shall fling Sir W. B. upon his back ere long. At my office, I
hearing Sir W. Pen was not well, I went to him to see, and sat with him,
and so home and to bed.

18th. This morning, having resolved of my brother's entertaining his
mistress's mother to-morrow, I sent my wife thither to-day to lie there
to-night and to direct him in the business, and I all the morning at the
office, and the afternoon intent upon my workmen, especially my joyners,
who will make my dining room very pretty. At night to my office to
dispatch business, and then to see Sir W. Pen, who continues in great
pain, and so home and alone to bed, but my head being full of my own
and my brother Tom's business I could hardly sleep, though not in much
trouble, but only multitude of thoughts.

19th (Lord's day). Got me ready in the morning and put on my first new
laceband; and so neat it is, that I am resolved my great expense shall
be lacebands, and it will set off any thing else the more. So walked to
my brother's, where I met Mr. Cooke, and discoursing with him do find
that he and Tom have promised a joynture of L50 to his mistress, and say
that I did give my consent that she should be joyntured in L30 per ann.
for Sturtlow, and the rest to be made up out of her portion. At which
I was stark mad, and very angry the business should be carried with
so much folly and against my mind and all reason. But I was willing to
forbear discovering of it, and did receive Mrs. Butler, her mother, Mr.
Lull and his wife, very civil people, very kindly, and without the least
discontent, and Tom had a good and neat dinner for us. We had little
discourse of any business, but leave it to one Mr. Smith on her part and
myself on ours. So we staid till sermon was done, and I took leave, and
to see Mr. Moore, who recovers well; and his doctor coming to him, one
Dr. Merrit, we had some of his very good discourse of anatomy, and other
things, very pleasant. By and by, I with Mr. Townsend walked in the
garden, talking and advising with him about Tom's business, and he
tells me he will speak with Smith, and says I offer fair to give her
L30 joynture and no more. Thence Tom waiting for me homewards towards my
house, talking and scolding him for his folly, and telling him my mind
plainly what he has to trust to if he goes this way to work, for he
shall never have her upon the terms they demand of L50. He left me, and
I to my uncle Wight, and there supped, and there was pretty Mistress
Margt. Wight, whom I esteem very pretty, and love dearly to look upon
her. We were very pleasant, I droning with my aunt and them, but I am
sorry to hear that the news of the selling of Dunkirk

     [A treaty was signed on the 27th October by which Dunkirk was sold
     to France for five million livres, two of which were to be paid
     immediately, and the remaining three by eight bills at dates varying
     from three months to two years; during which time the King of
     England was to contribute the aid of a naval force, if necessary,
     for defence against Spain.  Subsequently the remaining three
     millions were reduced to 2,500,000 to be paid at Paris, and 254,000
     in London.  It is not known that Clarendon suggested the sale of
     Dunkirk, but it is certain that he adopted the measure with zeal.
     There is also no doubt that he got as much as France could be
     induced to give.--Lister's Life of Clarendon, ii. 173-4.]

is taken so generally ill, as I find it is among the merchants; and
other things, as removal of officers at Court, good for worse; and all
things else made much worse in their report among people than they
are. And this night, I know not upon what ground, the gates of the City
ordered to be kept shut, and double guards every where. So home, and
after preparing things against to-morrow for the Duke, to bed. Indeed I
do find every body's spirit very full of trouble; and the things of
the Court and Council very ill taken; so as to be apt to appear in
bad colours, if there should ever be a beginning of trouble, which God
forbid!

20th. Up and in Sir J. Minnes's coach with him and Sir W. Batten to
White Hall, where now the Duke is come again to lodge: and to Mr.
Coventry's little new chamber there. And by and by up to the Duke,
who was making himself ready; and there among other discourse young
Killigrew did so commend "The Villaine," a new play made by Tom Porter;
and acted only on Saturday at the Duke's house, as if there never had
been any such play come upon the stage. The same yesterday was told me
by Captain Ferrers; and this morning afterwards by Dr. Clerke, who saw
it. Insomuch that after I had done with the Duke, and thence gone with
Commissioner Pett to Mr. Lilly's, the great painter, who came forth to
us; but believing that I come to bespeak a picture, he prevented us by
telling us, that he should not be at leisure these three weeks; which
methinks is a rare thing. And then to see in what pomp his table was
laid for himself to go to dinner; and here, among other pictures, saw
the so much desired by me picture of my Lady Castlemaine, which is a
most blessed picture; and that that I must have a copy of. And having
thence gone to my brother's, where my wife lodged last night, and eat
something there, I took her by coach to the Duke's house, and there was
the house full of company: but whether it was in over-expecting or what,
I know not, but I was never less pleased with a play in my life. Though
there was good singing and dancing, yet no fancy in the play, but
something that made it less contenting was my conscience that I ought
not to have gone by my vow, and, besides, my business commanded me
elsewhere. But, however, as soon as I came home I did pay my crown to
the poor's box, according to my vow, and so no harm as to that is done,
but only business lost and money lost, and my old habit of pleasure
wakened, which I will keep down the more hereafter, for I thank God
these pleasures are not sweet to me now in the very enjoying of them. So
by coach home, and after a little business at my office, and seeing Sir
W. Pen, who continues ill, I went to bed. Dunkirk, I am confirmed, is
absolutely sold; for which I am very sorry.

21st. Up, and while I was dressing myself, my brother Tom being there
I did chide him for his folly in abusing himself about the match, for I
perceive he do endeavour all he can to get her, and she and her friends
to have more than her portion deserves, which now from 6 or L700 is come
to L450. I did by several steps shew Tom how he would not be L100 the
better for her according to the ways he took to joynture her. After
having done with him to the office, and there all the morning, and in
the middle of our sitting my workmen setting about the putting up of
my rails upon my leads, Sir J. Minnes did spy them and fell a-swearing,
which I took no notice of, but was vexed, and am still to the very
heart for it, for fear it should put him upon taking the closett and my
chamber from me, which I protest I am now afraid of. But it is my very
great folly to be so much troubled at these trifles, more than at the
loss of L100, or things of greater concernment; but I forget the lesson
I use to preach to others. After dinner to my office with my head and
heart full of troublesome business, and thence by water with Mr. Smith,
to Mr. Lechmore, the Counsellor at the Temple, about Field's business;
and he tells me plainly that, there being a verdict against me, there is
no help for it, but it must proceed to judgment. It is L30 damage to me
for my joining with others in committing Field to prison, we being not
justices of the Peace in the City, though in Middlesex; this troubled
me, but I hope the King will make it good to us. Thence to Mr. Smith,
the scrivener, upon Ludgate Hill, to whom Mrs. Butler do committ
her business concerning her daughter and my brother. He tells me her
daughter's portion is but L400, at which I am more troubled than before;
and they find fault that his house is too little. So after I had told
him my full mind, I went away to meet again to-morrow, but I believe the
business will be broke off, which for Tom's sake I am much grieved for,
but it cannot be helped without his ruin. Thence to see Mr. Moore,
who is pretty well again, and we read over and discoursed about Mrs.
Goldsborough's business, and her son coming by my appointment thither,
I did tell him our resolution as to her having her estate reconveyed to
her. Hither also came my brother, and before Mr. Moore I did advise
and counsel him about his match, and how we had all been abused by
Mr. Cooke's folly. So home and to my office, and there settled many
businesses, and so home and to supper, and so to bed, Sir W. Pen being
still in great pain.

22nd. Up, and carrying my wife and her brother to Covent Garden, near
their father's new lodging, by coach, I to my Lord Sandwich's, who
receives me now more and more kindly, now he sees that I am respected
in the world; and is my most noble patron. Here I staid and talked
about many things, with my Lord and Mr. Povy, being there about Tangier
business, for which the Commission is a taking out. Hence (after talking
with Mr. Cooke, whom I met here about Mrs. Butler's portion, he do
persist to say that it will be worth L600 certain, when he knows as well
as I do now that it is but L400, and so I told him, but he is a fool,
and has made fools of us). So I by water to my brother's, and thence to
Mr. Smith's, where I was, last night, and there by appointment met Mrs.
Butler, with whom I plainly discoursed and she with me. I find she will
give but L400, and no more, and is not willing to do that without a
joynture, which she expects and I will not grant for that portion, and
upon the whole I find that Cooke has made great brags on both sides, and
so has abused us both, but know not how to help it, for I perceive she
had much greater expectations of Tom's house and being than she finds.
But however we did break off the business wholly, but with great love
and kindness between her and me, and would have been glad we had known
one another's minds sooner, without being misguided by this fellow
to both our shames and trouble. For I find her a very discreet, sober
woman, and her daughter, I understand and believe, is a good lady; and
if portions did agree, though she finds fault with Tom's house, and his
bad imperfection in his speech, I believe we should well agree in other
matters. After taking a kind farewell, I to Tom's, and there did give
him a full account of this sad news, with which I find he is much
troubled, but do appear to me to be willing to be guided herein, and
apprehends that it is not for his good to do otherwise, and so I do
persuade [him] to follow his business again, and I hope he will, but
for Cooke's part and Dr. Pepys, I shall know them for two fools another
time. Hence, it raining hard, by coach home, being first trimmed here
by Benier, who being acquainted with all the players, do tell me that
Betterton is not married to Ianthe, as they say; but also that he is
a very sober, serious man, and studious and humble, following of his
studies, and is rich already with what he gets and saves, and then to my
office till late, doing great deal of business, and settling my mind
in pretty good order as to my business, though at present they are very
many. So home and to bed. This night was buried, as I hear by the bells
at Barking Church, my poor Morena,

     [The burial of Elizabeth, daughter of John Dekins or Dickens, is
     recorded in the parish register of All Hallows, Barking, as having
     taken place on October 22nd.  See ante, October 3rd]

whose sickness being desperate, did kill her poor father; and he being
dead for sorrow, she could not recover, nor desire to live, but from
that time do languish more and more, and so is now dead and buried.

23rd. Up and among my workmen, and so to the office, and there sitting
all the morning we stept all out to visit Sir W. Batten, who it seems
has not been well all yesterday, but being let blood is now pretty well,
and Sir W. Pen after office I went to see, but he continues in great
pain of the gout and in bed, cannot stir hand nor foot but with great
pain. So to my office all the evening putting things public and private
in order, and so at night home and to supper and to bed, finding great
content since I am come to follow my business again, which God preserve
in me.

24th. After with great pleasure lying a great while talking and sporting
in bed with my wife (for we have been for some years now, and at present
more and more, a very happy couple, blessed be God), I got up and to my
office, and having done there some business, I by water, and then
walked to Deptford to discourse with Mr. Lowly and Davis about my late
conceptions about keeping books of the distinct works done in the yards,
against which I find no objection but their ignorance and unwillingness
to do anything of pains and what is out of their ordinary dull road, but
I like it well, and will proceed in it. So home and dined there with my
wife upon a most excellent dish of tripes of my own directing, covered
with, mustard, as I have heretofore seen them done at my Lord Crew's, of
which I made a very great meal, and sent for a glass of wine for myself,
and so to see Sir W. Pen, who continues bed-rid in great pain, and hence
to the Treasury to Sir J. Minnes paying off of tickets, and at night
home, and in my study (after seeing Sir W. Batten, who also continues
ill) I fell to draw out my conceptions about books for the clerk that
cheques in the yard to keep according to the distinct works there, which
pleases me very well, and I am confident it will be of great use. At 9
at night home, and to supper, and to bed. This noon came to see me and
sat with me a little after dinner Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon, who tells
me how ill things go at Court: that the King do show no countenance to
any that belong to the Queen; nor, above all, to such English as she
brought over with her, or hath here since, for fear they should tell her
how he carries himself to Mrs. Palmer;--[Lady Castlemaine.]--insomuch
that though he has a promise, and is sure of being made her chyrurgeon,
he is at a loss what to do in it, whether to take it or no, since the
King's mind is so altered in favour to all her dependants, whom she is
fain to let go back into Portugall (though she brought them from their
friends against their wills with promise of preferment), without doing
any thing for them. But he tells me that her own physician did tell
him within these three days that the Queen do know how the King orders
things, and how he carries himself to my Lady Castlemaine and others, as
well as any body; but though she hath spirit enough, yet seeing that she
do no good by taking notice of it, for the present she forbears it in
policy; of which I am very glad. But I pray God keep us in peace; for
this, with other things, do give great discontent to all people.

25th. Up and to the office, and there with Mr. Coventry sat all the
morning, only we two, the rest being absent or sick. Dined at home with
my wife upon a good dish of neats' feet and mustard, of which I made a
good meal. All the afternoon alone at my office and among my workmen,
who (I mean the joyners) have even ended my dining room, and will be
very handsome and to my full content. In the evening at my office about
one business or another, and so home and to bed, with my mind every day
more and more quiet since I come to follow my business, and shall be
very happy indeed when the trouble of my house is over.

26th (Lord's day).Up and put on my new Scallop, and is very fine. To
church, and there saw the first time Mr. Mills in a surplice; but it
seemed absurd for him to pull it over his ears in the reading-pew, after
he had done, before all the church, to go up to the pulpitt, to preach
without it. Home and dined, and Mr. Sympson, my joyner that do my
diningroom, and my brother Tom with me to a delicate fat pig. Tom takes
his disappointment of his mistress to heart; but all will be well again
in a little time. Then to church again, and heard a simple Scot preach
most tediously. So home, and to see Sir W. Batten, who is pretty well
again, and then to my uncle Wight's to show my fine band and to see Mrs.
Margaret Wight, but she was not there. All this day soldiers going up
and down the town, there being an alarm and many Quakers and others
clapped up; but I believe without any reason: only they say in
Dorsetshire there hath been some rising discovered. So after supper
home, and then to my study, and making up my monthly account to myself.
I find myself, by my expense in bands and clothes this month, abated
a little of my last, and that I am worth L679 still; for which God be
praised. So home and to bed with quiett mind, blessed be God, but afeard
of my candle's going out, which makes me write thus slubberingly.

27th. Up, and after giving order to the plasterer now to set upon the
finishing of my house, then by water to wait upon the Duke, and walking
in the matted Gallery, by and by comes Mr. Coventry and Sir John Minnes,
and then to the Duke, and after he was ready, to his closet, where I
did give him my usual account of matters, and afterwards, upon Sir J.
Minnes' desire to have one to assist him in his employment, Sir W. Pen
is appointed to be his, and Mr. Pett to be the Surveyor's assistant.
Mr. Coventry did desire to be excused, and so I hope (at least it is my
present opinion) to have none joined with me, but only Mr. Coventry do
desire that I would find work for one of his clerks, which I did not
deny, but however I will think of it, whether without prejudice to mine
I can do it. Thence to my Lord Sandwich, who now-a-days calls me into
his chamber, and alone did discourse with me about the jealousy that the
Court have of people's rising; wherein he do much dislike my Lord Monk's
being so eager against a company of poor wretches, dragging them up and
down the street; but would have him rather to take some of the greatest
ringleaders of them, and punish them; whereas this do but tell the world
the King's fears and doubts. For Dunkirk; he wonders any wise people
should be so troubled thereat, and scorns all their talk against it,
for that he says it was not Dunkirk, but the other places, that did and
would annoy us, though we had that, as much as if we had it not. He also
took notice of the new Ministers of State, Sir H. Bennet and Sir Charles
Barkeley, their bringing in, and the high game that my Lady Castlemaine
plays at Court (which I took occasion to mention as that that the people
do take great notice of), all which he confessed. Afterwards he told me
of poor Mr. Spong, that being with other people examined before the King
and Council (they being laid up as suspected persons; and it seems Spong
is so far thought guilty as that they intend to pitch upon him to put
to the wracke or some other torture), he do take knowledge of my Lord
Sandwich, and said that he was well known to Mr. Pepys. But my Lord
knows, and I told him, that it was only in matter of musique and pipes,
but that I thought him to be a very innocent fellow; and indeed I am
very sorry for him. After my Lord and I had done in private, we went
out, and with Captain Cuttance and Bunn did look over their draught of a
bridge for Tangier, which will be brought by my desire to our office by
them to-morrow. Thence to Westminster Hall, and there walked long with
Mr. Creed, and then to the great half-a-crown ordinary, at the King's
Head, near Charing Cross, where we had a most excellent neat dinner and
very high company, and in a noble manner. After dinner he and I into
another room over a pot of ale and talked. He showed me our commission,
wherein the Duke of York, Prince Rupert, Duke of Albemarle, Lord
Peterborough, Lord Sandwich, Sir G. Carteret, Sir William Compton,
Mr. Coventry, Sir R. Ford, Sir William Rider, Mr. Cholmley, Mr. Povy,
myself, and Captain Cuttance, in this order are joyned for the carrying
on the service of Tangier, which I take for a great honour to me. He
told me what great faction there is at Court; and above all, what is
whispered, that young Crofts is lawful son to the King, the King being
married to his mother.

     [There has been much confusion as to the name and parentage of
     Charles's mistress.  Lucy Walter was the daughter of William Walter
     of Roch Castle, co. Pembroke, and Mr. S. Steinman, in his "Althorp
     Memoirs" (privately printed, 1869), sets out her pedigree, which is
     a good one.  Roch Castle was taken and burnt by the Parliamentary
     forces in 1644, and Lucy was in London in 1648, where she made the
     acquaintance of Colonel Algernon Sidney.  She then fell into the
     possession of his brother, Colonel Robert Sidney.  In September of
     this same year she was taken up by Charles, Prince of Wales.
     Charles terminated his connection with her on October 30th, 1651,
     and she died in 1658, as appears by a document (administration entry
     in the Register of the Prerogative Court) met with by the late
     Colonel Chester.  William Erskine, who had served Charles as
     cupbearer in his wanderings, and was appointed Master of the
     Charterhouse in December, 1677, had the care of Lucy Walter, and
     buried her in Paris.  He declared that the king never had any
     intention of marrying her, and she did not deserve it.  Thomas Ross,
     the tutor of her son, put the idea of this claim into his head, and
     asked Dr. Cosin to certify to a marriage.  In consequence of this he
     was removed from his office, and Lord Crofts took his place
     (Steinman's "Althorp Memoirs").  Lucy Walter took the name of Barlow
     during her wanderings.]

How true this is, God knows; but I believe the Duke of York will not be
fooled in this of three crowns. Thence to White Hall, and walked long in
the galleries till (as they are commanded to all strange persons), one
come to tell us, we not being known, and being observed to walk there
four or five hours (which was not true, unless they count my walking
there in the morning), he was commanded to ask who we were; which being
told, he excused his question, and was satisfied. These things speak
great fear and jealousys. Here we staid some time, thinking to stay out
the play before the King to-night, but it being "The Villaine," and my
wife not being there, I had no mind. So walk to the Exchange, and there
took many turns with him; among other things, observing one very pretty
Exchange lass, with her face full of black patches, which was a strange
sight. So bid him good-night and away by coach to Mr. Moore, with whom
I staid an hour, and found him pretty well and intends to go abroad
tomorrow, and so it raining hard by coach home, and having visited both
Sir Williams, who are both sick, but like to be well again, I to my
office, and there did some business, and so home and to bed. At Sir W.
Batten's I met with Mr. Mills, who tells me that he could get nothing
out of the maid hard by (that did poyson herself) before she died, but
that she did it because she did not like herself, nor had not
liked herself, nor anything she did a great while. It seems she was
well-favoured enough, but crooked, and this was all she could be got to
say, which is very strange.

28th. At the office sitting all the morning, and then home to dinner
with my wife, and after dinner she and I passing an hour or two in
ridiculous talk, and then to my office, doing business there till 9 at
night, and so home and to supper and to bed. My house is now in its last
dirt, I hope, the plasterer and painter now being upon winding up all
my trouble, which I expect will now in a fortnight's time, or a little
more, be quite over.

29th (Lord Mayor's day). Intended to have made me fine, and by
invitation to have dined with the Lord Mayor to-day, but going to see
Sir W. Batten this morning, I found Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes
going with Sir W. Batten and myself to examine Sir G. Carteret's
accounts for the last year, whereupon I settled to it with them all the
day long, only dinner time (which Sir G. Carteret gave us), and by night
did as good as finish them, and so parted, and thence to my office, and
there set papers in order and business against to-morrow. I received
a letter this day from my father, speaking more trouble about my uncle
Thomas his business, and of proceeding to lay claim to Brampton and
all my uncle left, because it is given conditional that we should pay
legacys, which to him we have not yet done, but I hope that will do us
no hurt; God help us if it should, but it disquiets my mind. I have also
a letter from my Lord Sandwich desiring me upon matters of concernment
to be with him early tomorrow morning, which I wonder what it should be.
So my mind full of thoughts, and some trouble at night, home and to bed.
Sir G. Carteret, who had been at the examining most of the late people
that are clapped up, do say that he do not think that there hath been
any great plotting among them, though they have a good will to it; but
their condition is so poor, and silly, and low, that they do not fear
them at all.

30th. Could sleep but little to-night for thoughts of my business. So
up by candlelight and by water to Whitehall, and so to my Lord Sandwich,
who was up in his chamber and all alone, did acquaint me with his
business; which was, that our old acquaintance Mr. Wade (in Axe Yard)
hath discovered to him L7,000 hid in the Tower, of which he was to have
two for discovery; my Lord himself two, and the King the other three,
when it was found; and that the King's warrant runs for me on my Lord's
part, and one Mr. Lee for Sir Harry Bennet, to demand leave of the
Lieutenant of the Tower for to make search. After he had told me the
whole business, I took leave and hastened to my office, expecting to be
called by a letter from my Lord to set upon the business, and so there I
sat with the officers all the morning. At noon when we were up comes
Mr. Wade with my Lord's letter, and tells me the whole business. So we
consulted for me to go first to Sir H. Bennet, who is now with many of
the Privy Counsellors at the Tower, examining of their late prisoners,
to advise with him when to begin. So I went; and the guard at the Tower
Gate, making me leave my sword at the gate, I was forced to stay so long
in the ale-house hard by, till my boy run home for my cloak, that my
Lord Mayor that now is, Sir John Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, with
all his company, was gone with their coaches to his house in Minchen
Lane. So my cloak being come, I walked thither; and there, by Sir G.
Carteret's means, did presently speak with Sir H. Bennet, who did show
and give me the King's warrant to me and Mr. Leigh, and another to
himself, for the paying of L2,000 to my Lord, and other two to the
discoverers. After a little discourse, dinner come in; and I dined with
them. There was my Lord Mayor, my Lord Lauderdale, Mr. Secretary Morris,
to whom Sir H. Bennet would give the upper hand; Sir Wm. Compton, Sir G.
Carteret, and myself, and some other company, and a brave dinner. After
dinner, Sir H. Bennet did call aside the Lord Mayor and me, and did
break the business to him, who did not, nor durst appear the least
averse to it, but did promise all assistance forthwith to set upon it.
So Mr. Lee and I to our office, and there walked till Mr. Wade and
one Evett his guide did come, and W. Griffin, and a porter with his
picke-axes, &c.; and so they walked along with us to the Tower, and Sir
H. Bennet and my Lord Mayor did give us full power to fall to work.
So our guide demands, a candle, and down into the cellars he goes,
inquiring whether they were the same that Baxter

     [Intended for John Barkstead, Lieutenant of the Tower under
     Cromwell.  Committed to the Tower (see March 17th, 1661-62).]

always had. We went into several little cellars, and then went out
a-doors to view, and to the Cole Harbour; but none did answer so well to
the marks which was given him to find it by, as one arched vault. Where,
after a great deal of council whether to set upon it now, or delay for
better and more full advice, we set to it, to digging we went to almost
eight o'clock at night, but could find nothing. But, however, our guides
did not at all seem discouraged; for that they being confident that the
money is there they look for, but having never been in the cellars, they
could not be positive to the place, and therefore will inform themselves
more fully now they have been there, of the party that do advise them.
So locking the door after us, we left work to-night, and up to the
Deputy Governor (my Lord Mayor, and Sir H. Bennet, with the rest of the
company being gone an hour before); and he do undertake to keep the key
of the cellars, that none shall go down without his privity. But, Lord!
to see what a young simple fantastique coxcombe is made Deputy Governor,
would make one mad; and how he called out for his night-gown of silk,
only to make a show to us; and yet for half an hour I did not think he
was the Deputy Governor, and so spoke not to him about the business,
but waited for another man; at last I broke our business to him; and
he promising his care, we parted. And Mr. Leigh and I by coach to White
Hall, where I did give my Lord Sandwich an account of our proceedings,
and some encouragement to hope for something hereafter, and so bade him
good-night, and so by coach home again, where to my trouble I found that
the painter had not been here to-day to do any thing, which vexes me
mightily. So to my office to put down my journal, and so home and to
bed. This morning, walking with Mr. Coventry in the garden, he did tell
me how Sir G. Carteret had carried the business of the Victuallers'
money to be paid by himself, contrary to old practice; at which he is
angry I perceive, but I believe means no hurt, but that things maybe
done as they ought. He expects Sir George should not bespatter him
privately, in revenge, but openly. Against which he prepares to bedaub
him, and swears he will do it from the beginning, from Jersey to this
day. And as to his own taking of too large fees or rewards for places
that he had sold, he will prove that he was directed to it by Sir George
himself among others. And yet he did not deny Sir G. Carteret his
due, in saying that he is a man that do take the most pains, and gives
himself the most to do business of any man about the Court, without
any desire of pleasure or divertisements; which is very true. But which
pleased me mightily, he said in these words, that he was resolved,
whatever it cost him, to make an experiment, and see whether it was
possible for a man to keep himself up in Court by dealing plainly
and walking uprightly, with any private game a playing: in the doing
whereof, if his ground do slip from under him, he will be contented; but
he is resolved to try, and never to baulke taking notice of any thing
that is to the King's prejudice, let it fall where it will; which is a
most brave resolucion. He was very free with me; and by my troth, I do
see more reall worth in him than in most men that I do know. I would not
forget two passages of Sir J. Minnes's at yesterday's dinner. The one,
that to the question how it comes to pass that there are no boars seen
in London, but many sows and pigs; it was answered, that the constable
gets them a-nights. The other, Thos. Killigrew's way of getting to see
plays when he was a boy. He would go to the Red Bull, and when the man
cried to the boys, "Who will go and be a devil, and he shall see the
play for nothing?" then would he go in, and be a devil upon the stage,
and so get to see plays.

31st. Lay pretty long in bed, and then up and among my workmen, the
carpenters being this day laying of my floor of my dining room, with
whom I staid a good while, and so to my office, and did a little
business, and so home to dinner, and after dinner all the afternoon with
my carpenters, making them lay all my boards but one in my dining room
this day, which I am confident they would have made two good days work
of if I had not been there, and it will be very pleasant. At night to
my office, and there late doing of my office business, and so home to
supper and bed. Thus ends this month, I and my family in good health,
but weary heartily of dirt, but now in hopes within two or three weeks
to be out of it. My head troubled with much business, but especially my
fear of Sir J. Minnes claiming my bed-chamber of me, but I hope now that
it is almost over, for I perceive he is fitting his house to go into it
the next week. Then my law businesses for Brampton makes me mad almost,
for that I want time to follow them, but I must by no means neglect
them. I thank God I do save money, though it be but a little, but I hope
to find out some job or other that I may get a sum by to set me up. I am
now also busy in a discovery for my Lord Sandwich and Sir H. Bennett by
Mr. Wade's means of some of Baxter's [Barkstead] money hid in one of
his cellars in the Tower. If we get it it may be I may be 10 or L20 the
better for it. I thank God I have no crosses, but only much business to
trouble my mind with. In all other things as happy a man as any in the
world, for the whole world seems to smile upon me, and if my house were
done that I could diligently follow my business, I would not doubt to do
God, and the King, and myself good service. And all I do impute almost
wholly to my late temperance, since my making of my vowes against wine
and plays, which keeps me most happily and contentfully to my business;
which God continue! Public matters are full of discontent, what with
the sale of Dunkirk, and my Lady Castlemaine, and her faction at Court;
though I know not what they would have more than to debauch the king,
whom God preserve from it! And then great plots are talked to be
discovered, and all the prisons in town full of ordinary people, taken
from their meeting-places last Sunday. But for certain some plots there
hath been, though not brought to a head.




NOVEMBER 1662

November 1st. Up and after a little while with my workmen I went to
my office, and then to our sitting all the morning. At noon with Mr.
Creede, whom I found at my house, to the Trinity House, to a great
dinner there, by invitacion, and much company. It seems one Captain
Evans makes his Elder Brother's dinner to-day. Among other discourses
one Mr. Oudant, secretary to the late Princesse of Orange, did discourse
of the convenience as to keeping the highways from being deep, by their
horses, in Holland (and Flanders where the ground is as miry as ours
is), going in their carts and, waggons as ours in coaches, wishing the
same here as an expedient to make the ways better, and I think there
is something in it, where there is breadth enough. Thence to my office,
sent for to meet Mr. Leigh again; from Sir H. Bennet. And he and I, with
Wade and his intelligencer and labourers, to the Tower cellars, to make
one tryall more; where we staid two or three hours digging, and dug
a great deal all under the arches, as it was now most confidently
directed, and so seriously, and upon pretended good grounds, that I
myself did truly expect to speed; but we missed of all: and so we went
away the second time like fools. And to our office, whither, a coach
being come, Mr. Leigh goes home to Whitehall; and I by appointment to
the Dolphin Tavern, to meet Wade and the other, Captn. Evett, who now
do tell me plainly, that he that do put him upon this is one that had
it from Barkestead's own mouth, and was advised with by him, just before
the King's coming in, how to get it out, and had all the signs told
him how and where it lay, and had always been the great confident of
Barkestead even to the trusting him with his life and all he had. So
that he did much convince me that there is good ground for what we go
about. But I fear it may be that he did find some conveyance of it away,
without the help of this man, before he died. But he is resolved to go
to the party once more, and then to determine what we shall do further.
So we parted, and I to my office, where after sending away my letters
to the post I do hear that Sir J. Minnes is resolved to turn part of
our entry into a room and to divide the back yard between Sir W. Pen and
him, which though I do not see how it will annoy me much particularly,
yet it do trouble me a little for fear it should, but I do not see how
it can well unless in his desiring my coming to my back stairs, but for
that I shall do as well as himself or Sir W. Pen, who is most concerned
to look after it.

2nd (Lord's day). Lay long with pleasure talking with my wife, in whom I
never had greater content, blessed be God! than now, she continuing
with the same care and thrift and innocence, so long as I keep her from
occasions of being otherwise, as ever she was in her life, and keeps
the house as well. To church, where Mr. Mills, after he had read the
service, and shifted himself as he did the last day, preached a very
ordinary sermon. So home to dinner with my wife. Then up into my new
rooms which are, almost finished, and there walked with great content
talking with my wife till church time, and then to church, and there
being a lazy preacher I slept out the sermon, and so home, and after
visiting the two Sir Williams, who are both of them mending apace, I to
my office preparing things against to-morrow for the Duke, and so home
and to bed, with some pain,... having taken cold this morning in sitting
too long bare-legged to pare my corns. My wife and I spent a good deal
of this evening in reading "Du Bartas' Imposture" and other parts which
my wife of late has taken up to read, and is very fine as anything I
meet with.

3d. Up and with Sir J. Minnes in his coach to White Hall, to the Duke's;
but found him gone out a-hunting. Thence to my Lord Sandwich, from whom
I receive every day more and more signs of his confidence and esteem
of me. Here I met with Pierce the chyrurgeon, who tells me that my Lady
Castlemaine is with child; but though it be the King's, yet her Lord
being still in town, and sometimes seeing of her, though never to eat or
lie together, it will be laid to him. He tells me also how the Duke of
York is smitten in love with my Lady Chesterfield

     [Lady Elizabeth Butler, daughter of James Butler, first Duke of
     Ormond, second wife of Philip Stanhope, second Earl of Chesterfield.
     She died July, 1665 (see "Memoires de Grammont," chap. viii.).
     Peter Cunningham thinks that this banishment was only temporary,
     for, according to the Grammont Memoirs, she was in town when the
     Russian ambassador was in London, December, 1662, and January, 1662-
     63.  "It appears from the books of the Lord Steward's office...
     that Lord Chesterfield set out for the country on the 12th May,
     1663, and, from his 'Short Notes' referred to in the Memoirs before
     his Correspondence, that he remained at Bretby, in Derbyshire, with
     his wife, throughout the summer of that year" ("Story of Nell Gwyn,"
     1852, p. 189).]

(a virtuous lady, daughter to my Lord of Ormond); and so much, that the
duchess of York hath complained to the King and her father about it, and
my Lady Chesterfield is gone into the country for it. At all which I
am sorry; but it is the effect of idleness, and having nothing else to
employ their great spirits upon. Thence with Mr. Creede and Mr. Moore
(who is got upon his legs and come to see my Lord) to Wilkinson's, and
there I did give them and Mr. Howe their dinner of roast beef, cost me
5s., and after dinner carried Mr. Moore as far as Paul's in a coach,
giving him direction about my law business, and there set him down, and
I home and among my workmen, who happened of all sorts to meet to their
making an end of a great many jobbs, so that after to-morrow I shall
have but a little plastering and all the painting almost to do, which
was good content to me. At night to my office, and did business; and
there came to me Mr. Wade and Evett, who have been again with their
prime intelligencer, a woman, I perceive: and though we have missed
twice, yet they bring such an account of the probability of the truth
of the thing, though we are not certain of the place, that we shall set
upon it once more; and I am willing and hopefull in it. So we resolved
to set upon it again on Wednesday morning; and the woman herself will be
there in a disguise, and confirm us in the place. So they took leave for
the night, and I to my business, and then home to my wife and to supper
and bed, my pain being going away. So by God's great blessing my mind is
in good condition of quiet.

4th. Lay long talking pleasantly with my wife in bed, it having rained,
and do still, very much all night long. Up and to the office, where
we sat till noon. This morning we had news by letters that Sir Richard
Stayner is dead at sea in the Mary, which is now come into Portsmouth
from Lisbon; which we are sorry for, he being a very stout seaman. But
there will be no great miss of him for all that. Dined at home with my
wife, and all the afternoon among my workmen, and at night to my office
to do business there, and then to see Sir W. Pen, who is still sick, but
his pain less than it was. He took occasion to talk with me about Sir J.
Minnes's intention to divide the entry and the yard, and so to keep him
out of the yard, and forcing him to go through the garden to his house.
Which he is vexed at, and I am glad to see that Sir J. Minnes do use him
just as he do me, and so I perceive it is not anything extraordinary
his carriage to me in the matter of our houses, for this is worse than
anything he has done to me, that he should give order for the stopping
up of his way to his house without so much as advising with him or
letting of him know it, and I confess that it is very highly and basely
done of him. So to my office again, and after doing business there, then
home to supper and to bed.

5th. Up and with my painters painting my dining room all day long till
night, not stirring out at all. Only in the morning my Lady Batten did
send to speak with me, and told me very civilly that she did not desire,
nor hoped I did, that anything should pass between us but what was
civill, though there was not the neighbourliness between her and my wife
that was fit to be, and so complained of my maid's mocking of her; when
she called "Nan" to her maid within her own house, my maid Jane in the
garden overheard her, and mocked her, and some other such like things
she told me, and of my wife's speaking unhandsomely of her; to all which
I did give her a very respectfull answer, such as did please her, and am
sorry indeed that this should be, though I do not desire there should be
any acquaintance between my wife and her. But I promised to avoid such
words and passages for the future. So home, and by and by Sir W. Pen
did send for me to his bedside; and tell me how really Sir J. Minnes did
resolve to have one of my rooms, and that he was very angry and hot, and
said he would speak to the Duke. To which, knowing that all this was but
to scare me, and to get him to put off his resolution of making up the
entry, I did tell him plainly how I did not value his anger more, than
he did mine, and that I should be willing to do what the Duke commanded,
and I was sure to have justice of him, and that was all I did say to him
about it, though I was much vexed, and after a little stay went home;
and there telling my wife she did put me into heart, and resolve to
offer him to change lodgings, and believe that that will one way or
other bring us to some end in this dispute. At night I called up my
maids, and schooled Jane, who did answer me so humbly and drolly about
it, that though I seemed angry, I was much pleased with her and [my]
wife also. So at night to bed.

6th. At the office forenoon and afternoon till late at night, very busy
answering my Lord Treasurer's letter, and my mind troubled till we come
to some end with Sir J. Minnes about our lodgings, and so home. And
after some pleasant discourse and supper to bed, and in my dream much
troubled by being with Will. Swan, a great fanatic, my old acquaintance,
and, methought, taken and led up with him for a plotter, all our
discourse being at present about the late plots.

7th. Up and being by appointment called upon by Mr. Lee, he and I to the
Tower, to make our third attempt upon the cellar. And now privately the
woman, Barkestead's great confident, is brought, who do positively say
that this is the place which he did say the money was hid in, and where
he and she did put up the L50,000

     [Thus in the MS., although the amount was first stated as L7,000
     (see October 30th, 1662)]

in butter firkins; and the very day that he went out of England did
say that neither he nor his would be the better for that money, and
therefore wishing that she and hers might. And so left us, and we full
of hope did resolve to dig all over the cellar, which by seven o'clock
at night we performed. At noon we sent for a dinner, and upon the head
of a barrel dined very merrily, and to work again. Between times, Mr.
Lee, who had been much in Spain, did tell me pretty stories of the
customs and other things, as I asked him, of the country, to my great
content. But at last we saw we were mistaken; and after digging the
cellar quite through, and removing the barrels from one side to
the other, we were forced to pay our porters, and give over our
expectations, though I do believe there must be money hid somewhere by
him, or else he did delude this woman in hopes to oblige her to further
serving him, which I am apt to believe. Thence by coach to White Hall,
and at my Lord's lodgings did write a letter, he not being within, to
tell him how things went, and so away again, only hearing that Mrs.
Sarah is married, I did go up stairs again and joy her and kiss her, she
owning of it; and it seems it is to a cook. I am glad she is disposed
of, for she grows old, and is very painfull,--[painstaking]--and one
I have reason to wish well for her old service to me. Then to my
brother's, where my wife, by my order, is tonight to stay a night or two
while my house is made clean, and thence home, where I am angry to see,
instead of the house made in part clean, all the pewter goods and other
things are brought up to scouring, which makes the house ten times
worse, at which I was very much displeased, but cannot help it. So to my
office to set down my journal, and so home and to bed.

8th. All the morning sitting at the office, and after that dined alone
at home, and so to the office again till 9 o'clock, being loth to go
home, the house is so dirty, and my wife at my brother's. So home and to
bed.

9th (Lord's day). Lay alone a good while, my mind busy about pleading
to-morrow to the Duke if there shall be occasion for this chamber that I
lie in against Sir J., Minnes. Then up, and after being ready walked to
my brother's, where my wife is, calling at many churches, and then to
the Temple, hearing a bit there too, and observing that in the streets
and churches the Sunday is kept in appearance as well as I have known
it at any time. Then to dinner to my brother's, only he and my wife, and
after dinner to see Mr. Moore, who is pretty well, and he and I to St.
Gregory's, where I escaped a great fall down the staires of the gallery:
so into a pew there and heard Dr. Ball make a very good sermon, though
short of what I expected, as for the most part it do fall out. So home
with Mr. Moore to his chamber, and after a little talk I walked home to
my house and staid at Sir W. Batten's. Till late at night with him and
Sir J. Minnes, with whom we did abundance of most excellent discourse of
former passages of sea commanders and officers of the navy, and so home
and to bed, with my mind well at ease but only as to my chamber, which I
fear to lose.

10th. Up betimes and to set my workmen to work, and then a little to the
office, and so with Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and myself by coach to
White Hall, to the Duke, who, after he was ready, did take us into his
closett. Thither come my Lord General Monk, and did privately talk with
the Duke about having the life-guards pass through the City today only
for show and to fright people, for I perceive there are great fears
abroad; for all which I am troubled and full of doubt that things will
not go well. He being gone, we fell to business of the Navy. Among other
things, how to pay off this fleet that is now come from Portugall; the
King of Portugall sending them home, he having no more use for them,
which we wonder at, that his condition should be so soon altered. And
our landmen also are coming back, being almost starved in that poor
country. Having done here I went by my Lord Sandwich's, who was not at
home, and so to Westminster Hall, where full of term, and here met with
many about business, among others my cozen Roger Pepys, who is all for
a composition with my uncle Thomas, which upon any fair terms I am for
also and desire it. Thence by water, and so by land to my Lord Crew's,
and dined with him and his brother, I know not his name; where very good
discourse; among others, of France's intention to make a patriarch of
his own, independent from the Pope, by which he will be able to cope
with the Spaniard in all councils, which hitherto he has never done.
My Lord Crew told us how he heard my Lord of Holland say that, being
Embassador about the match with the Queene-Mother that now is, the King
of France--[Louis XIII., in 1624.]--insisted upon a dispensation from
the Pope, which my Lord Holland making a question of, and that he was
commanded to yield to nothing to the prejudice of our religion, says
the King of France, "You need not fear that, for if the Pope will not
dispense with the match, my Bishopp of Paris shall." By and by come in
great Mr. Swinfen, the Parliament-man, who, among other discourse of the
rise and fall of familys, told us of Bishopp Bridgeman (brother of Sir
Orlando) who lately hath bought a seat anciently of the Levers, and then
the Ashtons; and so he hath in his great hall window (having repaired
and beautified the house) caused four great places to be left for coates
of armes. In one, he hath put the Levers, with this motto, "Olim." In
another the Ashtons, with this, "Heri." In the next his own, with this,
"Hodie." In the fourth nothing but this motto, "Cras nescio cujus."
Thence towards my brother's; met with Jack Cole in Fleet Street, and he
and I went into his cozen Mary Cole's (whom I never saw since she was
married), and drank a pint of wine and much good discourse. I found him
a little conceited, but he had good things in him, and a man may know
the temper of the City by him, he being of a general conversation,
and can tell how matters go; and upon that score I will encourage his
acquaintance. Thence to my brother's, and taking my wife up, carried her
to Charing Cross, and there showed her the Italian motion, much after
the nature of what I showed her a while since in Covent Garden. Their
puppets here are somewhat better, but their motions not at all. Thence
by coach to my Lady's, and, hiding my wife with Sarah below, I went up
and heard some musique with my Lord, and afterwards discoursed with him
alone, and so good night to him and below, having sent for Mr. Creed,
had thought to have shown my wife a play before the King, but it is so
late that we could not, and so we took coach, and taking up Sarah at
my brother's with their night geare we went home, and I to my office
to settle matters, and so home and to bed. This morning in the Duke's
chamber Sir J. Minnes did break to me his desire about my chamber, which
I did put off to another time to discourse of, he speaking to me very
kindly to make me the less trouble myself, hoping to save myself and to
contrive something or other to pleasure him as well, though I know not
well what. The town, I hear, is full of discontents, and all know of
the King's new bastard by Mrs. Haslerigge, and as far as I can hear
will never be contented with Episcopacy, they are so cruelly set for
Presbytery, and the Bishopps carry themselves so high, that they are
never likely to gain anything upon them.

11th. All the morning sitting at the office, and then to dinner with my
wife, and so to the office again (where a good while Mr. Bland was with
me, telling me very fine things in merchandize, which, but that the
trouble of my office do so cruelly hinder me, I would take some pains
in) till late at night. Towards the evening I, as I have done for three
or four nights, studying something of Arithmetique, which do please me
well to see myself come forward. So home, to supper, and to bed.

12th. At my office most of the morning, after I had done among my
painters, and sent away Mr. Shaw and Hawly, who came to give me a visit
this morning. Shaw it seems is newly re-married to a rich widow. At noon
dined at home with my wife, and by and by, by my wife's appointment came
two young ladies, sisters, acquaintances of my wife's brother's, who are
desirous to wait upon some ladies, and proffer their service to my wife.
The youngest, indeed, hath a good voice, and sings very well, besides
other good qualitys; but I fear hath been bred up with too great liberty
for my family, and I fear greater inconveniences of expenses, and my
wife's liberty will follow, which I must study to avoid till I have a
better purse; though, I confess, the gentlewoman, being pretty handsome,
and singing, makes me have a good mind to her. Anon I took them by coach
and carried them to a friend's of theirs, in Lincoln's Inn Fields,
and there I left them and I to the Temple by appointment to my cousin
Roger's chamber, where my uncle Thomas and his son Thomas met us, I
having hoped that they would have agreed with me to have had [it] ended
by my cozen Roger, but they will have two strangers to be for them
against two others of mine, and so we parted without doing any thing
till the two send me the names of their arbiters. Thence I walked home,
calling a little in Paul's Churchyard, and, I thank God, can read and
never buy a book, though I have a great mind to it. So to the Dolphin
Tavern near home, by appointment, and there met with Wade and Evett, and
have resolved to make a new attempt upon another discovery, in which God
give us better fortune than in the other, but I have great confidence
that there is no cheat in these people, but that they go upon good
grounds, though they have been mistaken in the place of the first. From
thence, without drinking a drop of wine, home to my office and there
made an end, though late, of my collection of the prices of masts for
these twelve years to this day, in order to the buying of some of Wood,
and I bound it up in painted paper to lie by as a book for future use.
So home and to supper and to bed, and a little before and after we were
in bed we had much talk and difference between us about my wife's having
a woman, which I seemed much angry at, that she should go so far in it
without consideration and my being consulted with. So to bed.

13th. Up and began our discontent again and sorely angered my wife, who
indeed do live very lonely, but I do perceive that it is want of work
that do make her and all other people think of ways of spending their
time worse, and this I owe to my building, that do not admit of her
undertaking any thing of work, because the house has been and is still
so dirty. I to my office, and there sat all the morning and dined with
discontent with my wife at noon, and so to my office, and there this
afternoon we had our first meeting upon our commission of inspecting
the Chest, and there met Sir J. Minnes, Sir Francis Clerke, Mr. Heath,
Atturney of the Dutchy, Mr. Prinn, Sir W. Rider, Captn. Cocke, and
myself. Our first work to read over the Institution, which is a decree
in Chancery in the year 1617, upon an inquisition made at Rochester
about that time into the revenues of the Chest, which had then, from the
year 1588 or 1590, by the advice of the Lord High Admiral and principal
officers then being, by consent of the seamen, been settled, paying
sixpence per month, according to their wages then, which was then but
10s. which is now 24s. We adjourned to a fortnight hence. So broke up,
and I to see Sir W. Pen, who is now pretty well, but lies in bed still;
he cannot rise to stand. Then to my office late, and this afternoon my
wife in her discontent sent me a letter, which I am in a quandary what
to do, whether to read it or not, but I purpose not, but to burn it
before her face, that I may put a stop to more of this nature. But
I must think of some way, either to find her some body to keep her
company, or to set her to work, and by employment to take up her
thoughts and time. After doing what I had to do I went home to supper,
and there was very sullen to my wife, and so went to bed and to sleep
(though with much ado, my mind being troubled) without speaking one word
to her.

14th. She begun to talk in the morning and to be friends, believing
all this while that. I had read her letter, which I perceive by her
discourse was full of good counsel, and relating the reason of her
desiring a woman, and how little charge she did intend it to be to me,
so I begun and argued it as full and plain to her, and she to reason
it highly to me, to put her away, and take one of the Bowyers if I did
dislike her, that I did resolve when the house is ready she shall try
her for a while; the truth is, I having a mind to have her come for her
musique and dancing. So up and about my papers all the morning, and her
brother coming I did tell him my mind plain, who did assure me that they
were both of the sisters very humble and very poor, and that she that
we are to have would carry herself so. So I was well contented and spent
part of the morning at my office, and so home and to dinner, and after
dinner, finding Sarah to be discontented at the news of this woman, I
did begin in my wife's chamber to talk to her and tell her that it was
not out of unkindness to her, but my wife came up, and I perceive she
is not too reconciled to her whatever the matter is, that I perceive I
shall not be able to keep her, though she is as good a servant (only a
little pettish) that ever I desire to have, and a creditable servant. So
she desired leave to go out to look [for] a service, and did, for which
I am troubled, and fell out highly afterwards with my wife about it. So
to my office, where we met this afternoon about answering a great letter
of my Lord Treasurer's, and that done to my office drawing up a letter
to him, and so home to supper.

15th. All the morning at the office sitting, dined with my wife
pleasantly at home, then among my painters, and by and by went to
my Civil Lawyers about my uncle's suit, and so home again and saw my
painters make an end of my house this night, which is my great joy, and
so to my office and did business till ten at night, and so home and to
supper, and after reading part of Bussy d'Ambois, a good play I bought
to-day, to bed.

16th (Lord's day). About 3 o'clock in the morning waked with a rude
noise among Sir J. Minnes his servants (he not being yet come to his
lodgings), who are the rudest people but they that lived before, one
Mrs. Davis, that ever I knew in my life. To sleep again, and after long
talking pleasantly with my wife, up and to church, where Mrs. Goodyer,
now Mrs. Buckworth, was churched. I love the woman for her gravity
above any in the parish. So home and to dinner with my wife with great
content, and after dinner walked up and down my house, which is now
almost finished, there being nothing to do but the glazier and furniture
to put up. By and by comes Tom, and after a little talk I with him
towards his end, but seeing many strangers and coaches coming to our
church, and finding that it was a sermon to be preached by a probationer
for the Turkey Company,--[The Turkey or Levant Company was established
in 1581.]--to be sent to Smyrna, I returned thither. And several Turkey
merchants filled all the best pews (and some in ours) in the Church, but
a most pitiful sermon it was upon a text in Zachariah, and a great time
he spent to show whose son Zachary was, and to prove Malachi to be the
last prophet before John the Baptist. Home and to see Sir W. Pen, who
gets strength, but still keeps his bed. Then home and to my office to do
some business there, and so home to supper and to bed.

17th. To the Duke's to-day, but he is gone a-hunting, and therefore I
to my Lord Sandwich's, and having spoke a little with him about his
businesses, I to Westminster Hall and there staid long doing many
businesses, and so home by the Temple and other places doing the like,
and at home I found my wife dressing by appointment by her woman--[Mrs.
Gosnell.]--that I think is to be, and her other sister being here to-day
with her and my wife's brother, I took Mr. Creed, that came to dine,
to an ordinary behind the Change, and there dined together, and after
dinner home and there spent an hour or two till almost dark, talking
with my wife, and making Mrs. Gosnell sing; and then, there being no
coach to be got, by water to White Hall; but Gosnell not being willing
to go through bridge, we were forced to land and take water, again, and
put her and her sister ashore at the Temple. I am mightily pleased with
her humour and singing. At White Hall by appointment, Mr. Creed carried
my wife and I to the Cockpitt, and we had excellent places, and saw the
King, Queen, Duke of Monmouth, his son, and my Lady Castlemaine, and all
the fine ladies; and "The Scornfull Lady," well performed. They had done
by eleven o'clock, and it being fine moonshine, we took coach and home,
but could wake nobody at my house, and so were fain to have my boy get
through one of the windows, and so opened the door and called up the
maids, and went to supper and to bed, my mind being troubled at what
my wife tells me, that her woman will not come till she hears from her
mother, for I am so fond of her that I am loth now not to have her,
though I know it will be a great charge to me which I ought to avoid,
and so will make it up in other things. So to bed.

18th. Up and to the office, where Mr. Phillip the lawyer came to me, but
I put him off to the afternoon. At noon I dined at Sir W. Batten's, Sir
John Minnes being here, and he and I very kind, but I every day expect
to pull a crow with him about our lodgings. My mind troubled about
Gosnell and my law businesses. So after dinner to Mr. Phillips his
chamber, where he demands an abatement for Piggott's money, which vexes
me also, but I will not give it him without my father's consent, which
I will write to him to-night about, and have done it. Here meeting my
uncle Thomas, he and I to my cozen Roger's chamber, and there I did give
my uncle him and Mr. Philips to be my two arbiters against Mr. Cole and
Punt, but I expect no great good of the matter. Thence walked home, and
my wife came home, having been abroad to-day, laying out above L12 in
linen, and a copper, and a pot, and bedstead, and other household stuff,
which troubles me also, so that my mind to-night is very heavy and
divided. Late at my office, drawing up a letter to my Lord Treasurer,
which we have been long about, and so home, and, my mind troubled, to
bed.

20th. All the morning sitting at the office, at noon with Mr. Coventry
to the Temple to advise about Field's, but our lawyers not being in the
way we went to St. James's, and there at his chamber dined, and I am
still in love more and more with him for his real worth. I broke to
him my desire for my wife's brother to send him to sea as a midshipman,
which he is willing to agree to, and will do it when I desire it. After
dinner to the Temple, to Mr. Thurland; and thence to my Lord Chief
Baron, Sir Edward Hale's, and back with Mr. Thurland to his chamber,
where he told us that Field will have the better of us; and that we must
study to make up the business as well as we can, which do much vex and
trouble us: but I am glad the Duke is concerned in it. Thence by coach
homewards, calling at a tavern in the way (being guided by the messenger
in whose custody Field lies), and spoke with Mr. Smith our messenger
about the business, and so home, where I found that my wife had finished
very neatly my study with the former hangings of the diningroom, which
will upon occasion serve for a fine withdrawing room. So a little to
my office and so home, and spent the evening upon my house, and so to
supper and to bed.

21St. Within all day long, helping to put up my hangings in my house in
my wife's chamber, to my great content. In the afternoon I went to speak
to Sir J. Minnes at his lodgings, where I found many great ladies, and
his lodgings made very fine indeed. At night to supper and to bed:
this night having first put up a spitting sheet, which I find very
convenient. This day come the King's pleasure-boats from Calais, with
the Dunkirk money, being 400,000 pistolles.

22nd. This morning, from some difference between my wife and Sarah, her
maid, my wife and I fell out cruelly, to my great discontent. But I do
see her set so against the wench, whom I take to be a most extraordinary
good servant, that I was forced for the wench's sake to bid her get her
another place, which shall cost some trouble to my wife, however, before
I suffer to be. Thence to the office, where I sat all the morning, then
dined; Mr. Moore with me, at home, my wife busy putting her furniture in
order. Then he and I out, and he home and I to my cozen Roger Pepys to
advise about treating with my uncle Thomas, and thence called at the
Wardrobe on Mr. Moore again, and so home, and after doing much business
at my office I went home and caused a new fashion knocker to be put
on my door, and did other things to the putting my house in order, and
getting my outward door painted, and the arch. This day I bought the
book of country dances against my wife's woman Gosnell comes, who dances
finely; and there meeting Mr. Playford he did give me his Latin songs of
Mr. Deering's, which he lately printed. This day Mr. Moore told me that
for certain the Queen-Mother is married to my Lord St. Albans, and he is
like to be made Lord Treasurer. Newes that Sir J. Lawson hath made up a
peace now with Tunis and Tripoli, as well as Argiers, by which he will
come home very highly honoured.

23rd (Lord's day). Up, after some talk with my wife, soberly, upon
yesterday's difference, and made good friends, and to church to hear Mr.
Mills, and so home, and Mr. Moore and my brother Tom dined with me.
My wife not being well to-day did not rise. In the afternoon to church
again, and heard drowsy Mr. Graves, and so to see Sir W. Pen, who
continues ill in bed, but grows better and better every day. Thence
to Sir W. Batten's, and there staid awhile and heard how Sir R. Ford's
daughter is married to a fellow without friends' consent, and the match
carried on and made up at Will Griffin's, our doorkeeper's. So to my
office and did a little business, and so home and to bed. I talked to
my brother to-day, who desires me to give him leave to look after his
mistress still; and he will not have me put to any trouble or obligation
in it, which I did give him leave to do. I hear to-day how old rich
Audley is lately dead, and left a very great estate, and made a great
many poor familys rich, not all to one. Among others, one Davis, my old
schoolfellow at Paul's, and since a bookseller in Paul's Church Yard:
and it seems do forgive one man L60,000 which he had wronged him of, but
names not his name; but it is well known to be the scrivener in Fleet
Street, at whose house he lodged. There is also this week dead a
poulterer, in Gracious Street, which was thought rich, but not so rich,
that hath left L800 per annum, taken in other men's names, and 40,000
Jacobs in gold.

     [A jacobus was a gold coin of the value of twenty-five shillings,
     called after James I, in whose reign it was first coined.]

24th. Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and I, going forth toward White
Hall, we hear that the King and Duke are come this morning to the Tower
to see the Dunkirk money! So we by coach to them, and there went up
and down all the magazines with them; but methought it was but poor
discourse and frothy that the King's companions (young Killigrew among
the rest) about the codpieces of some of the men in armour there to be
seen, had with him. We saw none of the money, but Mr. Slingsby did show
the King, and I did see, the stamps of the new money that is now to be
made by Blondeau's fashion,

     [Peter Blondeau was employed by the Commonwealth to coin their
     money.  After the Restoration, November 3rd, 1662, he received
     letters of denization, and a grant for being engineer of the Mint in
     the Tower of London, and for using his new invention for coining
     gold and silver with the mill and press, with the fee of L100 per
     annum (Walpole's "Anecdotes of Painting").]

which are very neat, and like the King. Thence the King to Woolwich,
though a very cold day; and the Duke to White Hall, commanding us to
come after him, which we did by coach; and in his closett, my Lord
Sandwich being there, did discourse with us about getting some of this
money to pay off the Fleets, and other matters; and then away hence,
and, it being almost dinner time, I to my Lord Crew's, and dined with
him, and had very good discourse, and he seemed to be much pleased with
my visits. Thence to Mr. Phillips, and so to the Temple, where met my
cozen Roger Pepys and his brother, Dr. John, as my arbitrators against
Mr. Cole and Mr. John Bernard for my uncle Thomas, and we two with them
by appointment. They began very high in their demands, and my friends,
partly being not so well acquainted with the will, and partly, I
doubt, not being so good wits as they, for which I blame my choosing
of relations (who besides that are equally engaged to stand for them as
me), I was much troubled thereat, and taking occasion to deny without
my father's consent to bind myself in a bond of L2000 to stand to their
award, I broke off the business for the present till I hear and consider
further, and so thence by coach (my cozen, Thomas Pepys, being in
another chamber busy all the while, going along with me) homeward, and
I set him down by the way; but, Lord! how he did endeavour to find out
a ninepence to clubb with me for the coach, and for want was forced to
give me a shilling, and how he still cries "Gad!" and talks of Popery
coming in, as all the Fanatiques do, of which I was ashamed. So home,
finding my poor wife very busy putting things in order, and so to bed,
my mind being very much troubled, and could hardly sleep all night,
thinking how things are like to go with us about Brampton, and blaming
myself for living so high as I do when for ought I know my father and
mother may come to live upon my hands when all is done.

25th. Up and to the office all the morning, and at noon with the rest,
by Mr. Holy, the ironmonger's invitation, to the Dolphin, to a venison
pasty, very good, and rare at this time of the year, and thence by coach
with Mr. Coventry as far as the Temple, and thence to Greatorex's, where
I staid and talked with him, and got him to mend my pocket ruler for
me, and so by coach to my Lord's lodging, where I sat with Mr. Moore by
appointment, making up accounts for my Lord Sandwich, which done he and
I and Capt. Ferrers and W. Howe very merry a good while in the great
dining room, and so it being late and my Lord not coming in, I by coach
to the Temple, and thence walked home, and so to my study to do some
business, and then home and to bed. Great talk among people how some
of the Fanatiques do say that the end of the world is at hand, and that
next Tuesday is to be the day. Against which, whenever it shall be, good
God fit us all.

26th. In the morning to the Temple to my cozen Roger, who now desires
that I would excuse him from arbitrating, he not being able to stand for
me as he would do, without appearing too high against my uncle Thomas,
which will raise his clamour. With this I am very well pleased, for
I did desire it, and so I shall choose other counsel. Thence home,
he being busy that I could not speak more with him. All day long till
twelve o'clock at night getting my house in order, my wife putting up
the red hangings and bed in her woman's chamber, and I my books and all
other matters in my chamber and study, which is now very pretty. So to
bed.

27th. At my waking, I found the tops of the houses covered with snow,
which is a rare sight, that I have not seen these three years. Up, and
put my people to perfect the cleaning of my house, and so to the office,
where we sat till noon; and then we all went to the next house upon
Tower Hill, to see the coming by of the Russia Embassador; for whose
reception all the City trained-bands do attend in the streets, and the
King's life-guards, and most of the wealthy citizens in their black
velvet coats, and gold chains (which remain of their gallantry at the
King's coming in), but they staid so long that we went down again home
to dinner. And after I had dined, I heard they were coming, and so I
walked to the Conduit in the Quarrefowr,

     [In two ordinances of the reign of Edward III., printed in Riley's
     "Memorials of London" (pp. 300, 389), this is called the "Carfukes,"
     which nearly approaches the name of the "Carfax," at Oxford, where
     four ways also met.  Pepys's form of the word is nearer quatre
     voies, the French equivalent of quadrivium.]

at the end of Gracious-street and Cornhill; and there (the spouts
thereof running very near me upon all the people that were under it) I
saw them pretty well go by. I could not see the Embassador in his coach;
but his attendants in their habits and fur caps very handsome, comely
men, and most of them with hawkes upon their fists to present to the
King. But Lord! to see the absurd nature of Englishmen, that cannot
forbear laughing and jeering at every thing that looks strange. So back
and to the office, and there we met and sat till seven o'clock, making
a bargain with Mr. Wood for his masts of New England; and then in Mr.
Coventry's coach to the Temple, but my cozen Roger Pepys not being at
leisure to speak to me about my business, I presently walked home, and
to my office till very late doing business, and so home, where I found
my house more and more clear and in order, and hope in a day or two now
to be in very good condition there and to my full content. Which God
grant! So to supper and to bed.

28th. A very hard frost; which is news to us after having none almost
these three years. Up and to Ironmongers' Hall by ten o'clock to the
funeral of Sir Richard Stayner. Here we were, all the officers of the
Navy, and my Lord Sandwich, who did discourse with us about the fishery,
telling us of his Majesty's resolution to give L200 to every man that
will set out a Busse;

     [A small sea-vessel used in the Dutch herring-fishery.]

and advising about the effects of this encouragement, which will be a
very great matter certainly. Here we had good rings, and by and by
were to take coach; and I being got in with Mr. Creed into a four-horse
coach, which they come and told us were only for the mourners, I
went out, and so took this occasion to go home. Where I staid all day
expecting Gosnell's coming, but there came an excuse from her that she
had not heard yet from her mother, but that she will come next week,
which I wish she may, since I must keep one that I may have some
pleasure therein. So to my office till late writing out a copy of my
uncle's will, and so home and to bed.

29th. Before I went to the office my wife's brother did come to us, and
we did instruct him to go to Gosnell's and to see what the true matter
is of her not coming, and whether she do intend to come or no, and so
I to the office; and this morning come Sir G. Carteret to us (being the
first time we have seen him since his coming from France): he tells us,
that the silver which he received for Dunkirk did weigh 120,000 weight.
Here all the morning upon business, and at noon (not going home to
dinner, though word was brought me that Will. Joyce was there, whom I
had not seen at my house nor any where else these three or four months)
with Mr. Coventry by his coach as far as Fleet Street, and there stepped
into Madam Turner's, where was told I should find my cozen Roger Pepys,
and with him to the Temple, but not having time to do anything I went
towards my Lord Sandwich's. (In my way went into Captn. Cuttance's
coach, and with him to my Lord's.) But the company not being ready I did
slip down to Wilkinson's, and having not eat any thing to-day did eat
a mutton pie and drank, and so to my Lord's, where my Lord and Mr.
Coventry, Sir Wm. Darcy, one Mr. Parham (a very knowing and well-spoken
man in this business), with several others, did meet about stating the
business of the fishery, and the manner of the King's giving of this
L200 to every man that shall set out a new-made English Busse by
the middle of June next. In which business we had many fine pretty
discourses; and I did here see the great pleasure to be had in
discoursing of publique matters with men that are particularly
acquainted with this or that business. Having come to some issue,
wherein a motion of mine was well received, about sending these
invitations from the King to all the fishing-ports in general, with
limiting so many Busses to this, and that port, before we know the
readiness of subscribers, we parted, and I walked home all the way, and
having wrote a letter full of business to my father, in my way calling
upon my cozen Turner and Mr. Calthrop at the Temple, for their consent
to be my arbitrators, which they are willing to. My wife and I to bed
pretty pleasant, for that her brother brings word that Gosnell, which my
wife and I in discourse do pleasantly call our Marmotte, will certainly
come next week without fail, which God grant may be for the best.

30th (Lord's day). To church in the morning, and Mr. Mills made a pretty
good sermon. It is a bitter cold frost to-day. Dined alone with my
wife to-day with great content, my house being quite clean from top to
bottom. In the afternoon I to the French church here

     [The French Protestant Church was founded by Edward VI. in the
     church of St. Anthony's Hospital in Threadneedle Street.  This was
     destroyed in the Great Fire, and rebuilt, but demolished for the
     approaches of the new Royal Exchange.  The church was then removed
     to St. Martin's-le-Grand, but this was also removed in 1888 to make
     room for the new Post Office buildings.]

in the city, and stood in the aisle all the sermon, with great delight
hearing a very admirable sermon, from a very young man, upon the article
in our creed, in order of catechism, upon the Resurrection. Thence home,
and to visit Sir W. Pen, who continues still bed-rid. Here was Sir W.
Batten and his Lady, and Mrs. Turner, and I very merry, talking of the
confidence of Sir R. Ford's new-married daughter, though she married so
strangely lately, yet appears at church as brisk as can be, and takes
place of her elder sister, a maid. Thence home and to supper, and then,
cold as it is, to my office, to make up my monthly accounts, and I do
find that, through the fitting of my house this month, I have spent in
that and kitchen L50 this month; so that now I am worth but L660, or
thereabouts. This being done and fitted myself for the Duke to-morrow, I
went home, and to prayers and to bed. This day I first did wear a muffe,
being my wife's last year's muffe,

     [The fashion of men wearing muffs appears to have been introduced
     from France in this reign.]

and now I have bought her a new one, this serves me very well. Thus ends
this month; in great frost; myself and family all well, but my mind much
disordered about my uncle's law business, being now in an order of
being arbitrated between us, which I wish to God it were done. I am
also somewhat uncertain what to think of my going about to take a
woman-servant into my house, in the quality of a woman for my wife. My
wife promises it shall cost me nothing but her meat and wages, and that
it shall not be attended with any other expenses, upon which termes I
admit of it; for that it will, I hope, save me money in having my wife
go abroad on visits and other delights; so that I hope the best, but am
resolved to alter it, if matters prove otherwise than I would have them.
Publique matters in an ill condition of discontent against the height
and vanity of the Court, and their bad payments: but that which troubles
most, is the Clergy, which will never content the City, which is not to
be reconciled to Bishopps: the more the pity that differences must still
be. Dunkirk newly sold, and the money brought over; of which we hope to
get some to pay the Navy: which by Sir J. Lawson's having dispatched the
business in the Straights, by making peace with Argier,--[The ancient
name for Algiers.]--Tunis, and Tripoli (and so his fleet will also
shortly come home), will now every day grow less, and so the King's
charge be abated; which God send!




DECEMBER 1662

December 1st. Up and by coach with Sir John Minnes and Sir W. Batten to
White Hall to the Duke's chamber, where, as is usual, my Lord Sandwich
and all of us, after his being ready, to his closett, and there
discoursed of matters of the Navy, and here Mr. Coventry did do me
the great kindness to take notice to the Duke of my pains in making a
collection of all contracts about masts, which have been of great use to
us. Thence I to my Lord Sandwich's, to Mr. Moore, to talk a little about
business; and then over the Parke (where I first in my life, it being a
great frost, did see people sliding with their skeates,

     [Iron skates appear to have been introduced by the Dutch, as the
     name certainly was; but we learn from Fitzstephen that bone skates
     (although not so called) were used in London in the twelfth
     century.]

which is a very pretty art), to Mr. Coventry's chamber to St. James's,
where we all met to a venison pasty, and were very merry, Major Norwood
being with us, whom they did play upon for his surrendering of Dunkirk.
Here we staid till three or four o'clock; and so to the Council Chamber,
where there met the Duke of York, Prince Rupert, Duke of Albemarle, my
Lord Sandwich, Sir Win. Compton, Mr. Coventry, Sir J. Minnes, Sir R.
Ford, Sir W. Rider, myself, and Captain Cuttance, as Commissioners for
Tangier. And after our Commission was read by Mr. Creed, who I perceive
is to be our Secretary, we did fall to discourse of matters: as, first,
the supplying them forthwith with victualls; then the reducing it to
make way for the money, which upon their reduction is to go to the
building of the Mole; and so to other matters, ordered as against
next meeting. This done we broke up, and I to the Cockpitt, with much
crowding and waiting, where I saw "The Valiant Cidd"--[Translated from
the "Cid" of Corneille]--acted, a play I have read with great delight,
but is a most dull thing acted, which I never understood before, there
being no pleasure in it, though done by Betterton and by Ianthe, And
another fine wench that is come in the room of Roxalana nor did the King
or queen once smile all the whole play, nor any of the company seem to
take any pleasure but what was in the greatness and gallantry of the
company. Thence to my Lord's, and Mr. Moore being in bed I staid not,
but with a link walked home and got thither by 12 o'clock, knocked up my
boy, and put myself to bed.

2nd. Before I went to the office my wife and I had another falling out
about Sarah, against whom she has a deadly hate, I know not for what,
nor can I see but she is a very good servant. Then to my office, and
there sat all the morning, and then to dinner with my wife at home, and
after dinner did give Jane a very serious lesson, against we take her
to be our chamber-maid, which I spoke so to her that the poor girl cried
and did promise to be very dutifull and carefull. So to the office,
where we sat as Commissioners for the Chest, and so examined most of the
old accountants to the Chest about it, and so we broke up, and I to my
office till late preparing business, and so home, being cold, and this
night first put on a wastecoate. So to bed.

3rd. Called up by Commissioner Pett, and with him by water, much against
my will, to Deptford, and after drinking a warm morning draft, with Mr.
Wood and our officers measuring all the morning his New England masts,
with which sight I was much pleased for my information, though I
perceive great neglect and indifference in all the King's officers in
what they do for the King. That done, to the Globe, and there dined with
Mr. Wood, and so by water with Mr. Pett home again, all the way reading
his Chest accounts, in which I did see things did not please me; as
his allowing himself 1300 for one year's looking to the business of
the Chest, and L150 per annum for the rest of the years. But I found no
fault to him himself, but shall when they come to be read at the Board.
We did also call at Limehouse to view two Busses that are building,
that being a thing we are now very hot upon. Our call was to see what
dimensions they are of, being 50 feet by the keel and about 60 tons.
Home and did a little business, and so taking Mr. Pett by the way, we
walked to the Temple, in our way seeing one of the Russia Embassador's
coaches go along, with his footmen not in liverys, but their country
habits; one of one colour and another of another, which was very
strange. At the Temple spoke with Mr. Turner and Calthrop, and so walked
home again, being in some pain through the cold which I have got to-day
by water, which troubles me. At the office doing business a good while,
and so home and had a posset, and so to bed.

4th. At the office all the morning setting about business, and after
dinner to it again, and so till night, and then home looking over my
Brampton papers against to-morrow that we are to meet with our counsel
on both sides toward an arbitration, upon which I was very late, and so
to bed.

5th. Up, it being a snow and hard frost, and being up I did call up
Sarah, who do go away to-day or to-morrow. I paid her her wages, and
gave her 10s. myself, and my wife 5s. to give her. For my part I think
never servant and mistress parted upon such foolish terms in the world
as they do, only for an opinion in my wife that she is ill-natured, in
all other things being a good servant. The wench cried, and I was
ready to cry too, but to keep peace I am content she should go, and the
rather, though I say nothing of that, that Jane may come into her place.
This being done, I walked towards Guildhall, thither being summoned by
the Commissioners for the Lieutenancy; but they sat not this morning. So
meeting in my way W. Swan, I took him to a house thereabouts, and gave
him a morning draft of buttered ale;

     [Buttered ale must have been a horrible concoction, as it is
     described as ale boiled with lump sugar and spice.]

he telling me still much of his Fanatique stories, as if he were a great
zealot, when I know him to be a very rogue. But I do it for discourse,
and to see how things stand with him and his party; who I perceive have
great expectation that God will not bless the Court nor Church, as it is
now settled, but they must be purified. The worst news he tells me, is
that Mr. Chetwind is dead, my old and most ingenious acquaintance. He is
dead, worth L3,000, which I did not expect, he living so high as he did
always and neatly. He hath given W. Symons his wife L300, and made Will
one of his executors. Thence to the Temple to my counsel, and thence to
Gray's Inn to meet with Mr. Cole but could not, and so took a turn or
two in the garden, being very pleasant with the snow and frost. Thence
to my brother's, and there I eat something at dinner and transcribed
a copy or two of the state of my uncle's estate, which I prepared last
night, and so to the Temple Church, and there walked alone till 4 or 5
o'clock, and then to my cozen Turner's chamber and staid there, up and
down from his to Calthrop's and Bernard's chambers, till so late, that
Mr. Cole not coming, we broke up for meeting this night, and so taking
my uncle Thomas homewards with me by coach, talking of our desire to
have a peace, and set him down at Gracious-street end, and so home, and
there I find Gosnell come, who, my wife tells me, is like to prove
a pretty companion, of which I am glad. So to my office for a little
business and then home, my mind having been all this day in most
extraordinary trouble and care for my father, there being so great
an appearance of my uncle's going away with the greatest part of the
estate, but in the evening by Gosnell's coming I do put off these
thoughts to entertain myself with my wife and her, who sings exceeding
well, and I shall take great delight in her, and so merrily to bed.

6th. Up and to the office, and there sat all the morning, Mr. Coventry
and I alone, the rest being paying off of ships. Dined at home with my
wife and Gosnell, my mind much pleased with her, and after dinner sat
with them a good while, till my wife seemed to take notice of my being
at home now more than at other times. I went to the office, and there
I sat till late, doing of business, and at 9 o'clock walked to Mr.
Rawlinson's, thinking to meet my uncle Wight there, where he was, but
a great deal of his wife's kindred-women and I knew not whom (which Mr.
Rawlinson did seem to me to take much notice of his being led by the
nose by his wife), I went away to my office again, and doing my business
there, I went home, and after a song by Gosnell we to bed.

7th (Lord's day). A great snow, and so to church this morning with my
wife, which is the first time she hath been at church since her going to
Brampton, and Gosnell attending her, which was very gracefull. So home,
and we dined above in our dining room, the first time since it was new
done, and in the afternoon I thought to go to the French church; but
finding the Dutch congregation there, and then finding the French
congregation's sermon begun in the Dutch, I returned home, and up to our
gallery, where I found my wife and Gosnell, and after a drowsy sermon,
we all three to my aunt Wight's, where great store of her usuall
company, and here we staid a pretty while talking, I differing from my
aunt, as I commonly do, in our opinion of the handsomeness of the Queen,
which I oppose mightily, saying that if my nose be handsome, then is
her's, and such like. After much discourse, seeing the room full, and
being unwilling to stay all three, I took leave, and so with my wife
only to see Sir W. Pen, who is now got out of his bed, and sits by the
fireside. And after some talk, home and to supper, and after prayers
to bed. This night came in my wife's brother and talked to my wife and
Gosnell about his wife, which they told me afterwards of, and I do smell
that he I doubt is overreached in thinking that he has got a rich wife,'
and I fear she will prove otherwise. So to bed.

8th. Up, and carrying Gosnell by coach, set her down at Temple Barr, she
going about business of hers today. By the way she was telling me how
Balty did tell her that my wife did go every day in the week to Court
and plays, and that she should have liberty of going abroad as often as
she pleased, and many other lies, which I am vexed at, and I doubt the
wench did come in some expectation of, which troubles me. So to the Duke
and Mr. Coventry, and alone, the rest being at a Pay and elsewhere, and
alone with Mr. Coventry I did read over our letter to my Lord Treasurer,
which I think now is done as well as it can be. Then to my Lord
Sandwich's, and there spent the rest of the morning in making up my
Lord's accounts with Mr. Moore, and then dined with Mr. Moore and
Battersby his friend, very well and merry, and good discourse. Then into
the Park, to see them slide with their skeates, which is very pretty.
And so to the Duke's, where the Committee for Tangier met: and here we
sat down all with him at a table, and had much good discourse about the
business, and is to my great content. That done, I hearing what play it
was that is to be acted before the King to-night, I would not stay, but
home by coach, where I find my wife troubled about Gosnell, who brings
word that her uncle, justice Jiggins, requires her to come three times
a week to him, to follow some business that her mother intrusts her
withall, and that, unless she may have that leisure given her, he will
not have her take any place; for which we are both troubled, but there
is no help for it, and believing it to be a good providence of God to
prevent my running behindhand in the world, I am somewhat contented
therewith, and shall make my wife so, who, poor wretch, I know will
consider of things, though in good earnest the privacy of her life must
needs be irksome to her. So I made Gosnell and we sit up looking over
the book of Dances till 12 at night, not observing how the time went,
and so to prayers and to bed.

9th. Lay long with my wife, contenting her about the business of
Gosnell's going, and I perceive she will be contented as well as myself,
and so to the office, and after sitting all the morning in hopes to have
Mr. Coventry dine with me, he was forced to go to White Hall, and so I
dined with my own company only, taking Mr. Hater home with me, but
he, poor man, was not very well, and so could not eat any thing. After
dinner staid within all the afternoon, being vexed in my mind about the
going away of Sarah this afternoon, who cried mightily, and so was I
ready to do, and Jane did also, and then anon went Gosnell away, which
did trouble me too; though upon many considerations, it is better that
I am rid of the charge. All together makes my house appear to me very
lonely, which troubles me much, and in a melancholy humour I went to
the office, and there about business sat till I was called to Sir
G. Carteret at the Treasury office about my Lord Treasurer's letter,
wherein he puts me to a new trouble to write it over again. So home
and late with Sir John Minnes at the office looking over Mr. Creed's
accounts, and then home and to supper, and my wife and I melancholy to
bed.

10th. This morning rose, receiving a messenger from Sir G. Carteret and
a letter from Mr. Coventry, one contrary to another, about our letter to
my Lord Treasurer, at which I am troubled, but I went to Sir George, and
being desirous to please both, I think I have found out a way to do it.
So back to the office with Sir J. Minnes, in his coach, but so great a
snow that we could hardly pass the streets. So we and Sir W. Batten to
the office, and there did discourse of Mr. Creed's accounts, and I fear
it will be a good while before we shall go through them, and many things
we meet with, all of difficulty. Then to the Dolphin, where Sir J.
Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and I, did treat the Auditors of the Exchequer,
Auditors Wood and Beale, and hither come Sir G. Carteret to us. We had a
good dinner, cost us L5 and 6s., whereof my share 26s., and after dinner
did discourse of our salarys and other matters, which I think now they
will allow. Thence home, and there I found our new cook-mayde Susan
come, who is recommended to us by my wife's brother, for which I like
her never the better, but being a good well-looked lass, I am willing
to try, and Jane begins to take upon her as a chamber-mayde. So to the
office, where late putting papers and my books and businesses in order,
it being very cold, and so home to supper.

11th. Up, it being a great frost upon the snow, and we sat all the
morning upon Mr. Creed's accounts, wherein I did him some service and
some disservice. At noon he dined with me, and we sat all the afternoon
together, discoursing of ways to get money, which I am now giving
myself wholly up to, and in the evening he went away and I to my office,
concluding all matters concerning our great letter so long in doing to
my Lord Treasurer, till almost one in the morning, and then home with my
mind much eased, and so to bed.

12th. From a very hard frost, when I wake, I find a very great thaw,
and my house overflown with it, which vexed me. At the office and home,
doing business all the morning. Then dined with my wife and sat talking
with her all the afternoon, and then to the office, and there examining
my copy of Mr. Holland's book till 10 at night, and so home to supper
and bed.

13th. Slept long to-day till Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten were set
out towards Portsmouth before I rose, and Sir G. Carteret came to the
office to speak with me before I was up. So I started up and down to
him. By and by we sat, Mr. Coventry and I (Sir G. Carteret being gone),
and among other things, Field and Stint did come, and received the L41
given him by the judgement against me and Harry Kem;

     [Fine for the imprisonment of Field (see February 4th, 1661-62, and
     October 21st, 1662).]

and we did also sign bonds in L500 to stand to the award of Mr. Porter
and Smith for the rest: which, however, I did not sign to till I got Mr.
Coventry to go up with me to Sir W. Pen; and he did promise me before
him to bear his share in what should be awarded, and both concluded that
Sir W. Batten would do no less. At noon broke up and dined with my wife,
and then to the office again, and there made an end of last night's
examination, and got my study there made very clean and put in order,
and then to write by the post, among other letters one to Sir W. Batten
about this day's work with Field, desiring his promise also. The letter
I have caused to be entered in our public book of letters. So home to
supper and to bed.

14th (Lord's day). Lay with great content talking with my wife in
bed, and so up and to church and then home, and had a neat dinner by
ourselves, and after dinner walked to White Hall and my Lord's, and up
and down till chappell time, and then to the King's chappell, where I
heard the service, and so to my Lord's, and there Mr. Howe and Pagett,
the counsellor, an old lover of musique. We sang some Psalms of Mr.
Lawes, and played some symphonys between till night, that I was sent for
to Mr. Creed's lodging, and there was Captain Ferrers and his lady and
W. Howe and I; we supped very well and good sport in discourse. After
supper I was sent for to my Lord, with whom I staid talking about his,
and my owne, and the publique affairs, with great content, he advising
me as to my owne choosing of Sir R. Bernard for umpire in the businesses
between my uncle and us, that I would not trust to him upon his
direction, for he did not think him a man to be trusted at all; and so
bid him good night, and to Mr. Creed's again; Mr. Moore, with whom I
intended to have lain, lying physically without sheets; and there, after
some discourse, to bed, and lay ill, though the bed good, my stomach
being sicke all night with my too heavy supper.

15th. Up and to my Lord's and thence to the Duke, and followed him into
the Park, where, though the ice was broken and dangerous, yet he would
go slide upon his scates, which I did not like, but he slides very well.
So back and to his closett, whither my Lord Sandwich comes, and there
Mr. Coventry and we three had long discourse together about the matters
of the Navy; and, indeed, I find myself more and more obliged to Mr.
Coventry, who studies to do me all the right he can in every thing to
the Duke. Thence walked a good while up and down the gallerys; and among
others, met with Dr. Clerke, who in discourse tells me, that Sir Charles
Barkeley's greatness is only his being pimp to the King, and to my Lady
Castlemaine. And yet for all this, that the King is very kind to the
Queen; who, he says, is one of the best women in the world. Strange how
the King is bewitched to this pretty Castlemaine. Thence to my Lord's,
and there with Mr. Creed, Moore, and Howe to the Crown and dined, and
thence to Whitehall, where I walked up and down the gallerys, spending
my time upon the pictures, till the Duke and the Committee for Tangier
met (the Duke not staying with us), where the only matter was to
discourse with my Lord Rutherford, who is this day made Governor of
Tangier, for I know not what reasons; and my Lord of Peterborough to be
called home; which, though it is said it is done with kindness, yet
all the world may see it is done otherwise, and I am sorry to see a
Catholick Governor sent to command there, where all the rest of the
officers almost are such already. But God knows what the reason is! and
all may see how slippery places all courtiers stand in. Thence by coach
home, in my way calling upon Sir John Berkenheade, to speak about my
assessment of L42 to the Loyal Sufferers; which, I perceive, I cannot
help; but he tells me I have been abused by Sir R. Ford, which I
shall hereafter make use of when it shall be fit. Thence called at the
Major-General's, Sir R. Browne, about my being assessed armes to the
militia; but he was abroad; and so driving through the backside of the
Shambles in Newgate Market, my coach plucked down two pieces of beef
into the dirt, upon which the butchers stopped the horses, and a great
rout of people in the street, crying that he had done him 40s and L5
worth of hurt; but going down, I saw that he had done little or none;
and so I give them a shilling for it and they were well contented, and
so home, and there to my Lady Batten's to see her, who tells me she hath
just now a letter from Sir William, how that he and Sir J. Minnes did
very narrowly escape drowning on the road, the waters are so high; but
is well. But, Lord! what a hypocrite-like face she made to tell it me.
Thence to Sir W. Pen and sat long with him in discourse, I making myself
appear one of greater action and resolution as to publique business than
I have hitherto done, at which he listens, but I know is a rogue in his
heart and likes not, but I perceive I may hold up my head, and the more
the better, I minding of my business as I have done, in which God do and
will bless me. So home and with great content to bed, and talk and chat
with my wife while I was at supper, to our great pleasure.

16th. Up and to the office, and thither came Mr. Coventry and Sir G.
Carteret, and among other business was Strutt's the purser, against
Captn. Browne, Sir W. Batten's brother-in-law, but, Lord! though I
believe the Captain has played the knave, though I seem to have a good
opinion of him and to mean him well, what a most troublesome fellow
that Strutt is, such as I never did meet with his fellow in my life. His
talking and ours to make him hold his peace set my head off akeing all
the afternoon with great pain. So to dinner, thinking to have had Mr.
Coventry, but he could not go with me; and so I took Captn. Murford.
Of whom I do hear what the world says of me; that all do conclude Mr.
Coventry, and Pett, and me, to be of a knot; and that we do now
carry all things before us; and much more in particular of me, and my
studiousnesse, &c., to my great content. After dinner came Mrs. Browne,
the Captain's wife, to see me and my wife, and I showed her a good
countenance, and indeed her husband has been civil to us, but though I
speak them fair, yet I doubt I shall not be able to do her husband much
favour in this business of Strutt's, whom without doubt he has abused.
So to the office, and hence, having done some business, by coach to
White Hall to Secretary Bennet's, and agreed with Mr. Lee to set upon
our new adventure at the Tower to-morrow. Hence to Col. Lovelace in
Cannon Row about seeing how Sir R. Ford did report all the officers of
the navy to be rated for the Loyal Sufferers, but finding him at the
Rhenish wine-house I could not have any answer, but must take another
time. Thence to my Lord's, and having sat talking with Mr. Moore
bewailing the vanity and disorders of the age, I went by coach to my
brother's, where I met Sarah, my late mayde, who had a desire to speak
with me, and I with her to know what it was, who told me out of good
will to me, for she loves me dearly, that I would beware of my wife's
brother, for he is begging or borrowing of her and often, and told me
of her Scallop whisk, and her borrowing of 50s. for Will, which she
believes was for him and her father. I do observe so much goodness and
seriousness in the mayde, that I am again and again sorry that I have
parted with her, though it was full against my will then, and if she had
anything in the world I would commend her for a wife for my brother
Tom. After much discourse and her professions of love to me and all my
relations, I bade her good night and did kiss her, and indeed she seemed
very well-favoured to me to-night, as she is always. So by coach home
and to my office, did some business, and so home to supper and to bed.

17th. This morning come Mr. Lee, Wade, and Evett, intending to have gone
upon our new design to the Tower today; but it raining, and the work
being to be done in the open garden, we put it off to Friday next. And
so I to the office doing business, and then dined at home with my poor
wife with great content, and so to the office again and made an end of
examining the other of Mr. Holland's books about the Navy, with which I
am much contented, and so to other businesses till night at my office,
and so home to supper, and after much dear company and talk with my
wife, to bed.

18th. Up and to the office, Mr. Coventry and I alone sat till two
o'clock, and then he inviting himself to my house to dinner, of which
I was proud; but my dinner being a legg of mutton and two capons, they
were not done enough, which did vex me; but we made shift to please
him, I think; but I was, when he was gone, very angry with my wife and
people. This afternoon came my wife's brother and his wife, and Mrs.
Lodum his landlady (my old friend Mr. Ashwell's sister), Balty's wife is
a most little and yet, I believe, pretty old girl, not handsome, nor has
anything in the world pleasing, but, they say, she plays mighty well on
the Base Violl. They dined at her father's today, but for ought I hear
he is a wise man, and will not give any thing to his daughter till he
sees what her husband do put himself to, so that I doubt he has made but
a bad matter of it, but I am resolved not to meddle with it. They gone I
to the office, and to see Sir W. Pen, with my wife, and thence I to Mr.
Cade the stationer, to direct him what to do with my two copies of Mr.
Holland's books which he is to bind, and after supplying myself with
several things of him, I returned to my office, and so home to supper
and to bed.

19th. Up and by appointment with Mr. Lee, Wade, Evett, and workmen
to the Tower, and with the Lieutenant's leave set them to work in the
garden, in the corner against the mayne-guard, a most unlikely place. It
being cold, Mr. Lee and I did sit all the day till three o'clock by the
fire in the Governor's house; I reading a play of Fletcher's, being "A
Wife for a Month," wherein no great wit or language. Having done we went
to them at work, and having wrought below the bottom of the foundation
of the wall, I bid them give over, and so all our hopes ended; and so
went home, taking Mr. Leigh with me, and after drunk a cup of wine he
went away, and I to my office, there reading in Sir W. Petty's book, and
so home and to bed, a little displeased with my wife, who, poor wretch,
is troubled with her lonely life, which I know not how without great
charge to help as yet, but I will study how to do it.

20th. Up and had L100 brought me by Prior of Brampton in full of his
purchase money for Barton's house and some land. So to the office, and
thence with Mr. Coventry in his coach to St. James's, with great content
and pride to see him treat me so friendly; and dined with him, and so
to White Hall together; where we met upon the Tangier Commission, and
discoursed many things thereon; but little will be done before my Lord
Rutherford comes there, as to the fortification or Mole. That done, my
Lord Sandwich and I walked together a good while in the Matted Gallery,
he acquainting me with his late enquiries into the Wardrobe business to
his content; and tells me how things stand. And that the first year was
worth about L3000 to him, and the next about as much; so that at this
day, if he were paid, it will be worth about L7000 to him. But it
contents me above all things to see him trust me as his confidant: so
I bid him good night, he being to go into the country, to keep his
Christmas, on Monday next. So by coach home and to my office, being post
night, and then home and to bed.

21st (Lord's day). Lay long in bed, so up to Church, and so home to
dinner alone with my wife very pleasant. After dinner I walked to my
brother's, where he told me some hopes he had of bringing his business
to pass still of his mistress, but I do find they do stand upon terms
that will not be either fit or in his power to grant, and therefore
I did dislike his talk and advised him to give it quite over. Thence
walked to White Hall, and there to chappell, and from thence up stairs,
and up and down the house and gallerys on the King's and Queen's side,
and so through the garden to my Lord's lodgings, where there was Mr.
Gibbons, Madge, and Mallard, and Pagett; and by and by comes in my Lord
Sandwich, and so we had great store of good musique. By and by comes in
my simple Lord Chandois, who (my Lord Sandwich being gone out to Court)
began to sing psalms, but so dully that I was weary of it. At last we
broke up; and by and by comes in my Lord Sandwich again, and he and I to
talk together about his businesses, and so he to bed and I and Mr. Creed
and Captain Ferrers fell to a cold goose pye of Mrs. Sarah's, heartily,
and so spent our time till past twelve o'clock, and then with Creed to
his lodgings, and so with him to bed, and slept till

22nd. Six or seven o'clock and so up, and by the fireside read a good
part of "The Advice to a Daughter," which a simple coxcomb has wrote
against Osborne, but in all my life I never did nor can expect to see so
much nonsense in print Thence to my Lord's, who is getting himself ready
for his journey to Hinchingbroke. And by and by, after eating something,
and talking with me about many things, and telling me his mind, upon
my asking about Sarah (who, it seems, only married of late, but is also
said to be turned a great drunkard, which I am ashamed of), that he
likes her service well, and do not love a strange face, but will not
endure the fault, but hath bade me speak to her and advise her if she
hath a mind to stay with him, which I will do. My Lord and his people
being gone, I walked to Mr. Coventry's chamber, where I found him gone
out into the Park with the Duke, so the boy being there ready with my
things, I shifted myself into a riding-habitt, and followed him through
White Hall, and in the Park Mr. Coventry's people having a horse ready
for me (so fine a one that I was almost afeard to get upon him, but I
did, and found myself more feared than hurt) and I got up and followed
the Duke, who, with some of his people (among others Mr. Coventry) was
riding out. And with them to Hide Park. Where Mr. Coventry asking leave
of the Duke, he bid us go to Woolwich. So he and I to the waterside,
and our horses coming by the ferry, we by oars over to Lambeth, and from
thence, with brave discourse by the way, rode to Woolwich, where we eat
and drank at Mr. Peat's, and discoursed of many businesses, and put in
practice my new way of the Call-book, which will be of great use. Here,
having staid a good while, we got up again and brought night home with
us and foul weather. So over to Whitehall to his chamber, whither my boy
came, who had staid in St. James's Park by my mistake all day, looking
for me. Thence took my things that I put off to-day, and by coach, being
very wet and cold, on my feet home, and presently shifted myself, and so
had the barber come; and my wife and I to read "Ovid's Metamorphoses,"
which I brought her home from Paul's Churchyard to-night, having called
for it by the way, and so to bed,

23rd. And slept hard till 8 o'clock this morning, and so up and to the
office, where I found Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten come unexpectedly
home last night from Portsmouth, having done the Pay there before we
could have, thought it. Sat all the morning, and at noon home to dinner
with my wife alone, and after dinner sat by the fire, and then up to
make up my accounts with her, and find that my ordinary housekeeping
comes to L7 a month, which is a great deal. By and by comes Dr. Pierce,
who among other things tells me that my Lady Castlemaine's interest at
Court increases, and is more and greater than the Queen's; that she hath
brought in Sir H. Bennet, and Sir Charles Barkeley; but that the queen
is a most good lady, and takes all with the greatest meekness that may
be. He tells me too that Mr. Edward Montagu is quite broke at Court
with his repute and purse; and that he lately was engaged in a quarrell
against my Lord Chesterfield: but that the King did cause it to be
taken up. He tells me, too, that the King is much concerned in the
Chancellor's sickness, and that the Chancellor is as great, he thinks,
as ever he was with the King. He also tells me what the world says of
me, "that Mr. Coventry and I do all the business of the office almost:"
at which I am highly proud. He being gone I fell to business, which
was very great, but got it well over by nine at night, and so home, and
after supper to bed.

24th. Lay pleasantly, talking to my wife, till 8 o'clock, then up and
to Sir W. Batten's to see him and Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes take
coach towards the Pay at Chatham, which they did and I home, and took
money in my pocket to pay many reckonings to-day in the town, as my
bookseller's, and paid at another shop L4 10s. for "Stephens's Thesaurus
Graecae Linguae," given to Paul's School: So to my brother's and
shoemaker, and so to my Lord Crew's, and dined alone with him, and after
dinner much discourse about matters. Upon the whole, I understand there
are great factions at Court, and something he said that did imply a
difference like to be between the King and the Duke, in case the Queen
should not be with child. I understand, about this bastard.

     [James Crofts, son of Charles II. by Lucy Walter, created Duke of
     Monmouth in 1663, Duke of Buccleuch in 1673, when he took the name
     of Scott.]

He says, also, that some great man will be aimed at when Parliament
comes to sit again; I understand, the Chancellor: and that there is
a bill will be brought in, that none that have been in arms for the
Parliament shall be capable of office. And that the Court are weary of
my Lord Albemarle and Chamberlin. He wishes that my Lord Sandwich had
some good occasion to be abroad this summer which is coming on, and that
my Lord Hinchingbroke were well married, and Sydney had some place at
Court. He pities the poor ministers that are put out, to whom, he says,
the King is beholden for his coming in, and that if any such thing had
been foreseen he had never come in. After this, and much other discourse
of the sea, and breeding young gentlemen to the sea, I went away, and
homeward, met Mr. Creed at my bookseller's in Paul's Church-yard, who
takes it ill my letter last night to Mr. Povy, wherein I accuse him of
the neglect of the Tangier boats, in which I must confess I did not do
altogether like a friend; but however it was truth, and I must own it to
be so, though I fall wholly out with him for it. Thence home and to my
office alone to do business, and read over half of Mr. Bland's discourse
concerning Trade, which (he being no scholler and so knows not the rules
of writing orderly) is very good. So home to supper and to bed, my wife
not being well.... This evening Mr. Gauden sent me, against Christmas,
a great chine of beef and three dozen of tongues. I did give 5s. to the
man that brought it, and half-a-crown to the porters. This day also
the parish-clerk brought the general bill of mortality, which cost me
half-a-crown more.

     [The Bills of Mortality for London were first compiled by order of
     Thomas Cromwell about 1538, and the keeping of them was commenced by
     the Company of Parish Clerks in the great plague year of 1593.  The
     bills were issued weekly from 1603.  The charter of the Parish
     Clerks' Company (1611) directs that "each parish clerk shall bring
     to the Clerks' Hall weekly a note of all christenings and burials."
     Charles I. in 1636 granted permission to the Parish Clerks to have a
     printing press and employ a printer in their hall for the purpose of
     printing their weekly bills.]

25th (Christmas Day). Up pretty early, leaving my wife not well in
bed, and with my boy walked, it being a most brave cold and dry frosty
morning, and had a pleasant walk to White Hall, where I intended to have
received the Communion with the family, but I came a little too late.
So I walked up into the house and spent my time looking over pictures,
particularly the ships in King Henry the VIIIth's Voyage to Bullen;

     [Boulogne.  These pictures were given by George III. to the Society
     of Antiquaries, who in return presented to the king a set of Thomas
     Hearne's works, on large paper.  The pictures were reclaimed by
     George IV., and are now at Hampton Court.  They were exhibited in
     the Tudor Exhibition, 1890.]

marking the great difference between their build then and now. By and by
down to the chappell again where Bishopp Morley preached upon the song
of the Angels, "Glory to God on high, on earth peace, and good will
towards men." Methought he made but a poor sermon, but long, and
reprehending the mistaken jollity of the Court for the true joy that
shall and ought to be on these days, he particularized concerning their
excess in plays and gaming, saying that he whose office it is to keep
the gamesters in order and within bounds, serves but for a second rather
in a duell, meaning the groom-porter. Upon which it was worth observing
how far they are come from taking the reprehensions of a bishopp
seriously, that they all laugh in the chappell when he reflected on
their ill actions and courses. He did much press us to joy in these
publique days of joy, and to hospitality. But one that stood by
whispered in my ear that the Bishopp himself do not spend one groat to
the poor himself. The sermon done, a good anthem followed, with vialls,
and then the King came down to receive the Sacrament. But I staid not,
but calling my boy from my Lord's lodgings, and giving Sarah some good
advice, by my Lord's order, to be sober and look after the house, I
walked home again with great pleasure, and there dined by my wife's
bed-side with great content, having a mess of brave plum-porridge

     [The national Christmas dish of plum pudding is a modern evolution
     from plum porridge, which was probably similar to the dish still
     produced at Windsor Castle.]

and a roasted pullet for dinner, and I sent for a mince-pie abroad, my
wife not being well to make any herself yet. After dinner sat talking a
good while with her, her [pain] being become less, and then to see Sir
W. Pen a little, and so to my office, practising arithmetique alone and
making an end of last night's book with great content till eleven at
night, and so home to supper and to bed.

26th. Up, my wife to the making of Christmas pies all day, being now
pretty well again, and I abroad to several places about some businesses,
among others bought a bake-pan in Newgate Market, and sent it home,
it cost me 16s. So to Dr. Williams, but he is out of town, then to the
Wardrobe. Hither come Mr. Battersby; and we falling into a discourse of
a new book of drollery in verse called Hudebras,

     [The first edition of Butler's "Hudibras" is dated 1663, and it
     probably had only been published a few days when Pepys bought it and
     sold it at a loss.  He subsequently endeavoured to appreciate the
     work, but was not successful.  The edition in the Pepysian Library
     is dated 1689.]

I would needs go find it out, and met with it at the Temple: cost me 2s.
6d. But when I came to read it, it is so silly an abuse of the Presbyter
Knight going to the warrs, that I am ashamed of it; and by and by
meeting at Mr. Townsend's at dinner, I sold it to him for 18d. Here we
dined with many tradesmen that belong to the Wardrobe, but I was weary
soon of their company, and broke up dinner as soon as I could, and away,
with the greatest reluctancy and dispute (two or three times my reason
stopping my sense and I would go back again) within myself, to the
Duke's house and saw "The Villaine," which I ought not to do without
my wife, but that my time is now out that I did undertake it for. But,
Lord! to consider how my natural desire is to pleasure, which God be
praised that he has given me the power by my late oaths to curb so well
as I have done, and will do again after two or three plays more. Here I
was better pleased with the play than I was at first, understanding
the design better than I did. Here I saw Gosnell and her sister at a
distance, and could have found it in my heart to have accosted them, but
thought not prudent. But I watched their going out and found that they
came, she, her sister and another woman, alone, without any man, and did
go over the fields a foot. I find that I have an inclination to have her
come again, though it is most against my interest either of profit or
content of mind, other than for their singing. Home on foot, in my way
calling at Mr. Rawlinson's and drinking only a cup of ale there. He
tells me my uncle has ended his purchase, which cost him L4,500, and how
my uncle do express his trouble that he has with his wife's relations,
but I understand his great intentions are for the Wights that hang upon
him and by whose advice this estate is bought. Thence home, and found my
wife busy among her pies, but angry for some saucy words that her mayde
Jane has given her, which I will not allow of, and therefore will give
her warning to be gone. As also we are both displeased for some slight
words that Sarah, now at Sir W. Pen's, hath spoke of us, but it is no
matter. We shall endeavour to joyne the lion's skin to the fox's tail.
So to my office alone a while, and then home to my study and supper and
bed. Being also vexed at my boy for his staying playing abroad when
he is sent of errands, so that I have sent him to-night to see whether
their country carrier be in town or no, for I am resolved to keep him no
more.

27th. Up, and while I am dressing I sent for my boy's brother, William,
that lives in town here as a groom, to whom and their sister Jane I told
my resolution to keep the boy no longer. So upon the whole they desire
to have him stay a week longer, and then he shall go. So to the office,
and there Mr. Coventry and I sat till noon, and then I stept to the
Exchange, and so home to dinner, and after dinner with my wife to the
Duke's Theatre, and saw the second part of "Rhodes," done with the new
Roxalana; which do it rather better in all respects for person, voice,
and judgment, then the first Roxalana. Home with great content with my
wife, not so well pleased with the company at the house to-day, which
was full of citizens, there hardly being a gentleman or woman in the
house; a couple of pretty ladies by us that made sport in it, being
jostled and crowded by prentices. So home, and I to my study making up
my monthly accounts, which is now fallen again to L630 or thereabouts,
which not long since was L680, at which I am sorry, but I trust in God I
shall get it up again, and in the meantime will live sparingly. So home
to supper and to bed.

28th (Lord's day). Up and, with my wife to church, and coming out, went
out both before my Lady Batten, he not being there, which I believe
will vex her. After dinner my wife to church again, and I to the French
church, where I heard an old man make a tedious, long sermon, till they
were fain to light candles to baptize the children by. So homewards,
meeting my brother Tom, but spoke but little with him, and calling also
at my uncle Wight's, but met him and her going forth, and so I went
directly home, and there fell to the renewing my last year's oaths,
whereby it has pleased God so much to better myself and practise, and so
down to supper, and then prayers and bed.

29th. Up and walked to Whitehall, where the Duke and Mr. Coventry being
gone forth I went to Westminster Hall, where I staid reading at Mrs.
Mitchell's shop, and sent for half a pint of sack for her. Here she told
me what I heard not of before, the strange burning of Mr. De Laun,
a merchant's house in Loathbury, and his lady (Sir Thomas Allen's
daughter) and her whole family; not one thing, dog nor cat, escaping;
nor any of the neighbours almost hearing of it till the house was quite
down and burnt. How this should come to pass, God knows, but a most
strange thing it is! Hither came Jack Spicer to me, and I took him to
the Swan, where Mr. Herbert did give me my breakfast of cold chine of
pork; and here Spicer and I talked of Exchequer matters, and how the
Lord Treasurer' hath now ordered all monies to be brought into the
Exchequer, and hath settled the King's revenue, and given to every
general expence proper assignments; to the Navy L200,000 and odd. He
also told me of the great vast trade of the goldsmiths in supplying the
King with money at dear rates. Thence to White Hall, and got up to the
top gallerys in the Banquetting House, to see the audience of the Russia
Embassadors; which [took place] after long waiting and fear of the
falling of the gallery (it being so full, and part of it being parted
from the rest, for nobody to come up merely from the weakness thereof):
and very handsome it was. After they were come in, I went down and got
through the croude almost as high as the King and the Embassadors,
where I saw all the presents, being rich furs, hawks, carpets, cloths of
tissue, and sea-horse teeth. The King took two or three hawks upon his
fist, having a glove on, wrought with gold, given him for the purpose.
The son of one of the Embassadors was in the richest suit for pearl and
tissue, that ever I did see, or shall, I believe. After they and all the
company had kissed the King's hand, then the three Embassadors and the
son, and no more, did kiss the Queen's. One thing more I did observe,
that the chief Embassador did carry up his master's letters in state
before him on high; and as soon as he had delivered them, he did fall
down to the ground and lay there a great while. After all was done, the
company broke up; and I spent a little while walking up and down the
gallery seeing the ladies, the two Queens, and the Duke of Monmouth with
his little mistress, which is very little, and like my brother-in-law's
wife. So with Mr. Creed to the Harp and Ball, and there meeting with Mr.
How, Goodgroom, and young Coleman, did drink and talk with them, and
I have almost found out a young gentlewoman for my turn, to wait on my
wife, of good family and that can sing. Thence I went away, and
getting a coach went home and sat late talking with my wife about our
entertaining Dr. Clerke's lady and Mrs. Pierce shortly, being in great
pain that my wife hath never a winter gown, being almost ashamed of
it, that she should be seen in a taffeta one; when all the world wears
moyre;--[By moyre is meant mohair.-B.]--so to prayers and to bed, but
we could not come to any resolution what to do therein, other than to
appear as she is.

30th. Up and to the office, whither Sir W. Pen came, the first time that
he has come downstairs since his late great sickness of the gout. We
with Mr. Coventry sat till noon, then I to the Change ward, to see what
play was there, but I liked none of them, and so homeward, and calling
in at Mr. Rawlinson's, where he stopped me to dine with him and two East
India officers of ships and Howell our turner. With the officers I had
good discourse, particularly of the people at the Cape of Good Hope, of
whom they of their own knowledge do tell me these one or two things: viz
.... that they never sleep lying, but always sitting upon the ground,
that their speech is not so articulate as ours, but yet [they]
understand one another well, that they paint themselves all over with
the grease the Dutch sell them (who have a fort there) and soot. After
dinner drinking five or six glasses of wine, which liberty I now take
till I begin my oath again, I went home and took my wife into coach, and
carried her to Westminster; there visited Mrs. Ferrer, and staid talking
with her a good while, there being a little, proud, ugly, talking lady
there, that was much crying up the Queen-Mother's Court at Somerset
House above our own Queen's; there being before no allowance of laughing
and the mirth that is at the other's; and indeed it is observed that
the greatest Court now-a-days is there. Thence to White Hall, where I
carried my wife to see the Queen in her presence-chamber; and the maydes
of honour and the young Duke of Monmouth playing at cards. Some of
them, and but a few, were very pretty; though all well dressed in velvet
gowns. Thence to my Lord's lodgings, where Mrs. Sarah did make us my
Lord's bed, and Mr. Creed I being sent for, sat playing at cards till it
was late, and so good night, and with great pleasure to bed.

31st. Lay pretty long in bed, and then I up and to Westminster Hall, and
so to the Swan, sending for Mr. W. Bowyer, and there drank my morning
draft, and had some of his simple discourse. Among other things he tells
me how the difference comes between his fair cozen Butler and Collonell
Dillon, upon his opening letters of her brother's from Ireland,
complaining of his knavery, and forging others to the contrary; and so
they are long ago quite broke off. Thence to a barber's and so to my
wife, and at noon took her to Mrs. Pierces by invitacion to dinner,
where there came Dr. Clerke and his wife and sister and Mr. Knight,
chief chyrurgeon to the King and his wife. We were pretty merry, the two
men being excellent company, but I confess I am wedded from the opinion
either of Mrs. Pierces beauty upon discovery of her naked neck to-day,
being undrest when we came in, or of Mrs. Clerke's genius, which I so
much admired, I finding her to be so conceited and fantastique in her
dress this day and carriage, though the truth is, witty enough. After
dinner with much ado the doctor and I got away to follow our business
for a while, he to his patients and I to the Tangier Committee, where
the Duke of York was, and we staid at it a good while, and thence in
order to the despatch of the boats and provisions for Tangier away, Mr.
Povy, in his coach, carried Mr. Gauden and I into London to Mr. Bland's,
the merchant, where we staid discoursing upon the reason of the delay
of the going away of these things a great while. Then to eat a dish
of anchovies, and drink wine and syder, and very merry, but above all
things pleased to hear Mrs. Bland talk like a merchant in her husband's
business very well, and it seems she do understand it and perform
a great deal. Thence merry back, Mr. Povy and, I to White Hall; he
carrying me thither on purpose to carry me into the ball this night
before the King. All the way he talking very ingenuously, and I find
him a fine gentleman, and one that loves to live nobly and neatly, as I
perceive by his discourse of his house, pictures, and horses. He brought
me first to the Duke's chamber, where I saw him and the Duchess at
supper; and thence into the room where the ball was to be, crammed with
fine ladies, the greatest of the Court. By and by comes the King and
Queen, the Duke and Duchess, and all the great ones: and after seating
themselves, the King takes out the Duchess of York; and the Duke, the
Duchess of Buckingham; the Duke of Monmouth, my Lady Castlemaine; and so
other lords other ladies: and they danced the Bransle.

     "Branle.  Espece de danse de plusieurs personnes, qui se tiennent
     par la main, et qui se menent tour-a-tour. "Dictionnaire de
     l'Academie.  A country dance mentioned by Shakespeare and other
     dramatists under the form of brawl, which word continued to be used
     in the eighteenth century.

                    "My grave Lord Keeper led the brawls;
                    The seals and maces danced before him."
                                             Gray, 'A Long Story.'

After that, the King led a lady a single Coranto--[swift and
lively]--and then the rest of the lords, one after another, other ladies
very noble it was, and great pleasure to see. Then to country dances;
the King leading the first, which he called for; which was, says he,
"Cuckolds all awry," the old dance of England. Of the ladies that
danced, the Duke of Monmouth's mistress, and my Lady Castlemaine, and
a daughter of Sir Harry de Vicke's, were the best. The manner was, when
the King dances, all the ladies in the room, and the Queen herself,
stand up: and indeed he dances rarely, and much better that the Duke
of York. Having staid here as long as I thought fit, to my infinite
content, it being the greatest pleasure I could wish now to see at
Court, I went out, leaving them dancing, and to Mrs. Pierces, where I
found the company had staid very long for my coming, but all gone but my
wife, and so I took her home by coach and so to my Lord's again, where
after some supper to bed, very weary and in a little pain from my riding
a little uneasily to-night in the coach.

Thus ends this year with great mirth to me and my wife: Our condition
being thus:--we are at present spending a night or two at my Lord's
lodgings at White Hall. Our home at the Navy-office, which is and hath a
pretty while been in good condition, finished and made very convenient.
My purse is worth about L650, besides my goods of all sorts, which
yet might have been more but for my late layings out upon my house and
public assessment, and yet would not have been so much if I had not
lived a very orderly life all this year by virtue of the oaths that God
put into my heart to take against wine, plays, and other expenses, and
to observe for these last twelve months, and which I am now going to
renew, I under God owing my present content thereunto. My family is
myself and wife, William, my clerk; Jane, my wife's upper mayde, but, I
think, growing proud and negligent upon it: we must part, which troubles
me; Susan, our cook-mayde, a pretty willing wench, but no good cook; and
Wayneman, my boy, who I am now turning away for his naughty tricks. We
have had from the beginning our healths to this day very well, blessed
be God! Our late mayde Sarah going from us (though put away by us) to
live with Sir W. Pen do trouble me, though I love the wench, so that
we do make ourselves a little strange to him and his family for it, and
resolve to do so. The same we are for other reasons to my Lady Batten
and hers. We have lately had it in our thoughts, and I can hardly bring
myself off of it, since Mrs. Gosnell cannot be with us, to find out
another to be in the quality of a woman to my wife that can sing or
dance, and yet finding it hard to save anything at the year's end as I
now live, I think I shall not be such a fool till I am more warm in my
purse, besides my oath of entering into no such expenses till I am worth
L1000. By my last year's diligence in my office, blessed be God! I am
come to a good degree of knowledge therein; and am acknowledged so by
all--the world, even the Duke himself, to whom I have a good access and
by that, and my being Commissioner with him for Tangier, he takes
much notice of me; and I doubt not but, by the continuance of the same
endeavours, I shall in a little time come to be a man much taken notice
of in the world, specially being come to so great an esteem with Mr.
Coventry. The only weight that lies heavy upon my mind is the ending
the business with my uncle Thomas about my-dead uncle's estate, which
is very ill on our side, and I fear when all is done I must be forced to
maintain my father myself, or spare a good deal towards it out of my own
purse, which will be a very great pull back to me in my fortune. But I
must be contented and bring it to an issue one way or other. Publique
matters stand thus: The King is bringing, as is said, his family, and
Navy, and all other his charges, to a less expence. In the mean time,
himself following his pleasures more than with good advice he would do;
at least, to be seen to all the world to do so. His dalliance with my
Lady Castlemaine being publique, every day, to his great reproach; and
his favouring of none at Court so much as those that are the confidants
of his pleasure, as Sir H. Bennet and Sir Charles Barkeley; which, good
God! put it into his heart to mend, before he makes himself too much
contemned by his people for it! The Duke of Monmouth is in so great
splendour at Court, and so dandled by the King, that some doubt, if the
King should have no child by the Queen (which there is yet no appearance
of), whether he would not be acknowledged for a lawful son; and that
there will be a difference follow upon it between the Duke of York and
him; which God prevent! My Lord Chancellor is threatened by people to be
questioned, the next sitting of the Parliament, by some spirits that do
not love to see him so great: but certainly he is a good servant to the
King. The Queen-Mother is said to keep too great a Court now; and her
being married to my Lord St. Albans is commonly talked of; and that they
had a daughter between them in France, how true, God knows. The Bishopps
are high, and go on without any diffidence in pressing uniformity; and
the Presbyters seem silent in it, and either conform or lay down, though
without doubt they expect a turn, and would be glad these endeavours of
the other Fanatiques would take effect; there having been a plot lately
found, for which four have been publickly tried at the Old Bayley and
hanged. My Lord Sandwich is still in good esteem, and now keeping his
Christmas in the country; and I in good esteem, I think, as any man can
be, with him. Mr. Moore is very sickly, and I doubt will hardly get over
his late fit of sickness, that still hangs on him. In fine, for the good
condition of myself, wife, family, and estate, in the great degree that
it is, and for the public state of the nation, so quiett as it is, the
Lord God be praised!

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS FOR DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1962 N.S.:

     Afeard of being louzy
     Afeard that my Lady Castlemaine will keep still with the King
     Afraid now to bring in any accounts for journeys
     After taking leave of my wife, which we could hardly do kindly
     Agreed at L3 a year (she would not serve under)
     All may see how slippery places all courtiers stand in
     All made much worse in their report among people than they are
     All the fleas came to him and not to me
     Aptness I have to be troubled at any thing that crosses me
     As much his friend as his interest will let him
     Badge of slavery upon the whole people (taxes)
     Bewailing the vanity and disorders of the age
     Bowling-ally (where lords and ladies are now at bowles)
     Cannot but be with the workmen to see things done to my mind
     Care not for his commands, and especially on Sundays
     Catched cold yesterday by putting off my stockings
     Charles Barkeley's greatness is only his being pimp to the King
     Comb my head clean, which I found so foul with powdering
     Command of an army is not beholden to any body to make him King
     Deliver her from the hereditary curse of child-bearing
     Did much insist upon the sin of adultery
     Discontented at the pride and luxury of the Court
     Discoursed much against a man's lying with his wife in Lent
     Enjoy some degree of pleasure now that we have health, money
     Fanatiques do say that the end of the world is at hand
     Fear she should prove honest and refuse and then tell my wife
     Fearing that Sarah would continue ill, wife and I removed
     God forgive me! what a mind I had to her
     Goldsmiths in supplying the King with money at dear rates
     Hard matter to settle to business after so much leisure
     Hate in others, and more in myself, to be careless of keys
     He made but a poor sermon, but long
     Holes for me to see from my closet into the great office
     Hopes to have had a bout with her before she had gone
     I fear that it must be as it can, and not as I would
     I know not yet what that is, and am ashamed to ask
     Joyne the lion's skin to the fox's tail
     King dined at my Lady Castlemaine's, and supped, every day
     Lady Castlemaine do speak of going to lie in at Hampton Court
     Lady Castlemaine is still as great with the King
     Lady Castlemaine's interest at Court increases
     Last of a great many Presbyterian ministers
     Laughing and jeering at every thing that looks strange
     Let me blood, about sixteen ounces, I being exceedingly full
     Lord! to see the absurd nature of Englishmen
     Lust and wicked lives of the nuns heretofore in England
     Lying a great while talking and sporting in bed with my wife
     Muske Millon
     My Jane's cutting off a carpenter's long mustacho
     My first attempt being to learn the multiplication-table
     No good by taking notice of it, for the present she forbears
     Only wind do now and then torment me...  extremely
     Parliament hath voted 2s. per annum for every chimney in England
     Parson is a cunning fellow he is as any of his coat
     Peruques of hair, as the fashion now is for ladies to wear
     Pleasures are not sweet to me now in the very enjoying of them
     Raising of our roofs higher to enlarge our houses
     See her look dejectedly and slighted by people already
     See a dead man lie floating upon the waters
     Sermon; but, it being a Presbyterian one, it was so long
     She so cruel a hypocrite that she can cry when she pleases
     She also washed my feet in a bath of herbs, and so to bed
     Short of what I expected, as for the most part it do fall out
     Sir W. Pen did it like a base raskall, and so I shall remember
     Slight answer, at which I did give him two boxes on the ears
     So good a nature that he cannot deny any thing
     Sorry to hear that Sir W. Pen's maid Betty was gone away
     Strange things he has been found guilty of, not fit to name
     Then to church to a tedious sermon
     They were not occupiers, but occupied (women)
     To Mr. Holliard's in the morning, thinking to be let blood
     Trumpets were brought under the scaffold that he not be heard
     Up and took physique, but such as to go abroad with
     Up early and took my physique; it wrought all the morning well
     When the candle is going out, how they bawl and dispute
     Whether she suspected anything or no I know not
     Whether he would have me go to law or arbitracon with him
     Will upon occasion serve for a fine withdrawing room
     Will put Madam Castlemaine's nose out of joynt
     With my whip did whip him till I was not able to stir





End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1662, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1662 ***

***** This file should be named 4138.txt or 4138.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/3/4138/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
