Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, May/June 1663, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, May/June 1663

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4141]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               MAY & JUNE
                                  1663

May 1st.  Up betimes and my father with me, and he and I all the morning
and Will Stankes private, in my wife's closet above, settling our matters
concerning our Brampton estate, &c., and I find that there will be, after
all debts paid within L100, L50 per annum clear coming towards my father's
maintenance, besides L25 per annum annuities to my Uncle Thomas and Aunt
Perkins.  Of which, though I was in my mind glad, yet thought it not fit
to let my father know it thoroughly, but after he had gone out to visit my
uncle Thomas and brought him to dinner with him, and after dinner I got my
father, brother Tom, and myself together, I did make the business worse to
them, and did promise L20 out of my own purse to make it L50 a year to my
father, propounding that Stortlow may be sold to pay L200 for his
satisfaction therein and the rest to go towards payment of debts and
legacies.  The truth is I am fearful lest my father should die before
debts are paid, and then the land goes to Tom and the burden of paying all
debts will fall upon the rest of the land.  Not that I would do my brother
any real hurt.  I advised my father to good husbandry and to living within
the compass of L50 a year, and all in such kind words, as not only made,
them but myself to weep, and I hope it will have a good effect.  That
being done, and all things agreed on, we went down, and after a glass of
wine we all took horse, and I, upon a horse hired of Mr. Game, saw him out
of London, at the end of Bishopsgate Street, and so I turned and rode,
with some trouble, through the fields, and then Holborn, &c., towards Hide
Park, whither all the world, I think, are going, and in my going, almost
thither, met W. Howe coming galloping upon a little crop black nag; it
seems one that was taken in some ground of my Lord's, by some mischance
being left by his master, a thief; this horse being found with black cloth
ears on, and a false mayne, having none of his own; and I back again with
him to the Chequer, at Charing Cross, and there put up my own dull jade,
and by his advice saddled a delicate stone-horse of Captain Ferrers's, and
with that rid in state to the Park, where none better mounted than I
almost, but being in a throng of horses, seeing the King's riders showing
tricks with their managed horses, which were very strange, my stone-horse
was very troublesome, and begun to, fight with other horses, to the
dangering him and myself, and with much ado I got out, and kept myself out
of harm's way..  Here I saw nothing good, neither the King, nor my Lady
Castlemaine, nor any great ladies or beauties being there, there being
more pleasure a great deal at an ordinary day; or else those few good
faces that there were choked up with the many bad ones, there being people
of all sorts in coaches there, to some thousands, I think.  Going thither
in the highway, just by the Park gate, I met a boy in a sculler boat,
carried by a dozen people at least, rowing as hard as he could drive, it
seems upon some wager.  By and by, about seven or eight o'clock, homeward;
and changing my horse again, I rode home, coaches going in great crowds to
the further end of the town almost.  In my way, in Leadenhall Street,
there was morris-dancing which I have not seen a great while.  So set my
horse up at Game's, paying 5s. for him.  And so home to see Sir J. Minnes,
who is well again, and after staying talking with him awhile, I took leave
and went to hear Mrs. Turner's daughter, at whose house Sir J. Minnes
lies, play on the harpsicon; but, Lord! it was enough to make any man sick
to hear her; yet I was forced to commend her highly.  So home to supper
and to bed, Ashwell playing upon the tryangle very well before I went to
bed.  This day Captain Grove sent me a side of pork, which was the oddest
present, sure, that was ever made any man; and the next, I remember I told
my wife, I believe would be a pound of candles, or a shoulder of mutton;
but the fellow do it in kindness, and is one I am beholden to.  So to bed
very weary, and a little galled for lack of riding, praying to God for a
good journey to my father, of whom I am afeard, he being so lately ill of
his pain.

2nd.  Being weary last night, I slept till almost seven o'clock, a thing I
have not done many a day.  So up and to my office (being come to some
angry words with my wife about neglecting the keeping of the house clean,
I calling her beggar, and she me pricklouse, which vexed me) and there all
the morning.  So to the Exchange and then home to dinner, and very merry
and well pleased with my wife, and so to the office again, where we met
extraordinary upon drawing up the debts of the Navy to my Lord Treasurer.
So rose and up to Sir W. Pen to drink a glass of bad syder in his new far
low dining room, which is very noble, and so home, where Captain Ferrers
and his lady are come to see my wife, he being to go the beginning of next
week to France to sea and I think to fetch over my young Lord
Hinchinbroke.  They being gone I to my office to write letters by the
post, and so home to supper and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day).  Up before 5 o'clock and alone at setting my Brampton
papers to rights according to my father's and my computation and
resolution the other day to my good content, I finding that there will be
clear saved to us L50 per annum, only a debt of it may be L100.  So made
myself ready and to church, where Sir W. Pen showed me the young lady
which young Dawes, that sits in the new corner-pew in the church, hath
stole away from Sir Andrew Rickard, her guardian, worth L1000 per annum
present, good land, and some money, and a very well-bred and handsome
lady: he, I doubt, but a simple fellow.  However, he got this good luck to
get her, which methinks I could envy him with all my heart.  Home to
dinner with my wife, who not being very well did not dress herself but
staid at home all day, and so I to church in the afternoon and so home
again, and up to teach Ashwell the grounds of time and other things on the
tryangle, and made her take out a Psalm very well, she having a good ear
and hand.  And so a while to my office, and then home to supper and
prayers, to bed, my wife and I having a little falling out because I would
not leave my discourse below with her and Ashwell to go up and talk with
her alone upon something she has to say.  She reproached me but I had
rather talk with any body than her, by which I find I think she is jealous
of my freedom with Ashwell, which I must avoid giving occasion of.

4th.  Up betimes and to setting my Brampton papers in order and looking
over my wardrobe against summer, and laying things in order to send to my
brother to alter.  By and by took boat intending to have gone down to
Woolwich, but seeing I could not get back time enough to dinner, I
returned and home.  Whither by and by the dancing-master' came, whom
standing by, seeing him instructing my wife, when he had done with her, he
would needs have me try the steps of a coranto, and what with his desire
and my wife's importunity, I did begin, and then was obliged to give him
entry-money 10s., and am become his scholler.  The truth is, I think it a
thing very useful for a gentleman, and sometimes I may have occasion of
using it, and though it cost me what I am heartily sorry it should,
besides that I must by my oath give half as much more to the poor, yet I
am resolved to get it up some other way, and then it will not be above a
month or two in a year.  So though it be against my stomach yet I will try
it a little while; if I see it comes to any great inconvenience or charge
I will fling it off.  After I had begun with the steps of half a coranto,
which I think I shall learn well enough, he went away, and we to dinner,
and by and by out by coach, and set my wife down at my Lord Crew's, going
to see my Lady Jem. Montagu, who is lately come to town, and I to St.
James's; where Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Pen and I staid a good while for the
Duke's coming in, but not coming, we walked to White Hall; and meeting the
King, we followed him into the Park, where Mr. Coventry and he talked of
building a new yacht, which the King is resolved to have built out of his
privy purse, he having some contrivance of his own.  The talk being done,
we fell off to White Hall, leaving the King in the Park, and going back,
met the Duke going towards St. James's to meet us.  So he turned back
again, and to his closett at White Hall; and there, my Lord Sandwich
present, we did our weekly errand, and so broke up; and I down into the
garden with my Lord Sandwich (after we had sat an hour at the Tangier
Committee); and after talking largely of his own businesses, we begun to
talk how matters are at Court: and though he did not flatly tell me any
such thing, yet I do suspect that all is not kind between the King and the
Duke, and that the King's fondness to the little Duke do occasion it; and
it may be that there is some fear of his being made heir to the Crown.
But this my Lord did not tell me, but is my guess only; and that my Lord
Chancellor is without doubt falling past hopes.  He being gone to Chelsey
by coach I to his lodgings, where my wife staid for me, and she from
thence to see Mrs. Pierce and called me at Whitehall stairs (where I went
before by land to know whether there was any play at Court to-night) and
there being none she and I to Mr. Creed to the Exchange, where she bought
something, and from thence by water to White Fryars, and wife to see Mrs.
Turner, and then came to me at my brother's, where I did give him order
about my summer clothes, and so home by coach, and after supper to bed to
my wife, with whom I have not lain since I used to lie with my father till
to-night.

5th.  Up betimes and to my office, and there busy all the morning, among
other things walked a good while up and down with Sir J. Minnes, he
telling many old stories of the Navy, and of the state of the Navy at the
beginning of the late troubles, and I am troubled at my heart to think,
and shall hereafter cease to wonder, at the bad success of the King's
cause, when such a knave as he (if it be true what he says) had the whole
management of the fleet, and the design of putting out of my Lord Warwick,
and carrying the fleet to the King, wherein he failed most fatally to the
King's ruin.  Dined at home, and after dinner up to try my dance, and so
to the office again, where we sat all the afternoon.  In the evening Deane
of Woolwich went home with me and showed me the use of a little sliding
ruler, less than that I bought the other day, which is the same with that,
but more portable; however I did not seem to understand or even to have
seen anything of it before, but I find him an ingenious fellow, and a good
servant in his place to the King.  Thence to my office busy writing
letters, and then came Sir W. Warren, staying for a letter in his business
by the post, and while that was writing he and I talked about merchandise,
trade, and getting of money.  I made it my business to enquire what way
there is for a man bred like me to come to understand anything of trade.
He did most discretely answer me in all things, shewing me the danger for
me to meddle either in ships or merchandise of any sort or common stocks,
but what I have to keep at interest, which is a good, quiett, and easy
profit, and once in a little while something offers that with ready money
you may make use of money to good profit.  Wherein I concur much with him,
and parted late with great pleasure and content in his discourse, and so
home to supper and to bed. It has been this afternoon very hot and this
evening also, and about 11 at night going to bed it fell a-thundering and
lightening, the greatest flashes enlightening the whole body of the yard,
that ever I saw in my life.

6th.  Up betimes and to my office a good while at my new rulers, then to
business, and towards noon to the Exchange with Creed, where we met with
Sir J. Minnes coming in his coach from Westminster, who tells us, in great
heat, that, by God, the Parliament will make mad work; that they will
render all men incapable of any military or civil employment that have
borne arms in the late troubles against the King, excepting some persons;
which, if it be so, as I hope it is not, will give great cause of
discontent, and I doubt will have but bad effects.  I left them at the
Exchange and walked to Paul's Churchyard to look upon a book or two, and
so back, and thence to the Trinity House, and there dined, where, among
other discourse worth hearing among the old seamen, they tell us that they
have catched often in Greenland in fishing whales with the iron grapnells
that had formerly been struck into their bodies covered over with fat;
that they have had eleven hogsheads of oyle out of the tongue of a whale.
Thence after dinner home to my office, and there busy till the evening.
Then home and to supper, and while at supper comes Mr. Pembleton, and
after supper we up to our dancing room and there danced three or four
country dances, and after that a practice of my coranto I began with him
the other day, and I begin to think that I shall be able to do something
at it in time.  Late and merry at it, and so weary to bed.

7th.  Up betimes and to my office awhile, and then by water with my wife,
leaving her at the new Exchange, and I to see Dr. Williams, and spoke with
him about my business with Tom Trice, and so to my brother's, who I find
very careful now-a-days, more than ordinary in his business and like to do
well.  From thence to Westminster, and there up and down from the Hall to
the Lobby, the Parliament sitting.  Sir Thomas Crew this day tells me that
the Queen, hearing that there was L40,000 per annum brought into her
account among the other expences of the Crown to the Committee of
Parliament, she took order to let them know that she hath yet for the
payment of her whole family received but L4,000, which is a notable act of
spirit, and I believe is true.  So by coach to my Lord Crew's, and there
dined with him.  He tells me of the order the House of Commons have made
for the drawing an Act for the rendering none capable of preferment or
employment in the State, but who have been loyall and constant to the King
and Church; which will be fatal to a great many, and makes me doubt lest I
myself, with all my innocence during the late times, should be brought in,
being employed in the Exchequer; but, I hope, God will provide for me.
This day the new Theatre Royal begins to act with scenes the Humourous
Lieutenant, but I have not time to see it, nor could stay to see my Lady
Jemimah lately come to town, and who was here in the house, but dined
above with her grandmother.  But taking my wife at my brother's home by
coach, and the officers being at Deptford at a Pay we had no office, but I
took my wife by water and so spent the evening, and so home with great
pleasure to supper, and then to bed.

8th.  Up very early and to my office, there preparing letters to my father
of great import in the settling of our affairs, and putting him upon a way
[of] good husbandry, I promising to make out of my own purse him up to L50
per annum, till either by my uncle Thomas's death or the fall of the
Wardrobe place he be otherwise provided.  That done I by water to the
Strand, and there viewed the Queen-Mother's works at Somersett House, and
thence to the new playhouse, but could not get in to see it.  So to visit
my Lady Jemimah, who is grown much since I saw her; but lacks mightily to
be brought into the fashion of the court to set her off: Thence to the
Temple, and there sat till one o'clock reading at Playford's in Dr.
Usher's 'Body of Divinity' his discourse of the Scripture, which is as
much, I believe, as is anywhere said by any man, but yet there is room to
cavill, if a man would use no faith to the tradition of the Church in
which he is born, which I think to be as good an argument as most is
brought for many things, and it may be for that among others.  Thence to
my brother's, and there took up my wife and Ashwell to the Theatre Royall,
being the second day of its being opened. The house is made with
extraordinary good contrivance, and yet hath some faults, as the
narrowness of the passages in and out of the Pitt, and the distance from
the stage to the boxes, which I am confident cannot hear; but for all
other things it is well, only, above all, the musique being below, and
most of it sounding under the very stage, there is no hearing of the bases
at all, nor very well of the trebles, which sure must be mended.  The play
was "The Humerous Lieutenant," a play that hath little good in it, nor
much in the very part which, by the King's command, Lacy now acts instead
of Clun.  In the dance, the tall devil's actions was very pretty.  The
play being done, we home by water, having been a little shamed that my
wife and woman were in such a pickle, all the ladies being finer and
better dressed in the pitt than they used, I think, to be.  To my office
to set down this day's passage, and, though my oath against going to plays
do not oblige me against this house, because it was not then in being, yet
believing that at the time my meaning was against all publique houses, I
am resolved to deny myself the liberty of two plays at Court, which are in
arreare to me for the months of March and April, which will more than
countervail this excess, so that this month of May is the first that I
must claim a liberty of going to a Court play according to my oath.  So
home to supper, and at supper comes Pembleton, and afterwards we all up to
dancing till late, and so broke up and to bed, and they say that I am like
to make a dancer.

9th.  Up betimes and to my office, whither sooner than ordinary comes Mr.
Hater desiring to speak a word to me alone, which I was from the disorder
of his countenance amused at, and so the poor man began telling me that by
Providence being the last Lord's day at a meeting of some Friends upon
doing of their duties, they were surprised, and he carried to the Counter,
but afterwards released; however, hearing that Sir W. Batten do hear of
[it,] he thought it good to give me an account of it, lest it might tend
to any prejudice to me.  I was extraordinary surprised with it, and
troubled for him, knowing that now it is out it is impossible for me to
conceal it, or keep him in employment under me without danger to myself.
I cast about all I could, and did give him the best advice I could,
desiring to know if I should promise that he would not for the time to
come commit the same, he told me he desired that I would rather forbear to
promise that, for he durst not do it, whatever God in His providence shall
do with him, and that for my part he did bless God and thank me for all
the love and kindness I have shewed him hitherto.  I could not without
tears in my eyes discourse with him further, but at last did pitch upon
telling the truth of the whole to Mr. Coventry as soon as I could, and to
that end did use means to prevent Sir W. Batten (who came to town last
night) from going to that end to-day, lest he might doe it to Sir G.
Carteret or Mr. Coventry before me; which I did prevail and kept him at
the office all the morning.  At noon dined at home with a heavy heart for
the poor man, and after dinner went out to my brother's, and thence to
Westminster, where at Mr. Jervas's, my old barber, I did try two or three
borders and perriwiggs, meaning to wear one; and yet I have no stomach
[for it,] but that the pains of keeping my hair clean is so great.  He
trimmed me, and at last I parted, but my mind was almost altered from my
first purpose, from the trouble that I foresee will be in wearing them
also.  Thence by water home and to the office, where busy late, and so
home to supper and bed, with my mind much troubled about T. Hater.

10th (Lord's day).  Up betimes, and put on a black cloth suit, with white
lynings under all, as the fashion is to wear, to appear under the
breeches.  So being ready walked to St. James's, where I sat talking with
Mr. Coventry, while he made himself ready, about several businesses of the
Navy, and afterwards, the Duke being gone out, he and I walked to White
Hall together over the Park, I telling him what had happened to Tom Hater,
at which he seems very sorry, but tells me that if it is not made very
publique, it will not be necessary to put him away at present, but give
him good caution for the time to come.  However, he will speak to the Duke
about it and know his pleasure.  Parted with him there, and I walked back
to St. James's, and was there at mass, and was forced in the crowd to
kneel down; and mass being done, to the King's Head ordinary, whither I
sent for Mr. Creed and there we dined, where many Parliament-men; and most
of their talk was about the news from Scotland, that the Bishop of
Galloway was besieged in his house by some woman, and had like to have
been outraged, but I know not how he was secured; which is bad news, and
looks just as it did in the beginning of the late troubles. From thence
they talked of rebellion; and I perceive they make it their great maxime
to be sure to master the City of London, whatever comes of it or from it.
After that to some other discourse, and, among other things, talking of
the way of ordinaries, that it is very convenient, because a man knows
what he hath to pay: one did wish that, among many bad, we could learn two
good things of France, which were that we would not think it below the
gentleman, or person of honour at a tavern, to bargain for his meat before
he eats it; and next, to take no servant without certificate from some
friend or gentleman of his good behaviour and abilities.  Hence with Creed
into St. James's Park, and there walked all the afternoon, and thence on
foot home, and after a little while at my office walked in the garden with
my wife, and so home to supper, and after prayers to bed.  My brother Tom
supped with me, and should have brought my aunt Ellen with him; she was
not free to go abroad.

11th.  Up betimes, and by water to Woolwich on board the Royall James, to
see in what dispatch she is to be carried about to Chatham.  So to the
yard a little, and thence on foot to Greenwich, where going I was set upon
by a great dogg, who got hold of my garters, and might have done me hurt;
but, Lord, to see in what a maze I was, that, having a sword about me, I
never thought of it, or had the heart to make use of it, but might, for
want of that courage, have been worried.  Took water there and home, and
both coming and going did con my lesson on my Ruler to measure timber,
which I think I can well undertake now to do.  At home there being
Pembleton I danced, and I think shall come on to do something in a little
time, and after dinner by coach with Sir W. Pen (setting down his daughter
at Clerkenwell), to St. James's, where we attended the Duke of York: and,
among other things, Sir G. Carteret and I had a great dispute about the
different value of the pieces of eight rated by Mr. Creed at 4s. and 5d.,
and by Pitts at 4s. and 9d., which was the greatest husbandry to the King?
he persisting that the greatest sum was; which is as ridiculous a piece of
ignorance as could be imagined.  However, it is to be argued at the Board,
and reported to the Duke next week; which I shall do with advantage, I
hope.  Thence to the Tangier Committee, where we should have concluded in
sending Captain Cuttance and the rest to Tangier to deliberate upon the
design of the Mole before they begin to work upon it, but there being not
a committee (my Lord intending to be there but was taken up at my Lady
Castlemayne's) I parted and went homeward, after a little discourse with
Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who tells me that my Lady Castlemaine hath now got
lodgings near the King's chamber at Court; and that the other day Dr.
Clerke and he did dissect two bodies, a man and a woman; before the King,
with which the King was highly pleased.  By water and called upon Tom
Trice by appointment with Dr. Williams, but the Dr. did not come, it seems
by T. Trice's desire, not thinking he should be at leisure.  However, in
general we talked of our business, and I do not find that he will come to
any lower terms than L150, which I think I shall not give him but by law,
and so we parted, and I called upon Mr. Crumlum, and did give him the 10s.
remaining, not laid out of the L5 I promised him for the school, with
which he will buy strings, and golden letters upon the books I did give
them.  I sat with him and his wife a great while talking, and she is [a]
pretty woman, never yet with child, and methinks looks as if her mouth
watered now and then upon some of her boys.  Then upon Tom Pepys, the
Turner, desiring his father and his letter to Piggott signifying his
consent to the selling of his land for the paying of us his money, and so
home, and finding Pembleton there we did dance till it was late, and so to
supper and to bed.

12th.  Up between four and five, and after dressing myself then to my
office to prepare business against the afternoon, where all the morning,
and dined at noon at home, where a little angry with my wife for minding
nothing now but the dancing-master, having him come twice a day, which is
a folly.  Again, to my office.  We sat till late, our chief business being
the reconciling the business of the pieces of eight mentioned yesterday
before the Duke of York, wherein I have got the day, and they are all
brought over to what I said, of which I am proud.  Late writing letters,
and so home to supper and to bed.  Here I found Creed staying for me, and
so after supper I staid him all night and lay with me, our great discourse
being the folly of our two doting knights, of which I am ashamed.

13th.  Lay till 6 o'clock and then up, and after a little talk and mirth,
he went away, and I to my office, where busy all the morning, and at noon
home to dinner, and after dinner Pembleton came and I practised.  But,
Lord!  to see how my wife will not be thought to need telling by me or
Ashwell, and yet will plead that she has learnt but a month, which causes
many short fallings out between us.  So to my office, whither one-eyed
Cooper came to see me, and I made him to show me the use of platts, and to
understand the lines, and how to find how lands bear, &c., to my great
content.  Then came Mr. Barrow, storekeeper of Chatham, who tells me many
things, how basely Sir W. Batten has carried himself to him, and in all
things else like a passionate dotard, to the King's great wrong.  God mend
all, for I am sure we are but in an ill condition in the Navy, however the
King is served in other places.  Home to supper, to cards, and to bed.

14th.  Up betimes and put up some things to send to Brampton.  Then abroad
to the Temple, and up and down about business, and met Mr. Moore; and with
him to an alehouse in Holborn; where in discourse he told me that he fears
the King will be tempted to endeavour the setting the Crown upon the
little Duke, which may cause troubles; which God forbid, unless it be his
due!  He told me my Lord do begin to settle to business again, which I am
glad of, for he must not sit out, now he has done his own business by
getting his estate settled, and that the King did send for him the other
day to my Lady Castlemaine's, to play at cards, where he lost L50; for
which I am sorry, though he says my Lord was pleased at it, and said he
would be glad at any time to lose L50 for the King to send for him to
play, which I do not so well like.  Thence home, and after dinner to the
office, where we sat till night, and then made up my papers and letters by
the post, and so home to dance with Pembleton.  This day we received a
baskett from my sister Pall, made by her of paper, which hath a great deal
of labour in it for country innocent work.  After supper to bed, and going
to bed received a letter from Mr. Coventry desiring my coming to him
to-morrow morning, which troubled me to think what the business should be,
fearing it must be some bad news in Tom Hater's business.

15th.  Up betimes and walked to St. James's, where Mr. Coventry being in
bed I walked in the Park, discoursing with the keeper of the Pell Mell,
who was sweeping of it; who told me of what the earth is mixed that do
floor the Mall, and that over all there is cockle-shells powdered, and
spread to keep it fast; which, however, in dry weather, turns to dust and
deads the ball.  Thence to Mr. Coventry; and sitting by his bedside, he
did tell me that he sent for me to discourse upon my Lord Sandwich's
allowances for his several pays, and what his thoughts are concerning his
demands; which he could not take the freedom to do face to face, it being
not so proper as by me: and did give me a most friendly and ingenuous
account of all; telling me how unsafe, at this juncture, while every
man's, and his actions particularly, are descanted upon, it is either for
him to put the Duke upon doing, or my Lord himself to desire anything
extraordinary, 'specially the King having been so bountifull already;
which the world takes notice of even to some repinings.  All which he did
desire me to discourse with my Lord of; which I have undertook to do. We
talked also of our office in general, with which he told me that he was
now-a-days nothing so satisfied as he was wont to be.  I confess I told
him things are ordered in that way that we must of necessity break in a
little time a pieces.  After done with him about these things, he told me
that for Mr. Hater the Duke's word was in short that he found he had a
good servant, an Anabaptist, and unless he did carry himself more to the
scandal of the office, he would bear with his opinion till he heard
further, which do please me very much.  Thence walked to Westminster, and
there up and down in the Hall and the Parliament House all the morning; at
noon by coach to my Lord Crew's, hearing that Lord Sandwich did dine
there; where I told him what had passed between Mr. Coventry and myself;
with which he was contented, though I could perceive not very well
pleased.  And I do believe that my Lord do find some other things go
against his mind in the House; for in the motion made the other day in the
House by my Lord Bruce, that none be capable of employment but such as
have been loyal and constant to the King and Church, the General [Monk]
and my Lord were mentioned to be excepted; and my Lord Bruce did come
since to my Lord, to clear himself that he meant nothing to his prejudice,
nor could it have any such effect if he did mean it.  After discourse with
my Lord; to dinner with him; there dining there my Lord Montagu of
Boughton, Mr. William Montagu his brother, the Queen's Sollicitor, &c.,
and a fine dinner.  Their talk about a ridiculous falling-out two days ago
at my Lord of Oxford's house, at an entertainment of his, there being
there my Lord of Albemarle, Lynsey, two of the Porters,  my Lord
Bellasses, and others, where there were high words and some blows, and
pulling off of perriwiggs; till my Lord Monk took away some of their
swords, and sent for some soldiers to guard the house till the fray was
ended.  To such a degree of madness the nobility of this age is come!
After dinner I went up to Sir Thomas Crew, who lies there not very well in
his head, being troubled with vapours and fits of dizziness: and there I
sat talking with him all the afternoon from one discourse to another,
the most was upon the unhappy posture of things at this time; that the
King do mind nothing but pleasures, and hates the very sight or thoughts
of business; that my Lady Castlemaine rules him, who, he says, hath all
the tricks of Aretin

     [An allusion to Aretin's infamous letters and sonnets accompanying
     the as infamous "Postures" engraved by Marc Antonio from the designs
     of Julio Romano (Steinman's "Memoir of Barbara, Duchess of
     Cleveland," privately printed, 1871).]

that are to be practised to give pleasure.  In which he is too able
.  .  .  . but what is the unhappiness in that, as the Italian proverb
says, "lazzo dritto non vuolt consiglio."  If any of the sober counsellors
give him good advice, and move him in anything that is to his good and
honour, the other part, which are his counsellers of pleasure, take him
when he is with my Lady Castlemaine, and in a humour of delight, and then
persuade him that he ought not to hear nor listen to the advice of those
old dotards or counsellors that were heretofore his enemies: when, God
knows! it is they that now-a-days do most study his honour.  It seems the
present favourites now are my Lord Bristol, Duke of Buckingham, Sir H.
Bennet, my Lord Ashley, and Sir Charles Barkeley; who, among them, have
cast my Lord Chancellor upon his back, past ever getting up again; there
being now little for him to do, and he waits at Court attending to speak
to the King as others do: which I pray God may prove of good effects, for
it is feared it will be the same with my Lord Treasurer shortly.  But
strange to hear how my Lord Ashley, by my Lord Bristol's means (he being
brought over to the Catholique party against the Bishopps, whom he hates
to the death, and publicly rails against them; not that he is become a
Catholique, but merely opposes the Bishopps; and yet, for aught I hear,
the Bishopp of London keeps as great with the King as ever) is got into
favour, so much that, being a man of great business and yet of pleasure,
and drolling too, he, it is thought, will be made Lord Treasurer upon the
death or removal of the good old man.  My Lord Albemarle, I hear, do bear
through and bustle among them, and will not be removed from the King's
good opinion and favour, though none of the Cabinett; but yet he is envied
enough.  It is made very doubtful whether the King do not intend the
making of the Duke of Monmouth legitimate;

     [Thomas Ross, Monmouth's tutor, put the idea into his head that
     Charles II. had married his mother.  The report was sedulously
     spread abroad, and obtained some kind of credence, until, in June,
     1678, the king set the matter at rest by publishing a declaration,
     which was entered in the Council book and registered in Chancery.
     The words of the declaration are: "That to avoid any dispute which
     might happen in time to come concerning the succession of the Crown,
     he (Charles) did declare, in the presence of Almighty God, that he
     never gave, nor made any contract of marriage, nor was married to
     Mrs. Barlow, alias Waters, the Duke of Monmouth's mother, nor to any
     other woman whatsoever, but to his present wife, Queen Catherine,
     then living."]

but surely the Commons of England will never do it, nor the Duke of York
suffer it, whose lady, I am told, is very troublesome to him by her
jealousy.  But it is wonderful that Sir Charles Barkeley should be so
great still, not [only] with the King, but Duke also; who did so stiffly
swear that he had lain with her.

     [The conspiracy of Sir Charles Berkeley, Lord Arran, Jermyn, Talbot,
     and Killigrew to traduce Anne Hyde was peculiarly disgraceful, and
     the conduct of all the actors in the affair of the marriage, from
     Lord Clarendon downwards, was far from creditable (see Lister's
     "Life of Clarendon," ii. 68-79)]

And another one Armour that he rode before her on horseback in Holland I
think .  .  .  .  No care is observed to be taken of the main chance,
either for maintaining of trade or opposing of factions, which, God knows,
are ready to break out, if any of them (which God forbid!) should dare to
begin; the King and every man about him minding so much their pleasures or
profits.  My Lord Hinchingbroke, I am told, hath had a mischance to kill
his boy by his birding-piece going off as he was a-fowling.  The gun was
charged with small shot, and hit the boy in the face and about the
temples, and he lived four days.  In Scotland, it seems, for all the
newes-books tell us every week that they are all so quiett, and everything
in the Church settled, the old woman had like to have killed, the other
day, the Bishop of Galloway, and not half the Churches of the whole
kingdom conform.  Strange were the effects of the late thunder and
lightning about a week since at Northampton, coming with great rain, which
caused extraordinary floods in a few hours, bearing away bridges, drowning
horses, men, and cattle.  Two men passing over a bridge on horseback, the
arches before and behind them were borne away, and that left which they
were upon: but, however, one of the horses fell over, and was drowned.
Stacks of faggots carried as high as a steeple, and other dreadful things;
which Sir Thomas Crew showed me letters to him about from Mr. Freemantle
and others, that it is very true.  The Portugalls have choused us,

     [The word chouse appears to have been introduced into the language
     at the beginning of the seventeenth century.  In 1609, a Chiaus sent
     by Sir Robert Shirley, from Constantinople to London, had chiaused
     (or choused) the Turkish and Persian merchants out of L4,000, before
     the arrival of his employer, and had decamped.  The affair was quite
     recent in 1610, when Jonson's "Alchemist" appeared, in which it is
     alluded to .]

it seems, in the Island of Bombay, in the East Indys; for after a great
charge of our fleets being sent thither with full commission from the King
of Portugall to receive it, the Governour by some pretence or other will
not deliver it to Sir Abraham Shipman, sent from the King, nor to my Lord
of Marlborough; which the King takes highly ill, and I fear our Queen will
fare the worse for it.  The Dutch decay there exceedingly, it being
believed that their people will revolt from them there, and they forced to
give over their trade.  This is talked of among us, but how true I
understand not.  Sir Thomas showed me his picture and Sir Anthony
Vandike's, in crayon in little, done exceedingly well.  Having thus freely
talked with him, and of many more things, I took leave, and by coach to
St. James's, and there told Mr. Coventry what I had done with my Lord with
great satisfaction, and so well pleased home, where I found it almost
night, and my wife and the dancing-master alone above, not dancing but
talking.  Now so deadly full of jealousy I am that my heart and head did
so cast about and fret that I could not do any business possibly, but went
out to my office, and anon late home again and ready to chide at every
thing, and then suddenly to bed and could hardly sleep, yet durst not say
any thing, but was forced to say that I had bad news from the Duke
concerning Tom Hater as an excuse to my wife, who by my folly has too much
opportunity given her with the man, who is a pretty neat black
man, but married.  But it is a deadly folly and plague that I bring upon
myself to be so jealous and by giving myself such an occasion more than my
wife desired of giving her another month's dancing.  Which however shall
be ended as soon as I can possibly.  But I am ashamed to think what a
course I did take by lying to see whether my wife did wear drawers to-day
as she used to do, and other things to raise my suspicion of her, but I
found no true cause of doing it.

16th.  Up with my mind disturbed and with my last night's doubts upon me,
for which I deserve to be beaten if not really served as I am fearful of
being, especially since God knows that I do not find honesty enough in my
own mind but that upon a small temptation I could be false to her, and
therefore ought not to expect more justice from her, but God pardon both
my sin and my folly herein.  To my office and there sitting all the
morning, and at noon dined at home.  After dinner comes Pembleton, and I
being out of humour would not see him, pretending business, but, Lord!
with what jealousy did I walk up and down my chamber listening to hear
whether they danced or no, which they did, notwithstanding I afterwards
knew and did then believe that Ashwell was with them.  So to my office
awhile, and, my jealousy still reigning, I went in and, not out of any
pleasure but from that only reason, did go up to them to practise, and did
make an end of "La Duchesse," which I think I should, with a little pains,
do very well.  So broke up and saw him gone.  Then Captain Cocke coming to
me to speak about my seeming discourtesy to him in the business of his
hemp, I went to the office with him, and there discoursed it largely and I
think to his satisfaction.  Then to my business, writing letters and other
things till late at night, and so home to supper and bed.  My mind in some
better ease resolving to prevent matters for the time to come as much as I
can, it being to no purpose to trouble myself for what is past, being
occasioned too by my own folly.

17th (Lord's day).  Up and in my chamber all the morning, preparing my
great letters to my father, stating to him the perfect condition of our
estate.  My wife and Ashwell to church, and after dinner they to church
again, and I all the afternoon making an end of my morning's work, which I
did about the evening, and then to talk with my wife till after supper,
and so to bed having another small falling out and myself vexed with my
old fit of jealousy about her dancing-master.  But I am a fool for doing
it.  So to bed by daylight, I having a very great cold, so as I doubt
whether I shall be able to speak to-morrow at our attending the Duke,
being now so hoarse.

18th.  Up and after taking leave of Sir W. Batten, who is gone this day
towards Portsmouth (to little purpose, God knows) upon his survey, I home
and spent the morning at dancing; at noon Creed dined with us and Mr.
Deane Woolwich, and so after dinner came Mr. Howe, who however had enough
for his dinner, and so, having done, by coach to Westminster, she to Mrs.
Clerke and I to St. James's, where the Duke being gone down by water
to-day with the King I went thence to my Lord Sandwich's lodgings, where
Mr. Howe and I walked a while, and going towards Whitehall through the
garden Dr. Clerk and Creed called me across the bowling green, and so I
went thither and after a stay went up to Mrs. Clerke who was dressing
herself to go abroad with my wife.  But, Lord!  in what a poor condition
her best chamber is, and things about her, for all the outside and show
that she makes, but I found her just such a one as Mrs. Pierce, contrary
to my expectation, so much that I am sick and sorry to see it.  Thence for
an hour Creed and I walked to White Hall, and into the Park, seeing the
Queen and Maids of Honour passing through the house going to the Park.
But above all, Mrs. Stuart is a fine woman, and they say now a common
mistress to the King,

     [The king said to 'la belle' Stuart, who resisted all his
     importunities, that he hoped he should live to see her "ugly and
     willing" (Lord Dartmouth's note to Burnet's "Own Time," vol. i.,
     p. 436, ed.  1823).]

as my Lady Castlemaine is; which is a great pity.  Thence taking a coach
to Mrs. Clerke's, took her, and my wife, and Ashwell, and a Frenchman, a
kinsman of hers, to the Park, where we saw many fine faces, and one
exceeding handsome, in a white dress over her head, with many others very
beautiful.  Staying there till past eight at night, I carried Mrs. Clerke
and her Frenchman, who sings well, home, and thence home ourselves,
talking much of what we had observed to-day of the poor household stuff of
Mrs. Clerke and mere show and flutter that she makes in the world; and
pleasing myself in my own house and manner of living more than ever I did
by seeing how much better and more substantially I live than others do.
So to supper and bed.

19th.  Up pretty betimes, but yet I observe how my dancing and lying a
morning or two longer than ordinary for my cold do make me hard to rise as
I used to do, or look after my business as I am wont.  To my chamber to
make an end of my papers to my father to be sent by the post to-night, and
taking copies of them, which was a great work, but I did it this morning,
and so to my office, and thence with Sir John Minnes to the Tower; and by
Mr. Slingsby, and Mr. Howard, Controller of the Mint, we were shown the
method of making this new money, from the beginning to the end, which is
so pretty that I did take a note of every part of it and set them down by
themselves for my remembrance hereafter.  That being done it was dinner
time, and so the Controller would have us dine with him and his company,
the King giving them a dinner every day.  And very merry and good
discourse about the business we have been upon, and after dinner went to
the Assay Office and there saw the manner of assaying of gold and silver,
and how silver melted down with gold do part, just being put into
aqua-fortis, the silver turning into water, and the gold lying whole in
the very form it was put in, mixed of gold and silver, which is a miracle;
and to see no silver at all but turned into water, which they can bring
again into itself out of the water.  And here I was made thoroughly to
understand the business of the fineness and coarseness of metals, and have
put down my lessons with my other observations therein.  At table among
other discourse they told us of two cheats, the best I ever heard.  One,
of a labourer discovered to convey away the bits of silver cut out pence
by swallowing them down into his belly, and so they could not find him
out, though, of course, they searched all the labourers; but, having
reason to doubt him, they did, by threats and promises, get him to
confess, and did find L7 of it in his house at one time.  The other of one
that got a way of coyning money as good and passable and large as the true
money is, and yet saved fifty per cent. to himself, which was by getting
moulds made to stamp groats like old groats, which is done so well, and I
did beg two of them which I keep for rarities, that there is not better in
the world, and is as good, nay, better than those that commonly go, which
was the only thing that they could find out to doubt them by, besides the
number that the party do go to put off, and then coming to the Comptroller
of the Mint, he could not, I say, find out any other thing to raise any
doubt upon, but only their being so truly round or near it, though I
should never have doubted the thing neither.  He was neither hanged nor
burned, the cheat was thought so ingenious, and being the first time they
could ever trap him in it, and so little hurt to any man in it, the money
being as good as commonly goes.  Thence to the office till the evening, we
sat, and then by water (taking Pembleton with us), over the water to the
Halfway House, where we played at nine-pins, and there my damned jealousy
took fire, he and my wife being of a side and I seeing of him take her by
the hand in play, though I now believe he did [it] only in passing and
sport.  Thence home and being 10 o'clock was forced to land beyond the
Custom House, and so walked home and to my office, and having dispatched
my great letters by the post to my father, of which I keep copies to show
by me and for my future understanding, I went home to supper and bed,
being late.  The most observables in the making of money which I observed
to-day, is the steps of their doing it.

1. Before they do anything they assay the bullion, which is done, if it be
gold, by taking an equal weight of that and of silver, of each a small
weight, which they reckon to be six ounces or half a pound troy; this they
wrap up in within lead.  If it be silver, they put such a quantity of that
alone and wrap it up in lead, and then putting them into little earthen
cupps made of stuff like tobacco pipes, and put them into a burning hot
furnace, where, after a while, the whole body is melted, and at last the
lead in both is sunk into the body of the cupp, which carries away all the
copper or dross with it, and left the pure gold and silver embodyed
together, of that which hath both been put into the cupp together, and the
silver alone in these where it was put alone in the leaden case.  And to
part the silver and the gold in the first experiment, they put the mixed
body into a glass of aqua-fortis, which separates them by spitting out the
silver into such small parts that you cannot tell what it becomes, but
turns into the very water and leaves the gold at the bottom clear of
itself, with the silver wholly spit out, and yet the gold in the form that
it was doubled together in when it was a mixed body of gold and silver,
which is a great mystery; and after all this is done to get the silver
together out of the water is as strange. But the nature of the assay is
thus: the piece of gold that goes into the furnace twelve ounces, if it
comes out again eleven ounces, and the piece of silver which goes in
twelve and comes out again eleven and two pennyweight, are just of the
alloy of the standard of England.  If it comes out, either of them, either
the gold above eleven, as very fine will sometimes within very little of
what it went in, or the silver above eleven and two pennyweight, as that
also will sometimes come out eleven and ten penny weight or more, they are
so much above the goodness of the standard, and so they know what
proportion of worse gold and silver to put to such a quantity of the
bullion to bring it to the exact standard. And on the contrary, [if] it
comes out lighter, then such a weight is beneath the standard, and so
requires such a proportion of fine metal to be put to the bullion to bring
it to the standard, and this is the difference of good and bad, better and
worse than the standard, and also the difference of standards, that of
Seville being the best and that of Mexico worst, and I think they said
none but Seville is better than ours.

2.  They melt it into long plates, which, if the mould do take ayre, then
the plate is not of an equal heaviness in every part of it, as it often
falls out.

3.  They draw these plates between rollers to bring them to an even
thickness all along and every plate of the same thickness, and it is very
strange how the drawing it twice easily between the rollers will make it
as hot as fire, yet cannot touch it.

4.  They bring it to another pair of rollers, which they call adjusting
it, which bring it to a greater exactness in its thickness than the first
could be.

5.  They cut them into round pieces, which they do with the greatest ease,
speed, and exactness in the world.

6.  They weigh these, and where they find any to be too heavy they file
them, which they call sizeing them; or light, they lay them by, which is
very seldom, but they are of a most exact weight, but however, in the
melting, all parts by some accident not being close alike, now and then a
difference will be, and, this filing being done, there shall not be any
imaginable difference almost between the weight of forty of these against
another forty chosen by chance out of all their heaps.

7.  These round pieces having been cut out of the plates, which in passing
the rollers are bent, they are sometimes a little crooked or swelling out
or sinking in, and therefore they have a way of clapping 100 or 2 together
into an engine, which with a screw presses them so hard that they come out
as flat as is possible.

8.  They blanch them.

9.  They mark the letters on the edges, which is kept as the great secret
by Blondeau, who was not in the way, and so I did not speak with him
to-day.

     [Professor W. C. Roberts-Austen, C.B., F.R.S., chemist to the Royal
     Mint, refers to Pepys's Diary and to Blondeau's machine in his
     Cantor Lectures on "Alloys used for Coinage," printed in the
     "journal of the Society of Arts" (vol. xxxii.).  He writes, "The
     hammer was still retained for coining in the Mint in the Tower of
     London, but the question of the adoption of the screw-press by the
     Moneyers appears to have been revived in 1649, when the Council of
     State had it represented to them that the coins of the Government
     might be more perfectly and beautifully done, and made equal to any
     coins in Europe.  It was proposed to send to France for Peter
     Blondeau, who had invented and improved a machine and method for
     making all coins 'with the most beautiful polish and equality on the
     edge, or with any proper inscription or graining.'  He came on the
     3rd of September, and although a Committee of the Mint reported in
     favour of his method of coining, the Company of Moneyers, who appear
     to have boasted of the success of their predecessors in opposing the
     introduction of the mill and screw-press in Queen Elizabeth's reign,
     prevented the introduction of the machinery, and consequently he did
     not produce pattern pieces until 1653 .  .  .  .  It is certain that
     Blondeau did not invent, but only improved the method of coining by
     the screw-press, and I believe his improvements related chiefly to a
     method for 'rounding the pieces before they are sized, and in making
     the edges of the moneys with letters and graining,' which he
     undertook to reveal to the king.  Special stress is laid on the
     engines wherewith the rims were marked, 'which might be kept secret
     among few men.'  I cannot find that there is any record in the Paris
     mint of Blondeau's employment there, and the only reference to his
     invention in the Mint records of this country refers to the
     'collars,' or perforated discs of metal surrounding the 'blank'
     while it was struck into a coin.  There is, however, in the British
     Museum a MS. believed to be in Blondeau's hand, in which he claims
     his process, 'as a new invention, to make a handsome coyne, than can
     be found in all the world besides, viz., that shall not only be
     stamped on both flat sides, but shall even be marked with letters on
     the thickness of the brim.'  The letters were raised.  The press
     Blondeau used was, I believe, the ordinary screw-press, and I
     suppose that the presses drawn in Akerman's well-known plate of the
     coining-room of the Mint in the Tower, published in 1803 ['Microcosm
     of London,' vol.  ii., p. 202], if not actually the same machines,
     were similar to those erected in 1661-62 by Sir William Parkhurst
     and Sir Anthony St. Leger, wardens of the Mint, at a cost of L1400,
     Professor Roberts-Austen shows that Benvenuto Cellini used a similar
     press to that attributed to Blondeau, and he gives an illustration
     of this in his lecture (p. 810).  In a letter to the editor the
     professor writes: "Pepys's account of the operations of coining, and
     especially of assaying gold and silver, is very interesting and
     singularly accurate considering that he could not have had technical
     knowledge of the subject."]

10.  They mill them, that is, put on the marks on both sides at once with
great exactness and speed, and then the money is perfect.  The mill is
after this manner: one of the dyes, which has one side of the piece cut,
is fastened to a thing fixed below, and the other dye (and they tell me a
payre of dyes will last the marking of L10,000 before it be worn out, they
and all other their tools being made of hardened steel, and the Dutchman
who makes them is an admirable artist, and has so much by the pound for
every pound that is coyned to find a constant supply of dyes) to an engine
above, which is moveable by a screw, which is pulled by men; and then a
piece being clapped by one sitting below between the two dyes, when they
meet the impression is set, and then the man with his finger strikes off
the piece and claps another in, and then the other men they pull again and
that is marked, and then another and another with great speed.  They say
that this way is more charge to the King than the old way, but it is
neater, freer from clipping or counterfeiting, the putting of the words
upon the edges being not to be done (though counterfeited) without an
engine of the charge and noise that no counterfeit will be at or venture
upon, and it employs as many men as the old and speedier. They now coyne
between L16 and L24,000 in a week.  At dinner they did discourse very
finely to us of the probability that there is a vast deal of money hid in
the land, from this:--that in King Charles's time there was near ten
millions of money coyned, besides what was then in being of King James's
and Queene Elizabeth's, of which there is a good deal at this day in
being.  Next, that there was but L750,000 coyned of the Harp and Crosse
money,

     [The Commonwealth coins (stamped with the cross and harp, and the
     inscription, "The Commonwealth of England") were called in by
     proclamation, September, 1660, and when brought to the Mint an equal
     amount of lawful money was allowed for them, weight for weight,
     deducting only for the coinage (Ruding's "Annals of the Coinage," 18
     19, vol. iii., p. 293).  The harp was taken out of the naval flags
     in May, 1660.]

and of this there was L500,000 brought in upon its being called in.  And
from very good arguments they find that there cannot be less of it in
Ireland and Scotland than L100,000; so that there is but L150,000 missing;
and of that, suppose that there should be not above 650,000 still
remaining, either melted down, hid, or lost, or hoarded up in England,
there will then be but L100,000 left to be thought to have been
transported.  Now, if L750,000 in twelve years' time lost but a L100,000
in danger of being transported, then within thirty-five years' time will
have lost but L3,888,880 and odd pounds; and as there is L650,000
remaining after twelve years' time in England, so after thirty-five years'
time, which was within this two years, there ought in proportion to have
been resting L6,111,120 or thereabouts, beside King James's and Queen
Elizabeth's money.  Now that most of this must be hid is evident, as they
reckon, because of the dearth of money immediately upon the calling-in of
the State's money, which was L500,000 that came in; and yet there was not
any money to be had in this City, which they say to their own observation
and knowledge was so.  And therefore, though I can say nothing in it
myself, I do not dispute it.

20th.  Up and to my office, and anon home and to see my wife dancing with
Pembleton about noon, and I to the Trinity House to dinner and after
dinner home, and there met Pembleton, who I perceive has dined with my
wife, which she takes no notice of, but whether that proceeds out of
design, or fear to displease me I know not, but it put me into a great
disorder again, that I could mind nothing but vexing, but however I
continued my resolution of going down by water to Woolwich, took my wife
and Ashwell; and going out met Mr. Howe come to see me, whose horse we
caused to be set up, and took him with us.  The tide against us, so I went
ashore at Greenwich before, and did my business at the yard about putting
things in order as to their proceeding to build the new yacht ordered to
be built by Christopher Pett,

     [In the minutes of the Royal Society is the following entry: "June
     11, 1662.  Dr. Pett's brother shewed a draught of the pleasure boat
     which he intended to make for the king" (Birch's "History of the
     Royal Society," vol. i., p. 85).  Peter Pett had already built a
     yacht for the king at Deptford.]

and so to Woolwich town, where at an alehouse I found them ready to attend
my coming, and so took boat again, it being cold, and I sweating, with my
walk, which was very pleasant along the green come and pease, and most of
the way sang, he and I, and eat some cold meat we had, and with great
pleasure home, and so he took horse again, and Pembleton coming, we danced
a country dance or two and so broke up and to bed, my mind restless and
like to be so while she learns to dance.  God forgive my folly.

21st.  Up, but cannot get up so early as I was wont, nor my mind to
business as it should be and used to be before this dancing.  However, to
my office, where most of the morning talking of Captain Cox of Chatham
about his and the whole yard's difference against Mr. Barrow the
storekeeper, wherein I told him my mind clearly, that he would be upheld
against the design of any to ruin him, he being we all believed, but Sir
W. Batten his mortal enemy, as good a servant as any the King has in the
yard.  After much good advice and other talk I home and danced with
Pembleton, and then the barber trimmed me, and so to dinner, my wife and I
having high words about her dancing to that degree that I did enter and
make a vow to myself not to oppose her or say anything to dispraise or
correct her therein as long as her month lasts, in pain of 2s. 6d.  for
every time, which, if God pleases, I will observe, for this roguish
business has brought us more disquiett than anything [that] has happened a
great while.  After dinner to my office, where late, and then home; and
Pembleton being there again, we fell to dance a country dance or two, and
so to supper and bed.  But being at supper my wife did say something that
caused me to oppose her in, she used the word devil, which vexed me, and
among other things I said I would not have her to use that word, upon
which she took me up most scornfully, which, before Ashwell and the rest
of the world, I know not now-a-days how to check, as I would heretofore,
for less than that would have made me strike her.  So that I fear without
great discretion I shall go near to lose too my command over her, and
nothing do it more than giving her this occasion of dancing and other
pleasures, whereby her mind is taken up from her business and finds other
sweets besides pleasing of me, and so makes her that she begins not at all
to take pleasure in me or study to please me as heretofore.  But if this
month of her dancing were but out (as my first was this night, and I paid
off Pembleton for myself) I shall hope with a little pains to bring her to
her old wont.  This day Susan that lived with me lately being out of
service, and I doubt a simple wench, my wife do take her for a little time
to try her at least till she goes into the country, which I am yet
doubtful whether it will be best for me to send her or no, for fear of her
running off in her liberty before I have brought her to her right temper
again.

22nd.  Up pretty betimes, and shall, I hope, come to myself and business
again, after a small playing the truant, for I find that my interest and
profit do grow daily, for which God be praised and keep me to my duty. To
my office, and anon one tells me that Rundall, the house-carpenter of
Deptford, hath sent me a fine blackbird, which I went to see.  He tells me
he was offered 20s.  for him as he came along, he do so whistle.  So to my
office, and busy all the morning, among other things, learning to
understand the course of the tides, and I think I do now do it.  At noon
Mr. Creed comes to me, and he and I to the Exchange, where I had much
discourse with several merchants, and so home with him to dinner, and then
by water to Greenwich, and calling at the little alehouse at the end of
the town to wrap a rag about my little left toe, being new sore with
walking, we walked pleasantly to Woolwich, in our way hearing the
nightingales sing.  So to Woolwich yard, and after doing many things
there, among others preparing myself for a dispute against Sir W. Pen in
the business of Bowyer's, wherein he is guilty of some corruption to the
King's wrong, we walked back again without drinking, which I never do
because I would not make my coming troublesome to any, nor would become
obliged too much to any.  In our going back we were overtook by Mr.
Steventon, a purser, and uncle to my clerk Will, who told me how he was
abused in the passing of his accounts by Sir J. Minnes to the degree that
I am ashamed to hear it, and resolve to retrieve the matter if I can
though the poor man has given it over.  And however am pleased enough to
see that others do see his folly and dotage as well as myself, though I
believe in my mind the man in general means well.

Took boat at Greenwich and to Deptford, where I did the same thing, and
found Davis, the storekeeper, a knave, and shuffling in the business of
Bewpers, being of the party with Young and Whistler to abuse the King, but
I hope I shall be even with them.  So walked to Redriffe, drinking at the
Half-way house, and so walked and by water to White Hall, all our way by
water coming and going reading a little book said to be writ by a person
of Quality concerning English gentry to be preferred before titular
honours, but the most silly nonsense, no sense nor grammar, yet in as good
words that ever I saw in all my life, but from beginning to end you met
not with one entire and regular sentence.  At White Hall Sir G. Carteret
was out of the way, and so returned back presently, and home by water and
to bed.

23rd.  Waked this morning between four and five by my blackbird, which
whistles as well as ever I heard any; only it is the beginning of many
tunes very well, but there leaves them, and goes no further.  So up and to
my office, where we sat, and among other things I had a fray with Sir J.
Minnes in defence of my Will in a business where the old coxcomb would
have put a foot upon him, which was only in Jack Davis and in him a
downright piece of knavery in procuring a double ticket and getting the
wrong one paid as well as the second was to the true party.  But it
appeared clear enough to the board that Will was true in it.  Home to
dinner, and after dinner by water to the Temple, and there took my Lyra
Viall book bound up with blank paper for new lessons.  Thence to
Greatorex's, and there seeing Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen go by coach I
went in to them and to White Hall; where, in the Matted Gallery, Mr.
Coventry was, who told us how the Parliament have required of Sir G.
Carteret and him an account what money shall be necessary to be settled
upon the Navy for the ordinary charge, which they intend to report
L200,000 per annum.  And how to allott this we met this afternoon, and
took their papers for our perusal, and so we parted.  Only there was
walking in the gallery some of the Barbary company, and there we saw a
draught of the arms of the company, which the King is of, and so is called
the Royall Company, which is, in a field argent an elephant proper, with a
canton on which England and France is quartered, supported by two Moors.
The crest an anchor winged, I think it is, and the motto too tedious:
"Regio floret, patrocinio commercium, commercioque Regnum." Thence back by
water to Greatorex's, and there he showed me his varnish which he had
invented, which appears every whit as good, upon a stick which he hath
done, as the Indian, though it did not do very well upon my paper ruled
with musique lines, for it sunk and did not shine.  Thence home by water,
and after a dance with Pembleton to my office and wrote by the post to Sir
W. Batten at Portsmouth to send for him up against next Wednesday, being
our triall day against Field at Guildhall, in which God give us good end.
So home: to supper and to bed.

24th (Lord's day).  Having taken one of Mr. Holliard's pills last night it
brought a stool or two this morning, and so forebore going to church this
morning, but staid at home looking over my papers about Tom Trice's
business, and so at noon dined, and my wife telling me that there was a
pretty lady come to church with Peg Pen to-day, I against my intention had
a mind to go to church to see her, and did so, and she is pretty handsome.
But over against our gallery I espied Pembleton, and saw him leer upon my
wife all the sermon, I taking no notice of him, and my wife upon him, and
I observed she made a curtsey to him at coming out without taking notice
to me at all of it, which with the consideration of her being desirous
these two last Lord's days to go to church both forenoon and afternoon do
really make me suspect something more than ordinary, though I am loth to
think the worst, but yet it put and do still keep me at a great loss in my
mind, and makes me curse the time that I consented to her dancing, and
more my continuing it a second month, which was more than she desired,
even after I had seen too much of her carriage with him.  But I must have
patience and get her into the country, or at least to make an end of her
learning to dance as soon as I can.  After sermon to Sir W. Pen's, with
Sir J. Minnes to do a little business to answer Mr. Coventry to-night.
And so home and with my wife and Ashwell into the garden walking a great
while, discoursing what this pretty wench should be by her garb and
deportment; with respect to Mrs. Pen she may be her woman, but only that
she sat in the pew with her, which I believe he would not let her do.  So
home, and read to my wife a fable or two in Ogleby's AEsop, and so to
supper, and then to prayers and to bed.  My wife this evening discoursing
of making clothes for the country, which I seem against, pleading lack of
money, but I am glad of it in some respects because of getting her out of
the way from this fellow, and my own liberty to look after my business
more than of late I have done.  So to prayers and to bed.  This morning it
seems Susan, who I think is distracted, or however is since she went from
me taught to drink, and so gets out of doors 2 or 3 times a day without
leave to the alehouse, did go before 5 o'clock to-day, making Griffin rise
in his shirt to let her out to the alehouse, she said to warm herself, but
her mistress, falling out with her about it, turned her out of doors this
morning, and so she is gone like an idle slut.  I took a pill also this
night.

25th.  Up, and my pill working a little I staid within most of the
morning, and by and by the barber came and Sarah Kite my cozen, poor
woman, came to see me and borrow 40s. of me, telling me she will pay it at
Michaelmas again to me.  I was glad it was no more, being indifferent
whether she pays it me or no, but it will be a good excuse to lend her nor
give her any more.  So I did freely at first word do it, and give her a
crown more freely to buy her child something, she being a good-natured and
painful wretch, and one that I would do good for as far as I can that I
might not be burdened.  My wife was not ready, and she coming early did
not see her, and I was glad of it.  She gone, I up and then hear that my
wife and her maid Ashwell had between them spilled the pot .  .  .  . upon
the floor and stool and God knows what, and were mighty merry making of it
clean.  I took no great notice, but merrily.  Ashwell did by and by come
to me with an errand from her mistress to desire money to buy a country
suit for her against she goes as we talked last night, and so I did give
her L4, and believe it will cost me the best part of 4 more to fit her
out, but with peace and honour I am willing to spare anything so as to be
able to keep all ends together, and my power over her undisturbed.  So to
my office and by and by home, where my wife and her master were dancing,
and so I staid in my chamber till they had done, and sat down myself to
try a little upon the Lyra viall, my hand being almost out, but easily
brought to again.  So by and by to dinner, and then carried my wife and
Ashwell to St. James's, and there they sat in the coach while I went in,
and finding nobody there likely to meet with the Duke, but only Sir J.
Minnes with my Lord Barkely (who speaks very kindly, and invites me with
great compliments to come now and then and eat with him, which I am glad
to hear, though I value not the thing, but it implies that my esteem do
increase rather than fall), and so I staid not, but into the coach again,
and taking up my wife's taylor, it raining hard, they set me down, and who
should our coachman be but Carleton the Vintner, that should have had Mrs.
Sarah, at Westminster, my Lord Chancellor's, and then to Paternoster Row.
I staid there to speak with my Lord Sandwich, and in my staying, meeting
Mr. Lewis Phillips of Brampton, he and afterwards others tell me that news
came last night to Court, that the King of France is sick of the spotted
fever, and that they are struck in again; and this afternoon my Lord
Mandeville is gone from the King to make him a visit; which will be great
news, and of great import through Europe.  By and by, out comes my Lord
Sandwich, and he and I talked a great while about his business, of his
accounts for his pay, and among other things he told me that this day a
vote hath passed that the King's grants of land to my Lord Monk and him
should be made good; which pleases him very well.  He also tells me that
things don't go right in the House with Mr. Coventry; I suppose he means
in the business of selling of places; but I am sorry for it.  Thence by
coach home, where I found Pembleton, and so I up to dance with them till
the evening, when there came Mr. Alsopp, the King's brewer, and Lanyon of
Plymouth to see me.  Mr. Alsopp tells me of a horse of his that lately,
after four days' pain, voided at his fundament four stones, bigger than
that I was cut of, very heavy, and in the middle of each of them either a
piece of iron or wood.  The King has two of them in his closett, and a
third the College of Physicians to keep for rarity, and by the King's
command he causes the turd of the horse to be every day searched to find
more.  At night to see Sir W. Batten come home this day from Portsmouth.
I met with some that say that the King of France is poisoned, but how true
that is is not known.  So home to supper and to bed pleasant.

26th.  Lay long in bed talking and pleasing myself with my wife.  So up and
to my office a while and then home, where I found Pembleton, and by many
circumstances I am led to conclude that there is something more than
ordinary between my wife and him, which do so trouble me that I know not
at this very minute that I now write this almost what either I write or am
doing, nor how to carry myself to my wife in it, being unwilling to speak
of it to her for making of any breach and other inconveniences, nor let it
pass for fear of her continuing to offend me and the matter grow worse
thereby.  So that I am grieved at the very heart, but I am very unwise in
being so.  There dined with me Mr. Creed and Captain Grove, and before
dinner I had much discourse in my chamber with Mr. Deane, the builder of
Woolwich, about building of ships.  But nothing could get the business out
of my head, I fearing that this afternoon by my wife's sending every [one]
abroad and knowing that I must be at the office she has appointed him to
come.  This is my devilish jealousy, which I pray God may be false, but it
makes a very hell in my mind, which the God of heaven remove, or I shall
be very unhappy.  So to the office, where we sat awhile.  By and by my
mind being in great trouble I went home to see how things were, and there
I found as I doubted Mr. Pembleton with my wife, and nobody else in the
house, which made me almost mad, and going up to my chamber after a turn
or two I went out again and called somebody on pretence of business and
left him in my little room at the door (it was the Dutchman, commander of
the King's pleasure boats, who having been beat by one of his men sadly,
was come to the office to-day to complain) telling him I would come again
to him to speak with him about his business.  So in great trouble and
doubt to the office, and Mr. Coventry nor Sir G. Carteret being there I
made a quick end of our business and desired leave to be gone, pretending
to go to the Temple, but it was home, and so up to my chamber, and as I
think if they had any intention of hurt I did prevent doing anything at
that time, but I continued in my chamber vexed and angry till he went
away, pretending aloud, that I might hear, that he could not stay, and
Mrs. Ashwell not being within they could not dance.  And, Lord!  to see
how my jealousy wrought so far that I went softly up to see whether any of
the beds were out of order or no, which I found not, but that did not
content me, but I staid all the evening walking, and though anon my wife
came up to me and would have spoke of business to me, yet I construed it
to be but impudence, and though my heart full yet I did say nothing, being
in a great doubt what to do.  So at night, suffered them to go all to bed,
and late put myself to bed in great discontent, and so to sleep.

27th.  So I waked by 3 o'clock, my mind being troubled, and so took
occasion by making water to wake my wife, and after having lain till past
4 o'clock seemed going to rise, though I did it only to see what she would
do, and so going out of the bed she took hold of me and would know what
ailed me, and after many kind and some cross words I began to tax her
discretion in yesterday's business, but she quickly told me my own,
knowing well enough that it was my old disease of jealousy, which I
denied, but to no purpose.  After an hour's discourse, sometimes high and
sometimes kind, I found very good reason to think that her freedom with
him is very great and more than was convenient, but with no evil intent,
and so after awhile I caressed her and parted seeming friends, but she
crying in a great discontent.  So I up and by water to the Temple, and
thence with Commissioner Pett to St. James's, where an hour with Mr.
Coventry talking of Mr. Pett's proceedings lately in the forest of
Sherwood, and thence with Pett to my Lord Ashley, Chancellor of the
Exchequer; where we met the auditors about settling the business of the
accounts of persons to whom money is due before the King's time in the
Navy, and the clearing of their imprests for what little of their debts
they have received.  I find my Lord, as he is reported, a very ready,
quick, and diligent person.  Thence I to Westminster Hall, where Term and
Parliament make the Hall full of people; no further news yet of the King
of France, whether he be dead or not.  Here I met with my cozen Roger
Pepys, and walked a good while with him, and among other discourse as a
secret he hath committed to nobody but myself, and he tells me that his
sister Claxton now resolving to give over the keeping of his house at
Impington, he thinks it fit to marry again, and would have me, by the help
of my uncle Wight or others, to look him out a widow between thirty and
forty years old, without children, and with a fortune, which he will
answer in any degree with a joynture fit for her fortune.  A woman sober,
and no high-flyer, as he calls it.  I demanded his estate.  He tells me,
which he says also he hath not done to any, that his estate is not full
L800 per annum, but it is L780 per annum, of which L200 is by the death of
his last wife, which he will allot for a joynture for a wife, but the
rest, which lies in Cambridgeshire, he is resolved to leave entire for his
eldest son.  I undertook to do what I can in it, and so I shall.  He tells
me that the King hath sent to them to hasten to make an end by midsummer,
because of his going into the country; so they have set upon four bills to
dispatch: the first of which is, he says, too devilish a severe act
against conventicles; so beyond all moderation, that he is afeard it will
ruin all: telling me that it is matter of the greatest grief to him in the
world, that he should be put upon this trust of being a Parliament-man,
because he says nothing is done, that he can see, out of any truth and
sincerity, but mere envy and design.  Thence by water to Chelsey, all the
way reading a little book I bought of "Improvement of Trade," a pretty
book and many things useful in it.  So walked to Little Chelsey, where I
found my Lord Sandwich with Mr. Becke, the master of the house, and Mr.
Creed at dinner, and I sat down with them, and very merry. After dinner
(Mr. Gibbons being come in also before dinner done) to musique, they
played a good Fancy, to which my Lord is fallen again, and says he cannot
endure a merry tune, which is a strange turn of his humour, after he has
for two or three years flung off the practice of Fancies and played only
fidlers' tunes.  Then into the Great Garden up to the Banqueting House;
and there by his glass we drew in the species very pretty.  Afterwards to
ninepins, where I won a shilling, Creed and I playing against my Lord and
Cooke.  This day there was great thronging to Banstead Downs, upon a great
horse-race and foot-race.  I am sorry I could not go thither.  So home
back as I came, to London Bridge, and so home, where I find my wife in a
musty humour, and tells me before Ashwell that Pembleton had been there,
and she would not have him come in unless I was there, which I was ashamed
of; but however, I had rather it should be so than the other way.  So to
my office, to put things in order there, and by and by comes Pembleton,
and word is brought me from my wife thereof that I might come home.  So I
sent word that I would have her go dance, and I would come presently.  So
being at a great loss whether I should appear to Pembleton or no, and what
would most proclaim my jealousy to him, I at last resolved to go home, and
took Tom Hater with me, and staid a good while in my chamber, and there
took occasion to tell him how I hear that Parliament is putting an act out
against all sorts of conventicles,

     [16 Car. II., cap. 4, "An Act to prevent and suppresse seditious
     Conventicles."  It was enacted that anyone of the age of sixteen or
     upwards present at an unlawful assembly or conventicle was to incur
     fine or imprisonment.  A conventicle was defined as an assembly of
     more than five persons besides the members of a family met together
     for holding worship not according to the rites of the Church of
     England.  The act was amended 22 Car. II., cap. i (1670), and
     practically repealed by the Toleration Act of 1689, but the act 22
     Car. II., cap. i, was specially repealed 52 Geo. III., cap. 155, s.
     1.]

and did give him good counsel, not only in his own behalf, but my own,
that if he did hear or know anything that could be said to my prejudice,
that he would tell me, for in this wicked age (specially Sir W. Batten
being so open to my reproaches, and Sir J. Minnes, for the neglect of
their duty, and so will think themselves obliged to scandalize me all they
can to right themselves if there shall be any inquiry into the matters of
the Navy, as I doubt there will) a man ought to be prepared to answer for
himself in all things that can be inquired concerning him. After much
discourse of this nature to him I sent him away, and then went up, and
there we danced country dances, and single, my wife and I; and my wife
paid him off for this month also, and so he is cleared.  After dancing we
took him down to supper, and were very merry, and I made myself so, and
kind to him as much as I could, to prevent his discourse, though I
perceive to my trouble that he knows all, and may do me the disgrace to
publish it as much as he can.  Which I take very ill, and if too much
provoked shall witness it to her.  After supper and he gone we to bed.

28th.  Up this morning, and my wife, I know not for what cause, being
against going to Chelsey to-day, it being a holy day (Ascension Day) and I
at leisure, it being the first holy day almost that we have observed ever
since we came to the office, we did give Ashwell leave to go by herself,
and I out to several places about business.  Among others to Dr. Williams,
to reckon with him for physique that my wife has had for a year or two,
coming to almost L4.  Then to the Exchange, where I hear that the King had
letters yesterday from France that the King there is in a [way] of living
again, which I am glad to hear.  At the coffee-house in Exchange Alley I
bought a little book, "Counsell to Builders," by Sir Balth. Gerbier.  It
is dedicated almost to all the men of any great condition in England, so
that the Epistles are more than the book itself, and both it and them not
worth a turd, that I am ashamed that I bought it.  Home and there found
Creed, who dined with us, and after dinner by water to the Royall Theatre;
but that was so full they told us we could have no room.  And so to the
Duke's House; and there saw "Hamlett" done, giving us fresh reason never
to think enough of Betterton.  Who should we see come upon the stage but
Gosnell, my wife's maid? but neither spoke, danced, nor sung; which I was
sorry for.  But she becomes the stage very well.  Thence by water home,
after we had walked to and fro, backwards and forwards, six or seven times
in the Temple walks, disputing whether to go by land or water.  By land
home, and thence by water to Halfway House, and there eat some supper we
carried with us, and so walked home again, it being late we were forced to
land at the dock, my wife and they, but I in a humour not willing to daub
my shoes went round by the Custom House.  So home, and by and by to bed,
Creed lying with me in the red chamber all night.

29th.  This day is kept strictly as a holy-day, being the King's
Coronation.  We lay long in bed, and it rained very hard, rain and hail,
almost all the morning.  By and by Creed and I abroad, and called at
several churches; and it is a wonder to see, and by that to guess the ill
temper of the City at this time, either to religion in general, or to the
King, that in some churches there was hardly ten people in the whole
church, and those poor people.  So to a coffee-house, and there in
discourse hear the King of France is likely to be well again.  So home to
dinner, and out by water to the Royall Theatre, but they not acting
to-day, then to the Duke's house, and there saw "The Slighted Mayde,"
wherein Gosnell acted Pyramena, a great part, and did it very well, and I
believe will do it better and better, and prove a good actor.  The play is
not very excellent, but is well acted, and in general the actors, in all
particulars, are better than at the other house.  Thence to the Cocke
alehouse, and there having drunk, sent them with Creed to see the German
Princess,

     [Mary Moders, alias Stedman, a notorious impostor, who pretended to
     be a German princess.  Her arrival as the German princess "at the
     Exchange Tavern, right against the Stocks betwixt the Poultry and
     Cornhill, at 5 in the morning .  .  .  ., with her marriage to
     Carleton the taverner's wife's brother," are incidents fully
     narrated in Francis Kirkman's "Counterfeit Lady Unveiled," 1673
     ("Boyne's Tokens," ed.  Williamson, vol. i., p. 703).  Her
     adventures formed the plot of a tragi-comedy by T. P., entitled "A
     Witty Combat, or the Female Victor," 1663, which was acted with
     great applause by persons of quality in Whitsun week.  Mary Carleton
     was tried at the Old Bailey for bigamy and acquitted, after which
     she appeared on the stage in her own character as the heroine of a
     play entitled "The German Princess."  Pepys went to the Duke's House
     to see her on April 15th, 1664.  The rest of her life was one
     continued course of robbery and fraud, and in 1678 she was executed
     at Tyburn for stealing a piece of plate in Chancery Lane.]

at the Gatehouse, at Westminster, and I to my brother's, and thence to my
uncle Fenner's to have seen my aunt James (who has been long in town and
goes away to-morrow and I not seen her), but did find none of them within,
which I was glad of, and so back to my brother's to speak with him, and so
home, and in my way did take two turns forwards and backwards through the
Fleete Ally to see a couple of pretty [strumpets] that stood off the doors
there, and God forgive me I could scarce stay myself from going into their
houses with them, so apt is my nature to evil after once, as I have these
two days, set upon pleasure again.  So home and to my office to put down
these two days' journalls, then home again and to supper, and then Creed
and I to bed with good discourse, only my mind troubled about my spending
my time so badly for these seven or eight days; but I must impute it to
the disquiet that my mind has been in of late about my wife, and for my
going these two days to plays, for which I have paid the due forfeit by
money and abating the times of going to plays at Court, which I am now to
remember that I have cleared all my times that I am to go to Court plays
to the end of this month, and so June is the first time that I am to begin
to reckon.

30th.  Up betimes, and Creed and I by water to Fleet Street, and my
brother not being ready, he and I walked to the New Exchange, and there
drank our morning draught of whay, the first I have done this year; but I
perceive the lawyers come all in as they go to the Hall, and I believe it
is very good.  So to my brother's, and there I found my aunt James, a
poor, religious, well-meaning, good soul, talking of nothing but God
Almighty, and that with so much innocence that mightily pleased me. Here
was a fellow that said grace so long like a prayer; I believe the fellow
is a cunning fellow, and yet I by my brother's desire did give him a
crown, he being in great want, and, it seems, a parson among the
fanatiques, and a cozen of my poor aunt's, whose prayers she told me did
do me good among the many good souls that did by my father's desires pray
for me when I was cut of the stone, and which God did hear, which I also
in complaisance did own; but, God forgive me, my mind was otherwise. I had
a couple of lobsters and some wine for her, and so, she going out of town
to-day, and being not willing to come home with me to dinner, I parted and
home, where we sat at the office all the morning, and after dinner all the
afternoon till night, there at my office getting up the time that I have
of late lost by not following my business, but I hope now to settle my
mind again very well to my business.  So home, and after supper did wash
my feet, and so to bed.

31st (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed talking with my wife, and do plainly
see that her distaste (which is beginning now in her again) against
Ashwell arises from her jealousy of me and her, and my neglect of herself,
which indeed is true, and I to blame; but for the time to come I will take
care to remedy all.  So up and to church, where I think I did see
Pembleton, whatever the reason is I did not perceive him to look up
towards my wife, nor she much towards him; however, I could hardly keep
myself from being troubled that he was there, which is a madness not to be
excused now that his coming to my house is past, and I hope all likelyhood
of her having occasion to converse with him again.  Home to dinner, and
after dinner up and read part of the new play of "The Five Houres'
Adventures," which though I have seen it twice; yet I never did admire or
understand it enough, it being a play of the greatest plot that ever I
expect to see, and of great vigour quite through the whole play, from
beginning to the end.  To church again after dinner (my wife finding
herself ill .  .  .  .  did not go), and there the Scot preaching I slept
most of the sermon.  This day Sir W. Batten's son's child is christened in
the country, whither Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W, Batten, and Sir W. Pen are
all gone.  I wonder, and take it highly ill that I am not invited by the
father, though I know his father and mother, with whom I am never likely
to have much kindness, but rather I study the contrary, are the cause of
it, and in that respect I am glad of it.  Being come from church, I to
make up my month's accounts, and find myself clear worth L726, for which
God be praised, but yet I might have been better by L20 almost had I
forborne some layings out in dancing and other things upon my wife, and
going to plays and other things merely to ease my mind as to the business
of the dancing-master, which I bless God is now over and I falling to my
quiet of mind and business again, which I have for a fortnight neglected
too much.  This month the greatest news is, the height and heat that the
Parliament is in, in enquiring into the revenue, which displeases the
Court, and their backwardness to give the King any money.  Their enquiring
into the selling of places do trouble a great many among the chief, my
Lord Chancellor (against whom particularly it is carried), and Mr.
Coventry; for which I am sorry.  The King of France was given out to be
poisoned and dead; but it proves to be the measles: and he is well, or
likely to be soon well again.  I find myself growing in the esteem and
credit that I have in the office, and I hope falling to my business again
will confirm me in it, and the saving of money which God grant!  So to
supper, prayers, and bed.  My whole family lying longer this morning than
was fit, and besides Will having neglected to brush my clothes, as he
ought to do, till I was ready to go to church, and not then till I bade
him, I was very angry, and seeing him make little matter of it, but
seeming to make it a matter indifferent whether he did it or no, I did
give him a box on the ear, and had it been another day should have done
more.  This is the second time I ever struck him.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 JUNE
                                 1663

June 1st.  Begun again to rise betimes by 4 o'clock, and made an end of
"The Adventures of Five Houres," and it is a most excellent play.  So to
my office, where a while and then about several businesses, in my way to
my brother's, where I dined (being invited) with Mr. Peter and Dean
Honiwood,  where Tom did give us a very pretty dinner, and we very
pleasant, but not very merry, the Dean being but a weak man, though very
good.  I was forced to rise, being in haste to St. James's to attend the
Duke, and left them to end their dinner; but the Duke having been
a-hunting to-day, and so lately come home and gone to bed, we could not
see him, and Mr. Coventry being out of the house too, we walked away to
White Hall and there took coach, and I with Sir J. Minnes to the Strand
May-pole; and there 'light out of his coach, and walked to the New
Theatre, which, since the King's players are gone to the Royal one, is
this day begun to be employed by the fencers to play prizes at. And here I
came and saw the first prize I ever saw in my life: and it was between one
Mathews, who did beat at all weapons, and one Westwicke, who was soundly
cut several times both in the head and legs, that he was all over blood:
and other deadly blows they did give and take in very good earnest, till
Westwicke was in a most sad pickle.  They fought at eight weapons, three
bouts at each weapon.  It was very well worth seeing, because I did till
this day think that it has only been a cheat; but this being upon a
private quarrel, they did it in good earnest; and I felt one of their
swords, and found it to be very little, if at all blunter on the edge,
than the common swords are.  Strange to see what a deal of money is flung
to them both upon the stage between every bout.  But a woful rude rabble
there was, and such noises, made my head ake all this evening. So, well
pleased for once with this sight, I walked home, doing several businesses
by the way.  In my way calling to see Commissioner Pett, who lies sick at
his daughter, a pretty woman, in Gracious Street, but is likely to be
abroad again in a day or two.  At home I found my wife in bed all this day
.  .  .  .  I went to see Sir Wm. Pen, who has a little pain of his gout
again, but will do well.  So home to supper and to bed. This day I hear at
Court of the great plot which was lately discovered in Ireland, made among
the Presbyters and others, designing to cry up the Covenant, and to secure
Dublin Castle and other places; and they have debauched a good part of the
army there, promising them ready money.

     [This  was known as "Blood's Plot," and was named after Colonel
     Thomas Blood, afterwards notorious for his desperate attack upon the
     Duke of Ormond in St. James's Street (1670) and for his robbery of
     the crown jewels in the Tower (1671).  He died August 24th, 1680.]

Some of the Parliament there, they say, are guilty, and some withdrawn
upon it; several persons taken, and among others a son of Scott's, that
was executed here for the King's murder.  What reason the King hath, I
know not; but it seems he is doubtfull of Scotland: and this afternoon,
when I was there, the Council was called extraordinary; and they were
opening the letters this last post's coming and going between Scotland and
us and other places.  Blessed be God, my head and hands are clear, and
therefore my sleep safe.  The King of France is well again.

2d.  Up and by water to White Hall and so to St. James's, to Mr. Coventry;
where I had an hour's private talk with him.  Most of it was discourse
concerning his own condition, at present being under the censure of the
House, being concerned with others in the Bill for selling of offices.  He
tells me, that though he thinks himself to suffer much in his fame hereby,
yet he values nothing more of evil to hang over him for that it is against
no statute, as is pretended, nor more than what his predecessors time out
of mind have taken; and that so soon as he found himself to be in an
errour, he did desire to have his fees set, which was done; and since that
he hath not taken a token more.  He undertakes to prove, that he did never
take a token of any captain to get him employed in his life beforehand, or
demanded any thing: and for the other accusation, that the Cavaliers are
not employed, he looked over the list of them now in the service, and of
the twenty-seven that are employed, thirteen have been heretofore always
under the King; two neutralls, and the other twelve men of great courage,
and such as had either the King's particular commands, or great
recommendation to put them in, and none by himself.  Besides that, he says
it is not the King's nor Duke's opinion that the whole party of the late
officers should be rendered desperate.  And lastly, he confesses that the
more of the Cavaliers are put in, the less of discipline hath followed in
the fleet; and that, whenever there comes occasion, it must be the old
ones that must do any good, there being only, he says, but Captain Allen
good for anything of them all.  He tells me, that he cannot guess whom all
this should come from; but he suspects Sir G. Carteret, as I also do, at
least that he is pleased with it.  But he tells me that he will bring Sir
G. Carteret to be the first adviser and instructor of him what to make his
place of benefit to him; telling him that Smith did make his place worth
L5000 and he believed L7000 to him the first year; besides something else
greater than all this, which he forbore to tell me.  It seems one Sir
Thomas Tomkins of the House, that makes many mad motions, did bring it
into the House, saying that a letter was left at his lodgings, subscribed
by one Benson (which is a feigned name, for there is no such man in the
Navy), telling him how many places in the Navy have been sold.  And by
another letter, left in the same manner since, nobody appearing, he writes
him that there is one Hughes and another Butler (both rogues, that have
for their roguery been turned out of their places), that will swear that
Mr. Coventry did sell their places and other things.  I offered him my
service, and will with all my heart serve him; but he tells me he do not
think it convenient to meddle, or to any purpose, but is sensible of my
love therein.  So I bade him good morrow, he being out of order to speak
anything of our office business, and so away to Westminster Hall, where I
hear more of the plot from Ireland; which it seems hath been hatching, and
known to the Lord Lieutenant a great while, and kept close till within
three days that it should have taken effect.  The term ended yesterday,
and it seems the Courts rose sooner, for want of causes, than it is
remembered to have done in the memory of man.  Thence up and down about
business in several places, as to speak with Mr. Phillips, but missed him,
and so to Mr. Beacham, the goldsmith, he being one of the jury to-morrow
in Sir W. Batten's case against Field.  I have been telling him our case,
and I believe he will do us good service there.  So home, and seeing my
wife had dined I went, being invited, and dined with Sir W. Batten, Sir J.
Minnes, and others, at Sir W. Batten's, Captain Allen giving them a Foy'
dinner, he being to go down to lie Admiral in the Downs this summer.  I
cannot but think it a little strange that having been so civil to him as I
have been he should not invite me to dinner, but I believe it was but a
sudden motion, and so I heard not of it.  After dinner to the office,
where all the afternoon till late, and so to see Sir W. Pen, and so home
to supper and to bed. To-night I took occasion with the vintner's man, who
came by my direction to taste again my tierce of claret, to go down to the
cellar with him to consult about the drawing of it; and there, to my great
vexation, I find that the cellar door hath long been kept unlocked, and
above half the wine drunk.  I was deadly mad at it, and examined my people
round, but nobody would confess it; but I did examine the boy, and
afterwards Will, and told him of his sitting up after we were in bed with
the maids, but as to that business he denies it, which I can [not] remedy,
but I shall endeavour to know how it went.  My wife did also this evening
tell me a story of Ashwell stealing some new ribbon from her, a yard or
two, which I am sorry to hear, and I fear my wife do take a displeasure
against her, that they will hardly stay together, which I should be sorry
for, because I know not where to pick such another out anywhere.

3rd.  Up betimes, and studying of my double horizontal diall against Dean
Honiwood comes to me, who dotes mightily upon it, and I think I must give
it him.  So after talking with Sir W. Batten, who is this morning gone to
Guildhall to his trial with Field, I to my office, and there read all the
morning in my statute-book, consulting among others the statute against
selling of offices, wherein Mr. Coventry is so much concerned; and though
he tells me that the statute do not reach him, yet I much fear that it
will.  At noon, hearing that the trial is done, and Sir W. Batten come to
the Sun behind the Exchange I went thither, where he tells me that he had
much ado to carry it on his side, but that at last he did, but the jury,
by the judge's favour, did give us but; L10 damages and the charges of the
suit, which troubles me; but it is well it went not against us, which
would have been much worse.  So to the Exchange, and thence home to
dinner, taking Deane of Woolwich along with me, and he dined alone with my
wife being undressed, and he and I spent all the afternoon finely,
learning of him the method of drawing the lines of a ship, to my great
satisfaction, and which is well worth my spending some time in, as I shall
do when my wife is gone into the country.  In the evening to the office
and did some business, then home, and, God forgive me, did from my wife's
unwillingness to tell me whither she had sent the boy, presently suspect
that he was gone to Pembleton's, and from that occasion grew so
discontented that I could hardly speak or sleep all night.

4th.  Up betimes, and my wife and Ashwell and I whiled away the morning up
and down while they got themselves ready, and I did so watch to see my
wife put on drawers, which poor soul she did, and yet I could not get off
my suspicions, she having a mind to go into Fenchurch Street before she
went out for good and all with me, which I must needs construe to be to
meet Pembleton, when she afterwards told me it was to buy a fan that she
had not a mind that I should know of, and I believe it is so.  Specially I
did by a wile get out of my boy that he did not yesterday go to
Pembleton's or thereabouts, but only was sent all that time for some
starch, and I did see him bringing home some, and yet all this cannot make
my mind quiet.  At last by coach I carried her to Westminster Hall, and
they two to Mrs. Bowyer to go from thence to my wife's father's and
Ashwell to hers, and by and by seeing my wife's father in the Hall, and
being loth that my wife should put me to another trouble and charge by
missing him to-day, I did employ a porter to go from a person unknown to
tell him his daughter was come to his lodgings, and I at a distance did
observe him, but, Lord! what a company of questions he did ask him, what
kind of man I was, and God knows what.  So he went home, and after I had
staid in the Hall a good while, where I heard that this day the Archbishop
of Canterbury, Juxon, a man well spoken of by all for a good man, is dead;
and the Bishop of London is to have his seat.  Home by water, where by and
by comes Dean Honiwood, and I showed him my double horizontal diall, and
promise to give him one, and that shall be it.  So, without eating or
drinking, he went away to Mr. Turner's, where Sir J. Minnes do treat my
Lord Chancellor and a great deal of guests to-day with a great dinner,
which I thank God I do not pay for; and besides, I doubt it is too late
for any man to expect any great service from my Lord Chancellor, for which
I am sorry, and pray God a worse do not come in his room.  So I to dinner
alone, and so to my chamber, and then to the office alone, my head aching
and my mind in trouble for my wife, being jealous of her spending the day,
though God knows I have no great reason.  Yet my mind is troubled.  By and
by comes Will Howe to see us, and walked with me an hour in the garden,
talking of my Lord's falling to business again, which I am glad of, and
his coming to lie at his lodgings at White Hall again.  The match between
Sir J. Cutts and my Lady Jemimah, he says, is likely to go on; for which I
am glad.  In the Hall to-day Dr. Pierce tells me that the Queen begins to
be brisk, and play like other ladies, and is quite another woman from what
she was, of which I am glad.  It may be, it may make the King like her the
better, and forsake his two mistresses, my Lady Castlemaine and Stewart.
He gone we sat at the office till night, and then home, where my wife is
come, and has been with her father all the afternoon, and so home, and she
and I to walk in the garden, giving ear to her discourse of her father's
affairs, and I found all well, so after putting things in order at my
office, home to supper and to bed.

5th.  Up and to read a little, and by and by the carver coming, I directed
him how to make me a neat head for my viall that is making. About 10
o'clock my wife and I, not without some discontent, abroad by coach, and I
set her at her father's; but their condition is such that she will not let
me see where they live, but goes by herself when I am out of sight.
Thence to my brother's, taking care for a passage for my wife the next
week in a coach to my father's, and thence to Paul's Churchyard, where I
found several books ready bound for me; among others, the new Concordance
of the Bible, which pleases me much, and is a book I hope to make good use
of.  Thence, taking the little History of England with me, I went by water
to Deptford, where Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten attending the Pay; I
dined with them, and there Dr. Britton, parson of the town, a fine man and
good company, dined with us, and good discourse.  After dinner I left them
and walked to Redriffe, and thence to White Hall, and at my Lord's
lodgings found my wife, and thence carried her to see my Lady Jemimah, but
she was not within.  So to Mr. Turner's, and there saw Mr. Edward Pepys's
lady, who my wife concurs with me to be very pretty, as most women we ever
saw.  So home, and after a walk in the garden a little troubled to see my
wife take no more pleasure with Ashwell, but neglect her and leave her at
home.  Home to supper and to bed.

6th.  Lay in bed till 7 o'clock, yet rose with an opinion that it was not
5, and so continued though I heard the clock strike, till noon, and would
not believe that it was so late as it truly was.  I was hardly ever so
mistaken in my life before.  Up and to Sir G. Carteret at his house, and
spoke to him about business, but he being in a bad humour I had no mind to
stay with him, but walked, drinking my morning draft of whay, by the way,
to York House, where the Russia Embassador do lie; and there I saw his
people go up and down louseing themselves: they are all in a great hurry,
being to be gone the beginning of next week.  But that that pleased me
best, was the remains of the noble soul of the late Duke of Buckingham
appearing in his house, in every place, in the doorcases and the windows.
By and by comes Sir John Hebden, the Russia Resident, to me, and he and I
in his coach to White Hall, to Secretary Morrice's, to see the orders
about the Russia hemp that is to be fetched from Archangel for our King,
and that being done, to coach again, and he brought me into the City and
so I home; and after dinner abroad by water, and met by appointment Mr.
Deane in the Temple Church, and he and I over to Mr. Blackbury's yard, and
thence to other places, and after that to a drinking house, in all which
places I did so practise and improve my measuring of timber, that I can
now do it with great ease and perfection, which do please me mightily.
This fellow Deane is a conceited fellow, and one that means the King a
great deal of service, more of disservice to other people that go away
with the profits which he cannot make; but, however, I learn much of him,
and he is, I perceive, of great use to the King in his place, and so I
shall give him all the encouragement I can. Home by water, and having
wrote a letter for my wife to my Lady Sandwich to copy out to send this
night's post, I to the office, and wrote there myself several things, and
so home to supper and bed.  My mind being troubled to think into what a
temper of neglect I have myself flung my wife into by my letting her learn
to dance, that it will require time to cure her of, and I fear her going
into the country will but make her worse; but only I do hope in the
meantime to spend my time well in my office, with more leisure than while
she is here.  Hebden, to-day in the coach, did tell me how he is vexed to
see things at Court ordered as they are by nobody that attends to
business, but every man himself or his pleasures.  He cries up my Lord
Ashley to be almost the only man that he sees to look after business; and
with that ease and mastery, that he wonders at him.  He cries out against
the King's dealing so much with goldsmiths, and suffering himself to have
his purse kept and commanded by them.  He tells me also with what exact
care and order the States of Holland's stores are kept in their Yards, and
every thing managed there by their builders with such husbandry as is not
imaginable; which I will endeavour to understand further, if I can by any
means learn.

7th (Lord's day).  Whit Sunday.  Lay long talking with my wife, sometimes
angry and ended pleased and hope to bring our matters to a better posture
in a little time, which God send.  So up and to church, where Mr. Mills
preached, but, I know not how, I slept most of the sermon.  Thence home,
and dined with my wife and Ashwell and after dinner discoursed very
pleasantly, and so I to church again in the afternoon, and, the Scot
preaching, again slept all the afternoon, and so home, and by and by to
Sir W. Batten's, to talk about business, where my Lady Batten inveighed
mightily against the German Princess, and I as high in the defence of her
wit and spirit, and glad that she is cleared at the sessions.  Thence to
Sir W. Pen, who I found ill again of the gout, he tells me that now Mr.
Castle and Mrs. Martha Batten do own themselves to be married, and have
been this fortnight.  Much good may it do him, for I do not envy him his
wife.  So home, and there my wife and I had an angry word or two upon
discourse of our boy, compared with Sir W. Pen's boy that he has now, whom
I say is much prettier than ours and she the contrary.  It troubles me to
see that every small thing is enough now-a-days to bring a difference
between us.  So to my office and there did a little business, and then
home to supper and to bed.  Mrs. Turner, who is often at Court, do tell me
to-day that for certain the Queen hath much changed her humour, and is
become very pleasant and sociable as any; and they say is with child, or
believed to be so.

8th.  Up and to my office a while, and thence by coach with Sir J. Minnes
to St. James's to the Duke, where Mr. Coventry and us two did discourse
with the Duke a little about our office business, which saved our coming
in the afternoon, and so to rights home again and to dinner.  After dinner
my wife and I had a little jangling, in which she did give me the lie,
which vexed me, so that finding my talking did but make her worse, and
that her spirit is lately come to be other than it used to be, and now
depends upon her having Ashwell by her, before whom she thinks I shall not
say nor do anything of force to her, which vexes me and makes me wish that
I had better considered all that I have of late done concerning my
bringing my wife to this condition of heat, I went up vexed to my chamber
and there fell examining my new concordance, that I have bought, with
Newman's, the best that ever was out before, and I find mine altogether as
copious as that and something larger, though the order in some respects
not so good, that a man may think a place is missing, when it is only put
in another place.  Up by and by my wife comes and good friends again, and
to walk in the garden and so anon to supper and to bed.  My cozen John
Angier the son, of Cambridge coming to me late to see me, and I find his
business is that he would be sent to sea, but I dissuaded him from it, for
I will not have to do with it without his friends' consent.

9th.  Up and after ordering some things towards my wife's going into the
country, to the office, where I spent the morning upon my measuring rules
very pleasantly till noon, and then comes Creed and he and I talked about
mathematiques, and he tells me of a way found out by Mr. Jonas Moore which
he calls duodecimal arithmetique, which is properly applied to measuring,
where all is ordered by inches, which are 12 in a foot, which I have a
mind to learn.  So he with me home to dinner and after dinner walk in the
garden, and then we met at the office, where Coventry, Sir J. Minnes, and
I, and so in the evening, business done, I went home and spent my time
till night with my wife.  Presently after my coming home comes Pembleton,
whether by appointment or no I know not, or whether by a former promise
that he would come once before my wife's going into the country, but I
took no notice of, let them go up and Ashwell with them to dance, which
they did, and I staid below in my chamber, but, Lord! how I listened and
laid my ear to the door, and how I was troubled when I heard them stand
still and not dance.  Anon they made an end and had done, and so I
suffered him to go away, and spoke not to him, though troubled in my mind,
but showed no discontent to my wife, believing that this is the last time
I shall be troubled with him.  So my wife and I to walk in the garden,
home and to supper and to bed.

10th.  Up and all the morning helping my wife to put up her things towards
her going into the country and drawing the wine out of my vessel to send.
This morning came my cozen Thomas Pepys to desire me to furnish him with
some money, which I could not do till his father has wrote to Piggott his
consent to the sale of his lands, so by and by we parted and I to the
Exchange a while and so home and to dinner, and thence to the Royal
Theatre by water, and landing, met with Captain Ferrers his friend, the
little man that used to be with him, and he with us, and sat by us while
we saw "Love in a Maze."  The play is pretty good, but the life of the
play is Lacy's part, the clown, which is most admirable; but for the rest,
which are counted such old and excellent actors, in my life I never heard
both men and women so ill pronounce their parts, even to my making myself
sick therewith.  Thence, Creed happening to be with us, we four to the
Half-Moon Tavern, I buying some sugar and carrying it with me, which we
drank with wine and thence to the whay-house, and drank a great deal of
whay, and so by water home, and thence to see Sir W. Pen, who is not in
much pain, but his legs swell and so immoveable that he cannot stir them,
but as they are lifted by other people and I doubt will have another fit
of his late pain.  Played a little at cards with him and his daughter, who
is grown every day a finer and finer lady, and so home to supper and to
bed.  When my wife and I came first home we took Ashwell and all the rest
below in the cellar with the vintner drawing out my wine, which I blamed
Ashwell much for and told her my mind that I would not endure it, nor was
it fit for her to make herself equal with the ordinary servants of the
house.

11th.  Up and spent most of the morning upon my measuring Ruler and with
great pleasure I have found out some things myself of great dispatch, more
than my book teaches me, which pleases me mightily.  Sent my wife's things
and the wine to-day by the carrier to my father's, but staid my boy from a
letter of my father's, wherein he desires that he may not come to trouble
his family as he did the last year.  Dined at home and then to the office,
where we sat all the afternoon, and at night home and spent the evening
with my wife, and she and I did jangle mightily about her cushions that
she wrought with worsteds the last year, which are too little for any use,
but were good friends by and by again.  But one thing I must confess I do
observe, which I did not before, which is, that I cannot blame my wife to
be now in a worse humour than she used to be, for I am taken up in my talk
with Ashwell, who is a very witty girl, that I am not so fond of her as I
used and ought to be, which now I do perceive I will remedy, but I would
to the Lord I had never taken any, though I cannot have a better than her.
To supper and to bed.  The consideration that this is the longest day in
the year is very unpleasant to me.--[It is necessary to note that this was
according to the old style.]--This afternoon my wife had a visit from my
Lady Jeminah and Mr. Ferrers.

12th.  Up and my office, there conning my measuring Ruler, which I shall
grow a master of in a very little time.  At noon to the Exchange and so
home to dinner, and abroad with my wife by water to the Royall Theatre;
and there saw "The Committee," a merry but indifferent play, only Lacey's
part, an Irish footman, is beyond imagination.  Here I saw my Lord
Falconbridge, and his Lady, my Lady Mary Cromwell, who looks as well as I
have known her, and well clad; but when the House began to fill she put on
her vizard,

     [Masks were commonly used by ladies in the reign of Elizabeth, and
     when their use was revived at the Restoration for respectable women
     attending the theatre, they became general.  They soon, however,
     became the mark of loose women, and their use was discontinued by
     women of repute.  On June 1st, 1704, a song was sung at the theatre
     in Lincoln's Inn Fields called "The Misses' Lamentation for want of
     their Vizard Masques at the Theatre."  Mr. R. W. Lowe gives several
     references to the use of vizard masks at the theatre in his
     interesting biography, "Thomas Betterton."]

and so kept it on all the play; which of late is become a great fashion
among the ladies, which hides their whole face.  So to the Exchange, to
buy things with my wife; among others, a vizard for herself.  And so by
water home and to my office to do a little business, and so to see Sir W.
Pen, but being going to bed and not well I could not see him.  So home and
to supper and bed, being mightily troubled all night and next morning with
the palate of my mouth being down from some cold I took to-day sitting
sweating in the playhouse, and the wind blowing through the windows upon
my head.

13th.  Up and betimes to Thames Street among the tarr men, to look the
price of tarr and so by water to Whitehall thinking to speak with Sir G.
Carteret, but he lying in the city all night, and meeting with Mr. Cutler
the merchant, I with him in his coach into the city to Sir G. Carteret,
but missing him there, he and I walked to find him at Sir Tho. Allen's in
Bread Street, where not finding him he and I walked towards our office, he
discoursing well of the business of the Navy, and particularly of the
victualling, in which he was once I perceive concerned, and he and I
parted and I to the office and there had a difference with Sir W. Batten
about Mr. Bowyer's tarr, which I am resolved to cross, though he sent me
last night, as a bribe, a barrel of sturgeon, which, it may be, I shall
send back, for I will not have the King abused so abominably in the price
of what we buy, by Sir W. Batten's corruption and underhand dealing.  So
from the office, Mr. Wayth with me, to the Parliament House, and there I
spoke and told Sir G. Carteret all, with which he is well pleased, and do
recall his willingness yesterday, it seems, to Sir W. Batten, that we
should buy a great quantity of tarr, being abused by him.  Thence with Mr.
Wayth after drinking a cupp of ale at the Swan, talking of the corruption
of the Navy, by water.  I landed him at Whitefriars, and I to the
Exchange, and so home to dinner, where I found my wife's brother, and
thence after dinner by water to the Royall Theatre, where I resolved to
bid farewell, as shall appear by my oaths tomorrow against all plays
either at publique houses or Court till Christmas be over.  Here we saw
"The Faithfull Sheepheardesse," a most simple thing, and yet much thronged
after, and often shown, but it is only for the scenes' sake, which is very
fine indeed and worth seeing; but I am quite out of opinion with any of
their actings, but Lacy's, compared with the other house. Thence to see
Mrs. Hunt, which we did and were much made of; and in our way saw my Lady
Castlemaine, who, I fear, is not so handsome as I have taken her for, and
now she begins to decay something.  This is my wife's opinion also, for
which I am sorry.  Thence by coach, with a mad coachman, that drove like
mad, and down byeways, through Bucklersbury home, everybody through the
street cursing him, being ready to run over them.  So home, and after
writing letters by the post, home to supper and bed.  Yesterday, upon
conference with the King in the Banqueting House, the Parliament did agree
with much ado, it being carried but by forty-two voices, that they would
supply him with a sum of money; but what and how is not yet known, but
expected to be done with great disputes the next week.  But if done at
all, it is well.

14th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed.  So up and to church.  Then to
dinner, and Tom dined with me, who I think grows a very thriving man, as
he himself tells me.  He tells me that his man John has got a wife, and
for that he intends to part with him, which I am sorry for, and then that
Mr. Armiger comes to be a constant lodger at his house, and he says has
money in his purse and will be a good paymaster, but I do much doubt it.
He being gone, I up and sending my people to church, my wife and I did
even our reckonings, and had a great deal of serious talk, wherein I took
occasion to give her hints of the necessity of our saving all we can. I do
see great cause every day to curse the time that ever I did give way to
the taking of a woman for her, though I could never have had a better, and
also the letting of her learn to dance, by both which her mind is so
devilishly taken off her business and minding her occasions, and besides
has got such an opinion in her of my being jealous, that it is never to be
removed, I fear, nor hardly my trouble that attends it; but I must have
patience.  I did give her 40s.  to carry into the country tomorrow with
her, whereof 15s. is to go for the coach-hire for her and Ashwell, there
being 20s. paid here already in earnest.  In the evening our discourse
turned to great content and love, and I hope that after a little
forgetting our late differences, and being a while absent one from
another, we shall come to agree as well as ever.  So to Sir W. Pen's to
visit him, and finding him alone, sent for my wife, who is in her
riding-suit, to see him, which she hath not done these many months I
think.  By and by in comes Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, and so we sat
talking. Among other things, Sir J. Minnes brought many fine expressions
of Chaucer, which he doats on mightily, and without doubt he is a very
fine poet.

     [Pepys continued through life an admirer of Chaucer, and we have the
     authority of Dryden himself for saying that we owe his character of
     the Good Parson to Pepys's recommendation.]

Sir W. Pen continues lame of the gout, that he cannot rise from his chair.
So after staying an hour with him, we went home and to supper, and so to
prayers and bed.

15th.  Up betimes, and anon my wife rose and did give me her keys, and put
other things in order and herself against going this morning into the
country.  I was forced to go to Thames Street and strike up a bargain for
some tarr, to prevent being abused therein by Hill, who was with me this
morning, and is mightily surprised that I should tell him what I can have
the same tarr with his for.  Thence home, but finding my wife gone, I took
coach and after her to her inn, where I am troubled to see her forced to
sit in the back of the coach, though pleased to see her company none but
women and one parson; she I find is troubled at all, and I seemed to make
a promise to get a horse and ride after them; and so, kissing her often,
and Ashwell once, I bid them adieu.  So home by coach, and thence by water
to Deptford to the Trinity House, where I came a little late; but I found
them reading their charter, which they did like fools, only reading here
and there a bit, whereas they ought to do it all, every word, and then
proceeded to the election of a maister, which was Sir W. Batten, without
any control, who made a heavy, short speech to them, moving them to give
thanks to the late Maister for his pains, which he said was very great,
and giving them thanks for their choice of him, wherein he would serve
them to the best of his power.  Then to the choice of their assistants and
wardens, and so rose.  I might have received 2s. 6d. as a younger Brother,
but I directed one of the servants of the House to receive it and keep it.
Thence to church, where Dr. Britton preached a sermon full of words
against the Nonconformists, but no great matter in it, nor proper for the
day at all.  His text was, "With one mind and one mouth give glory to God,
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ."  That done, by water, I in the barge
with the Maister, to the Trinity House at London; where, among others, I
found my Lords Sandwich and Craven, and my cousin Roger Pepys, and Sir Wm.
Wheeler.  Anon we sat down to dinner, which was very great, as they always
have.  Great variety of talk.  Mr. Prin, among many, had a pretty tale of
one that brought in a bill in parliament for the empowering him to dispose
his land to such children as he should have that should bear the name of
his wife.  It was in Queen Elizabeth's time.  One replied that there are
many species of creatures where the male gives the denomination to both
sexes, as swan and woodcock, but not above one where the female do, and
that is a goose. Both at and after dinner we had great discourses of the
nature and power of spirits, and whether they can animate dead bodies; in
all which, as of the general appearance of spirits, my Lord Sandwich is
very scepticall. He says the greatest warrants that ever he had to believe
any, is the present appearing of the Devil

     [In 1664, there being a generall report all over the kingdom of Mr.
     Monpesson his house being haunted, which hee himself affirming to
     the King and Queene to be true, the King sent the Lord Falmouth, and
     the Queene sent mee, to examine the truth of; but wee could neither
     see nor heare anything that was extraordinary; and about a year
     after, his Majesty told me that hee had discovered the cheat, and
     that Mr. Monpesson, upon his Majesty sending for him, confessed it
     to him.  And yet Mr. Monpesson, in a printed letter, had afterwards
     the confidence to deny that hee had ever made any such confession"
     ("Letters of the Second Earl of Chesterfield," p. 24, 1829, 8vo.).
     Joseph Glanville published a relation of the famous disturbance at
     the house of Mr. Monpesson, at Tedworth, Wilts, occasioned by the
     beating of an invisible drum every night for a year.  This story,
     which was believed at the time, furnished the plot for Addison's
     play of "The Drummer," or the "Haunted House."  In the "Mercurius
     Publicus," April 16-23, 1663, there is a curious examination on this
     subject, by which it appears that one William Drury, of Uscut,
     Wilts, was the invisible drummer.--B.]

in Wiltshire, much of late talked of, who beats a drum up and down. There
are books of it, and, they say, very true; but my Lord observes, that
though he do answer to any tune that you will play to him upon another
drum, yet one tune he tried to play and could not; which makes him suspect
the whole; and I think it is a good argument.  Sometimes they talked of
handsome women, and Sir J. Minnes saying that there was no beauty like
what he sees in the country-markets, and specially at Bury, in which I
will agree with him that there is a prettiest women I ever saw.  My Lord
replied thus: "Sir John, what do you think of your neighbour's wife?"
looking upon me.  "Do you not think that he hath a great beauty to his
wife?  Upon my word he hath."  Which I was not a little proud of.  Thence
by barge with my Lord to Blackfriars, where we landed and I thence walked
home, where vexed to find my boy (whom I boxed at his coming for it) and
Will abroad, though he was but upon Tower Hill a very little while.  My
head akeing with the healths I was forced to drink to-day I sent for the
barber, and he having done, I up to my wife's closett, and there played on
my viallin a good while, and without supper anon to bed, sad for want of
my wife, whom I love with all my heart, though of late she has given me
some troubled thoughts.

16th.  Up, but not so early as I intend now, and to my office, where doing
business all the morning.  At noon by desire I dined with Sir W. Batten,
who tells me that the House have voted the supply, intended for the King,
shall be by subsidy.  After dinner with Sir J. Minnes to see some pictures
at Brewer's, said to be of good hands, but I do not like them.  So I to
the office and thence to Stacy's, his Tar merchant, whose servant with
whom I agreed yesterday for some tar do by combination with Bowyer and
Hill fall from our agreement, which vexes us all at the office, even Sir
W. Batten, who was so earnest for it.  So to the office, where we sat all
the afternoon till night, and then to Sir W. Pen, who continues ill, and
so to bed about 10 o'clock.

17th.  Up before 4 o'clock, which is the hour I intend now to rise at, and
to my office a while, and with great pleasure I fell to my business again.
Anon went with money to my tar merchant to pay for the tar, which he
refuses to sell me; but now the master is come home, and so he speaks very
civilly, and I believe we shall have it with peace.  I brought back my
money to my office, and thence to White Hall, and in the garden spoke to
my Lord Sandwich, who is in his gold-buttoned suit, as the mode is, and
looks nobly.  Captain Ferrers, I see, is come home from France.  I only
spoke one word to him, my Lord being there.  He tells me the young
gentlemen are well there; so my Lord went to my Lord Albemarle's to
dinner, and I by water home and dined alone, and at the office (after half
an hour's viallin practice after dinner) till late at night, and so home
and to bed.  This day I sent my cozen Edward Pepys his Lady, at my cozen
Turner's, a piece of venison given me yesterday, and Madam Turner I sent
for a dozen bottles of her's, to fill with wine for her.  This day I met
with Pierce the surgeon, who tells me that the King has made peace between
Mr. Edward Montagu and his father Lord Montagu, and that all is well
again; at which; for the family's sake, I am very glad, but do not think
it will hold long.

18th.  Up by four o'clock and to my office, where all the morning writing
out in my Navy collections the ordinary estimate of the Navy, and did it
neatly.  Then dined at home alone, my mind pleased with business, but sad
for the absence of my wife.  After dinner half an hour at my viallin, and
then all the afternoon sitting at the office late, and so home and to bed.
This morning Mr. Cutler came and sat in my closet half an hour with me,
his discourse very excellent, being a wise man, and I do perceive by him
as well as many others that my diligence is taken notice of in the world,
for which I bless God and hope to continue doing so.  Before I went into
my house this night I called at Sir W. Batten's, where finding some great
ladies at table at supper with him and his lady, I retreated and went
home, though they called to me again and again, and afterwards sent for
me.  So I went, and who should it be but Sir Fr. Clerke and his lady and
another proper lady at supper there, and great cheer, where I staid till
11 o'clock at night, and so home and to bed.

19th.  Lay till 6 o'clock, and then up and to my office, where all the
morning, and at noon to the Exchange, and coming home met Mr. Creed, and
took him back, and he dined with me, and by and by came Mr. Moore, whom I
supplied with L30, and then abroad with them by water to Lambeth,
expecting to have seen the Archbishop lie in state; but it seems he is not
laid out yet.  And so over to White Hall, and at the Privy Seal Office
examined the books, and found the grant of increase of salary to the
principall officers in the year 1639, L300 among the Controller, Surveyor,
and Clerk of the Shippes.  Thence to Wilkinson's after a good walk in the
Park, where we met on horseback Captain Ferrers; who tells us that the
King of France is well again, and that he saw him train his Guards, all
brave men, at Paris; and that when he goes to his mistress, Madame la
Valiere, a pretty little woman, now with child by him, he goes with his
guards with him publiquely, and his trumpets and kettle-drums with him,
who stay before the house while he is with her; and yet he says that, for
all this, the Queen do not know of it, for that nobody dares to tell her;
but that I dare not believe.  Thence I to Wilkinson's, where we had
bespoke a dish of pease, where we eat them very merrily, and there being
with us the little gentleman, a friend of Captain Ferrers, that was with
my wife and I at a play a little while ago, we went thence to the Rhenish
wine-house, where we called for a red Rhenish wine called Bleahard, a
pretty wine, and not mixed, as they say.  Here Mr. Moore showed us the
French manner, when a health is drunk, to bow to him that drunk to you,
and then apply yourself to him, whose lady's health is drunk, and then to
the person that you drink to, which I never knew before; but it seems it
is now the fashion.  Thence by water home and to bed, having played out of
my chamber window on my pipe before I went to bed, and making Will read a
part of a Latin chapter, in which I perceive in a little while he will be
pretty ready, if he spends but a little pains in it.

20th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning, and dined at home, Mr.
Deane, of Woolwich, with me, and he and I all the afternoon down by water,
and in a timber yard, measuring of timber, which I now understand
thoroughly, and shall be able in a little time to do the King great
service.  Home in the evening, and after Will's reading a little in the
Latin Testament, to bed.

21st (Lord's day).  Up betimes, and fell to reading my Latin grammar,
which I perceive I have great need of, having lately found it by my
calling Will to the reading of a chapter in Latin, and I am resolved to go
through it.  After being trimmed, I by water to White Hall, and so over
the Park, it raining hard, to Mr. Coventry's chamber, where I spent two
hours with him about business of the Navy, and how by his absence things
are like to go with us, and with good content from my being with him he
carried me by coach and set me down at Whitehall, and thence to right home
by water.  He shewed me a list, which he hath prepared for the
Parliament's view, if the business of his selling of offices should be
brought to further hearing, wherein he reckons up, as I remember, 236
offices of ships which have been disposed of without his taking one
farthing.  This, of his own accord, he opened his cabinet on purpose to
shew me, meaning, I suppose, that I should discourse abroad of it, and
vindicate him therein, which I shall with all my power do.  At home, being
wet, shifted my band and things, and then to dinner, and after dinner went
up and tried a little upon my tryangle, which I understand fully, and with
a little use I believe could bring myself to do something.  So to church,
and slept all the sermon, the Scot, to whose voice I am not to be
reconciled, preaching.  Thence with Sir J. Minnes (who poor man had forgot
that he carried me the other day to the painter's to see some pictures
which he has since bought and are brought home) to his Jodgings to see
some base things he calls them of great masters of painting.  So I said
nothing that he had shown me them already, but commended them, and I think
they are indeed good enough. Thence to see Sir W. Pen, who continues ill
of the gout still.  Here we staid a good while, and then I to my office,
and read my vows seriously and with content, and so home to supper, to
prayers, and to bed.

22nd.  Up betimes and to my office, reading over all our letters of the
office that we have wrote since I came into the Navy, whereby to bring the
whole series of matters into my memory, and to enter in my manuscript some
of them that are needful and of great influence.  By and by with Sir W.
Batten by coach to Westminster, where all along I find the shops evening
with the sides of the houses, even in the broadest streets; which will
make the City very much better than it was.  I walked in the Hall from one
man to another.  Hear that the House is still divided about the manner of
levying the subsidys which they intend to give the King, both as to the
manner, the time, and the number.  It seems the House do consent to send
to the King to desire that he would be graciously pleased to let them know
who it was that did inform him of what words Sir Richard Temple should
say, which were to this purpose: "That if the King would side with him, or
be guided by him and his party, that he should not lack money:" but
without knowing who told it, they do not think fit to call him to any
account for it.  Thence with Creed and bought a lobster, and then to an
alehouse, where the maid of the house is a confident merry lass, and if
modest is very pleasant to the customers that come thither. Here we eat
it, and thence to walk in the Park a good while.  The Duke being gone
a-hunting, and by and by came in and shifted himself; he having in his
hunting, rather than go about, 'light and led his horse through a river up
to his breast, and came so home: and when we were come, which was by and
by, we went on to him, and being ready he retired with us, and we had a
long discourse with him.  But Mr. Creed's accounts stick still through the
perverse ignorance of Sir G. Carteret, which I cannot safely control as I
would.  Thence to the Park again, and there walked up and down an hour or
two till night with Creed, talking, who is so knowing, and a man of that
reason, that I cannot but love his company, though I do not love the man,
because he is too wise to be made a friend of, and acts all by interest
and policy, but is a man fit to learn of. So to White Hall, and by water
to the Temple, and calling at my brother's and several places, but to no
purpose, I came home, and meeting Strutt, the purser, he tells me for a
secret that he was told by Field that he had a judgment against me in the
Exchequer for L400.  So I went to Sir W. Batten, and taking Mr. Batten,
his son the counsellor, with me, by coach, I went to Clerke, our
Solicitor, who tells me there can be no such thing, and after conferring
with them two together, who are resolved to look well after the business,
I returned home and to my office, setting down this day's passages, and
having a letter that all is well in the country I went home to supper, and
then a Latin chapter of Will and to bed.

23rd.  Up by four o'clock, and so to my office; but before I went out,
calling, as I have of late done, for my boy's copybook, I found that he
had not done his task; so I beat him, and then went up to fetch my rope's
end, but before I got down the boy was gone.  I searched the cellar with a
candle, and from top to bottom could not find him high nor low.  So to the
office; and after an hour or two, by water to the Temple, to my cozen
Roger; who, I perceive, is a deadly high man in the Parliament business,
and against the Court, showing me how they have computed that the King
hath spent, at least hath received, about four millions of money since he
came in: and in Sir J. Winter's case, in which I spoke to him, he is so
high that he says he deserves to be hanged, and all the high words he
could give, which I was sorry to see, though I am confident he means well.
Thence by water home, and to the 'Change; and by and by comes the King and
the Queen by in great state, and the streets full of people. I stood in
Mr.--------'s balcone.  They dine all at my Lord Mayor's; but what he do
for victuals, or room for them, I know not.  So home to dinner alone, and
there I found that my boy had got out of doors, and came in for his hat
and band, and so is gone away to his brother; but I do resolve even to let
him go away for good and all.  So I by and by to the office, and there had
a great fray with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, who, like an old
dotard, is led by the nose by him.  It was in Captain Cocke's business of
hemp, wherein the King is absolutely abused; but I was for peace sake
contented to be quiet and to sign to his bill, but in my manner so as to
justify myself, and so all was well; but to see what a knave Sir W. Batten
is makes my heart ake.  So late at my office, and then home to supper and
to bed, my man Will not being well.

24th.  Up before 4 o'clock, and so to my lute an hour or more, and then by
water, drinking my morning draft alone at an alehouse in Thames Street, to
the Temple, and thence after a little discourse with my cozen Roger about
some business, away by water to St. James's, and there an hour's private
discourse with Mr. Coventry, where he told me one thing to my great joy,
that in the business of Captain Cocke's hemp, disputed before him the
other day, Mr. Coventry absent, the Duke did himself tell him since, that
Mr. Pepys and he did stand up and carry it against the rest that were
there, Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten, which do please me much to see
that the Duke do take notice of me.  We did talk highly of Sir W. Batten's
corruption, which Mr. Coventry did very kindly say that it might be only
his heaviness and unaptness for business, that he do things without advice
and rashly, and to gratify people that do eat and drink and play with him,
and that now and then he observes that he signs bills only in anger and
fury to be rid of men.  Speaking of Sir G. Carteret, of whom I perceive he
speaks but slightly, and diminishing of him in his services for the King
in Jersey; that he was well rewarded, and had good lands and rents, and
other profits from the King, all the time he was there; and that it was
always his humour to have things done his way.  He brought an example how
he would not let the Castle there be victualled for more than a month,
that so he might keep it at his beck, though the people of the town did
offer to supply it more often themselves, which, when one did propose to
the King, Sir George Carteret being by, says Sir George, "Let me know who
they are that would do it, I would with all my heart pay them."  "Ah, by
God," says the Commander that spoke of it, "that is it that they are
afeard of, that you would hug them," meaning that he would not endure
them.  Another thing he told me, how the Duke of York did give Sir G.
Carteret and the Island his profits as Admirall, and other things, toward
the building of a pier there.  But it was never laid out, nor like to be.
So it falling out that a lady being brought to bed, the Duke was to be
desired to be one of the godfathers; and it being objected that that would
not be proper, there being no peer of the land to be joyned with him, the
lady replied, "Why, let him choose; and if he will not be a godfather
without a peer, then let him even stay till he hath made a pier of his
own."

     [In the same spirit, long after this, some question arising as to
     the best material to be used in building Westminster Bridge, Lord
     Chesterfield remarked, that there were too many wooden piers (peers)
     at Westminster already.--B.]

He tells me, too, that he hath lately been observed to tack about at
Court, and to endeavour to strike in with the persons that are against the
Chancellor; but this he says of him, that he do not say nor do anything to
the prejudice of the Chancellor.  But he told me that the Chancellor was
rising again, and that of late Sir G. Carteret's business and employment
hath not been so full as it used to be while the Chancellor stood up.
From that we discoursed of the evil of putting out men of experience in
business as the Chancellor, and from that to speak of the condition of the
King's party at present, who, as the Papists, though otherwise fine
persons, yet being by law kept for these fourscore years out of
employment, they are now wholly uncapable of business; and so the
Cavaliers for twenty years, who, says he, for the most part have either
given themselves over to look after country and family business, and those
the best of them, and the rest to debauchery, &c.; and that was it that
hath made him high against the late Bill brought into the House for the
making all men incapable of employment that had served against the King.
Why, says he, in the sea-service, it is impossible to do any thing without
them, there being not more than three men of the whole King's side that
are fit to command almost; and these were Captain Allen, Smith, and Beech;
and it may be Holmes, and Utber, and Batts might do something.  I desired
him to tell me if he thought that I did speak anything that I do against
Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes out of ill will or design.  He told me
quite the contrary, and that there was reason enough.  After a good deal
of good and fine discourse, I took leave, and so to my Lord Sandwich's
house, where I met my Lord, and there did discourse of our office
businesses, and how the Duke do show me kindness, though I have
endeavoured to displease more or less of my fellow officers, all but Mr.
Coventry and Pett; but it matters not.  Yes, says my Lord, Sir J. Minnes,
who is great with the Chancellor; I told him the Chancellor I have thought
was declining, and however that the esteem he has among them is nothing
but for a jester or a ballad maker; at which my Lord laughs, and asks me
whether I believe he ever could do that well. Thence with Mr. Creed up and
down to an ordinary, and, the King's Head being full, went to the other
over against it, a pretty man that keeps it, and good and much meat,
better than the other, but the company and room so small that he must
break, and there wants the pleasure that the other house has in its
company.  Here however dined an old courtier that is now so, who did bring
many examples and arguments to prove that seldom any man that brings any
thing to Court gets any thing, but rather the contrary; for knowing that
they have wherewith to live, will not enslave themselves to the
attendance, and flattery, and fawning condition of a courtier, whereas
another that brings nothing, and will be contented to cog, and lie, and
flatter every man and woman that has any interest with the persons that
are great in favour, and can cheat the King, as nothing is to be got
without offending God and the King, there he for the most part, and he
alone, saves any thing.  Thence to St. James Park, and there walked two or
three hours talking of the difference between Sir G. Carteret and Mr.
Creed about his accounts, and how to obviate him, but I find Creed a
deadly cunning fellow and one that never do any thing openly, but has
intrigues in all he do or says.  Thence by water home to see all well, and
thence down to Greenwich, and there walked into a pretty common garden and
there played with him at nine pins for some drink, and to make the fellows
drink that set up the pins, and so home again being very cold, and taking
a very great cold, being to-day the first time in my tabby doublet this
year.  Home, and after a small supper Creed and I to bed.  This day I
observed the house, which I took to be the new tennis-court, newly built
next my Lord's lodgings, to be fallen down by the badness of the
foundation or slight working, which my cozen Roger and his discontented
party cry out upon, as an example how the King's work is done, which I am
sorry to see him and others so apt to think ill of things.  It hath beaten
down a good deal of my Lord's lodgings, and had like to have killed Mrs.
Sarah, she having but newly gone out of it.

25th.  Up both of us pretty early and to my chamber, where he and I did
draw up a letter to Sir G. Carteret in excuse and preparation for Creed
against we meet before the Duke upon his accounts, which I drew up and it
proved very well, but I am pleased to see with what secret cunning and
variety of artifice this Creed has carried on his business even unknown to
me, which he is now forced by an accident to communicate to me.  So that
taking up all the papers of moment which lead to the clearing of his
accounts unobserved out of the Controller's hand, which he now makes great
use of; knowing that the Controller has not wherewith to betray him.
About this all the morning, only Mr. Bland came to me about some business
of his, and told me the news, which holds to be true, that the Portuguese
did let in the Spaniard by a plot, and they being in the midst of the
country and we believing that they would have taken the whole country,
they did all rise and kill the whole body, near 8,000 men, and Don John of
Austria having two horses killed under him, was forced with one man to
flee away.  Sir George Carteret at the office (after dinner, and Creed
being gone, for both now and yesterday I was afraid to have him seen by
Sir G. Carteret with me, for fear that he should increase his doubt that I
am of a plot with Creed in the business of his accounts) did tell us that
upon Tuesday last, being with my Lord Treasurer, he showed him a letter
from Portugall speaking of the advance of the Spaniards into their
country, and yet that the Portuguese were never more courageous than now;
for by an old prophecy, from France, sent thither some years, though not
many since, from the French King, it is foretold that the Spaniards should
come into their country, and in such a valley they should be all killed,
and then their country should be wholly delivered from the Spaniards.
This was on Tuesday last, and yesterday came the very first news that in
this very valley they had thus routed and killed the Spaniards, which is
very strange but true.  So late at the office, and then home to supper and
to bed.  This noon I received a letter from the country from my wife,
wherein she seems much pleased with the country; God continue that she may
have pleasure while she is there. She, by my Lady's advice, desires a new
petticoat of the new silk striped stuff, very pretty.  So I went to
Paternoster Row' presently, and bought her one, with Mr. Creed's help, a
very fine rich one, the best I did see there, and much better than she
desires or expects, and sent it by Creed to Unthanke to be made against
tomorrow to send by the carrier, thinking it had been but Wednesday
to-day, but I found myself mistaken, and also the taylor being out of the
way, it could not be done, but the stuff was sent me back at night by
Creed to dispose of some other way to make, but now I shall keep it to
next week.

26th.  Up betimes, and Mr. Moore coming to see me, he and

     [Paternoster Row, now famous as the headquarters of the publishing
     houses, was at this time chiefly inhabited by mercers.  "This
     street, before the Fire of London, was taken up by eminent Mercers,
     Silkmen and Lacemen; and their shops were so resorted to by the
     nobility and gentry in their coaches, that oft times the street was
     so stop'd up that there was no passage for foot passengers"
     (Strype's "Stow," book iii., p. 195)].

I discoursed of going to Oxford this Commencement, Mr. Nathaniel Crew
being Proctor and Mr. Childe commencing Doctor of Musique this year, which
I have a great mind to do, and, if I can, will order my matters so that I
may do it.  By and by, he and I to the Temple, it raining hard, my cozen
Roger being got out, he and I walked a good while among the Temple trees
discoursing of my getting my Lord to let me have security upon his estate
for L100 per ann. for two lives, my own and my wife, for my money. But
upon second thoughts Mr. Moore tells me it is very likely my Lord will
think that I beg something, and may take it ill, and so we resolved not to
move it there, but to look for it somewhere else.  Here it raining hard he
and I walked into the King's Bench Court, where I never was before, and
there staid an hour almost, till it had done raining, which is a sad
season, that it is said there hath not been one fair day these three
months, and I think it is true, and then by water to Westminster, and at
the Parliament House I spoke with Roger Pepys.  The House is upon the
King's answer to their message about Temple, which is, that my Lord of
Bristoll did tell him that Temple did say those words; so the House are
resolved upon sending some of their members to him to know the truth, and
to demand satisfaction if it be not true.  So by water home, and after a
little while getting me ready, Sir W. Batten, Sir J. Minnes, my Lady
Batten, and I by coach to Bednall Green, to Sir W. Rider's to dinner,
where a fine place, good lady mother, and their daughter, Mrs. Middleton,
a fine woman.  A noble dinner, and a fine merry walk with the ladies alone
after dinner in the garden, which is very pleasant; the greatest quantity
of strawberrys I ever saw, and good, and a collation of great mirth, Sir
J. Minnes reading a book of scolding very prettily. This very house

     [Sir William Rider's house was known as Kirby Castle, and was
     supposed to have been built in 1570 by John Thorpe for John Kirby.
     It was associated in rhyme with other follies of the time in bricks
     and mortar, as recorded by Stow

                   "Kirkebyes Castell, and Fisher's Follie,
                    Spinila's pleasure, and Megse's glorie."

     The place was known in Strype's time as the "Blind Beggar's House,"
     but he knew nothing of the ballad, "The Beggar's Daughter of Bednall
     Green," for he remarks, "perhaps Kirby beggared himself by it."  Sr.
     William Rider died at this house in 1669.]

was built by the Blind Beggar of Bednall Green, so much talked of and sang
in ballads; but they say it was only some of the outhouses of it. We drank
great store of wine, and a beer glass at last which made me almost sick.
At table, discoursing of thunder and lightning, they told many stories of
their own knowledge at table of their masts being shivered from top to
bottom, and sometimes only within and the outside whole, but among the
rest Sir W. Rider did tell a story of his own knowledge, that a Genoese
gaily in Leghorn Roads was struck by thunder, so as the mast was broke
a-pieces, and the shackle upon one of the slaves was melted clear off of
his leg without hurting his leg.  Sir William went on board the vessel,
and would have contributed towards the release of the slave whom Heaven
had thus set free, but he could not compass it, and so he was brought to
his fetters again.  In the evening home, and a little to my Tryangle, and
so to bed.

27th.  Up by 4 o'clock and a little to my office.  Then comes by agreement
Sir W. Warren, and he and I from ship to ship to see deals of all sorts,
whereby I have encreased my knowledge and with great pleasure. Then to his
yard and house, where I staid two hours or more discoursing of the expense
of the navy and the corruption of Sir W. Batten and his man Wood that he
brings or would bring to sell all that is to be sold by the Navy.  Then
home to the office, where we sat a little, and at noon home to dinner,
alone, and thence, it raining hard, by water to the Temple, and so to
Lincoln's Inn, and there walked up and down to see the new garden which
they are making, and will be very pretty, and so to walk under the
Chappell by agreement, whither Mr. Clerke our Solicitor came to me, and he
fetched Mr. Long, our Attorney in the Exchequer in the business against
Field, and I directed him to come to the best and speediest composition he
could, which he will do.  So home on foot, calling upon my brother's and
elsewhere upon business, and so home to my office, and there wrote letters
to my father and wife, and so home to bed, taking three pills overnight.

28th (Lord's day).  Early in the morning my last night's physic worked and
did give me a good stool, and then I rose and had three or four stools,
and walked up and down my chamber.  Then up, my maid rose and made me a
posset, and by and by comes Mr. Creed, and he and I spent all the morning
discoursing against to-morrow before the Duke the business of his pieces
of eight, in which the Treasurer makes so many queries.  At noon, my
physic having done working, I went down to dinner, and then he and I up
again and spent most of the afternoon reading in Cicero and other books of
good discourse, and then he went away, and then came my brother Tom to see
me, telling me how the Joyces do make themselves fine clothes against Mary
is brought to bed.  He being gone I went to cast up my monthly accounts,
and to my great trouble I find myself L7 worse than I was the last month,
but I confess it is by my reckoning beforehand a great many things, yet
however I am troubled to see that I can hardly promise myself to lay up
much from month's end to month's end, about L4 or L5 at most, one month
with another, without some extraordinary gettings, but I must and I hope I
shall continue to have a care of my own expenses.  So to the reading my
vows seriously and then to supper.  This evening there came my boy's
brother to see for him, and tells me he knows not where he is, himself
being out of town this week and is very sorry that he is gone, and so am
I, but he shall come no more.  So to prayers, and to bed.

29th.  Up betimes and to my office, and by and by to the Temple, and there
appointed to meet in the evening about my business, and thence I walked
home, and up and down the streets is cried mightily the great victory got
by the Portugalls against the Spaniards, where 10,000 slain, 3 or 4,000
taken prisoners, with all the artillery, baggage, money, &c., and Don John
of Austria

     [He was natural son of Philip IV., King of Spain, who, after his
     father's death in 1665, exerted his whole influence to overthrow the
     Regency appointed during the young king's minority.--B.]

forced to flee with a man or two with him, which is very great news.
Thence home and at my office all the morning, and then by water to St.
James's, but no meeting to-day being holy day, but met Mr. Creed in the
Park, and after a walk or two, discoursing his business, took leave of him
in Westminster Hall, whither we walked, and then came again to the Hall
and fell to talk with Mrs. Lane, and after great talk that she never went
abroad with any man as she used heretofore to do, I with one word got her
to go with me and to meet me at the further Rhenish wine-house, where I
did give her a Lobster and do so touse her and feel her all over, making
her believe how fair and good a skin she has, and indeed she has a very
white thigh and leg, but monstrous fat.  When weary I did give over and
somebody, having seen some of our dalliance, called aloud in the street,
"Sir! why do you kiss the gentlewoman so?" and flung a stone at the
window, which vexed me, but I believe they could not see my touzing her,
and so we broke up and I went out the back way, without being observed I
think, and so she towards the Hall and I to White Hall, where taking water
I to the Temple with my cozen Roger and Mr. Goldsborough to Gray's Inn to
his counsel, one Mr. Rawworth, a very fine man, where it being the
question whether I as executor should give a warrant to Goldsborough in my
reconveying her estate back again, the mortgage being performed against
all acts of the testator, but only my own, my cozen said he never heard it
asked before; and the other that it was always asked, and he never heard
it denied, or scrupled before, so great a distance was there in their
opinions, enough to make a man forswear ever having to do with the law; so
they agreed to refer it to Serjeant Maynard.  So we broke up, and I by
water home from the Temple, and there to Sir W. Batten and eat with him,
he and his lady and Sir J. Minnes having been below to-day upon the East
India men that are come in, but never tell me so, but that they have been
at Woolwich and Deptford, and done great deal of business.  God help them.
So home and up to my lute long, and then, after a little Latin chapter
with Will, to bed.  But I have used of late, since my wife went, to make a
bad use of my fancy with whatever woman I have a mind to, which I am
ashamed of, and shall endeavour to do so no more.  So to sleep.

30th.  Up betimes yesterday and to-day, the sun rising very bright and
glorious; and yet yesterday, as it hath been these two months and more,
was a foul day the most part of the day.  By and by by water to White
Hall, and there to my Lord's lodgings by appointment, whither Mr. Creed
comes to me, having been at Chelsey this morning to fetch my Lord to St.
James's.  So he and I to the Park, where we understand that the King and
Duke are gone out betimes this morning on board the East India ships
lately come in, and so our meeting appointed is lost.  But he and I walked
at the further end of the Park, not to be observed, whither by and by
comes my Lord Sandwich, and he and we walked two hours and more in the
Park and then in White Hall Gallery, and lastly in White Hall garden,
discoursing of Mr. Creed's accounts, and how to answer the Treasurer's
objections.  I find that the business is L500 deep, the advantage of
Creed, and why my Lord and I should be concerned to promote his profit
with so much dishonour and trouble to us I know not, but however we shall
do what we can, though he deserves it not, for there is nothing even to
his own advantage that can be got out of him, but by mere force.  So full
of policy he is in the smallest matters, that I perceive him to be made up
of nothing but design.  I left him here, being in my mind vexed at the
trouble that this business gets me, and the distance that it makes between
Sir G. Carteret and myself, which I ought to avoyd.  Thence by water home
and to dinner, and afterwards to the office, and there sat till evening,
and then I by water to Deptford to see Sir W. Pen, who lies ill at Captain
Rooth's, but in a way to be well again this weather, this day being the
only fair day we have had these two or three months.  Among other
discourse I did tell him plainly some of my thoughts concerning Sir W.
Batten. and the office in general, upon design for him to understand that
I do mind things and will not balk to take notice of them, that when he
comes to be well again he may know how to look upon me.  Thence homeward
walked, and in my way met Creed coming to meet me, and then turned back
and walk a while, and so to boat and home by water, I being not very
forward to talk of his business, and he by design the same, to see how I
would speak of it, but I did not, but in general terms, and so after
supper with general discourse to bed and sleep.  Thus, by God's blessing,
ends this book of two years; I being in all points in good health and a
good way to thrive and do well.  Some money I do and can lay up, but not
much, being worth now above L700, besides goods of all sorts. My wife in
the country with Ashwell, her woman, with my father; myself at home with
W. Hewer and my cooke-maid Hannah, my boy Wayneman being lately run away
from me.  In my office, my repute and understanding good, especially with
the Duke and Mr. Coventry; only the rest of the officers do rather envy
than love me, I standing in most of their lights, specially Sir W. Batten,
whose cheats I do daily oppose to his great trouble, though he appears
mighty kind and willing to keep friendship with me, while Sir J. Minnes,
like a dotard, is led by the nose by him. My wife and I, by my late
jealousy, for which I am truly to be blamed, have not the kindness between
us which we used and ought to have, and I fear will be lost hereafter if I
do not take course to oblige her and yet preserve my authority.  Publique
matters are in an ill condition; Parliament sitting and raising four
subsidys for the King, which is but a little, considering his wants; and
yet that parted withal with great hardness.  They being offended to see so
much money go, and no debts of the publique's paid, but all swallowed by a
luxurious Court: which the King it is believed and hoped will retrench in
a little time, when he comes to see the utmost of the revenue which shall
be settled on him: he expecting to have his L1,200,000 made good to him,
which is not yet done by above L150,000, as he himself reports to the
House.  My differences with my uncle Thomas at a good quiett, blessed be
God!  and other matters.  The town full of the great overthrow lately
given to the Spaniards by the Portugalls, they being advanced into the
very middle of Portugall.  The weather wet for two or three months
together beyond belief, almost not one fair day coming between till this
day, which has been a very pleasant [day] and the first pleasant [day]
this summer.  The charge of the Navy intended to be limited to L200,000
per annum, the ordinary charge of it, and that to be settled upon the
Customs.  The King yet greatly taken up with Madam Castlemaine and Mrs.
Stewart, which God of Heaven put an end to!  Myself very studious to learn
what I can of all things necessary for my place as an officer of the Navy,
reading lately what concerns measuring of timber and knowledge of the
tides.  I have of late spent much time with Creed, being led to it by his
business of his accounts, but I find him a fellow of those designs and
tricks, that there is no degree of true friendship to be made with him,
and therefore I must cast him off, though he be a very understanding man,
and one that much may be learned of as to cunning and judging of other
men.  Besides, too, I do perceive more and more that my time of pleasure
and idleness of any sort must be flung off to attend to getting of some
money and the keeping of my family in order, which I fear by my wife's
liberty may be otherwise lost.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A woman sober, and no high-flyer, as he calls it
     After awhile I caressed her and parted seeming friends
     Book itself, and both it and them not worth a turd
     But a woful rude rabble there was, and such noises
     Did find none of them within, which I was glad of
     Did so watch to see my wife put on drawers, which (she did)
     Duodecimal arithmetique
     Employed by the fencers to play prizes at
     Enquiring into the selling of places do trouble a great many
     Every small thing is enough now-a-days to bring a difference
     Give her a Lobster and do so touse her and feel her all over
     God knows that I do not find honesty enough in my own mind
     Goes with his guards with him publiquely, and his trumpets
     Great plot which was lately discovered in Ireland
     He hoped he should live to see her "ugly and willing"
     He is too wise to be made a friend of
     I calling her beggar, and she me pricklouse, which vexed me
     I slept most of the sermon
     In some churches there was hardly ten people in the whole church
     It must be the old ones that must do any good
     Jealous, though God knows I have no great reason
     John has got a wife, and for that he intends to part with him
     Keep at interest, which is a good, quiett, and easy profit
     Lay long in bed talking and pleasing myself with my wife
     My wife and her maid Ashwell had between them spilled the pot
     No sense nor grammar, yet in as good words that ever I saw
     Nor would become obliged too much to any
     Nothing is to be got without offending God and the King
     Nothing of any truth and sincerity, but mere envy and design
     Reading my Latin grammar, which I perceive I have great need
     Sad for want of my wife, whom I love with all my heart
     Saw his people go up and down louseing themselves
     See whether my wife did wear drawers to-day as she used to do
     Sent me last night, as a bribe, a barrel of sturgeon
     She begins not at all to take pleasure in me or study to please
     She used the word devil, which vexed me
     So home, and after supper did wash my feet, and so to bed
     Softly up to see whether any of the beds were out of order or no
     Statute against selling of offices
     The goldsmith, he being one of the jury to-morrow
     Thence by coach, with a mad coachman, that drove like mad
     Therefore ought not to expect more justice from her
     They say now a common mistress to the King
     Through the Fleete Ally to see a couple of pretty [strumpets]
     Upon a small temptation I could be false to her
     Waked this morning between four and five by my blackbird
     Whose voice I am not to be reconciled
     Wife and the dancing-master alone above, not dancing but talking
     Would not make my coming troublesome to any





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, May/June 1663
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4141.txt or 4141.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/4/4141/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
