Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, July/August 1663, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, July/August 1663

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 30, 2004 [EBook #4142]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                              JULY & AUGUST
                                  1663

July 1st.  This morning it rained so hard (though it was fair yesterday,
and we thereupon in hopes of having some fair weather, which we have
wanted these three months) that it wakened Creed, who lay with me last
night, and me, and so we up and fell to discourse of the business of his
accounts now under dispute, in which I have taken much trouble upon myself
and raised a distance between Sir G. Carteret and myself, which troubles
me, but I hope we have this morning light on an expedient that will right
all, that will answer their queries, and yet save Creed the L500 which he
did propose to make of the exchange abroad of the pieces of eight which he
disbursed.  Being ready, he and I by water to White Hall, where I left him
before we came into the Court, for fear I should be seen by Sir G.
Carteret with him, which of late I have been forced to avoid to remove
suspicion.  I to St. James's, and there discoursed a while with Mr.
Coventry, between whom and myself there is very good understanding and
friendship, and so to Westminster Hall, and being in the Parliament lobby,
I there saw my Lord of Bristoll come to the Commons House to give his
answer to their question, about some words he should tell the King that
were spoke by Sir Richard Temple, a member of their House.  A chair was
set at the bar of the House for him, which he used but little, but made an
harangue of half an hour bareheaded, the House covered.  His speech being
done, he came out and withdrew into a little room till the House had
concluded of an answer to his speech; which they staying long upon, I went
away.  And by and by out comes Sir W. Batten; and he told me that his
Lordship had made a long and a comedian-like speech, and delivered with
such action as was not becoming his Lordship.  He confesses he did tell
the King such a thing of Sir Richard Temple, but that upon his honour they
were not spoke by Sir Richard, he having taken a liberty of enlarging to
the King upon the discourse which had been between Sir Richard and himself
lately; and so took upon himself the whole blame, and desired their
pardon, it being not to do any wrong to their fellow-member, but out of
zeal to the King.  He told them, among many other things, that as to his
religion he was a Roman Catholique, but such a one as thought no man to
have right to the Crown of England but the Prince that hath it; and such a
one as, if the King should desire his counsel as to his own, he would not
advise him to another religion than the old true reformed religion of this
country, it being the properest of this kingdom as it now stands; and
concluded with a submission to what the House shall do with him, saying,
that whatever they shall do, says he, "thanks be to God, this head, this
heart, and this sword (pointing to them all), will find me a being in any
place in Europe."  The House hath hereupon voted clearly Sir Richard
Temple to be free from the imputation of saying those words; but when Sir
William Batten came out, had not concluded what to say to my Lord, it
being argued that to own any satisfaction as to my Lord from his speech,
would be to lay some fault upon the King for the message he should upon no
better accounts send to the impeaching of one of their members.  Walking
out, I hear that the House of Lords are offended that my Lord Digby should
come to this House and make a speech there without leave first asked of
the House of Lords. I hear also of another difficulty now upon him; that
my Lord of Sunderland (whom I do not know) was so near to the marriage of
his daughter as that the wedding-clothes were made, and portion and every
thing agreed on and ready; and the other day he goes away nobody yet knows
whither, sending her the next morning a release of his right or claim to
her, and advice to his friends not to enquire into the reason of this
doing, for he hath enough for it; but that he gives them liberty to say
and think what they will of him, so they do not demand the reason of his
leaving her, being resolved never to have her, but the reason desires and
resolves not to give.  Thence by water with Sir W. Batten to Trinity
House, there to dine with him, which we did; and after dinner we fell
talking, Sir J. Minnes, Mr. Batten and I; Mr. Batten telling us of a late
triall of Sir Charles Sydly  the other day, before my Lord Chief Justice
Foster and the whole bench, for his debauchery a little while since at
Oxford Kate's,

     [The details in the original are very gross.  Dr. Johnson relates
     the story in the "Lives of the Poets," in his life of Sackville,
     Lord Dorset "Sackville, who was then Lord Buckhurst, with Sir
     Charles Sedley and Sir Thomas Ogle, got drunk at the Cock, in Bow
     Street, by Covent Garden, and going into the balcony exposed
     themselves to the populace in very indecent postures.  At last, as
     they grew warmer, Sedley stood forth naked, and harangued the
     populace in such profane language, that the publick indignation was
     awakened; the crowd attempted to force the door, and being repulsed,
     drove in the performers with stones, and broke the windows of the
     house.  For this misdemeanour they were indicted, and Sedley was
     fined five hundred pounds; what was the sentence of the others is
     not known.  Sedley employed [Henry] Killigrew and another to procure
     a remission from the King, but (mark the friendship of the
     dissolute!) they begged the fine for themselves, and exacted it to
     the last groat."  The woman known as Oxford Kate appears to have
     kept the notorious Cock Tavern in Bow Street at this date.]

coming in open day into the Balcone and showed his nakedness, .  .  .  .
and abusing of scripture and as it were from thence preaching a mountebank
sermon from the pulpit, saying that there he had to sell such a powder as
should make all the [women] in town run after him, 1000 people standing
underneath to see and hear him, and that being done he took a glass of
wine .  .  .  .  and then drank it off, and then took another and drank
the King's health.  It seems my Lord and the rest of the judges did all of
them round give him a most high reproof; my Lord Chief justice saying,
that it was for him, and such wicked wretches as he was, that God's anger
and judgments hung over us, calling him sirrah many times.  It's said they
have bound him to his good behaviour (there being no law against him for
it) in L5000.  It being told that my Lord Buckhurst was there, my Lord
asked whether it was that Buckhurst that was lately tried for robbery; and
when answered Yes, he asked whether he had so soon forgot his deliverance
at that time, and that it would have more become him to have been at his
prayers begging God's forgiveness, than now running into such courses
again .  .  .  .  Thence home, and my clerks being gone by my leave to see
the East India ships that are lately come home, I staid all alone within
my office all the afternoon.  This day I hear at dinner that Don John of
Austria, since his flight out of Portugall, is dead of his wounds:--[not
true]--so there is a great man gone, and a great dispute like to be ended
for the crown of Spayne, if the King should have died before him.  I
received this morning a letter from my wife, brought by John Gower to
town, wherein I find a sad falling out between my wife and my father and
sister and Ashwell upon my writing to my father to advise Pall not to keep
Ashwell from her mistress, or making any difference between them.  Which
Pall telling to Ashwell, and she speaking some words that her mistress
heard, caused great difference among them; all which I am sorry from my
heart to hear of, and I fear will breed ill blood not to be laid again.
So that I fear my wife and I may have some falling out about it, or at
least my father and I, but I shall endeavour to salve up all as well as I
can, or send for her out of the country before the time intended, which I
would be loth to do.  In the evening by water to my coz. Roger Pepys'
chamber, where he was not come, but I found Dr. John newly come to town,
and is well again after his sickness; but, Lord! what a simple man he is
as to any public matter of state, and talks so sillily to his brother Dr.
Tom.  What the matter is I know not, but he has taken (as my father told
me a good while since) such displeasure that he hardly would touch his hat
to me, and I as little to him.  By and by comes Roger, and he told us the
whole passage of my Lord Digby to-day, much as I have said here above;
only that he did say that he would draw his sword against the Pope
himself, if he should offer any thing against his Majesty, and the good of
these nations; and that he never was the man that did either look for a
Cardinal's cap for himself, or any body else, meaning Abbot Montagu; and
the House upon the whole did vote Sir Richard Temple innocent; and that my
Lord Digby hath cleared the honour of his Majesty, and Sir Richard
Temple's, and given perfect satisfaction of his own respects to the House.
Thence to my brother's, and being vexed with his not minding my father's
business here in getting his Landscape done, I went away in an anger, and
walked home, and so up to my lute and then to bed.

2d.  Up betimes to my office, and there all the morning doing business, at
noon to the Change, and there met with several people, among others
Captain Cox, and with him to a Coffee [House], and drank with him and some
other merchants.  Good discourse.  Thence home and to dinner, and, after a
little alone at my viol, to the office, where we sat all the afternoon,
and so rose at the evening, and then home to supper and to bed, after a
little musique.  My mind troubled me with the thoughts of the difference
between my wife and my father in the country.  Walking in the garden this
evening with Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes, Sir G. Carteret told us
with great contempt how like a stage-player my Lord Digby spoke yesterday,
pointing to his head as my Lord did, and saying, "First, for his head,"
says Sir G. Carteret, "I know what a calf's head would have done better by
half for his heart and his sword, I have nothing to say to them."  He told
us that for certain his head cost the late King his, for it was he that
broke off the treaty at Uxbridge.  He told us also how great a man he was
raised from a private gentleman in France by Monsieur Grandmont,

     [Antoine, Duc de Gramont, marshal of France, who died July 12th,
     1678, aged seventy-four.  His memoirs have been published.]

and afterwards by the Cardinall,--[Mazarin]--who raised him to be a
Lieutenant-generall, and then higher; and entrusted by the Cardinall, when
he was banished out of France, with great matters, and recommended by him
to the Queen as a man to be trusted and ruled by: yet when he came to have
some power over the Queen, he begun to dissuade her from her opinion of
the Cardinal; which she said nothing to till the Cardinal was returned,
and then she told him of it; who told my Lord Digby, "Eh bien, Monsieur,
vous estes un fort bon amy donc:" but presently put him out of all; and
then he was, from a certainty of coming in two or three years' time to be
Mareschall of France (to which all strangers, even Protestants, and those
as often as French themselves, are capable of coming, though it be one of
the greatest places in France), he was driven to go out of France into
Flanders; but there was not trusted, nor received any kindness from the
Prince of Conde, as one to whom also he had been false, as he had been to
the Cardinal and Grandmont.  In fine, he told us how he is a man of
excellent parts, but of no great faith nor judgment, and one very easy to
get up to great height of preferment, but never able to hold it.  So home
and to my musique; and then comes Mr. Creed to me giving me an account of
his accounts, how he has now settled them fit for perusal the most strict,
at which I am glad.  So he and I to bed together.

3d.  Up and he home, and I with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten by coach
to Westminster, to St. James's, thinking to meet Sir G. Carteret, and to
attend the Duke, but he not coming we broke up, and so to Westminster
Hall, and there meeting with Mr. Moore he tells me great news that my Lady
Castlemaine is fallen from Court, and this morning retired.  He gives me
no account of the reason of it, but that it is so: for which I am sorry:
and yet if the King do it to leave off not only her but all other
mistresses, I should be heartily glad of it, that he may fall to look
after business.  I hear my Lord Digby is condemned at Court for his
speech, and that my Lord Chancellor grows great again.  Thence with Mr.
Creed, whom I called at his chamber, over the water to Lambeth; but could
not, it being morning, get to see the Archbishop's hearse: so he and I
walked over the fields to Southwark, and there parted, and I spent half an
hour in Mary Overy's Church, where are fine monuments of great antiquity,
I believe, and has been a fine church.  Thence to the Change, and meeting
Sir J. Minnes there, he and I walked to look upon Backwell's design of
making another alley from his shop through over against the Exchange door,
which will be very noble and quite put down the other two.

So home to dinner and then to the office, and entered in my manuscript
book the Victualler's contract, and then over the water and walked to see
Sir W. Pen, and sat with him a while, and so home late, and to my viall.
So up comes Creed again to me and stays all night, to-morrow morning being
a hearing before the Duke.  So to bed full of discourse of his business.

4th.  Up by 4 o'clock and sent him to get matters ready, and I to my
office looking over papers and mending my manuscript by scraping out the
blots and other things, which is now a very fine book.  So to St. James's
by water with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, I giving occasion to a
wager about the tide, that it did flow through bridge, by which Sir W.
Batten won 5s. of Sir J. Minnes.  At St. James's we staid while the Duke
made himself ready.  Among other things Sir Allen Apsley showed the Duke
the Lisbon Gazette in Spanish, where the late victory is set down
particularly, and to the great honour of the English beyond measure. They
have since taken back Evora, which was lost to the Spaniards, the English
making the assault, and lost not more than three men.  Here I learnt that
the English foot are highly esteemed all over the world, but the horse not
so much, which yet we count among ourselves the best; but they abroad have
had no great knowledge of our horse, it seems.  The Duke being ready, we
retired with him, and there fell upon Mr. Creed's business, where the
Treasurer did, like a mad coxcomb, without reason or method run over a
great many things against the account, and so did Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
Batten, which the Duke himself and Mr. Coventry and my Lord Barkely and
myself did remove, and Creed being called in did answer all with great
method and excellently to the purpose (myself I am a little conscious did
not speak so well as I purposed and do think I used to do, that is, not so
intelligibly and persuasively, as I well hoped I should), not that what I
said was not well taken, and did carry the business with what was urged
and answered by Creed and Mr. Coventry, till the Duke himself did declare
that he was satisfied, and my Lord Barkely offered to lay L100 that the
King would receive no wrong in the account, and the two last knights held
their tongues, or at least by not understanding it did say what made for
Mr. Creed, and so Sir G. Carteret was left alone, but yet persisted to say
that the account was not good, but full of corruption and foul dealing.
And so we broke up to his shame, but I do fear to the loss of his
friendship to me a good while, which I am heartily troubled for.  Thence
with Creed to the King's Head ordinary; but, coming late, dined at the
second table very well for 12d.; and a pretty gentleman in our company,
who confirms my Lady Castlemaine's being gone from Court, but knows not
the reason; he told us of one wipe the Queen a little while ago did give
her, when she came in and found the Queen under the dresser's hands, and
had been so long:

"I wonder your Majesty," says she, "can have the patience to sit so long
a-dressing?"--"I have so much reason to use patience," says the Queen,
"that I can very well bear with it."  He thinks that it may be the Queen
hath commanded her to retire, though that is not likely.  Thence with
Creed to hire a coach to carry us to Hide Park, to-day there being a
general muster of the King's Guards, horse and foot: but they demand so
high, that I, spying Mr. Cutler the merchant, did take notice of him, and
he going into his coach, and telling me that he was going to shew a couple
of Swedish strangers the muster, I asked and went along with him; where a
goodly sight to see so many fine horses and officers, and the King, Duke,
and others come by a-horseback, and the two Queens in the Queen-Mother's
coach, my Lady Castlemaine not being there.  And after long being there, I
'light, and walked to the place where the King, Duke, &c., did stand to
see the horse and foot march by and discharge their guns, to show a French
Marquisse (for whom this muster was caused) the goodness of our firemen;
which indeed was very good, though not without a slip now and then; and
one broadside close to our coach we had going out of the Park, even to the
nearness as to be ready to burn our hairs.  Yet methought all these gay
men are not the soldiers that must do the King's business, it being such
as these that lost the old King all he had, and were beat by the most
ordinary fellows that could be.  Thence with much ado out of the Park, and
I 'lighted and through St. James's down the waterside over, to Lambeth, to
see the Archbishop's corps (who is to be carried away to Oxford on
Monday), but came too late, and so walked over the fields and bridge home
(calling by the way at old George's), but find that he is dead, and there
wrote several letters, and so home to supper and to bed.  This day in the
Duke's chamber there being a Roman story in the hangings, and upon the
standards written these four letters--S. P. Q. R., Sir G. Carteret came to
me to know what the meaning of those four letters were; which ignorance is
not to be borne in a Privy Counsellor, methinks, that a schoolboy should
be whipt for not knowing.

5th (Lord's day).  Lady Batten had sent twice to invite me to go with them
to Walthamstow to-day, Mrs. Martha' being married already this morning to
Mr. Castle, at this parish church.  I could not rise soon enough to go
with them, but got myself ready, and so to Games's, where I got a horse
and rode thither very pleasantly, only coming to make water I found a
stopping, which makes me fearful of my old pain.  Being come thither, I
was well received, and had two pair of gloves, as the rest, and walked up
and down with my Lady in the garden, she mighty kind to me, and I have the
way to please her.  A good dinner and merry, but methinks none of the
kindness nor bridall respect between the bridegroom and bride, that was
between my wife and I, but as persons that marry purely for convenience.
After dinner to church by coach, and there my Lady, Mrs. Turner, Mrs.
Lemon, and I only, we, in spite to one another, kept one another awake;
and sometimes I read in my book of Latin plays, which I took in my pocket,
thinking to have walked it.  An old doting parson preached.  So home
again, and by and by up and homewards, calling in our way (Sir J. Minnes
and I only) at Mr. Batten's (who with his lady and child went in another
coach by us), which is a very pretty house, and himself in all things
within and without very ingenious, and I find a very fine study and good
books.  So set out, Sir J. Minnes and I in his coach together, talking all
the way of chymistry, wherein he do know something, at least, seems so to
me, that cannot correct him, Mr. Batten's man riding my horse, and so home
and to my office a while to read my vows, then home to prayers and to bed.

6th.  Up pretty early and to my office all the morning, writing out a list
of the King's ships in my Navy collections with great pleasure.  At noon
Creed comes to me, who tells me how well he has sped with Sir G. Carteret
after all our trouble, that he had his tallys up and all the kind words
possible from him, which I believe is out of an apprehension what a fool
he has made of himself hitherto in making so great a stop therein.  But I
find, and so my Lord Sandwich may, that Sir G. Carteret had a design to do
him a disgrace, if he could possibly, otherwise he would never have
carried the business so far after that manner, but would first have
consulted my Lord and given him advice what to do therein for his own
honour, which he thought endangered.  Creed dined with me and then walked
a while, and so away, and I to my office at my morning's work till dark
night, and so with good content home.  To supper, a little musique, and
then to bed.

7th.  Up by 4 o'clock and to my office, and there continued all the
morning upon my Navy book to my great content.  At noon down by barge with
Sir J. Minnes (who is going to Chatham) to Woolwich, in our way eating of
some venison pasty in the barge, I having neither eat nor drank to-day,
which fills me full of wind.  Here also in Mr. Pett's garden I eat some
and the first cherries I have eat this year, off the tree where the King
himself had been gathering some this morning.  Thence walked alone, only
part of the way Deane walked with me, complaining of many abuses in the
Yard, to Greenwich, and so by water to Deptford, where I found Mr.
Coventry, and with him up and down all the stores, to the great trouble of
the officers, and by his help I am resolved to fall hard to work again, as
I used to do.  So thence he and I by water talking of many things, and I
see he puts his trust most upon me in the Navy, and talks, as there is
reason, slightly of the two old knights, and I should be glad by any
drudgery to see the King's stores and service looked to as they ought, but
I fear I shall never understand half the miscarriages and tricks that the
King suffers by.  He tells me what Mr. Pett did to-day, that my Lord
Bristoll told the King that he will impeach the Chancellor of High
Treason: but I find that my Lord Bristoll hath undone himself already in
every body's opinion, and now he endeavours to raise dust to put out other
men's eyes, as well as his own; but I hope it will not take, in
consideration merely that it is hard for a Prince to spare an experienced
old officer, be he never so corrupt; though I hope this man is not so, as
some report him to be.  He tells me that Don John is yet alive, and not
killed, as was said, in the great victory against the Spaniards in
Portugall of late.  So home, and late at my office.  Thence home and to my
musique.  This night Mr. Turner's house being to be emptied out of my
cellar, and therefore I think to sit up a little longer than ordinary.
This afternoon, coming from the waterside with Mr. Coventry, I spied my
boy upon Tower Hill playing with the rest of the boys; so I sent W.
Griffin to take him, and he did bring him to me, and so I said nothing to
him, but caused him to be stripped (for he was run away with his best
suit), and so putting on his other, I sent him going, without saying one
word hard to him, though I am troubled for the rogue, though he do not
deserve it.  Being come home I find my stomach not well for want of eating
to-day my dinner as I should do, and so am become full of wind.  I called
late for some victuals, and so to bed, leaving the men below in the cellar
emptying the vats up through Mr. Turner's own house, and so with more
content to bed late.

8th.  Being weary, and going to bed late last night, I slept till 7
o'clock, it raining mighty hard, and so did every minute of the day after
sadly.  But I know not what will become of the corn this year, we having
had but two fair days these many months.  Up and to my office, where all
the morning busy, and then at noon home to dinner alone upon a good dish
of eeles, given me by Michell, the Bewpers' man, and then to my viall a
little, and then down into the cellar and up and down with Mr. Turner to
see where his vault may be made bigger, or another made him, which I think
may well be.  And so to my office, where very busy all day setting things
in order my contract books and preparing things against the next sitting.
In the evening I received letters out of the country, among others from my
wife, who methinks writes so coldly that I am much troubled at it, and I
fear shall have much ado to bring her to her old good temper.  So home to
supper and musique, which is all the pleasure I have of late given myself,
or is fit I should, others spending too much time and money.  Going in I
stepped to Sir W. Batten, and there staid and talked with him (my Lady
being in the country), and sent for some lobsters, and Mrs. Turner came
in, and did bring us an umble pie hot out of her oven, extraordinary good,
and afterwards some spirits of her making, in which she has great
judgment, very good, and so home, merry with this night's refreshment.

9th.  Up.  Making water this morning, which I do every morning as soon as
I am awake, with greater plenty and freedom than I used to do, which I
think I may impute to last night's drinking of elder spirits.  Abroad, it
raining, to Blackfriars, and there went into a little alehouse and staid
while I sent to the Wardrobe, but Mr. Moore was gone out.  Here I kissed
three or four times the maid of the house, who is a pretty girl, but very
modest, and, God forgive me, had a mind to something more.  Thence to my
lawyer's; up and down to the Six Clerks' Office, where I found my bill
against Tom Trice dismissed, which troubles me, it being through my
neglect, and will put me to charges.  So to Mr. Phillips, and discoursed
with him about finding me out somebody that will let me have for money an
annuity of about L100 per annum for two lives.  So home, and there put up
my riding things against the evening, in case Mr. Moore should continue
his mind to go to Oxford, which I have little mind to do, the weather
continuing so bad and the waters high.  Dined at home, and Mr. Moore in
the afternoon comes to me and concluded not to go.  Sir W. Batten and I
sat a little this afternoon at the office, and thence I by water to
Deptford, and there mustered the Yard, purposely, God forgive me, to find
out Bagwell, a carpenter, whose wife is a pretty woman, that I might have
some occasion of knowing him and forcing her to come to the office again,
which I did so luckily that going thence he and his wife did of themselves
meet me in the way to thank me for my old kindness, but I spoke little to
her, but shall give occasion for her coming to me.  Her husband went along
with me to show me Sir W. Pen's lodging, which I knew before, but only to
have a time of speaking to him and sounding him.  So left and I went in to
Sir W. Pen, who continues ill, and worse, I think, than before.  He tells
me my Lady Castlemaine was at Court, for all this talk this week, which I
am glad to hear; but it seems the King is stranger than ordinary to her.
Thence walked home as I used to do, and to bed presently, having taken
great cold in my feet by walking in the dirt this day in thin shoes or
some other way, so that I begun to be in pain, and with warm clothes made
myself better by morning, but yet in pain.

10th.  Up late and by water to Westminster Hall, where I met Pierce the
chirurgeon, who tells me that for certain the King is grown colder to my
Lady Castlemaine than ordinary, and that he believes he begins to love the
Queen, and do make much of her, more than he used to do.  Up to the Lobby,
and there sent out for Mr. Coventry and Sir W. Batten, and told them if
they thought convenient I would go to Chatham today, Sir John Minnes being
already there at a Pay, and I would do such and such business there, which
they thought well of, and so I went home and prepared myself to go after,
dinner with Sir W. Batten.  Sir W. Batten and Mr. Coventry tell me that my
Lord Bristoll hath this day impeached my Lord Chancellor in the House of
Lords of High Treason.  The chief of the articles are these: 1st.  That he
should be the occasion of the peace made with Holland lately upon such
disadvantageous terms, and that he was bribed to it.  2d.  That Dunkirke
was also sold by his advice chiefly, so much to the damage of England.
3d.  That he had L6000 given him for the drawing-up or promoting of the
Irish declaration lately, concerning the division of the lands there.
4th.  He did carry on the design of the Portugall match, so much to the
prejudice of the Crown of England, notwithstanding that he knew the Queen
is not capable of bearing children.  5th.  That the Duke's marrying of his
daughter was a practice of his, thereby to raise his family; and that it
was done by indirect courses.  6th.  That the breaking-off of the match
with Parma, in which he was employed at the very time when the match with
Portugall was made up here, which he took as a great slur to him, and so
it was; and that, indeed, is the chief occasion of all this fewde.  7th.
That he hath endeavoured to bring in Popery, and wrote to the Pope for a
cap for a subject of the King of England's (my Lord Aubigny ); and some
say that he lays it to the Chancellor, that a good Protestant Secretary
(Sir Edward Nicholas) was laid aside, and a Papist, Sir H. Bennet, put in
his room: which is very strange, when the last of these two is his own
creature, and such an enemy accounted to the Chancellor, that they never
did nor do agree; and all the world did judge the Chancellor to be falling
from the time that Sir H. Bennet was brought in.  Besides my Lord Bristoll
being a Catholique himself, all this is very strange.  These are the main
of the Articles.  Upon which my Lord Chancellor desired that the noble
Lord that brought in these Articles, would sign to them with his hand;
which my Lord Bristoll did presently.  Then the House did order that the
judges should, against Monday next, bring in their opinion, Whether these
articles are treason, or no? and next, they would know, Whether they were
brought in regularly or no, without leave of the Lords' House?  After
dinner I took boat (H. Russell) and down to Gravesend in good time, and
thence with a guide post to Chatham, where I found Sir J. Minnes and Mr.
Wayth walking in the garden, whom I told all this day's news, which I left
the town full of, and it is great news, and will certainly be in the
consequence of it.  By and by to supper, and after long discourse, Sir J.
Minnes and I, he saw me to my chamber, which not pleasing me, I sent word
so to Mrs. Bradford, that I should be crowded into such a hole, while the
clerks and boarders of her own take up the best rooms.  However I lay
there and slept well.

11th.  Up early and to the Dock, and with the Storekeeper and other
officers all the morning from one office to another.  At noon to the
Hill-house in Commissioner Pett's coach, and after seeing the guard-ships,
to dinner, and after dining done to the Dock by coach, it raining hard, to
see "The Prince" launched, which hath lain in the Dock in repairing these
three years.  I went into her and was launched in her. Thence by boat
ashore, it raining, and I went to Mr. Barrow's, where Sir J. Minnes and
Commissioner Pett; we staid long eating sweetmeats and drinking, and
looking over some antiquities of Mr. Barrow's, among others an old
manuscript Almanac, that I believe was made for some monastery, in
parchment, which I could spend much time upon to understand.  Here was a
pretty young lady, a niece of Barrow's, which I took much pleasure to look
on.  Thence by barge to St. Mary Creek; where Commissioner Pett (doubtful
of the growing greatness of Portsmouth by the finding of those creeks
there), do design a wett dock at no great charge, and yet no little one;
he thinks towards L10,000.  And the place, indeed, is likely to be a very
fit place, when the King hath money to do it with.  Thence, it raining as
hard as it could pour down, home to the Hillhouse, and anon to supper, and
after supper, Sir J. Minnes and I had great discourse with Captain Cox and
Mr. Hempson about business of the yard, and particularly of pursers'
accounts with Hempson, who is a cunning knave in that point. So late to
bed and, Mr. Wayth being gone, I lay above in the Treasurer's bed and
slept well.  About one or two in the morning the curtains of my bed being
drawn waked me, and I saw a man stand there by the inside of my bed
calling me French dogg 20 times, one after another, and I starting, as if
I would get out of the bed, he fell a-laughing as hard as he could drive,
still calling me French dogg, and laid his hand on my shoulder. At last,
whether I said anything or no I cannot tell, but I perceived the man,
after he had looked wistly upon me, and found that I did not answer him to
the names that he called me by, which was Salmon, Sir Carteret's clerk,
and Robt. Maddox, another of the clerks, he put off his hat on a suddaine,
and forebore laughing, and asked who I was, saying, "Are you Mr. Pepys?"
I told him yes, and now being come a little better to myself, I found him
to be Tom Willson, Sir W. Batten's clerk, and fearing he might be in some
melancholy fit, I was at a loss what to do or say. At last I asked him
what he meant.  He desired my pardon for that he was mistaken, for he
thought verily, not knowing of my coming to lie there, that it had been
Salmon, the Frenchman, with whom he intended to have made some sport.  So
I made nothing of it, but bade him good night, and I, after a little
pause, to sleep again, being well pleased that it ended no worse, and
being a little the better pleased with it, because it was the Surveyor's
clerk, which will make sport when I come to tell Sir W. Batten of it, it
being a report that old Edgeborough, the former Surveyor, who died here,
do now and then walk.

12th (Lord's day).  Up, and meeting Tom Willson he asked my pardon again,
which I easily did give him, telling him only that it was well I was not a
woman with child, for it might have made me miscarry.  With Sir J. Minnes
to church, where an indifferent good sermon.  Here I saw Mrs. Becky Allen,
who hath been married, and is this day churched, after her bearing a
child.  She is grown tall, but looks very white and thin, and I can find
no occasion while I am here to come to have her company, which I desire
and expected in my coming, but only coming out of the church I kissed her
and her sister and mother-in-law.  So to dinner, Sir J. Minnes,
Commissioner Pett, and I, &c., and after dinner walked in the garden, it
being a very fine day, the best we have had this great while, if not this
whole summer.  To church again, and after that walked through the
Rope-ground to the Dock, and there over and over the Dock and grounds
about it, and storehouses, &c., with the officers of the Yard, and then to
Commissioner Pett's and had a good sullybub and other good things, and
merry.  Commissioner Pett showed me alone his bodys as a secrett, which I
found afterwards by discourse with Sir J. Minnes that he had shown them
him, wherein he seems to suppose great mystery in the nature of Lynes to
be hid, but I do not understand it at all.  Thence walked to the
Hill-house, being myself much dissatisfied, and more than I thought I
should have been with Commissioner Pett, being, by what I saw since I came
hither, convinced that he is not able to exercise the command in the Yard
over the officers that he ought to do, or somebody else, if ever the
service be well looked after there.  Sat up and with Sir J. Minnes
talking, and he speaking his mind in slighting of the Commissioner, for
which I wish there was not so much reason.  For I do see he is but a man
of words, though indeed he is the ablest man that we have to do service if
he would or durst.  Sir J. Minnes being gone to bed, I took Mr. Whitfield,
one of the clerks, and walked to the Dock about eleven at night, and there
got a boat and a crew, and rowed down to the guard-ships, it being a most
pleasant moonshine evening that ever I saw almost. The guard-ships were
very ready to hail us, being no doubt commanded thereto by their Captain,
who remembers how I surprised them the last time I was here.  However, I
found him ashore, but the ship in pretty good order, and the arms well
fixed, charged, and primed.  Thence to the Soveraign, where I found no
officers aboard, no arms fixed, nor any powder to prime their few guns,
which were charged, without bullet though.  So to the London, where
neither officers nor any body awake; I boarded her, and might have done
what I would, and at last could find but three little boys; and so spent
the whole night in visiting all the ships, in which I found, for the most
part, neither an officer aboard, nor any men so much as awake, which I was
grieved to find, specially so soon after a great Larum, as Commissioner
Pett brought us word that he [had] provided against, and put all in a
posture of defence but a week ago, all which I am resolved to represent to
the Duke.

13th.  So, it being high day, I put in to shore and to bed for two hours
just, and so up again, and with the Storekeeper and Clerk of the Rope-yard
up and down the Dock and Rope-house, and by and by mustered the Yard, and
instructed the Clerks of the Cheque in my new way of Callbook, and that
and other things done, to the Hill-house, and there we eat something, and
so by barge to Rochester, and there took coach hired for our passage to
London, and Mrs. Allen, the clerk of the Rope-yard's wife with us,
desiring her passage, and it being a most pleasant and warm day, we got by
four o'clock home.  In our way she telling us in what condition Becky
Allen is married against all expectation a fellow that proves to be a
coxcomb and worth little if any thing at all, and yet are entered into a
way of living above their condition that will ruin them presently, for
which, for the lady's sake, I am much troubled.  Home I found all well
there, and after dressing myself, I walked to the Temple; and there, from
my cozen Roger, hear that the judges have this day brought in their answer
to the Lords, That the articles against my Lord Chancellor are not
Treason; and to-morrow they are to bring in their arguments to the House
for the same.  This day also the King did send by my Lord Chamberlain to
the Lords, to tell them from him, that the most of the articles against my
Lord Chancellor he himself knows to be false.  Thence by water to
Whitehall, and so walked to St. James's, but missed Mr. Coventry.  I met
the Queen-Mother walking in the Pell Mell, led by my Lord St. Alban's. And
finding many coaches at the Gate, I found upon enquiry that the Duchess is
brought to bed of a boy; and hearing that the King and Queen are rode
abroad with the Ladies of Honour to the Park, and seeing a great crowd of
gallants staying here to see their return, I also staid walking up and
down, and among others spying a man like Mr. Pembleton (though I have
little reason to think it should be he, speaking and discoursing long with
my Lord D'Aubigne), yet how my blood did rise in my face, and I fell into
a sweat from my old jealousy and hate, which I pray God remove from me.
By and by the King and Queen, who looked in this dress (a white laced
waistcoat and a crimson short pettycoat, and her hair dressed ci la
negligence) mighty pretty; and the King rode hand in hand with her.  Here
was also my Lady Castlemaine rode among the rest of the ladies; but the
King took, methought, no notice of her; nor when they 'light did any body
press (as she seemed to expect, and staid for it) to take her down, but
was taken down by her own gentleman.  She looked mighty out of humour, and
had a yellow plume in her hat (which all took notice of), and yet is very
handsome, but very melancholy: nor did any body speak to her, or she so
much as smile or speak to any body.  I followed them up into White Hall,
and into the Queen's presence, where all the ladies walked, talking and
fiddling with their hats and feathers, and changing and trying one
another's by one another's heads, and laughing.  But it was the finest
sight to me, considering their great beautys and dress, that ever I did
see in all my life.  But, above all, Mrs. Stewart in this dress, with her
hat cocked and a red plume, with her sweet eye, little Roman nose, and
excellent taille, is now the greatest beauty I ever saw, I think, in my
life; and, if ever woman can, do exceed my Lady Castlemaine, at least in
this dress nor do I wonder if the King changes, which I verily believe is
the reason of his coldness to my Lady Castlemaine.  Here late, with much
ado I left to look upon them, and went away, and by water, in a boat with
other strange company, there being no other to be had, and out of him into
a sculler half to the bridge, and so home and to Sir W. Batten, where I
staid telling him and Sir J. Minnes and Mrs. Turner, with great mirth, my
being frighted at Chatham by young Edgeborough, and so home to supper and
to bed, before I sleep fancying myself to sport with Mrs. Stewart with
great pleasure.

14th.  Up a little late, last night recovering my sleepiness for the night
before, which was lost, and so to my office to put papers and things to
right, and making up my journal from Wednesday last to this day.  All the
morning at my office doing of business; at noon Mr. Hunt came to me, and
he and I to the Exchange, and a Coffee House, and drank there, and thence
to my house to dinner, whither my uncle Thomas came, and he tells me that
he is going down to Wisbech, there to try what he can recover of my uncle
Day's estate, and seems to have good arguments for what he do go about, in
which I wish him good speed.  I made him almost foxed, the poor man having
but a bad head, and not used I believe nowadays to drink much wine.  So
after dinner, they being gone, I to my office, and so home to bed.  This
day I hear the judges, according to order yesterday, did bring into the
Lords' House their reasons of their judgment in the business between my
Lord Bristoll and the Chancellor; and the Lords do concur with the Judges
that the articles are not treason, nor regularly brought into the House,
and so voted that a Committee should be chosen to examine them; but
nothing to be done therein till the next sitting of this Parliament (which
is like to be adjourned in a day or two), and in the mean time the two
Lords to, remain without prejudice done to either of them.

15th.  Up and all the morning at the office, among other things with
Cooper the Purveyor, whose dullness in his proceeding in his work I was
vexed at, and find that though he understands it may be as much as other
men that profess skill in timber, yet I perceive that many things, they do
by rote, and very dully.  Thence home to dinner, whither Captain Grove
came and dined with me, he going into the country to-day; among other
discourse he told me of discourse very much to my honour, both as to my
care and ability, happening at the Duke of Albemarle's table the other
day, both from the Duke, and the Duchess themselves; and how I paid so
much a year to him whose place it was of right, and that Mr. Coventry did
report thus of me; which was greatly to my content, knowing how against
their minds I was brought into the Navy.  Thence by water to Westminster,
and there spent a good deal of time walking in the Hall, which is going to
be repaired, and, God forgive me, had a mind to have got Mrs. Lane abroad,
or fallen in with any woman else (in that hot humour).  But it so happened
she could not go out, nor I meet with any body else, and so I walked
homeward, and in my way did many and great businesses of my own at the
Temple among my lawyers and others to my great content, thanking God that
I did not fall into any company to occasion spending time and money. To
supper, and then to a little viall and to bed, sporting in my fancy with
the Queen.

16th.  Up and dispatched things into the country and to my father's, and
two keggs of Sturgeon and a dozen bottles of wine to Cambridge for my
cozen Roger Pepys, which I give him.  By and by down by water on several
Deall ships, and stood upon a stage in one place seeing calkers sheathing
of a ship.  Then at Wapping to my carver's about my Viall head.  So home,
and thence to my Viall maker's in Bishops, gate Street; his name is Wise,
who is a pretty fellow at it.  Thence to the Exchange, and so home to
dinner, and then to my office, where a full board, and busy all the
afternoon, and among other things made a great contract with Sir W. Warren
for 40,000 deals Swinsound, at L3 17s. od. per hundred.  In the morning
before I went on the water I was at Thames Street about some pitch, and
there meeting Anthony Joyce, I took him and Mr. Stacy, the Tarr merchant,
to the tavern, where Stacy told me many old stories of my Lady Batten's
former poor condition, and how her former husband broke, and how she came
to her state.  At night, after office done, I went to Sir W. Batten's,
where my Lady and I [had] some high words about emptying our house of
office, where I did tell her my mind, and at last agreed that it should be
done through my office, and so all well.  So home to bed.

17th.  Up, and after doing some business at my office, Creed came to me,
and I took him to my viall maker's, and there I heard the famous Mr.
Stefkins play admirably well, and yet I found it as it is always, I over
expected.  I took him to the tavern and found him a temperate sober man,
at least he seems so to me.  I commit the direction of my viall to him.
Thence to the Change, and so home, Creed and I to dinner, and after dinner
Sir W. Warren came to me, and he and I in my closet about his last night's
contract, and from thence to discourse of measuring of timber, wherein I
made him see that I could understand the matter well, and did both learn
of and teach him something.  Creed being gone through my staying talking
to him so long, I went alone by water down to Redriffe, and so to sit and
talk with Sir W. Pen, where I did speak very plainly concerning my
thoughts of Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes.  So as it may cost me some
trouble if he should tell them again, but he said as much or more to me
concerning them both, which I may remember if ever it should come forth,
and nothing but what is true and my real opinion of them, that they
neither do understand to this day Creed's accounts, nor do deserve to be
employed in their places without better care, but that the King had better
give them greater salaries to stand still and do nothing.  Thence coming
home I was saluted by Bagwell and his wife (the woman I have a kindness
for), and they would have me into their little house, which I was willing
enough to, and did salute his wife.  They had got wine for me, and I
perceive live prettily, and I believe the woman a virtuous modest woman.
Her husband walked through to Redriffe with me, telling me things that I
asked of in the yard, and so by water home, it being likely to rain again
to-night, which God forbid.  To supper and to bed.

18th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning, and Sir J. Minnes and I
did a little, and but a little business at the office.  So I eat a bit of
victuals at home, and so abroad to several places, as my bookseller's, and
then to Thomson the instrument maker's to bespeak a ruler for my pocket
for timber, &c., which I believe he will do to my mind.  So to the Temple,
Wardrobe, and lastly to Westminster Hall, where I expected some bands made
me by Mrs. Lane, and while she went to the starchers for them, I staid at
Mrs. Howlett's, who with her husband were abroad, and only their daughter
(which I call my wife) was in the shop, and I took occasion to buy a pair
of gloves to talk to her, and I find her a pretty spoken girl, and will
prove a mighty handsome wench.  I could love her very well.  By and by
Mrs. Lane comes, and my bands not being done she and I posted and met at
the Crown in the Palace Yard, where we eat a chicken I sent for, and
drank, and were mighty merry, and I had my full liberty of towzing her and
doing what I would, but the last thing of all .  .  .  .  Of which I am
heartily ashamed, but I do resolve never to do more so.  But, Lord! to see
what a mind she has to a husband, and how she showed me her hands to tell
her her fortune, and every thing that she asked ended always whom and when
she was to marry.  And I pleased her so well, saying as.  I know she would
have me, and then she would say that she had been with all the artists in
town, and they always told her the same things, as that she should live
long, and rich, and have a good husband, but few children, and a great fit
of sickness, and 20 other things, which she says she has always been told
by others.  Here I staid late before my bands were done, and then they
came, and so I by water to the Temple, and thence walked home, all in a
sweat with my tumbling of her and walking, and so a little supper and to
bed, fearful of having taken cold.

19th (Lord's day).  Lay very long in pleasant dreams till Church time, and
so up, and it being foul weather so that I cannot walk as I intended to
meet my Cozen Roger at Thomas Pepys's house (whither he rode last night),
to Hatcham, I went to church, where a sober Doctor made a good sermon.  So
home to dinner alone, and then to read a little, and so to church again,
where the Scot made an ordinary sermon, and so home to my office, and
there read over my vows and increased them by a vow against all strong
drink till November next of any sort or quantity, by which I shall try how
I can forbear it.  God send it may not prejudice my health, and then I
care not.  Then I fell to read over a silly play writ by a person of
honour (which is, I find, as much as to say a coxcomb), called "Love a la
Mode,"' and that being ended, home, and played on my lute and sung psalms
till bedtime, then to prayers and to bed.

20th.  Up and to my office, and then walked to Woolwich, reading Bacon's
"Faber fortunae,"

     [Pepys may here refer either to Essay XLI. (of Fortune) or to a
     chapter' in the "Advancement of Learning."  The sentence, "Faber
     quisque fortunae propria," said to be by Appius Claudian, is quoted
     more than once in the "De Augmentis Scientiarum," lib. viii., cap.
     2.]

which the oftener I read the more I admire.  There found Captain Cocke,
and up and down to many places to look after matters, and so walked back
again with him to his house, and there dined very finely.  With much ado
obtained an excuse from drinking of wine, and did only taste a drop of
Sack which he had for his lady, who is, he fears, a little consumptive,
and her beauty begins to want its colour.  It was Malago Sack, which, he
says, is certainly 30 years old, and I tasted a drop of it, and it was
excellent wine, like a spirit rather than wine.  Thence by water to the
office, and taking some papers by water to White Hall and St. James's, but
there being no meeting with the Duke to-day, I returned by water and down
to Greenwich, to look after some blocks that I saw a load carried off by a
cart from Woolwich, the King's Yard.  But I could not find them, and so
returned, and being heartily weary I made haste to bed, and being in bed
made Will read and construe three or four Latin verses in the Bible, and
chide him for forgetting his grammar.  So to sleep, and sleep ill all the
night, being so weary, and feverish with it.

21st.  And so lay long in the morning, till I heard people knock at my
door, and I took it to be about 8 o'clock (but afterwards found myself a
little mistaken), and so I rose and ranted at Will and the maid, and swore
I could find my heart to kick them down stairs, which the maid mumbled at
mightily.  It was my brother, who staid and talked with me, his chief
business being about his going about to build his house new at the top,
which will be a great charge for him, and above his judgment. By and by
comes Mr. Deane, of Woolwich, with his draught of a ship, and the bend and
main lines in the body of a ship very finely, and which do please me
mightily, and so am resolved to study hard, and learn of him to understand
a body, and I find him a very pretty fellow in it, and rational, but a
little conceited, but that's no matter to me.  At noon, by my Lady
Batten's desire, I went over the water to Mr. Castle's, who brings his
wife home to his own house to-day, where I found a great many good old
women, and my Lady, Sir W. Batten, and Sir J. Minnes.  A good, handsome,
plain dinner, and then walked in the garden; which is pleasant enough,
more than I expected there, and so Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and I by
water to the office, and there sat, and then I by water to the Temple
about my law business, and back again home and wrote letters to my father
and wife about my desire that they should observe the feast at Brampton,
and have my Lady and the family, and so home to supper and bed, my head
aching all the day from my last night's bad rest, and yesterday's
distempering myself with over walking, and to-day knocking my head against
a low door in Mr. Castle's house.  This day the Parliament kept a fast for
the present unseasonable weather.

22nd.  Up, and by and by comes my uncle Thomas, to whom I paid L10 for his
last half year's annuity, and did get his and his son's hand and seal for
the confirming to us Piggott's mortgage, which was forgot to be expressed
in our late agreement with him, though intended, and therefore they might
have cavilled at it, if they would.  Thence abroad calling at several
places upon some errands, among others to my brother Tom's barber and had
my hair cut, while his boy played on the viallin, a plain boy, but has a
very good genius, and understands the book very well, but to see what a
shift he made for a string of red silk was very pleasant. Thence to my
Lord Crew's.  My Lord not being come home, I met and staid below with
Captain Ferrers, who was come to wait upon my Lady Jemimah to St. James's,
she being one of the four ladies that hold up the mantle at the
christening this afternoon of the Duke's child (a boy).  In discourse of
the ladies at Court, Captain Ferrers tells me that my Lady Castlemaine is
now as great again as ever she was; and that her going away was only a fit
of her own upon some slighting words of the King, so that she called for
her coach at a quarter of an hour's warning, and went to Richmond; and the
King the next morning, under pretence of going a-hunting, went to see her
and make friends, and never was a-hunting at all.  After which she came
back to Court, and commands the King as much as ever, and hath and doth
what she will.  No longer ago than last night, there was a private
entertainment made for the King and Queen at the Duke of Buckingham's, and
she: was not invited: but being at my Lady Suffolk's, her aunt's (where my
Lady Jemimah and Lord Sandwich dined) yesterday, she was heard to say,
"Well; much good may it do them, and for all that I will be as merry as
they:" and so she went home and caused a great supper to be prepared.  And
after the King had been with the Queen at Wallingford House, he came to my
Lady Castlemaine's, and was there all night, and my Lord Sandwich with
him, which was the reason my Lord lay in town all night, which he has not
done a great while before.  He tells me he believes that, as soon as the
King can get a husband for Mrs. Stewart however, my Lady Castlemaine's
nose will be out of joynt; for that she comes to be in great esteem, and
is more handsome than she.  I found by his words that my Lord Sandwich
finds some pleasure in the country where he now is, whether he means one
of the daughters of the house or no I know not, but hope the contrary,
that he thinks he is very well pleased with staying there, but yet upon
breaking up of the Parliament, which the King by a message to-day says
shall be on Monday next, he resolves to go. Ned Pickering, the coxcomb,
notwithstanding all his hopes of my Lord's assistance, wherein I am sorry
to hear my Lord has much concerned himself, is defeated of the place he
expected under the Queen.  He came hither by and by and brought some
jewells for my Lady Jem. to put on, with which and her other clothes she
looks passing well.  I staid and dined with my Lord Crew, who whether he
was not so well pleased with me as he used to be, or that his head was
full of business, as I believe it was, he hardly spoke one word to me all
dinner time, we dining alone, only young Jack Crew, Sir Thomas's son, with
us.  After dinner I bade him farewell.  Sir Thomas I hear has gone this
morning ill to bed, so I had no mind to see him.  Thence homewards, and in
the way first called at Wotton's, the shoemaker's, who tells me the reason
of Harris's' going from Sir Wm. Davenant's house, that he grew very proud
and demanded L20 for himself extraordinary, more than Betterton or any
body else, upon every new play, and L10 upon every revive; which with
other things Sir W. Davenant would not give him, and so he swore he would
never act there more, in expectation of being received in the other House;
but the King will not suffer it, upon Sir W. Davenant's desire that he
would not, for then he might shut up house, and that is true.  He tells me
that his going is at present a great loss to the House, and that he fears
he hath a stipend from the other House privately.  He tells the that the
fellow grew very proud of late, the King and every body else crying him up
so high, and that above Betterton, he being a more ayery man, as he is
indeed.  But yet Betterton, he says, they all say do act: some parts that
none but himself can do.  Thence to my bookseller's, and found my
Waggoners done.  The very binding cost me 14s., but they are well done,
and so with a porter home with them, and so by water to Ratcliffe, and
there went to speak with Cumberford the platt-maker, and there saw his
manner of working, which is very fine and laborious.  So down to Deptford,
reading Ben Jonson's "Devil is an asse," and so to see Sir W. Pen, who I
find walking out of doors a little, but could not stand long; but in doors
and I with him, and staid a great while talking, I taking a liberty to
tell him my thoughts in things of the office; that when he comes abroad
again, he may know what to think of me, and to value me as he ought.
Walked home as I used to do, and being weary, and after some discourse
with Mr. Barrow, who came to see and take his leave of me, he being
to-morrow to set out toward the Isle of Man, I went to bed.  This day I
hear that the Moores have made some attaques upon the outworks of Tangier;
but my Lord Tiviott; with the loss of about 200 men, did beat them off,
and killed many of them.  To-morrow the King and Queen for certain go down
to Tunbridge.  But the King comes hack again against Monday to raise the
Parliament.

23rd.  Up and to my office, and thence by information from, Mr. Ackworth I
went down to Woolwich, and mustered the three East India ships that lie
there, believing that there is great-juggling between the Pursers and
Clerks of the Cheque in cheating the King of the wages and victuals of men
that do not give attendance, and I found very few on board.  So to the
yard, and there mustered the yard, and found many faults, and discharged
several fellows that were absent from their business.  I staid also at Mr.
Ackworth's desire at dinner with him and his wife, and there was a simple
fellow, a gentleman I believe of the Court, their kinsmen, that threatened
me I could have little discourse or begin, acquaintance with Ackworth's
wife, and so after dinner away, with all haste home, and there found Sir
J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten at the office, and by Sir W. Batten's
testimony and Sir G. Carteret's concurrence was forced to consent to a
business of Captain Cocke's timber, as bad as anything we have lately
disputed about, and all through Mr. Coventry's not being with us.  So up
and to supper with Sir W. Batten upon a soused mullett, very good meat,
and so home and to bed.

24th.  Up pretty early (though of late I have been faulty by an hour or
two every morning of what I should do) and by water to the Temple, and
there took leave of my cozen Roger Pepys, who goes out of town to-day. So
to Westminster Hall, and there at Mrs. Michell's shop sent for beer and
sugar and drink, and made great cheer with it among her and Mrs. Howlett,
her neighbour, and their daughters, especially Mrs. Howlett's daughter,
Betty, which is a pretty girl, and one I have long called wife, being, I
formerly thought, like my own wife.  After this good neighbourhood, which
I do to give them occasion of speaking well and commending me in some
company that now and then I know comes to their shop, I went to the Six
clerks' office, and there had a writ for Tom Trice, and paid 20s. for it
to Wilkinson, and so up and down to many places, among others to the viall
maker's, and there saw the head, which now pleases me mightily, and so
home, and being sent for presently to Mr. Bland's, where Mr. Povy and
Gauden and I were invited to dinner, which we had very finely and great
plenty, but for drink, though many and good, I drank nothing but small
beer and water, which I drank so much that I wish it may not do me hurt.
They had a kinswoman, they call daughter, in the house, a short, ugly,
red-haired slut, that plays upon the virginalls, and sings, but after such
a country manner I was weary of it, but yet could not but commend it.  So
by and by after dinner comes Monsr. Gotier, who is beginning to teach her,
but, Lord! what a droll fellow it is to make her hold open her mouth, and
telling this and that so drolly would make a man burst, but himself I
perceive sings very well.  Anon we sat dawn again to a collacon of
cheesecakes, tarts, custards, and such like, very handsome, and so up and
away home, where I at the office a while, till disturbed by, Mr. Hill, of
Cambridge, with whom I walked in the garden a while, and thence home and
then in my dining room walked, talking of several matters of state till 11
at night, giving him a glass of wine.  I was not unwilling to hear him
talk, though he is full of words, yet a man of large conversation,
especially among the Presbyters and Independents; he tells me that
certainly, let the Bishops alone, and they will ruin themselves, and he is
confident that the King's declaration about two years since will be the
foundation of the settlement of the Church some time or other, for the
King will find it hard to banish all those that will appear Nonconformists
upon this Act that is coming out against them.  He being gone, I to bed.

25th.  Up and to my office setting papers in order for these two or three
days, in which I have been hindered a little, and then having intended
this day to go to Banstead Downs to see a famous race, I sent Will to get
himself ready to go with me, and I also by and by home and put on my
riding suit, and being ready came to the office to Sir J. Minnes and Sir
W. Batten, and did a little of course at the office this morning, and so
by boat to White Hall, where I hear that the race is put off, because the
Lords do sit in Parliament to-day.  However, having appointed Mr. Creed to
come to me to Fox Hall, I went over thither, and after some debate, Creed
and I resolved to go to Clapham, to Mr. Gauden's, who had sent his coach
to their place for me because I was to have my horse of him to go to the
race.  So I went thither by coach and my Will by horse with me; Mr. Creed
he went over back again to Westminster to fetch his horse. When I came to
Mr. Gauden's one first thing was to show me his house, which is almost
built, wherein he and his family live.  I find it very regular and finely
contrived, and the gardens and offices about it as convenient and as full
of good variety as ever I saw in my life.  It is true he hath been
censured for laying out so much money; but he tells me that he built it
for his brother, who is since dead (the Bishop), who when he should come
to be Bishop of Winchester, which he was promised (to which bishoprick at
present there is no house), he did intend to dwell here.  Besides, with
the good husbandry in making his bricks and other things I do not think it
costs him so much money as people think and discourse.  By and by to
dinner, and in comes Mr. Creed.  I saluted Mr. Gauden's lady, and the
young ladies, he having many pretty children, and his sister, the Bishop's
widow; who was, it seems, Sir W. Russel's daughter, the Treasurer of the
Navy; who by her discourse at dinner I find to be very well-bred, and a
woman of excellent discourse, even so much as to have my attention all
dinner with much more pleasure than I did give to Mr. Creed, whose
discourse was mighty merry in inveighing at Mr. Gauden's victuals that
they had at sea the last voyage that he prosecuted, till methought the
woman began to take it seriously.  After dinner by Mr. Gauden's motion we
got Mrs. Gauden and her sister to sing to a viall, on which Mr. Gauden's
eldest son (a pretty man, but a simple one methinks) played but very
poorly, and the musique bad, but yet I commended it.  Only I do find that
the ladies have been taught to sing and do sing well now, but that the
viall puts them out.  I took the viall and played some things from one of
their books, Lyra lessons, which they seemed to like well.  Thus we pass
an hour or two after dinner and towards the evening we bade them Adieu!
and took horse; being resolved that, instead of the race which fails us,
we would go to Epsum.  So we set out, and being gone a little way I sent
home Will to look to the house, and Creed and I rode forward; the road
being full of citizens going and coming toward Epsum, where, when we came,
we could hear of no lodging, the town so full; but which was better, I
went towards Ashted, my old place of pleasure; and there by direction of
one goodman Arthur, whom we met on the way, we went to Farmer Page's, at
which direction he and I made good sport, and there we got a lodging in a
little hole we could not stand upright in, but rather than go further to
look we staid there, and while supper was getting ready I took him to walk
up and down behind my cozen Pepys's house that was, which I find comes
little short of what I took it to be when I was a little boy, as things
use commonly to appear greater than then when one comes to be a man and
knows more, and so up and down in the closes, which I know so well
methinks, and account it good fortune that I lie here that I may have
opportunity to renew my old walks.  It seems there is one Mr. Rouse, they
call him the Queen's Tailor, that lives there now.  So to our lodging to
supper, and among other meats had a brave dish of cream, the best I ever
eat in my life, and with which we pleased ourselves much, and by and by to
bed, where, with much ado yet good sport, we made shift to lie, but with
little ease, and a little spaniel by us, which has followed us all the
way, a pretty dogg, and we believe that follows my horse, and do belong to
Mrs. Gauden, which we, therefore, are very careful of.

26th (Lord's-day).  Up and to the Wells,

     [Epsom medicinal wells were discovered about 1618, but they did not
     become fashionable until the Restoration.  John Toland, in his
     "Description of Epsom," says that he often counted seventy coaches in
     the Ring (the present racecourse on the Downs) on a Sunday evening;
     but by the end of the eighteenth century Epsom had entirely lost its
     vogue.]

where great store of citizens, which was the greatest part of the company,
though there were some others of better quality.  I met many that I knew,
and we drank each of us two pots and so walked away, it being very
pleasant to see how everybody turns up his tail, here one and there
another, in a bush, and the women in their quarters the like. Thence I
walked with Creed to Mr. Minnes's house, which has now a very good way
made to it, and thence to Durdans and walked round it and within the Court
Yard and to the Bowling-green, where I have seen so much mirth in my time;
but now no family in it (my Lord Barkeley, whose it is, being with his
family at London), and so up and down by Minnes's wood, with great
pleasure viewing my old walks, and where Mrs. Hely and I did use to walk
and talk, with whom I had the first sentiments of love and pleasure in
woman's company, discourse, and taking her by the hand, she being a pretty
woman.  So I led him to Ashted Church (by the place where Peter, my
cozen's man, went blindfold and found a certain place we chose for him
upon a wager), where we had a dull Doctor, one Downe, worse than I think
even parson King was, of whom we made so much scorn, and after sermon
home, and staid while our dinner, a couple of large chickens, were
dressed, and a good mess of cream, which anon we had with good content,
and after dinner (we taking no notice of other lodgers in the house,
though there was one that I knew, and knew and spoke to me, one Mr. Rider,
a merchant), he and I to walk, and I led him to the pretty little wood
behind my cozens house, into which we got at last by clambering, and our
little dog with us, but when we were among the hazel trees and bushes,
Lord! what a course did we run for an hour together, losing ourselves, and
indeed I despaired I should ever come to any path, but still from thicket
to thicket, a thing I could hardly have believed a man could have been
lost so long in so small a room.  At last I found out a delicate walk in
the middle that goes quite through the wood, and then went out of the
wood, and holloed Mr. Creed, and made him hunt me from place to place, and
at last went in and called him into my fine walk, the little dog still
hunting with us through the wood.  In this walk being all bewildered and
weary and sweating, Creed he lay down upon the ground, which I did a
little, but I durst not long, but walked from him in the fine green walk,
which is half a mile long, there reading my vows as I used to on Sundays.
And after that was done, and going and lying by Creed an hour, he and I
rose and went to our lodging and paid our reckoning, and so mounted,
whether to go toward London home or to find a new lodging, and so rode
through Epsum, the whole town over, seeing the various companys that were
there walking; which was very pleasant to see how they are there without
knowing almost what to do, but only in the morning to drink waters.  But,
Lord!  to see how many I met there of citizens, that I could not have
thought to have seen there, or that they had ever had it in their heads or
purses to go down thither.  We rode out of the town through Yowell beyond
Nonesuch House a mile, and there our little dogg, as he used to do, fell
a-running after a flock of sheep feeding on the common, till he was out of
sight, and then endeavoured to come back again, and went to the last gate
that he parted with us at, and there the poor thing mistakes our scent,
instead of coming forward he hunts us backward, and runs as hard as he
could drive back towards Nonesuch, Creed and I after him, and being by
many told of his going that way and the haste he made, we rode still and
passed him through Yowell, and there we lost any further information of
him.  However, we went as far as Epsum almost, hearing nothing of him, we
went back to Yowell, and there was told that he did pass through the town.
We rode back to Nonesuch to see whether he might be gone back again, but
hearing nothing we with great trouble and discontent for the loss of our
dogg came back once more to Yowell, and there set up our horses and selves
for all night, employing people to look for the dogg in the town, but can
hear nothing of him.  However, we gave order for supper, and while that
was dressing walked out through Nonesuch Park to the house, and there
viewed as much as we could of the outside, and looked through the great
gates, and found a noble court; and altogether believe it to have been a
very noble house, and a delicate park about it, where just now there was a
doe killed, for the King to carry up to Court.  So walked back again, and
by and by our supper being ready, a good leg of mutton boiled, we supped
and to bed, upon two beds in the same room, wherein we slept most
excellently all night.

27th.  Up in the morning about 7 o'clock, and after a little study,
resolved of riding to the Wells to look for our dogg, which we did, but
could hear nothing; but it being much a warmer day than yesterday there
was great store of gallant company, more than then, to my greater
pleasure.  There was at a distance, under one of the trees on the common,
a company got together that sung.  I, at the distance, and so all the rest
being a quarter of a mile off, took them for the Waytes, so I rode up to
them, and found them only voices, some citizens met by chance, that sung
four or five parts excellently.  I have not been more pleased with a snapp
of musique, considering the circumstances of the time and place, in all
my life anything so pleasant.  We drank each of us, three cupps, and so,
after riding up to the horsemen upon the hill, where they were making of
matches to run, we went away and to Yowell, where we found our breakfast,
the remains of our supper last night hashed, and by and by, after the
smith had set on two new shoes to Creed's horse, we mounted, and with
little discourse, I being intent upon getting home in time, we rode hard
home, observing Mr. Gauden's house, but not calling there (it being too
late for me to stay, and wanting their dog too).  The house stands very
finely, and has a graceful view to the highway.  Set up our horses at Fox
Hall, and I by water (observing the King's barge attending his going to
the House this day) home, it being about one o'clock.  So got myself ready
and shifting myself, and so by water to Westminster, and there came most
luckily to the Lords' House as the House of Commons were going into the
Lord's House, and there I crowded in along with the Speaker, and got to
stand close behind him, where he made his speech to the King (who sat with
his crown on and robes, and so all the Lords in their robes, a fine
sight); wherein he told his Majesty what they have done this Parliament,
and now offered for his royall consent.  The greatest matters were a bill
for the Lord's day (which it seems the Lords have lost, and so cannot be
passed, at which the Commons are displeased); the bills against
Conventicles and Papists (but it seems the Lords have not passed them),
and giving his Majesty four entire subsidys; which last, with about twenty
smaller Acts, were passed with this form: The Clerk of the House reads the
title of the bill, and then looks at the end and there finds (writ by the
King I suppose) "Le Roy le veult," and that he reads.  And to others he
reads, "Soit fait comme vous desirez."  And to the Subsidys, as well that
for the Commons, I mean the layety, as for the Clergy, the King writes,
"Le Roy remerciant les Seigneurs, &c., Prelats, &c., accepte leur
benevolences."  The Speaker's speech was far from any oratory, but was as
plain (though good matter) as any thing could be, and void of elocution.
After the bills passed, the King, sitting on his throne, with his speech
writ in a paper which he held in his lap, and scarce looked off of it, I
thought, all the time he made his speech to them, giving them thanks for
their subsidys, of which, had he not need, he would not have asked or
received them; and that need, not from any extravagancys of his, he was
sure, in any thing, but the disorders of the times compelling him to be at
greater charge than he hoped for the future, by their care in their
country, he should be: and that for his family expenses and others, he
would labour however to retrench in many things convenient, and would have
all others to do so too.  He desired that nothing of old faults should be
remembered, or severity for the same used to any in the country, it being
his desire to have all forgot as well as forgiven.  But, however, to use
all care in suppressing any tumults, &c.; assuring them that the restless
spirits of his and their adversaries have great expectations of something
to be done this summer.  And promised that though the Acts about
Conventicles and Papists were not ripe for passing this Session, yet he
would take care himself that neither of them should in this intervall be
encouraged to the endangering of the peace; and that at their next meeting
he would himself prepare two bills for them concerning them.  So he
concluded, that for the better proceeding of justice he did think fit to
make this a Session, and to prorogue them to the 16th of March next.  His
speech was very plain, nothing at all of spirit in it, nor spoke with any;
but rather on the contrary imperfectly, repeating many times his words
though he read all which I was sorry to see, it having not been hard for
him to have got all the speech without book.  So they all went away, the
King out of the House at the upper end, he being by and by to go to
Tunbridge to the Queen; and I in the Painted Chamber spoke with my Lord
Sandwich while he was putting off his robes, who tells me he will now
hasten down into the country, as soon as he can get some money settled on
the Wardrobe.  Here meeting Creed, he and I down to the Hall, and I having
at Michell's shop wrote a little letter to Mr. Gauden, to go with his
horse, and excusing my not taking leave or so much as asking after the old
lady the widow when we came away the other day from them, he and I over
the water to Fox Hall, and there sent away the horse with my letter, and
then to the new Spring Garden, walking up and down, but things being dear
and little attendance to be had we went away, leaving much brave company
there, and so to a less house hard by, where we liked very well their
Codlin tarts, having not time, as we intended, to stay the getting ready
of a dish of pease.  And there came to us an idle boy to show us some
tumbling tricks, which he did very well, and the greatest bending of his
body that ever I observed in my life.  Thence by water to White Hall, and
walked over the Park to St. James's; but missed Mr. Coventry, he not being
within; and so out again, and there the Duke was coming along the
Pell-Mell.  It being a little darkish, I staid not to take notice of him,
but we went directly back again.  And in our walk over the Park, one of
the Duke's footmen came running behind us, and came looking just in our
faces to see who we were, and went back again.  What his meaning is I know
not, but was fearful that I might not go far enough with my hat off,
though methinks that should not be it, besides, there were others covered
nearer than myself was, but only it was my fear.  So to White Hall and by
water to the Bridge, and so home to bed, weary and well pleased with my
journey in all respects.  Only it cost me about 20s., but it was for my
health, and I hope will prove so, only I do find by my riding a little
swelling to rise just by my anus.  I had the same the last time I rode,
and then it fell again, and now it is up again about the bigness of the
bag of a silkworm, makes me fearful of a rupture.  But I will speak to Mr.
Hollyard about it, and I am glad to find it now, that I may prevent it
before it goes too far.

28th.  Up after sleeping very well, and so to my office setting down the
Journall of this last three days, and so settled to business again, I hope
with greater cheerfulness and success by this refreshment.  At the office
all the morning, and at noon to Wise's about my viall that is a-doing, and
so home to dinner and then to the office, where we sat all the afternoon
till night, and I late at it till after the office was risen.  Late came
my Jane and her brother Will: to entreat for my taking of the boy again,
but I will not hear her, though I would yet be glad to do anything for her
sake to the boy, but receive him again I will not, nor give him anything.
She would have me send him to sea; which if I could I would do, but there
is no ship going out.  The poor girl cried all the time she was with me,
and would not go from me, staying about two hours with me till 10 or 11
o'clock, expecting that she might obtain something of me, but receive him
I will not.  So the poor girl was fain to go away crying and saying
little.  So from thence home, where my house of office was emptying, and I
find they will do, it with much more cleanness than I expected.  I went up
and down among them a good while, but knowing that Mr. Coventry was to
call me in the morning, I went to bed and left them to look after the
people.  So to bed.

29th.  Up about 6 o'clock, and found the people to have just done, and
Hannah not gone to bed yet, but was making clean of the yard and kitchen.
Will newly gone to bed.  So I to my office, and having given some order to
Tom Hater, to whom I gave leave for his recreation to go down to
Portsmouth this Pay, I went down to Wapping to Sir W. Warren, and there
staid an hour or two discoursing of some of his goods and then things in
general relating to this office, &c., and so home, and there going to Sir
William Batten (having no stomach to dine at home, it being yet hardly
clean of last night's [mess])and there I dined with my Lady and her
daughter and son Castle, and mighty kind she is and I kind to her, but,
Lord!  how freely and plainly she rails against Commissioner Pett, calling
him rogue, and wondering that the King keeps such a fellow in the Navy.
Thence by and by walked to see Sir W. Pen at Deptford, reading by the way
a most ridiculous play, a new one, called "The Politician Cheated."  After
a little sitting with him I walked to the yard a little and so home again,
my Will with me, whom I bade to stay in the yard for me, and so to bed.
This morning my brother Tom was with me, and we had some discourse again
concerning his country mistress, but I believe the most that is fit for us
to condescend to, will not content her friends.

30th.  Up and to the office to get business ready for our sitting, this
being the first day of altering it from afternoon during the Parliament
sitting to the fore-noon again.  By and by Mr. Coventry only came (Sir
John Minnes and Sir William Batten being gone this morning to Portsmouth
to pay some ships and the yard there), and after doing a little business
he and I down to Woolwich, and there up and down the yard, and by and by
came Sir G. Carteret and we all looked into matters, and then by water
back to Deptford, where we dined with him at his house, a very good dinner
and mightily tempted with wines of all sorts and brave French Syder, but I
drunk none.  But that which is a great wonder I find his little daughter
Betty, that was in hanging sleeves but a month or two ago, and is a very
little young child; married, and to whom, but to young Scott, son to Madam
Catharine Scott, that was so long in law, and at whose triall I was with
her husband; he pleading that it was unlawfully got and would not own it,
she, it seems, being brought to bed of it, if not got by somebody else at
Oxford, but it seems a little before his death he did own the child, and
hath left him his estate, not long since. So Sir G. Carteret hath struck
up of a sudden a match with him for his little daughter.  He hath about
L2000 per annum; and it seems Sir G. Carteret hath by this means
over-reached Sir H. Bennet, who did endeavour to get this gentleman for a
sister of his, but Sir G. Carteret I say has over-reached him.  By this
means Sir G. Carteret hath married two daughters this year both very well.
After dinner into Deptford yard, but our bellies being full we could do no
great business, and so parted, and Mr. Coventry and I to White Hall by
water, where we also parted, and I to several places about business, and
so calling for my five books of the Variorum print bound according to my
common binding instead of the other which is more gaudy I went home.  The
town talk this day is of nothing but the great foot-race run this day on
Banstead Downes, between Lee, the Duke of Richmond's footman, and a tyler,
a famous runner.  And Lee hath beat him; though the King and Duke of York
and all men almost did bet three or four to one upon the tyler's head.

31st.  Up early to my accounts this month, and I find myself worth clear
L730, the most I ever had yet, which contents me though I encrease but
very little.  Thence to my office doing business, and at noon to my viall
maker's, who has begun it and has a good appearance, and so to the
Exchange, where I met Dr. Pierce, who tells me of his good luck to get to
be groom of the Privy-Chamber to the Queen, and without my Lord Sandwich's
help; but only by his good fortune, meeting a man that hath let him have
his right for a small matter, about L60, for which he can every day have
L400.  But he tells me my Lord hath lost much honour in standing so long
and so much for that coxcomb Pickering, and at last not carrying it for
him; but hath his name struck out by the King and Queen themselves after
he had been in ever since the Queen's coming.  But he tells me he believes
that either Sir H. Bennet, my Lady Castlemaine, or Sir Charles Barkeley
had received some money for the place, and so the King could not
disappoint them, but was forced to put out this fool rather than a better
man.  And I am sorry to hear what he tells me that Sir Charles Barkeley
hath still such power over the King, as to be able to fetch him from the
Council-table to my Lady Castlemaine when he pleases.  He tells me also,
as a friend, the great injury that he thinks I do myself by being so
severe in the Yards, and contracting the ill-will of the whole Navy for
those offices, singly upon myself.  Now I discharge a good conscience
therein, and I tell him that no man can (nor do he say any say it) charge
me with doing wrong; but rather do as many good offices as any man.  They
think, he says, that I have a mind to get a good name with the King and
Duke, who he tells me do not consider any such thing; but I shall have as
good thanks to let all alone, and do as the rest.  But I believe the
contrary; and yet I told him I never go to the Duke alone, as others do,
to talk of my own services.  However, I will make use of his council, and
take some course to prevent having the single ill-will of the office.
Before I went to the office I went to the Coffee House, where Sir J.
Cutler and Mr. Grant were, and there Mr. Grant showed me letters of Sir
William Petty's, wherein he says, that his vessel which he hath built upon
two keeles (a modell whereof, built for the King, he showed me) hath this
month won a wager of L50 in sailing between Dublin and Holyhead with the
pacquett-boat, the best ship or vessel the King hath there; and he offers
to lay with any vessel in the world.  It is about thirty ton in burden,
and carries thirty men, with good accommodation, (as much more as any ship
of her burden,) and so any vessel of this figure shall carry more men,
with better accommodation by half, than any other ship.  This carries also
ten guns, of about five tons weight.  In their coming back from Holyhead
they started together, and this vessel came to Dublin by five at night,
and the pacquett-boat not before eight the next morning; and when they
came they did believe that, this vessel had been drowned, or at least
behind, not thinking she could have lived in that sea.  Strange things are
told of this vessel, and he concludes his letter with this position, "I
only affirm that the perfection of sayling lies in my principle, finde it
out who can." Thence home, in my way meeting Mr. Rawlinson, who tells me
that my uncle Wight is off of his Hampshire purchase and likes less of the
Wights, and would have me to be kind and study to please him, which I am
resolved to do.  Being at home he sent for me to dinner to meet Mr. Moore,
so I went thither and dined well, but it was strange for me to refuse, and
yet I did without any reluctancy to drink wine in a tavern, where nothing
else almost was drunk, and that excellent good.  Thence with Mr. Moore to
the Wardrobe, and there sat while my Lord was private with Mr. Townsend
about his accounts an hour or two, we reading of a merry book against the
Presbyters called Cabbala, extraordinary witty.  Thence walked home and to
my office, setting papers of all sorts and writing letters and putting
myself into a condition to go to Chatham with Mr. Coventry to-morrow. So,
at almost 12 o'clock, and my eyes tired with seeing to write, I went home
and to bed.  Ending the month with pretty good content of mind, my wife in
the country and myself in good esteem, and likely by pains to become
considerable, I think, with God's blessing upon my diligence.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 AUGUST
                                  1663

Aug.  1st.  Up betimes and got me ready, and so to the office and put
things in order for my going.  By and by comes Sir G. Carteret, and he and
I did some business, and then Mr. Coventry sending for me, he staying in
the boat, I got myself presently ready and down to him, he and I by water
to Gravesend (his man Lambert with us), and there eat a bit and so
mounted, I upon one of his horses which met him there, a brave proud
horse, all the way talking of businesses of the office and other matters
to good purpose.  Being come to Chatham, we put on our boots and so walked
to the yard, where we met Commissioner Pett, and there walked up and down
looking and inquiring into many businesses, and in the evening went to the
Commissioner's and there in his upper Arbor sat and talked, and there
pressed upon the Commissioner to take upon him a power to correct and
suspend officers that do not their duty and other things, which he
unwillingly answered he would if we would own him in it.  Being gone
thence Mr. Coventry and I did discourse about him, and conclude that he is
not able to do the same in that yard that he might and can and it maybe
will do in another, what with his old faults and the relations that he has
to most people that act there.  After an hour or two's discourse at the
Hill-house before going to bed, I see him to his and he me to my chamber,
he lying in the Treasurer's and I in the Controller's chambers.

2nd (Lord's day).  Up and after the barber had done he and I walked to the
Docke, and so on board the Mathias, where Commissioner Pett and he and I
and a good many of the officers and others of the yard did hear an
excellent sermon of Mr. Hudson's upon "All is yours and you are God's," a
most ready, learned, and good sermon, such as I have not heard a good
while, nor ever thought he could have preached.  We took him with us to
the Hill-house, and there we dined, and an officer or two with us.  So
after dinner the company withdrew, and we three to private discourse and
laid the matters of the yard home again to the Commissioner, and
discoursed largely of several matters.  Then to the parish church, and
there heard a poor sermon with a great deal of false Greek in it, upon
these words, "Ye are my friends, if ye do these things which I command
you."  Thence to the Docke and by water to view St. Mary Creeke, but do
not find it so proper for a wet docks as we would have it, it being uneven
ground and hard in the bottom and no, great depth of water in many places.
Returned and walked from the Docke home, Mr. Coventry and I very much
troubled to see how backward Commissioner Pett is to tell any of the
faults of the officers, and to see nothing in better condition here for
his being here than they are in other yards where there is none.  After
some discourse to bed.  But I sat up an hour after Mr. Coventry was gone
to read my vows, it raining a wonderful hard showre about 11 at night for
an hour together.  So to bed.

3rd.  Up both of us very betimes and to the Yard, and see the men called
over and choose some to be discharged.  Then to the Ropehouses and viewed
them all and made an experiment which was the stronger, English or Riga
hemp, the latter proved the stronger, but the other is very good, and much
better we believe than any but Riga.  We did many other things this
morning, and I caused the Timber measurer to measure some timber, where I
found much fault and with reason, which we took public notice of, and did
give them admonition for the time to come.  At noon Mr. Pett did give us a
very great dinner, too big in all conscience, so that most of it was left
untouched.  Here was Collonell Newman and several other gentlemen of the
country and officers of the yard.  After dinner they withdrew and
Commissioner Pett, Mr. Coventry and I sat close to our business all the
noon in his parler, and there run through much business and answered
several people.  And then in the evening walked in the garden, where we
conjured him to look after the yard, and for the time to come that he
would take the whole faults and ill management of the yard upon himself,
he having full power and our concurrence to suspend or do anything else
that he thinks fit to keep people and officers to their duty.  He having
made good promises, though I fear his performance, we parted (though I
spoke so freely that he could have been angry) good friends, and in some
hopes that matters will be better for the time to come.  So walked to the
Hillhouse (which we did view and the yard about it, and do think to put it
off as soon as we can conveniently) and there made ourselves ready and
mounted and rode to Gravesend (my riding Coate not being to be found I
fear it is stole) on our way being overtaken by Captain Browne that serves
the office of the Ordnance at Chatham.  All the way, though he was a rogue
and served the late times all along, yet he kept us in discourse of the
many services that he did for many of the King's party, lords and Dukes,
and among others he recovered a dog that was stolne from Mr. Cary
(head-keeper of the buck-hounds to the King) and preserved several horses
of the Duke of Richmond's, and his best horse he was forst to put out his
eyes and keep him for a stallion to preserve him from being carried away.
But he gone at last upon my enquiry to tell us how (he having been here
too for survey of the Ropeyard) the day's work of the Rope-makers become
settled, which pleased me very well.  Being come to our Inn Mr. Coventry
and I sat, and talked till 9 or 10 a-clock and then to bed.

4th.  We were called up about four a-clock, and being ready went and took
a Gravesend boat, and to London by nine a-clock.  By the way talking of
several businesses of the navy.  So to the office, where Sir Wm. Pen (the
first time that he has been with us a great while, he having been long
sick) met us, and there we sat all the morning.  My brother John I find
come to town to my house, as I sent for him, on Saturday last; so at noon
home and dined with him, and after dinner and the barber been with me I
walked out with him to my viall maker's and other places and then left
him, and I by water to Blackbury's, and there talked with him about some
masts (and by the way he tells me that Paul's is now going to be repaired
in good earnest), and so with him to his garden close by his house, where
I eat some peaches and apricots; a very pretty place.  So over the water
to Westminster hall, and not finding Mrs. Lane, with whom I purposed to be
merry, I went to Jervas's and took him and his wife over the water to
their mother Palmer's (the woman that speaks in the belly, and with whom I
have two or three years ago made good sport with Mr. Mallard), thinking
because I had heard that she is a woman of that sort that I might there
have lit upon some lady of pleasure (for which God forgive me), but blest
be God there was none, nor anything that pleased me, but a poor little
house that she has set out as fine as she can, and for her singing which
she pretends to is only some old body songs and those sung abominably,
only she pretends to be able to sing both bass and treble, which she do
something like, but not what I thought formerly and expected now; nor do
her speaking in her belly take me now as it did then, but it may be that
is because I know it and see her mouth when she speaks, which should not
be.  After I had spent a shilling there in wine I took boat with Jervas
and his wife and set them at Westminster, and it being late forbore Mrs.
Lane and went by water to the Old Swan by a boat, where I had good sport
with one of the young men about his travells as far as Voxhall, in
mockery, which yet the fellow answered me most prettily and traveller-like
unto my very good mirth.  So home, and with my brother eat a bit of bread
and cheese, and so to bed, he with me.  This day I received a letter from
my wife, which troubles me mightily, wherein she tells me how Ashwell did
give her the lie to her teeth, and that thereupon my wife giving her a box
on the eare, the other struck her again, and a deal of stir which troubles
me, and that my Lady has been told by my father or mother something of my
wife's carriage, which altogether vexes me, and I fear I shall find a
trouble of my wife when she comes home to get down her head again, but if
Ashwell goes I am resolved to have no more, but to live poorly and low
again for a good while, and save money and keep my wife within bounds if I
can, or else I shall bid Adieu to all content in the world.  So to bed, my
mind somewhat disturbed at this, but yet I shall take care, by prudence,
to avoid the ill consequences which I fear, things not being gone too far
yet, and this height that my wife is come to being occasioned from my own
folly in giving her too much head heretofore for the year past.

5th.  All the morning at the office, whither Deane of Woolwich came to me
and discoursed of the body of ships, which I am now going about to
understand, and then I took him to the coffee-house, where he was very
earnest against Mr. Grant's report in favour of Sir W. Petty's vessel,
even to some passion on both sides almost.  So to the Exchange, and thence
home to dinner with my brother, and in the afternoon to Westminster hall,
and there found Mrs. Lane, and by and by by agreement we met at the
Parliament stairs (in my way down to the boat who should meet us but my
lady Jemimah, who saw me lead her but said nothing to me of her, though I
ought to speak to her to see whether she would take notice of it or no)
and off to Stangate and so to the King's Head at Lambeth marsh, and had
variety of meats and drinks, but I did so towse her and handled her, but
could get nothing more from her though I was very near it; but as wanton
and bucksome as she is she dares not adventure upon the business, in which
I very much commend and like her. Staid pretty late, and so over with her
by water, and being in a great sweat with my towsing of her durst not go
home by water, but took coach, and at home my brother and I fell upon Des
Cartes, and I perceive he has studied him well, and I cannot find but he
has minded his book, and do love it.  This evening came a letter about
business from Mr. Coventry, and with it a silver pen he promised me to
carry inke in, which is very necessary.  So to prayers and to bed.

6th.  Up and was angry with my maid Hannah for keeping the house no
better, it being more dirty now-a-days than ever it was while my whole
family was together.  So to my office, whither Mr. Coventry came and Sir
William Pen, and we sat all the morning.  This day Mr. Coventry borrowed
of me my manuscript of the Navy.  At noon I to the 'Change, and meeting
with Sir W. Warren, to a coffee-house, and there finished a contract with
him for the office, and so parted, and I to my cozen Mary Joyce's at a
gossiping, where much company and good cheer.  There was the King's
Falconer, that lives by Paul's, and his wife, an ugly pusse, but brought
him money.  He speaking of the strength of hawkes, which will strike a
fowle to the ground with that force that shall make the fowle rebound a
great way from ground, which no force of man or art can do, but it was
very pleasant to hear what reasons he and another, one Ballard, a rich man
of the same Company of Leathersellers of which the Joyces are, did give
for this.  Ballard's wife, a pretty and a very well-bred woman, I took
occasion to kiss several times, and she to carve, drink, and show me great
respect.  After dinner to talk and laugh.  I drank no wine, but sent for
some water; the beer not being good.  A fiddler was sent for, and there
one Mrs. Lurkin, a neighbour, a good, and merry poor woman, but a very
tall woman, did dance and show such tricks that made us all merry, but
above all a daughter of Mr. Brumfield's, black, but well-shaped and
modest, did dance very well, which pleased me mightily.  I begun the
Duchess with her, but could not do it; but, however, I came off well
enough, and made mighty much of her, kissing and leading her home, with
her cozen Anthony and Kate Joyce (Kate being very handsome and well, that
is, handsomely dressed to-day, and I grew mighty kind and familiar with
her, and kissed her soundly, which she takes very well) to their house,
and there I left them, having in our way, though nine o'clock at night,
carried them into a puppet play in Lincolnes Inn Fields, where there was
the story of Holofernes, and other clockwork, well done.  There was at
this house today Mr. Lawrence, who did give the name, it seems, to my
cozen Joyce's child, Samuel, who is a very civil gentleman, and his wife a
pretty woman, who, with Kate Joyce, were stewards of the feast to-day, and
a double share cost for a man and a woman came to 16s., which I also would
pay, though they would not by any means have had me do so.  I walked home
very well contented with this afternoon's work, I thinking it convenient
to keep in with the Joyces against a bad day, if I should have occasion to
make use of them.  So I walked home, and after a letter to my wife by the
post and my father, I home to supper, and after a little talk with my
brother to bed.

7th.  Up and to my office a little, and then to Brown's for my measuring
rule, which is made, and is certainly the best and the most commodious for
carrying in one's pocket, and most useful that ever was made, and myself
have the honour of being as it were the inventor of this form of it.  Here
I staid discoursing an hour with him and then home, and thither came Sir
Fairbrother to me, and we walked a while together in the garden and then
abroad into the cittie, and then we parted for a while and I to my Viall,
which I find done and once varnished, and it will please me very well when
it is quite varnished.  Thence home and to study my new rule till my head
aked cruelly.  So by and by to dinner and the Doctor and Mr. Creed came to
me.  The Doctor's discourse, which (though he be a very good-natured man)
is but simple, was some sport to me and Creed, though my head akeing I
took no great pleasure in it.  We parted after dinner, and I walked to
Deptford and there found Sir W. Pen, and I fell to measuring of some
planks that was serving into the yard, which the people took notice of,
and the measurer himself was amused at, for I did it much more ready than
he, and I believe Sir W. Pen would be glad I could have done less or he
more.  By and by he went away and I staid walking up and down, discoursing
with the officers of the yard of several things, and so walked back again,
and on my way young Bagwell and his wife waylayd me to desire my favour
about getting him a better ship, which I shall pretend to be willing to do
for them, but my mind is to know his wife a little better.  They being
parted I went with Cadbury the mast maker to view a parcel of good masts
which I think it were good to buy, and resolve to speak to the board about
it.  So home, and my brother John and I up and I to my musique, and then
to discourse with him, and I find him not so thorough a philosopher, at
least in Aristotle, as I took him for, he not being able to tell me the
definition of final nor which of the 4 Qualitys belonged to each of the 4
Elements.  So to prayers, and to bed, among other things being much
satisfied with my new rule.

8th.  Up and to my office, whither I search for Brown the mathematical
instrument maker, who now brought me a ruler for measuring timber and
other things so well done and in all things to my mind that I do set up my
trust upon it that I cannot have a better, nor any man else have so good
for this purpose, this being of my own ordering.  By and by we sat all the
morning dispatching of business, and then at noon rose, and I with Mr.
Coventry down to the water-side, talking, wherein I see so much goodness
and endeavours of doing the King service, that I do more and more admire
him.  It being the greatest trouble to me, he says, in the world to see
not only in the Navy, but in the greatest matters of State, where he can
lay his finger upon the soare (meaning this man's faults, and this man's
office the fault lies in), and yet dare or can not remedy matters.  Thence
to the Exchange about several businesses, and so home to dinner, and in
the afternoon took my brother John and Will down to Woolwich by water, and
after being there a good while, and eating of fruit in Sheldon's garden,
we began our walk back again, I asking many things in physiques of my
brother John, to which he gives me so bad or no answer at all, as in the
regions of the ayre he told me that he knew of no such thing, for he never
read Aristotle's philosophy and Des Cartes ownes no such thing, which
vexed me to hear him say.  But I shall call him to task, and see what it
is that he has studied since his going to the University.  It was late
before we could get from Greenwich to London by water, the tide being
against us and almost past, so that to save time and to be clear of
anchors I landed at Wapping, and so walked home weary enough, walking over
the stones.  This night Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes returned [from]
Portsmouth, but I did not go see them.

9th (Lord's day).  Up, and leaving my brother John to go somewhere else, I
to church, and heard Mr. Mills (who is lately returned out of the country,
and it seems was fetched in by many of the parishioners, with great
state,) preach upon the authority of the ministers, upon these words, "We
are therefore embassadors of Christ."  Wherein, among other high
expressions, he said, that such a learned man used to say, that if a
minister of the word and an angell should meet him together, he would
salute the minister first; which methought was a little too high.  This
day I begun to make use of the silver pen (Mr. Coventry did give me) in
writing of this sermon, taking only the heads of it in Latin, which I
shall, I think, continue to do.  So home and at my office reading my
vowes, and so to Sir W. Batten to dinner, being invited and sent for, and
being willing to hear how they left things at Portsmouth, which I found
but ill enough, and are mightily for a Commissioner to be at seat there to
keep the yard in order.  Thence in the afternoon with my Lady Batten,
leading her through the streets by the hand to St. Dunstan's Church, hard
by us (where by Mrs. Russell's means we were set well), and heard an
excellent sermon of one Mr. Gifford, the parson there, upon "Remember
Lot's wife."  So from thence walked back to Mrs. Russell's, and there
drank and sat talking a great while.  Among other things talked of young
Dawes that married the great fortune, who it seems has a Baronet's patent
given him, and is now Sir Thos. Dawes, and a very fine bred man they say
he is.  Thence home, and my brother being abroad I walked to my uncle
Wight's and there staid, though with little pleasure, and supped, there
being the husband of Mrs. Anne Wight, who it seems is lately married to
one Mr. Bentley, a Norwich factor.  Home, and staid up a good while
examining Will in his Latin below, and my brother along with him in his
Greeke, and so to prayers and to bed.  This afternoon I was amused at the
tune set to the Psalm by the Clerke of the parish, and thought at first
that he was out, but I find him to be a good songster, and the parish
could sing it very well, and was a good tune.  But I wonder that there
should be a tune in the Psalms that I never heard of.

10th.  Up, though not so early this summer as I did all the last, for
which I am sorry, and though late am resolved to get up betimes before the
season of rising be quite past.  To my office to fit myself to wait on the
Duke this day.  By and by by water to White Hall, and so to St. James's,
and anon called into the Duke's chamber, and being dressed we were all as
usual taken in with him and discoursed of our matters, and that being
done, he walked, and I in the company with him, to White Hall, and there
he took barge for Woolwich, and, I up to the Committee of Tangier, where
my Lord Sandwich, pay Lord Peterborough, (whom I have not seen before
since his coming back,) Sir W. Compton, and Mr. Povy.  Our discourse about
supplying my Lord Teviott with money, wherein I am sorry to see, though
they do not care for him, yet they are willing to let him for civility and
compliment only have money almost without expecting any account of it; but
by this means, he being such a cunning fellow as he is, the King is like
to pay dear for our courtiers' ceremony.  Thence by coach with my Lords
Peterborough and Sandwich to my Lord Peterborough's house; and there,
after an hour's looking over some fine books of the Italian buildings,
with fine cuts; and also my Lord Peterborough's bowes and arrows, of which
he is a great lover, we sat down to dinner, my Lady coming down to dinner
also, and there being Mr. Williamson, that belongs to Sir H. Bennet, whom
I find a pretty understanding and accomplished man, but a little
conceited.  After dinner I took leave and went to Greatorex's, whom I
found in his garden, and set him to work upon my ruler, to engrave an
almanac and other things upon the brasses of it, which a little before
night he did, but the latter part he slubbered over, that I must get him
to do it over better, or else I shall not fancy my rule, which is such a
folly that I am come to now, that whereas before my delight was in
multitude of books, and spending money in that and buying alway of other
things, now that I am become a better husband, and have left off buying,
now my delight is in the neatness of everything, and so cannot be pleased
with anything unless it be very neat, which is a strange folly.  Hither
came W. Howe about business, and he and I had a great deal of discourse
about my Lord Sandwich, and I find by him that my Lord do dote upon one of
the daughters of Mrs. [Becke] where he lies, so that he spends his time
and money upon her.  He tells me she is a woman of a very bad fame and
very impudent, and has told my Lord so, yet for all that my Lord do spend
all his evenings with her, though he be at court in the day time, and that
the world do take notice of it, and that Pickering is only there as a
blind, that the world may think that my Lord spends his time with him when
he do worse, and that hence it is that my Lord has no more mind to go into
the country than he has.  In fine, I perceive my Lord is dabbling with
this wench, for which I am sorry, though I do not wonder at it, being a
man amorous enough, and now begins to allow himself the liberty that he
says every body else at Court takes. Here I am told that my Lord Bristoll
is either fled or concealed himself; having been sent for to the King, it
is believed to be sent to the Tower, but he is gone out of the way.
Yesterday, I am told also, that Sir J. Lenthall, in Southwarke, did
apprehend about one hundred Quakers, and other such people, and hath sent
some of them to the gaole at Kingston, it being now the time of the
Assizes.  Hence home and examined a piece of, Latin of Will's with my
brother, and so to prayers and to bed.  This evening I had a letter from
my father that says that my wife will come to town this week, at which I
wonder that she should come to town without my knowing more of it.  But I
find they have lived very ill together since she went, and I must use all
the brains I have to bring her to any good when she do come home, which I
fear will be hard to do, and do much disgust me the thoughts of it.

11th.  Up and to my office, whither, by and by, my brother Tom came, and I
did soundly rattle him for his neglecting to see and please the Joyces as
he has of late done.  I confess I do fear that he do not understand his
business, nor will do any good in his trade, though he tells me that he do
please every body and that he gets money, but I shall not believe it till
I see a state of his accounts, which I have ordered him to bring me before
he sees me any more.  We met and sat at the office all the morning, and at
noon I to the 'Change, where I met Dr. Pierce, who tells me that the King
comes to towne this day, from Tunbridge, to stay a day or two, and then
fetch the Queen from thence, who he says is grown a very debonnaire lady,
and now hugs him, and meets him gallopping upon the road, and all the
actions of a fond and pleasant lady that can be, that he believes has a
chat now and then of Mrs. Stewart, but that there is no great danger of
her, she being only an innocent, young, raw girl; but my Lady Castlemaine,
who rules the King in matters of state, and do what she list with him, he
believes is now falling quite out of favour.  After the Queen is come back
she goes to the Bath; and so to Oxford, where great entertainments are
making for her.  This day I am told that my Lord Bristoll hath warrants
issued out against him, to have carried him to the Tower; but he is fled
away, or hid himself.  So much the Chancellor hath got the better of him.
Upon the 'Change my brother, and Will bring me word that Madam Turner
would come and dine with me to-day, so I hasted home and found her and
Mrs. Morrice there (The. Joyce being gone into the country), which is the
reason of the mother rambling.  I got a dinner for them, and after dinner
my uncle Thomas and aunt Bell came and saw me, and I made them almost
foxed with wine till they were very kind (but I did not carry them up to
my ladies).  So they went away, and so my two ladies and I in Mrs.
Turner's coach to Mr. Povy's, who being not within, we went in and there
shewed Mrs. Turner his perspective and volary,

     [A large birdcage, in which the birds can fly about; French
     'voliere'.  Ben Jonson uses the word volary.]

and the fine things that he is building of now, which is a most neat
thing.  Thence to the Temple and by water to Westminster; and there
Morrice and I went to Sir R. Ling's to have fetched a niece of his, but
she was not within, and so we went to boat again and then down to the
bridge, and there tried to find a sister of Mrs. Morrice's, but she was
not within neither, and so we went through bridge, and I carried them on
board the King's pleasure-boat, all the way reading in a book of Receipts
of making fine meats and sweetmeats, among others to make my own sweet
water, which made us good sport.  So I landed them at Greenwich, and there
to a garden, and gave them fruit and wine, and so to boat again, and
finally, in the cool of the evening, to Lyon Kee,

     [Lion Key, Lower Thames Street, where the famous Duchess of Suffolk
     in the time of Bishop Gardiner's persecution took boat for the
     continent.  James, Duke of York, also left the country from this
     same place on the night of April 20th, 1648, when he escaped from
     St. James's Palace.]

the tide against us, and so landed and walked to the Bridge, and there
took a coach by chance passing by, and so I saw them home, and there eat
some cold venison with them, and drunk and bade them good night, having
been mighty merry with them, and I think it is not amiss to preserve,
though it cost me a little, such a friend as Mrs. Turner.  So home and to
bed, my head running upon what to do to-morrow to fit things against my
wife's coming, as to buy a bedstead, because my brother John is here, and
I have now no more beds than are used.

12th.  A little to my office, to put down my yesterday's journall, and so
abroad to buy a bedstead and do other things.  So home again, and having
put up the bedstead and done other things in order to my wife's coming, I
went out to several places and to Mrs. Turner's, she inviting me last
night, and there dined; with her and Madam Morrice and a stranger we were
very merry and had a fine dinner, and thence I took leave and to White
Hall, where my Lords Sandwich, Peterborough, and others made a Tangier
Committee; spent the afternoon in reading and ordering with a great deal
of alteration, and yet methinks never a whit the better, of a letter drawn
by Creed to my Lord Rutherford.  The Lords being against anything that
looked to be rough, though it was in matter of money and accounts, wherein
their courtship may cost the King dear.  Only I do see by them, that
speaking in matters distasteful to him that we write to, it is best to do
it in the plainest way and without ambages or reasoning, but only say
matters of fact, and leave the party to collect your meaning.  Thence by
water to my brother's, and there I hear my wife is come and gone home, and
my father is come to town also, at which I wondered.  But I discern it is
to give my brother advice about his business, and it may be to pacify me
about the differences that have been between my wife and him and my mother
at her late being with them.  Though by and by he coming to Mr. Holden's
(where I was buying a hat) he took no notice to me of anything.  I talked
to him a little while and left him to lie at the end of the town, and I
home, where methought I found my wife strange, not knowing, I believe, in
what temper she could expect me to be in, but I fell to kind words, and so
we were very kind, only she could not forbear telling me how she had been
used by them and her mayde, Ashwell, in the country, but I find it will be
best not to examine it, for I doubt she's in fault too, and therefore I
seek to put it off from my hearing, and so to bed and there entertained
her with great content, and so to sleep.

13th.  Lay long in bed with my wife talking of family matters, and so up
and to the office, where we sat all the' morning, and then home to dinner,
and after dinner my wife and I to talk again about getting of a couple of
good mayds and to part with Ashwell, which troubles me for her father's
sake, though I shall be glad to have the charge taken away of keeping a
woman.  Thence a little to the office, and so abroad with my wife by water
to White Hall, and there at my Lord's lodgings met my Lady Jemimah, with
whom we staid a good while.  Thence to Mrs. Hunt's, where I left my wife,
and I to walk a little in St. James's Park, while Mrs. Harper might come
home, with whom we came to speak about her kinswoman Jane Gentleman to
come and live with us as a chamber mayde, and there met with Mr. Hoole my
old acquaintance of Magdalen, and walked with him an hour in the Parke,
discoursing chiefly of Sir Samuel Morland, whose lady is gone into France.
It seems he buys ground and a farm in the country, and lays out money upon
building, and God knows what! so that most of the money he sold his
pension of L500 per annum for, to Sir Arthur Slingsby, is believed is
gone.  It seems he hath very great promises from the King, and Hoole hath
seen some of the King's letters, under his own hand, to Morland, promising
him great things (and among others, the order of the Garter, as Sir Samuel
says); but his lady thought it below her to ask any thing at the King's
first coming, believing the King would do it of himself, when as Hoole do
really think if he had asked to be Secretary of State at the King's first
coming, he might have had it.  And the other day at her going into France,
she did speak largely to the King herself, how her husband hath failed of
what his Majesty had promised, and she was sure intended him; and the King
did promise still, as he is a King and a gentleman, to be as good as his
word in a little time, to a tittle: but I never believe it.  Here in the
Park I met with Mr. Coventry, where he sent for a letter he had newly writ
to me, wherein he had enclosed one from Commissioner Pett complaining of
his being defeated in his attempt to suspend two pursers, wherein the
manner of his doing it, and complaint of our seeing him (contrary to our
promises the other day), deserted, did make us laugh mightily, and was
good sport to think how awkwardly he goes about a thing that he has no
courage of his own nor mind to do.  Mr. Coventry answered it very
handsomely, but I perceive Pett has left off his corresponding with me any
more.  Thence to fetch my wife from Mrs. Hunt's, where now he was come in,
and we eat and drunk, and so away (their child being at home, a very
lively, but not pretty at all), by water to Mrs. Turner's, and there made
a short visit, and so home by coach, and after supper to prayers and to
bed, and before going to bed Ashwell began to make her complaint, and by
her I do perceive that she has received most base usage from my wife,
which my wife sillily denies, but it is impossible the wench could invent
words and matter so particularly, against which my wife has nothing to say
but flatly to deny, which I am sorry to see, and blows to have past, and
high words even at Hinchinbrooke House among my Lady's people, of which I
am mightily ashamed.  I said nothing to either of them, but let them talk
till she was gone and left us abed, and then I told my wife my mind with
great sobriety of grief, and so to sleep.

14th.  Awake, and to chide my wife again, and I find that my wife has got
too great head to be brought down soon, nor is it possible with any
convenience to keep Ashwell longer, my wife is so set and convinced, as
she was in Sarah, to make her appear a Lyer in every small thing that we
shall have no peace while she stays.  So I up and to my office doing
several businesses in my study, and so home to dinner.  The time having
outslipt me and my stomach, it being past, two a-clock, and yet before we
could sit down to dinner Mrs. Harper and her cousin Jane came, and we
treated and discoursed long about her coming to my wife for a chamber
mayd, and I think she will do well.  So they went away expecting notice
when she shall come, and so we sat down to dinner at four a-clock almost,
and then I walked forth to my brother's, where I found my father very
discontented, and has no mind to come to my house, and would have begun
some of the differences between my wife and him, but I desired to hear
none of them, and am sorry at my folly in forcing it and theirs in not
telling me of it at the beginning, and therefore am resolved to make the
best of a bad market, and to bring my wife to herself again as soon and as
well as I can.  So we parted very kindly, and he will dine with me
to-morrow or next day.  Thence walked home, doing several errands by the
way, and at home took my wife to visit Sir W. Pen, who is still lame, and
after an hour with him went home and supped, and with great content to
bed.

15th.  Lay pretty long in bed, being a little troubled with some pain got
by wind and cold, and so up with good peace of mind, hoping that my wife
will mind her house and servants, and so to the office, and being too soon
to sit walked to my viail, which is well nigh done, and I believe I may
have it home to my mind next week.  So back to my office, and there we sat
all the morning, I till 2 o'clock before I could go to dinner again.
After dinner walked forth to my instrument maker, and there had my rule he
made me lay now so perfected, that I think in all points I have never need
or desire a better, or think that any man yet had one so good in all the
several points of it for my use.  So by water down to Deptford, taking
into my boat with me Mr. Palmer, one whom I knew and his wife when I was
first married, being an acquaintance of my wife's and her friends lodging
at Charing Cross during our differences.  He joyed me in my condition, and
himself it seems is forced to follow the law in a common ordinary way, but
seems to do well, and is a sober man, enough by his discourse.  He landed
with me at Deptford, where he saw by the officers' respect to me a piece
of my command, and took notice of it, though God knows I hope I shall not
be elated with that, but rather desire to be known for serving the King
well, and doing my duty.  He gone I walked up and down the yard a while
discoursing with the officers, and so by water home meditating on my new
Rule with great pleasure.  So to my office, and there by candle light
doing business, and so home to supper and to bed.

16th (Lord's day).  Up and with my wife to church, and finding her
desirous to go to church, I did suspect her meeting of Pembleton, but he
was not there, and so I thought my jealousy in vain, and treat the sermon
with great quiet.  And home to dinner very pleasant, only some angry,
notwithstanding my wife could not forbear to give Ashwell, and after
dinner to church again, and there, looking up and down, I found Pembleton
to stand in the isle against us, he coming too late to get a pew.  Which,
Lord! into what a sweat did it put me!  I do not think my wife did see
him, which did a little satisfy me.  But it makes me mad to see of what a
jealous temper I am and cannot helpe it, though let him do what he can I
do not see, as I am going to reduce my family, what hurt he can do me,
there being no more occasion now for my wife to learn of him.  Here
preached a confident young coxcomb.  So home, and I staid a while with Sir
J. Minnes, at Mrs. Turner's, hearing his parrat talk, laugh, and crow,
which it do to admiration.  So home and with my wife to see Sir W. Pen,
and thence to my uncle Wight, and took him at supper and sat down, where
methinks my uncle is more kind than he used to be both to me now, and my
father tell me to him also, which I am glad at.  After supper home, it
being extraordinary dark, and by chance a lanthorn came by, and so we
hired it to light us home, otherwise were we no sooner within doors but a
great showre fell that had doused us cruelly if we had not been within, it
being as dark as pitch.  So to prayers and to bed.

17th.  Up, and then fell into discourse, my wife and I to Ashwell, and
much against my will I am fain to express a willingness to Ashwell that
she should go from us, and yet in my mind I am glad of it, to ease me of
the charge.  So she is to go to her father this day.  And leaving my wife
and her talking highly, I went away by coach with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
Batten to St. James's, and there attended of course the Duke.  And so to
White Hall, where I met Mr. Moore, and he tells me with great sorrow of my
lord's being debauched he fears by this woman at Chelsey, which I am
troubled at, and resolve to speak to him of it if I can seasonably. Thence
home, where I dined, and after dinner comes our old mayde Susan to look
for a gorgett that she says she has lost by leaving it here, and by many
circumstances it being clear to me that Hannah, our present cook-mayde,
not only has it, but had it on upon her necke when Susan came in, and
shifted it off presently upon her coming in, I did charge her so home with
it (having a mind to have her gone from us), that in a huff she told us
she would be gone to-night if I would pay her her wages, which I was glad
and my wife of, and so fetched her her wages, and though I am doubtful
that she may convey some things away with her clothes, my wife searching
them, yet we are glad of her being so gone, and so she went away in a
quarter of an hour's time.  Being much amused at this to have never a maid
but Ashwell, that we do not intend to keep, nor a boy, and my wife and I
being left for an hour, till my brother came in, alone in the house, I
grew very melancholy, and so my brother being come in I went forth to Mrs.
Holden's, to whom I formerly spoke about a girle to come to me instead of
a boy, and the like I did to Mrs. Standing and also to my brother Tom,
whom I found at an alehouse in Popinjay ally drinking, and I standing with
him at the gate of the ally, Ashwell came by, and so I left Tom and went
almost home with her, talking of her going away.  I find that she is
willing to go, and told her (though behind my back my wife has told her
that it was more my desire than hers that she should go, which was not
well), that seeing my wife and she could not agree I did choose rather
(was she my sister) have her gone, it would be better for us and for her
too.  To which she willing agreed, and will not tell me anything but that
she do believe that my wife would have some body there that might not be
so liable to give me information of things as she takes her to be.  But,
however, I must later to prevent all that.  I parted with her near home,
agreeing to take no notice of my coming along with her, and so by and by
came home after her.  Where I find a sad distracted house, which troubles
me.  However, to supper and prayers and to bed. And while we were getting
to bed my wife began to discourse to her, and plainly asked whether she
had got a place or no.  And the other answered that she could go if we
would to one of our own office, to which we agreed if she would.  She
thereupon said no; she would not go to any but where she might teach
children, because of keeping herself in use of what things she had earnt,
which she do not here nor will there, but only dressing.  By which I
perceive the wench is cunning, but one very fit for such a place, and
accomplished to be woman to any lady in the land.  So quietly to sleep, it
being a cold night.  But till my house is settled, I do not see that I can
mind my business of the office, which grieves me to the heart.  But I hope
all will over in a little time, and I hope to the best.  This day at Mrs.
Holden's I found my new low crowned beaver according to the present
fashion made, and will be sent home to-morrow.

18th.  Up and to my office, where we sat all the morning.  And at noon
home, and my father came and dined with me, Susan being come and helped my
wife to dress dinner.  After dinner my father and I talked about our
country-matters, and in fine I find that he thinks L50 per ann. will go
near to keep them all, which I am glad of.  He having taken his leave of
me and my wife without any mention of the differences between them and my
wife in the country, I went forth to several places about businesses, and
so home again, and after prayers to bed.

19th.  Up betimes, and my wife up and about the house, Susan beginning to
have her drunken tricks, and put us in mind of her old faults and folly
and distractednesse, which we had forgot, so that I became mightily
troubled with her.  This morning came my joyners to new lay the floors,
and begun with the dining room.  I out and see my viall again, and it is
very well, and to Mr. Hollyard, and took some pills of him and a note
under his hand to drink wine with my beere, without which I was obliged,
by my private vowe, to drink none a good while, and have strictly observed
it, and by my drinking of small beere and not eating, I am so mightily
troubled with wind, that I know not what to do almost.  Thence to White
Hall, and there met Mr. Moore, and fell a-talking about my Lord's folly at
Chelsey, and it was our discourse by water to London and to the great
coffee house against the Exchange, where we sat a good while talking; and
I find that my lord is wholly given up to this wench, who it seems has
been reputed a common strumpett.  I have little encouragement from Mr.
Moore to meddle with it to tell my Lord, for fear it may do him no good,
but me hurt.  Thence homewards, taking leave of him, and met Tom Marsh, my
old acquaintance at Westminster, who talks mightily of the honour of his
place, being Clerke Assistant to the Clerke of the House of Commons, and I
take him to be a coxcombe, and so did give him half a pint of wine, but
drink none myself, and so got shut of him.  So home, and there found my
wife almost mad with Susan's tricks, so as she is forced to let her go and
leave the house all in dirt and the clothes all wet, and gets Goody
Taylour to do the business for her till another comes. Here came Will
Howe, and he and I alone in my chamber talking of my Lord, who drives me
out of love to my Lord to tell my Lord of the matter we discoursed of,
which tend so much to the ruin of his state, and so I resolved to take a
good heart and do whatever comes of it.  He gone, we sat down and eat a
bit of dinner fetched from the cooke's, and so up again and to my joyners,
who will make my floors very handsome.  By and by comes in Pembleton,
which begun to make me sweat, but I did give him so little countenance,
and declared at one word against dancing any more, and bid him a short
(God be with you) myself, and so he took as short a leave of my wife and
so went away, and I think without any time of receiving any great
satisfaction from my wife or invitation to come again.  To my office till
it was dark doing business, and so home by candle light to make up my
accounts for my Lord and Mr. Moore.  By and by comes Mr. Moore to me, and
staid a good while with me making up his accounts and mine, and we did not
come to any end therein for want of his papers, and so put it off to
another time.  He supped with me in all my dirt and disorder, and so went
away and we to bed.  I discoursed with him a great while about my speaking
to my Lord of his business, and I apprehend from him that it is likely to
prove perhaps of bad effect to me and no good to him, and therefore I
shall even let it alone and let God do his will, at least till my Lord is
in the country, and then we shall see whether he resolves to come to
Chelsey again or no, and so order the stopping of him therein if we can.

20th.  Up betimes and to my office (having first been angry with my
brother John, and in the heat of my sudden passion called him Asse and
coxcomb, for which I am sorry, it being but for leaving the key of his
chamber with a spring lock within side of his door), and there we sat all
the morning, and at noon dined at home, and there found a little girl,
which she told my wife her name was Jinny, by which name we shall call
her.  I think a good likely girl, and a parish child of St. Bride's, of
honest parentage, and recommended by the churchwarden.  After dinner among
my joyners laying my floors, which please me well, and so to my office,
and we sat this afternoon upon an extraordinary business of victualling.
In the evening came Commissioner Pett, who fell foule on mee for my
carriage to him at Chatham, wherein, after protestation of my love and
good meaning to him, he was quiet; but I doubt he will not be able to do
the service there that any other man of his ability would. Home in the
evening my viall (and lute new strung being brought home too), and I would
have paid Mr. Hunt for it, but he did not come along with it himself,
which I expected and was angry for it, so much is it against my nature to
owe anything to any body.  This evening the girle that was brought to me
to-day for so good a one, being cleansed of lice this day by my wife, and
good, new clothes put on her back, she run away from Goody Taylour that
was shewing her the way to the bakehouse, and we heard no more of her.  So
to supper and to bed.

21st.  Up betimes and among my joyners, and to my office, where the
joyners are also laying mouldings in the inside of my closet.  Then abroad
and by water to White Hall, and there got Sir G. Carteret to sign me my
last quarter's bills for my wages, and meeting with Mr. Creed he told me
how my Lord Teviott hath received another attaque from Guyland at Tangier
with 10,000 men, and at last, as is said, is come, after a personal treaty
with him, to a good understanding and peace with him. Thence to my
brother's, and there told him how my girl has served us which he sent me,
and directed him to get my clothes again, and get the girl whipped.  So to
other places by the way about small businesses, and so home, and after
looking over all my workmen, I went by water and land to Deptford, and
there found by appointment Sir W. Batten, but he was got to Mr. Waith's to
dinner, where I dined with him, a good dinner and good discourse, and his
wife, I believe, a good woman.  We fell in discourse of Captain Cocke, and
how his lady has lost all her fine linen almost, but besides that they say
she gives out she had L3000 worth of linen, which we all laugh at, and Sir
W. Batten (who I perceive is not so fond of the Captain as he used to be,
and less of her, from her slight receiving of him and his lady it seems
once) told me how he should say that he see he must spend L700 per ann.
get it how he could, which was a high speech, and by all men's discover,
his estate not good enough to spend so much.  After dinner altered our
design to go to Woolwich, and put it off to to-morrow morning, and so went
all to Greenwich (Mrs. Waith excepted, who went thither, but not to the
same house with us, but to her father's, that lives there), to the
musique-house, where we had paltry musique, till the master organist came,
whom by discourse I afterwards knew, having employed him for my Lord
Sandwich, to prick out something (his name Arundell), and he did give me a
fine voluntary or two, and so home by water, and at home I find my girl
that run away brought by a bedel of St. Bride's Parish, and stripped her
and sent her away, and a newe one come, of Griffin's helping to, which I
think will prove a pretty girl.  Her name, Susan, and so to supper after
having this evening paid Mr. Hunt L3 for my viall (besides the carving
which I paid this day 10s. for to the carver), and he tells me that I may,
without flattery, say, I have as good a Theorbo viall and viallin as is in
England.  So to bed.

22nd.  Up by four o'clock to go with Sir W. Batten to Woolwich and Sir J.
Minnes, which we did, though not before 6 or 7 by their laying a-bed. Our
business was to survey the new wharf building there, in order to the
giving more to him that do it (Mr. Randall) than contracted for, but I see
no reason for it, though it be well done, yet no better than contracted to
be.  Here we eat and drank at the Clerke of the Cheques, and in taking
water at the Tower gate, we drank a cup of strong water, which I did out
of pure conscience to my health, and I think is not excepted by my oaths,
but it is a thing I shall not do again, hoping to have no such occasion.
After breakfast Mr. Castle and I walked to Greenwich, and in our way met
some gypsys, who would needs tell me my fortune, and I suffered one of
them, who told me many things common as others do, but bade me beware of a
John and a Thomas, for they did seek to do me hurt, and that somebody
should be with me this day se'nnight to borrow money of me, but I should
lend him none.  She got ninepence of me. And so I left them and to
Greenwich and so to Deptford, where the two knights were come, and thence
home by water, where I find my closet done at my office to my mind and
work gone well on at home; and Ashwell gone abroad to her father, my wife
having spoken plainly to her.  After dinner to my office, getting my
closet made clean and setting some papers in order, and so in the evening
home and to bed.  This day Sir W. Batten tells me that Mr. Newburne (of
whom the nickname came up among us forarse Tom Newburne) is dead of eating
cowcumbers, of which, the other day, I heard another, I think Sir Nicholas
Crisp's son.

23rd (Lord's day).  Up and to church without my wife, she being all dirty,
as my house is.  God forgive me, I looked about to see if I could spy
Pembleton, but I could not, which did please me not a little.  Home to
dinner, and then to walk up and down in my house with my wife, discoursing
of our family matters, and I hope, after all my troubles of mind and
jealousy, we shall live happily still.  To church again, and so home to my
wife; and with her read "Iter Boreale,"  a poem, made just at the King's
coming home; but I never read it before, and now like it pretty well, but
not so as it was cried up.  So to supper.  No pleasure or discourse with
Ashwell, with whom for her neglect and unconcernment to do any thing in
this time of dirt and trouble in the house, but gadding abroad as she has
been all this afternoon, I know not whither.  After supper to prayers and
to bed, having been, by a sudden letter coming to me from Mr. Coventry,
been with Sir W. Pen, to discourse with him about sending 500 soldiers
into Ireland.  I doubt matters do not go very right there.

24th.  Up very early, and my joyners came to work.  I to Mr. Moore; from
him came back home again, and drew up an account to my Lord, and that
being done met him at my Lord Sandwich's, where I was a good while alone
with my Lord; and I perceive he confides in me and loves me as he uses to
do, and tells me his condition, which is now very well all I fear is that
he will not live within compass, for I am told this morning of strange
dotages of his upon the slut at Chelsea, even in the presence of his
daughter, my Lady Jem, and Mrs. Ferrets, who took notice of it.  There
come to him this morning his prints of the river Tagus and the City of
Lisbon, which he measured with his own hand, and printed by command of the
King.  My Lord pleases himself with it, but methinks it ought to have been
better done than by jobing.  Besides I put him upon having some took off
upon white sattin, which he ordered presently.  I offered my Lord my
accounts, and did give him up his old bond for L500 and took a new one of
him for L700, which I am by lending him more money to make up: and I am
glad of it.  My Lord would have had me dine with him, but I had a mind to
go home to my workmen, and so took a kind good bye of him, and so with
Creed to St. James's, and, missing Mr. Coventry, walked to the New
Exchange, and there drank some whey, and so I by water home, and found my
closett at my office made very clean and neat to my mind mightily, and
home to dinner, and then to my office to brush my books, and put them and
my papers in order again, and all the afternoon till late at night doing
business there, and so home to supper, and then to work in my chamber,
making matters of this day's accounts clear in my books, they being a
little extraordinary, and so being very late I put myself to bed, the rest
being long ago gone.

25th.  Up very early and removed the things out of my chamber into the
dining room, it being to be new floored this day.  So the workmen being
come and falling to work there, I to the office, and thence down to
Lymehouse to Phin. Pett's about masts, and so back to the office, where we
sat; and being rose, and Mr. Coventry being gone, taking his leave, for
that he is to go to the Bath with the Duke to-morrow, I to the 'Change and
there spoke with several persons, and lastly with Sir W. Warren, and with
him to a Coffee House, and there sat two hours talking of office business
and Mr. Wood's knavery, which I verily believe, and lastly he tells me
that he hears that Captain Cocke is like to become a principal officer,
either a Controller or a Surveyor, at which I am not sorry so either of
the other may be gone, and I think it probable enough that it may be so.
So home at 2 o'clock, and there I found Ashwell gone, and her wages come
to 50s., and my wife, by a mistake from me, did give her 20s. more; but I
am glad that she is gone and the charge saved. After dinner among my
joyners, and with them till dark night, and this night they made an end of
all; and so having paid them 40s. for their six days' work, I am glad they
have ended and are gone, for I am weary and my wife too of this dirt.  My
wife growing peevish at night, being weary, and I a little vexed to see
that she do not retain things in her memory that belong to the house as
she ought and I myself do, I went out in a little seeming discontent to
the office, and after being there a while, home to supper and to bed.
To-morrow they say the King and the Duke set out for the Bath.  This noon
going to the Exchange, I met a fine fellow with trumpets before him in
Leadenhall-street, and upon enquiry I find that he is the clerk of the
City Market; and three or four men carried each of them an arrow of a
pound weight in their hands.  It seems this Lord Mayor begins again an old
custome, that upon the three first days of Bartholomew Fayre, the first,
there is a match of wrestling, which was done, and the Lord Mayor there
and Aldermen in Moorefields yesterday: to-day, shooting: and to-morrow,
hunting.  And this officer of course is to perform this ceremony of riding
through the city, I think to proclaim or challenge any to shoot.  It seems
that the people of the fayre cry out upon it as a great hindrance to them.

26th.  Up, and after doing something in order to the putting of my house
in order now the joynery is done, I went by water to White Hall, where the
Court full of waggons and horses, the King and Court going this day out
towards the Bath, and I to St. James's, where I spent an hour or more
talking of many things to my great content with Mr. Coventry in his
chamber, he being ready to set forth too with the Duke to-day, and so left
him, and I meeting Mr. Gauden, with him to our offices and in Sir W. Pen's
chamber did discourse by a meeting on purpose with Mr. Waith about the
victualling business and came to some issue in it.  So home to dinner, and
Mr. Moore came and dined with me, and after dinner I paid him some money
which evened all reckonings between him and me to this day, and for my
Lord also I paid him some money, so that now my Lord owes me, for which I
have his bond, just L700.  After long discourse with him of the fitness of
his giving me a receipt for this money, which I for my security think
necessary and he otherwise do not think so, at last, after being a little
angry, and I resolving not to let go my money without it, he did give me
one.  Thence I took him, and he and I took a pleasant walk to Deptford and
back again, I doing much business there.  He went home and I home also,
indoors to supper, being very glad to see my house begin to look like
itself again, hoping after this is over not to be in any dirt a great
while again, but it is very handsome, and will be more when the floors
come to be of one colour.  So weary to bed.  Pleased this day to see
Captain Hickes come to me with a list of all the officers of Deptford
Yard, wherein he, being a high old Cavalier, do give me an account of
every one of them to their reproach in all respects, and discovers many of
their knaverys; and tells me, and so I thank God I hear every where, that
my name is up for a good husband for the King, and a good man, for which I
bless God; and that he did this by particular direction of Mr. Coventry.

27th.  Up, after much pleasant talke with my wife and a little that vexes
me, for I see that she is confirmed in it that all that I do is by design,
and that my very keeping of the house in dirt, and the doing of this and
any thing else in the house, is but to find her employment to keep her
within and from minding of her pleasure, in which, though I am sorry to
see she minds it, is true enough in a great degree.  To my office, and
there we sat and despatched much business.  Home and dined with my wife
well, and then up and made clean my closet of books, and had my chamber a
third time made very clean, so that it is now in a very fine condition.
Thence down to see some good plank in the river with Sir W. Batten and
back again, it being a very cold day and a cold wind.  Home again, and
after seeing Sir W. Pen, to my office, and there till late doing of
business, being mightily encouraged by every body that I meet withal upon
the 'Change and every where else, that I am taken notice of for a man that
do the King's business wholly and well.  For which the Lord be praised,
for I know no honour I desire more.  Home to supper, where I find my house
very clean from top to bottom again to my great content.  I found a feacho
(as he calls it) of fine sugar and a case of orange-flower water come from
Mr. Cocke, of Lisbon, the fruits of my last year's service to him, which I
did in great justice to the man, a perfect stranger.  He sends it me
desiring that I would not let Sir J. Minnes know it, from whom he expected
to have found the service done that he had from me, from whom he could
expect nothing, and the other failed him, and would have done I am sure to
this day had not I brought it to some end. After supper to bed.

28th.  At the office betimes (it being cold all night and this morning,
and a very great frost they say abroad, which is much, having had no
summer at all almost), where we sat, and in the afternoon also about
settling the establishment of the number of men borne on ships, &c., till
the evening, and after that in my closet till late, and quite tired with
business, home to supper and to bed.

29th.  Abroad with my wife by water to Westminster, and there left her at
my Lord's lodgings, and I to Jervas the barber's, and there was trimmed,
and did deliver back a periwigg, which he brought by my desire the other
day to show me, having some thoughts, though no great desire or resolution
yet to wear one, and so I put it off for a while.  Thence to my wife, and
calling at both the Exchanges, buying stockings for her and myself, and
also at Leadenhall, where she and I, it being candlelight, bought meat for
to-morrow, having never a mayde to do it, and I myself bought, while my
wife was gone to another shop, a leg of beef, a good one, for six pense,
and my wife says is worth my money.  So walked home with a woman carrying
our things.  I am mightily displeased at a letter Tom sent me last night,
to borrow L20 more of me, and yet gives me no account, as I have long
desired, how matters stand with him in the world. I am troubled also to
see how, contrary to my expectation, my brother John neither is the
scholler nor minds his studies as I thought would have done, but loiters
away his time, so that I must send him soon to Cambridge again.

31st.  Up and to my office all the morning, where Sir W. Batten and Sir J.
Minnes did pay the short allowance money to the East India companies, and
by the assistance of the City Marshall and his men, did lay hold of two or
three of the chief of the companies that were in the mutiny the other day,
and sent them to prison.  This noon came Jane Gentleman to serve my wife
as her chamber mayde.  I wish she may prove well.  So ends this month,
with my mind pretty well in quiett, and in good disposition of health
since my drinking at home of a little wine with my beer; but no where else
do I drink any wine at all.  The King and Queen and the Court at the Bath,
my Lord Sandwich in the country newly gone.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     And so to bed and there entertained her with great content
     Apprehend about one hundred Quakers
     Being cleansed of lice this day by my wife
     Conceited, but that's no matter to me
     Fear it may do him no good, but me hurt
     Fearful that I might not go far enough with my hat off
     He having made good promises, though I fear his performance
     My wife has got too great head to be brought down soon
     So much is it against my nature to owe anything to any body
     Sporting in my fancy with the Queen
     Things being dear and little attendance to be had we went away
     Towzing her and doing what I would, but the last thing of all. . . .





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, July/August 1663
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4142.txt or 4142.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/4/4142/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
