The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1663, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1663
       Transcribed From The Shorthand Manuscript In The Pepysian
       Library Magdalene College Cambridge By The Rev. Mynors
       Bright

Author: Samuel Pepys

Commentator: Lord Braybrooke

Editor: Henry B. Wheatley

Release Date: October 9, 2006 [EBook #4145]
Posting Date: March 22, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1663 ***




Produced by David Widger





THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

(Unabridged)

WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

1963

By Samuel Pepys

Edited With Additions By

Henry B. Wheatley F.S.A.




    LONDON
    GEORGE BELL & SONS YORK ST.  COVENT GARDEN
    CAMBRIDGE DEIGHTON BELL & CO.


    1893




JANUARY 1662-1663

January 1st, Lay with my wife at my Lord's lodgings, where I have been
these two nights, till 10 o'clock with great pleasure talking, then I
rose and to White Hall, where I spent a little time walking among the
courtiers, which I perceive I shall be able to do with great confidence,
being now beginning to be pretty well known among them. Then to my wife
again, and found Mrs. Sarah with us in the chamber we lay in. Among
other discourse, Mrs. Sarah tells us how the King sups at least four or
[five] times every week with my Lady Castlemaine; and most often stays
till the morning with her, and goes home through the garden all alone
privately, and that so as the very centrys take notice of it and speak
of it. She tells me, that about a month ago she [Lady Castlemaine]
quickened at my Lord Gerard's at dinner, and cried out that she was
undone; and all the lords and men were fain to quit the room, and women
called to help her. In fine, I find that there is nothing almost
but bawdry at Court from top to bottom, as, if it were fit, I could
instance, but it is not necessary; only they say my Lord Chesterfield,
groom of the stole to the Queen, is either gone or put away from the
Court upon the score of his lady's having smitten the Duke of York, so
as that he is watched by the Duchess of York, and his lady is retired
into the country upon it. How much of this is true, God knows, but it is
common talk. After dinner I did reckon with Mrs. Sarah for what we have
eat and drank here, and gave her a crown, and so took coach, and to the
Duke's House, where we saw "The Villaine" again; and the more I see it,
the more I am offended at my first undervaluing the play, it being very
good and pleasant, and yet a true and allowable tragedy. The house was
full of citizens, and so the less pleasant, but that I was willing to
make an end of my gaddings, and to set to my business for all the year
again tomorrow. Here we saw the old Roxalana in the chief box, in a
velvet gown, as the fashion is, and very handsome, at which I was glad.
Hence by coach home, where I find all well, only Sir W. Pen they say ill
again. So to my office to set down these two or three days' journall,
and to close the last year therein, and so that being done, home to
supper, and to bed, with great pleasure talking and discoursing with my
wife of our late observations abroad.

2nd. Lay long in bed, and so up and to the office, where all the morning
alone doing something or another. So dined at home with my wife, and in
the afternoon to the Treasury office, where Sir W. Batten was paying off
tickets, but so simply and arbitrarily, upon a dull pretence of doing
right to the King, though to the wrong of poor people (when I know
there is no man that means the King less right than he, or would trouble
himself less about it, but only that he sees me stir, and so he would
appear doing something, though to little purpose), that I was weary of
it. At last we broke up, and walk home together, and I to see Sir W.
Pen, who is fallen sick again. I staid a while talking with him, and so
to my office, practising some arithmetique, and so home to supper and
bed, having sat up late talking to my poor wife with great content.

3rd. Up and to the office all the morning, and dined alone with my wife
at noon, and then to my office all the afternoon till night, putting
business in order with great content in my mind. Having nothing now
in my mind of trouble in the world, but quite the contrary, much joy,
except only the ending of our difference with my uncle Thomas, and the
getting of the bills well over for my building of my house here, which
however are as small and less than any of the others. Sir W. Pen it
seems is fallen very ill again. So to my arithmetique again to-night,
and so home to supper and to bed.

4th (Lord's day). Up and to church, where a lazy sermon, and so home
to dinner to a good piece of powdered beef, but a little too salt. At
dinner my wife did propound my having of my sister Pall at my house
again to be her woman, since one we must have, hoping that in that
quality possibly she may prove better than she did before, which I take
very well of her, and will consider of it, it being a very great trouble
to me that I should have a sister of so ill a nature, that I must be
forced to spend money upon a stranger when it might better be upon her,
if she were good for anything. After dinner I and she walked, though it
was dirty, to White Hall (in the way calling at the Wardrobe to see how
Mr. Moore do, who is pretty well, but not cured yet), being much afeard
of being seen by anybody, and was, I think, of Mr. Coventry, which so
troubled me that I made her go before, and I ever after loitered behind.
She to Mr. Hunt's, and I to White Hall Chappell, and then up to walk up
and down the house, which now I am well known there, I shall forbear
to do, because I would not be thought a lazy body by Mr. Coventry and
others by being seen, as I have lately been, to walk up and down doing
nothing. So to Mr. Hunt's, and there was most prettily and kindly
entertained by him and her, who are two as good people as I hardly know
any, and so neat and kind one to another. Here we staid late, and so to
my Lord's to bed.

5th. Up and to the Duke, who himself told me that Sir J. Lawson was come
home to Portsmouth from the Streights, who is now come with great renown
among all men, and, I perceive, mightily esteemed at Court by all.
The Duke did not stay long in his chamber; but to the King's chamber,
whither by and by the Russia Embassadors come; who, it seems, have a
custom that they will not come to have any treaty with our or any King's
Commissioners, but they will themselves see at the time the face of the
King himself, be it forty days one after another; and so they did to-day
only go in and see the King; and so out again to the Council-chamber.
The Duke returned to his chamber, and so to his closett, where Sir
G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, Mr. Coventry, and myself
attended him about the business of the Navy; and after much discourse
and pleasant talk he went away. And I took Sir W. Batten and Captain
Allen into the wine cellar to my tenant (as I call him, Serjeant
Dalton), and there drank a great deal of variety of wines, more than
I have drunk at one time, or shall again a great while, when I come to
return to my oaths, which I intend in a day or two. Thence to my Lord's
lodging, where Mr. Hunt and Mr. Creed dined with us, and were very
merry. And after dinner he and I to White Hall, where the Duke and the
Commissioners for Tangier met, but did not do much: my Lord Sandwich not
being in town, nobody making it their business. So up, and Creed and
I to my wife again, and after a game or two at cards, to the Cockpitt,
where we saw "Claracilla," a poor play, done by the King's house (but
neither the King nor Queen were there, but only the Duke and Duchess,
who did show some impertinent and, methought, unnatural dalliances
there, before the whole world, such as kissing, and leaning upon one
another); but to my very little content, they not acting in any degree
like the Duke's people. So home (there being here this night Mrs. Turner
and Mrs. Martha Batten of our office) to my Lord's lodgings again, and
to a game at cards, we three and Sarah, and so to supper and some apples
and ale, and to bed with great pleasure, blessed be God!

6th (Twelfth Day). Up and Mr. Creed brought a pot of chocolate ready
made for our morning draft, and then he and I to the Duke's, but I was
not very willing to be seen at this end of the town, and so returned to
our lodgings, and took my wife by coach to my brother's, where I set her
down, and Creed and I to St. Paul's Church-yard, to my bookseller's, and
looked over several books with good discourse, and then into St. Paul's
Church, and there finding Elborough, my old schoolfellow at Paul's, now
a parson, whom I know to be a silly fellow, I took him out and walked
with him, making Creed and myself sport with talking with him, and so
sent him away, and we to my office and house to see all well, and
thence to the Exchange, where we met with Major Thomson, formerly of our
office, who do talk very highly of liberty of conscience, which now he
hopes for by the King's declaration, and that he doubts not that if he
will give him, he will find more and better friends than the Bishopps
can be to him, and that if he do not, there will many thousands in a
little time go out of England, where they may have it. But he says that
they are well contented that if the King thinks it good, the Papists may
have the same liberty with them. He tells me, and so do others, that Dr.
Calamy is this day sent to Newgate for preaching, Sunday was se'nnight,
without leave, though he did it only to supply the place; when otherwise
the people must have gone away without ever a sermon, they being
disappointed of a minister but the Bishop of London will not take that
as an excuse. Thence into Wood Street, and there bought a fine table for
my dining-room, cost me 50s.; and while we were buying it, there was a
scare-fire

     [Scar-fire or scarefire.  An alarm of fire.  One of the little
     pieces in Herrick's "Hesperides" is entitled "The Scar-fire," but
     the word sometimes was used, as in the text, for the fire itself.
     Fuller, in his "Worthies," speaks of quenching scare-fires.]

in an ally over against us, but they quenched it. So to my brother's,
where Creed and I and my wife dined with Tom, and after dinner to the
Duke's house, and there saw "Twelfth Night"

     [Pepys saw "Twelfth Night" for the first time on September 11th,
     1661, when he supposed it was a new play, and "took no pleasure at
     all in it."]

acted well, though it be but a silly play, and not related at all to the
name or day. Thence Mr. Battersby the apothecary, his wife, and I and
mine by coach together, and setting him down at his house, he paying
his share, my wife and I home, and found all well, only myself somewhat
vexed at my wife's neglect in leaving of her scarf, waistcoat, and
night-dressings in the coach today that brought us from Westminster,
though, I confess, she did give them to me to look after, yet it was
her fault not to see that I did take them out of the coach. I believe it
might be as good as 25s. loss or thereabouts. So to my office, however,
to set down my last three days' journall, and writing to my Lord
Sandwich to give him an account of Sir J. Lawson's being come home, and
to my father about my sending him some wine and things this week, for
his making an entertainment of some friends in the country, and so
home. This night making an end wholly of Christmas, with a mind fully
satisfied with the great pleasures we have had by being abroad from
home, and I do find my mind so apt to run to its old want of pleasures,
that it is high time to betake myself to my late vows, which I will
to-morrow, God willing, perfect and bind myself to, that so I may, for a
great while, do my duty, as I have well begun, and increase my good name
and esteem in the world, and get money, which sweetens all things, and
whereof I have much need. So home to supper and to bed, blessing God
for his mercy to bring me home, after much pleasure, to my house and
business with health and resolution to fall hard to work again.

7th. Up pretty early, that is by seven o'clock, it being not yet light
before or then. So to my office all the morning, signing the Treasurer's
ledger, part of it where I have not put my hand, and then eat a mouthful
of pye at home to stay my stomach, and so with Mr. Waith by water to
Deptford, and there among other things viewed old pay-books, and found
that the Commanders did never heretofore receive any pay for the rigging
time, but only for seatime, contrary to what Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
Batten told the Duke the other day. I also searched all the ships in the
Wett Dock for fire, and found all in good order, it being very dangerous
for the King that so many of his ships lie together there. I was among
the canvass in stores also, with Mr. Harris, the saylemaker, and learnt
the difference between one sort and another, to my great content, and so
by water home again, where my wife tells me stories how she hears that
by Sarah's going to live at Sir W. Pen's, all our affairs of my family
are made known and discoursed of there and theirs by my people, which do
trouble me much, and I shall take a time to let Sir W. Pen know how he
has dealt in taking her without our full consent. So to my office, and
by and by home to supper, and so to prayers and bed.

8th. Up pretty early, and sent my boy to the carrier's with some wine
for my father, for to make his feast among his Brampton friends this
Christmas, and my muff to my mother, sent as from my wife. But before I
sent my boy out with them, I beat him for a lie he told me, at which his
sister, with whom we have of late been highly displeased, and warned her
to be gone, was angry, which vexed me, to see the girl I loved so well,
and my wife, should at last turn so much a fool and unthankful to us.
So to the office, and there all the morning, and though without and
a little against the advice of the officers did, to gratify him, send
Thomas Hater to-day towards Portsmouth a day or two before the rest of
the clerks, against the Pay next week. Dined at home; and there being
the famous new play acted the first time to-day, which is called "The
Adventures of Five Hours," at the Duke's house, being, they say, made or
translated by Colonel Tuke, I did long to see it; and so made my wife to
get her ready, though we were forced to send for a smith, to break open
her trunk, her mayde Jane being gone forth with the keys, and so we
went; and though early, were forced to sit almost out of sight, at the
end of one of the lower forms, so full was the house. And the play,
in one word, is the best, for the variety and the most excellent
continuance of the plot to the very end, that ever I saw, or think ever
shall, and all possible, not only to be done in the time, but in most
other respects very admittable, and without one word of ribaldry;
and the house, by its frequent plaudits, did show their sufficient
approbation. So home; with much ado in an hour getting a coach home,
and, after writing letters at my office, I went home to supper and to
bed, now resolving to set up my rest as to plays till Easter, if not
Whitsuntide next, excepting plays at Court.

9th. Waking in the morning, my wife I found also awake, and begun
to speak to me with great trouble and tears, and by degrees from one
discourse to another at last it appears that Sarah has told somebody
that has told my wife of my meeting her at my brother's and making her
sit down by me while she told me stories of my wife, about her giving
her scallop to her brother, and other things, which I am much vexed at,
for I am sure I never spoke any thing of it, nor could any body tell
her but by Sarah's own words. I endeavoured to excuse my silence herein
hitherto by not believing any thing she told me, only that of the
scallop which she herself told me of. At last we pretty good friends,
and my wife begun to speak again of the necessity of her keeping
somebody to bear her company; for her familiarity with her other
servants is it that spoils them all, and other company she hath none,
which is too true, and called for Jane to reach her out of her trunk,
giving her the keys to that purpose, a bundle of papers, and pulls out
a paper, a copy of what, a pretty while since, she had wrote in a
discontent to me, which I would not read, but burnt. She now read it,
and it was so piquant, and wrote in English, and most of it true, of the
retiredness of her life, and how unpleasant it was; that being wrote in
English, and so in danger of being met with and read by others, I was
vexed at it, and desired her and then commanded her to tear it. When she
desired to be excused it, I forced it from her, and tore it, and withal
took her other bundle of papers from her, and leapt out of the bed and
in my shirt clapped them into the pocket of my breeches, that she might
not get them from me, and having got on my stockings and breeches and
gown, I pulled them out one by one and tore them all before her face,
though it went against my heart to do it, she crying and desiring me not
to do it, but such was my passion and trouble to see the letters of
my love to her, and my Will wherein I had given her all I have in the
world, when I went to sea with my Lord Sandwich, to be joyned with a
paper of so much disgrace to me and dishonour, if it should have been
found by any body. Having torn them all, saving a bond of my uncle
Robert's, which she hath long had in her hands, and our marriage
license, and the first letter that ever I sent her when I was her
servant,

     [The usual word at this time for a lover.  We have continued the
     correlative term "mistress," but rejected that of "servant."]

I took up the pieces and carried them into my chamber, and there, after
many disputes with myself whether I should burn them or no, and having
picked up, the pieces of the paper she read to-day, and of my Will which
I tore, I burnt all the rest, and so went out to my office troubled
in mind. Hither comes Major Tolhurst, one of my old acquaintance in
Cromwell's time, and sometimes of our clubb, to see me, and I could do
no less than carry him to the Mitre, and having sent for Mr. Beane, a
merchant, a neighbour of mine, we sat and talked, Tolhurst telling me
the manner of their collierys in the north. We broke up, and I home to
dinner. And to see my folly, as discontented as I am, when my wife came
I could not forbear smiling all dinner till she began to speak bad words
again, and then I began to be angry again, and so to my office. Mr.
Bland came in the evening to me hither, and sat talking to me about
many things of merchandise, and I should be very happy in his discourse,
durst I confess my ignorance to him, which is not so fit for me to do.
There coming a letter to me from Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, by my desire
appointing his and Dr. Clerke's coming to dine with me next Monday, I
went to my wife and agreed upon matters, and at last for my honour am
forced to make her presently a new Moyre gown to be seen by Mrs. Clerke,
which troubles me to part with so much money, but, however, it sets my
wife and I to friends again, though I and she never were so heartily
angry in our lives as to-day almost, and I doubt the heartburning will
not [be] soon over, and the truth is I am sorry for the tearing of so
many poor loving letters of mine from sea and elsewhere to her. So to
my office again, and there the Scrivener brought me the end of the
manuscript which I am going to get together of things of the Navy, which
pleases me much. So home, and mighty friends with my wife again, and so
to bed.

10th. Up and to the office. From thence, before we sat, Sir W. Pen sent
for me to his bedside to talk (indeed to reproach me with my not owning
to Sir J. Minnes that he had my advice in the blocking up of the garden
door the other day, which is now by him out of fear to Sir J. Minnes
opened again), to which I answered him so indifferently that I think he
and I shall be at a distance, at least to one another, better than ever
we did and love one another less, which for my part I think I need not
care for. So to the office, and sat till noon, then rose and to dinner,
and then to the office again, where Mr. Creed sat with me till late
talking very good discourse, as he is full of it, though a cunning knave
in his heart, at least not to be too much trusted, till Sir J. Minnes
came in, which at last he did, and so beyond my expectation he was
willing to sign his accounts, notwithstanding all his objections, which
really were very material, and yet how like a doting coxcomb he
signs the accounts without the least satisfaction, for which we both
sufficiently laughed at him and Sir W. Batten after they had signed them
and were gone, and so sat talking together till 11 o'clock at night, and
so home and to bed.

11th (Lord's day). Lay long talking pleasant with my wife, then up and
to church, the pew being quite full with strangers come along with Sir
W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, so after a pitifull sermon of the
young Scott, home to dinner. After dinner comes a footman of my Lord
Sandwich's (my Lord being come to town last night) with a letter from my
father, in which he presses me to carry on the business for Tom with his
late mistress, which I am sorry to see my father do, it being so much
out of our power or for his advantage, as it is clear to me it is,
which I shall think of and answer in my next. So to my office all the
afternoon writing orders myself to have ready against to-morrow, that
I might not appear negligent to Mr. Coventry. In the evening to Sir W.
Pen's, where Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, and afterwards came Sir
G. Carteret. There talked about business, and afterwards to Sir W.
Batten's, where we staid talking and drinking Syder, and so I went away
to my office a little, and so home and to bed.

12th. Up, and to Sir W. Batten's to bid him and Sir J. Minnes adieu,
they going this day towards Portsmouth, and then to Sir W. Pen's to see
Sir J. Lawson, who I heard was there, where I found him the same plain
man that he was, after all his success in the Straights, with which
he is come loaded home. Thence to Sir G. Carteret, and with him in his
coach to White Hall, and first I to see my Lord Sandwich (being come now
from Hinchingbrooke), and after talking a little with him, he and I
to the Duke's chamber, where Mr. Coventry and he and I into the Duke's
closett and Sir J. Lawson discoursing upon business of the Navy, and
particularly got his consent to the ending some difficulties in Mr.
Creed's accounts. Thence to my Lord's lodgings, and with Mr. Creed to
the King's Head ordinary, but people being set down, we went to two
or three places; at last found some meat at a Welch cook's at Charing
Cross, and here dined and our boys. After dinner to the 'Change to buy
some linen for my wife, and going back met our two boys. Mine had struck
down Creed's boy in the dirt, with his new suit on, and the boy taken
by a gentlewoman into a house to make clean, but the poor boy was in a
pitifull taking and pickle; but I basted my rogue soundly. Thence to my
Lord's lodging, and Creed to his, for his papers against the Committee.
I found my Lord within, and he and I went out through the garden towards
the Duke's chamber, to sit upon the Tangier matters; but a lady called
to my Lord out of my Lady Castlemaine's lodging, telling him that the
King was there and would speak with him. My Lord could not tell what to
bid me say at the Committee to excuse his absence, but that he was with
the King; nor would suffer me to go into the Privy Garden (which is now
a through-passage, and common), but bid me to go through some other way,
which I did; so that I see he is a servant of the King's pleasures too,
as well as business. So I went to the Committee, where we spent all this
night attending to Sir J. Lawson's description of Tangier and the place
for the Mole,

     [The construction of this Mole or breakwater turned out a very
     costly undertaking.  In April, 1663, it was found that the charge
     for one year's work was L13,000.  In March, 1665, L36,000 had been
     spent upon it.  The wind and sea exerted a very destructive
     influence over this structure, although it was very strongly built,
     and Colonel Norwood reported in 1668 that a breach had been made in
     the Mole, which cost a considerable sum to repair.]

of which he brought a very pretty draught. Concerning the making of
the Mole, Mr. Cholmely did also discourse very well, having had some
experience in it. Being broke up, I home by coach to Mr. Bland's, and
there discoursed about sending away of the merchant ship which hangs
so long on hand for Tangier. So to my Lady Batten's, and sat with her
awhile, Sir W. Batten being gone out of town; but I did it out of design
to get some oranges for my feast to-morrow of her, which I did. So home,
and found my wife's new gown come home, and she mightily pleased with
it. But I appeared very angry that there were no more things got ready
against to-morrow's feast, and in that passion sat up long, and went
discontented to bed.

13th. So my poor wife rose by five o'clock in the morning, before day,
and went to market and bought fowls and many other things for dinner,
with which I was highly pleased, and the chine of beef was down also
before six o'clock, and my own jack, of which I was doubtfull, do carry
it very well. Things being put in order, and the cook come, I went
to the office, where we sat till noon and then broke up, and I home,
whither by and by comes Dr. Clerke and his lady, his sister, and a
she-cozen, and Mr. Pierce and his wife, which was all my guests. I had
for them, after oysters, at first course, a hash of rabbits, a lamb, and
a rare chine of beef. Next a great dish of roasted fowl, cost me about
30s., and a tart, and then fruit and cheese. My dinner was noble and
enough. I had my house mighty clean and neat; my room below with a
good fire in it; my dining-room above, and my chamber being made a
withdrawing-chamber; and my wife's a good fire also. I find my new table
very proper, and will hold nine or ten people well, but eight with great
room. After dinner the women to cards in my wife's chamber, and the Dr.
and Mr. Pierce in mine, because the dining-room smokes unless I keep
a good charcoal fire, which I was not then provided with. At night to
supper, had a good sack posset and cold meat, and sent my guests away
about ten o'clock at night, both them and myself highly pleased with our
management of this day; and indeed their company was very fine, and Mrs.
Clerke a very witty, fine lady, though a little conceited and proud. So
weary, so to bed. I believe this day's feast will cost me near L5.

14th. Lay very long in bed, till with shame forced to rise, being called
up by Mr. Bland about business. He being gone I went and staid upon
business at the office and then home to dinner, and after dinner staid
a little talking pleasant with my wife, who tells me of another woman
offered by her brother that is pretty and can sing, to which I do listen
but will not appear over forward, but I see I must keep somebody for
company sake to my wife, for I am ashamed she should live as she do.
So to the office till 10 at night upon business, and numbering and
examining part of my sea-manuscript with great pleasure, my wife sitting
working by me. So home to supper and to bed.

15th. Up and to my office preparing things, by and by we met and sat Mr.
Coventry and I till noon, and then I took him to dine with me, I having
a wild goose roasted, and a cold chine of beef and a barrel of oysters.
We dined alone in my chamber, and then he and I to fit ourselves for
horseback, he having brought me a horse; and so to Deptford, the ways
being very dirty. There we walked up and down the Yard and Wett Dock,
and did our main business, which was to examine the proof of our new way
of the call-books, which we think will be of great use. And so to horse
again, and I home with his horse, leaving him to go over the fields to
Lambeth, his boy at my house taking home his horse. I vexed, having left
my keys in my other pocket in my chamber, and my door is shut, so that I
was forced to set my boy in at the window, which done I shifted myself,
and so to my office till late, and then home to supper, my mind being
troubled about Field's business and my uncle's, which the term coming
on I must think to follow again. So to prayers and to bed, and much
troubled in mind this night in my dreams about my uncle Thomas and his
son going to law with us.

16th. Lay long talking in bed with my wife. Up, and Mr. Battersby, the
apothecary, coming to see me, I called for the cold chine of beef and
made him eat, and drink wine, and talked, there being with us Captain
Brewer, the paynter, who tells me how highly the Presbyters do talk in
the coffeehouses still, which I wonder at. They being gone I walked
two or three hours with my brother Tom, telling him my mind how it is
troubled about my father's concernments, and how things would be with
them all if it should please God that I should die, and therefore desire
him to be a good husband and follow his business, which I hope he do. At
noon to dinner, and after dinner my wife began to talk of a woman again,
which I have a mind to have, and would be glad Pall might please us, but
she is quite against having her, nor have I any great mind to it, but
only for her good and to save money flung away upon a stranger. So to my
office till 9 o'clock about my navy manuscripts, and there troubled in
my mind more and more about my uncle's business from a letter come this
day from my father that tells me that all his tenants are sued by my
uncle, which will cost me some new trouble, I went home to supper and so
to bed.

17th. Waked early with my mind troubled about our law matters, but it
came into my mind that [sayings] of Epictetus, which did put me to a
great deal of ease, it being a saying of great reason. Up to the office,
and there sat Mr. Coventry, Mr. Pett, new come to town, and I. I was
sorry for signing a bill and guiding Mr. Coventry to sign a bill to Mr.
Creed for his pay as Deputy Treasurer to this day, though the service
ended 5 or 6 months ago, which he perceiving did blot out his name
afterwards, but I will clear myself to him from design in it. Sat
till two o'clock and then home to dinner, and Creed with me, and after
dinner, to put off my mind's trouble, I took Creed by coach and to the
Duke's playhouse, where we did see "The Five Hours" entertainment again,
which indeed is a very fine play, though, through my being out of order,
it did not seem so good as at first; but I could discern it was not
any fault in the play. Thence with him to the China alehouse, and
there drank a bottle or two, and so home, where I found my wife and her
brother discoursing about Mr. Ashwell's daughter, whom we are like to
have for my wife's woman, and I hope it may do very well, seeing there
is a necessity of having one. So to the office to write letters, and
then home to supper and to bed.

18th (Lord's day). Up, and after the barber had done, and I had spoke
with Mr. Smith (whom I sent for on purpose to speak of Field's business,
who stands upon L250 before he will release us, which do trouble me
highly), and also Major Allen of the Victualling Office about his ship
to be hired for Tangier, I went to church, and thence home to dinner
alone with my wife, very pleasant, and after dinner to church again, and
heard a dull, drowsy sermon, and so home and to my office, perfecting my
vows again for the next year, which I have now done, and sworn to in
the presence of Almighty God to observe upon the respective penalties
thereto annexed, and then to Sir W. Pen's (though much against my will,
for I cannot bear him, but only to keep him from complaint to others
that I do not see him) to see how he do, and find him pretty well, and
ready to go abroad again.

19th. Up and to White Hall, and while the Duke is dressing himself I
went to wait on my Lord Sandwich, whom I found not very well, and Dr.
Clerke with him. He is feverish, and hath sent for Mr. Pierce to let him
blood, but not being in the way he puts it off till night, but he stirs
not abroad to-day. Then to the Duke, and in his closett discoursed as we
use to do, and then broke up. That done, I singled out Mr. Coventry into
the Matted Gallery, and there I told him the complaints I meet every
day about our Treasurer's or his people's paying no money, but at
the goldsmith's shops, where they are forced to pay fifteen or twenty
sometimes per cent. for their money, which is a most horrid shame, and
that which must not be suffered. Nor is it likely that the Treasurer
(at least his people) will suffer Maynell the Goldsmith to go away with
L10,000 per annum, as he do now get, by making people pay after this
manner for their money. We were interrupted by the Duke, who called Mr.
Coventry aside for half an hour, walking with him in the gallery, and
then in the garden, and then going away I ended my discourse with Mr.
Coventry. But by the way Mr. Coventry was saying that there remained
nothing now in our office to be amended but what would do of itself
every day better and better, for as much as he that was slowest, Sir W.
Batten, do now begin to look about him and to mind business. At which,
God forgive me! I was a little moved with envy, but yet I am glad, and
ought to be, though it do lessen a little my care to see that the King's
service is like to be better attended than it was heretofore. Thence
by coach to Mr. Povy's, being invited thither by [him] came a messenger
this morning from him, where really he made a most excellent and large
dinner, of their variety, even to admiration, he bidding us, in a
frolique, to call for what we had a mind, and he would undertake to give
it us: and we did for prawns, swan, venison, after I had thought the
dinner was quite done, and he did immediately produce it, which I
thought great plenty, and he seems to set off his rest in this plenty
and the neatness of his house, which he after dinner showed me, from
room to room, so beset with delicate pictures, and above all, a piece of
perspective in his closett in the low parler; his stable, where was some
most delicate horses, and the very-racks painted, and mangers, with a
neat leaden painted cistern, and the walls done with Dutch tiles, like
my chimnies. But still, above all things, he bid me go down into his
wine-cellar, where upon several shelves there stood bottles of all sorts
of wine, new and old, with labells pasted upon each bottle, and in
the order and plenty as I never saw books in a bookseller's shop; and
herein, I observe, he puts his highest content, and will accordingly
commend all that he hath, but still they deserve to be so. Here dined
with me Dr. Whore and Mr. Scawen. Therewith him and Mr. Bland, whom we
met by the way, to my Lord Chancellor's, where the King was to meet my
Lord Treasurer, &c., many great men, to settle the revenue of Tangier.
I staid talking awhile there, but the King not coming I walked to my
brother's, where I met my cozen Scotts (Tom not being at home) and sent
for a glass of wine for them, and having drunk we parted, and I to the
Wardrobe talking with Mr. Moore about my law businesses, which I doubt
will go ill for want of time for me to attend them. So home, where I
found Mrs. Lodum speaking with my wife about her kinswoman which is
offered my wife to come as a woman to her. So to the office and put
things in order, and then home and to bed, it being my great comfort
that every day I understand more and more the pleasure of following of
business and the credit that a man gets by it, which I hope at last too
will end in profit. This day, by Dr. Clerke, I was told the occasion
of my Lord Chesterfield's going and taking his lady (my Lord Ormond's
daughter) from Court. It seems he not only hath been long jealous of the
Duke of York, but did find them two talking together, though there were
others in the room, and the lady by all opinions a most good, virtuous
woman. He, the next day (of which the Duke was warned by somebody that
saw the passion my Lord Chesterfield was in the night before), went and
told the Duke how much he did apprehend himself wronged, in his picking
out his lady of the whole Court to be the subject of his dishonour;
which the Duke did answer with great calmness, not seeming to understand
the reason of complaint, and that was all that passed but my Lord did
presently pack his lady into the country in Derbyshire, near the Peake;
which is become a proverb at Court, to send a man's wife to the Devil's
arse a' Peake, when she vexes him. This noon I did find out Mr. Dixon at
Whitehall, and discoursed with him about Mrs. Wheatly's daughter for
a wife for my brother Tom, and have committed it to him to enquire the
pleasure of her father and mother concerning it. I demanded L300.

20th. Up betimes and to the office, where all the morning. Dined at
home, and Mr. Deane of Woolwich with me, talking about the abuses of
the yard. Then to the office about business all the afternoon with great
pleasure, seeing myself observed by every body to be the only man of
business of us all, but Mr. Coventry. So till late at night, and then
home to supper and bed.

21st. Up early leaving my wife very ill in bed... and to my office till
eight o'clock, there coming Ch. Pepys

     [Charles Pepys was second son of Thomas Pepys, elder brother of
     Samuel's father.  Samuel paid part of the legacy to Charles and his
     elder brother Thomas on May 25th, 1664.]

to demand his legacy of me, which I denied him upon good reason of
his father and brother's suing us, and so he went away. Then came
Commissioner Pett, and he and I by agreement went to Deptford, and after
a turn or two in the yard, to Greenwich, and thence walked to Woolwich.
Here we did business, and I on board the Tangier-merchant, a ship
freighted by us, that has long lain on hand in her despatch to Tangier,
but is now ready for sailing. Back, and dined at Mr. Ackworth's, where
a pretty dinner, and she a pretty, modest woman; but above all things
we saw her Rocke, which is one of the finest things done by a woman that
ever I saw. I must have my wife to see it. After dinner on board the
Elias, and found the timber brought by her from the forest of Deane to
be exceeding good. The Captain gave each of us two barrels of pickled
oysters put up for the Queen mother. So to the Dock again, and took in
Mrs. Ackworth and another gentlewoman, and carried them to London, and
at the Globe tavern, in Eastcheap, did give them a glass of wine, and so
parted. I home, where I found my wife ill in bed all day, and her face
swelled with pain. My Will has received my last two quarters salary, of
which I am glad. So to my office till late and then home, and after the
barber had done, to bed.

22nd. To the office, where Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes are come
from Portsmouth. We sat till dinner time. Then home, and Mr. Dixon by
agreement came to dine, to give me an account of his success with Mr.
Wheatly for his daughter for my brother; and in short it is, that his
daughter cannot fancy my brother because of his imperfection in his
speech, which I am sorry for, but there the business must die, and we
must look out for another. There came in also Mrs. Lodum, with an answer
from her brother Ashwell's daughter, who is likely to come to me, and
with her my wife's brother, and I carried Commissioner Pett in with me,
so I feared want of victuals, but I had a good dinner, and mirth, and
so rose and broke up, and with the rest of the officers to Mr. Russell's
buriall, where we had wine and rings, and a great and good company
of aldermen and the livery of the Skinners' Company. We went to St.
Dunstan's in the East church, where a sermon, but I staid not, but went
home, and, after writing letters, I took coach to Mr. Povy's, but he not
within I left a letter there of Tangier business, and so to my Lord's,
and there find him not sick, but expecting his fit to-night of an ague.
Here was Sir W. Compton, Mr. Povy, Mr. Bland, Mr. Gawden and myself;
we were very busy about getting provisions sent forthwith to Tangier,
fearing that by Mr. Gawden's neglect they might want bread. So
among other ways thought of to supply them I was empowered by the
Commissioners of Tangier that were present to write to Plymouth and
direct Mr. Lanyon to take up vessels great or small to the quantity of
150 tons, and fill them with bread of Mr. Gawden's lying ready there for
Tangier, which they undertake to bear me out in, and to see the freight
paid. This I did. About 10 o'clock we broke up, and my Lord's fit was
coming upon him, and so we parted, and I with Mr. Creed, Mr. Pierce,
Win. Howe and Captn. Ferrers, who was got almost drunk this afternoon,
and was mighty capricious and ready to fall out with any body, supped
together in the little chamber that was mine heretofore upon some fowls
sent by Mr. Shepley, so we were very merry till 12 at night, and so
away, and I lay with Mr. Creed at his lodgings, and slept well.

23rd. Up and hastened him in despatching some business relating to
Tangier, and I away homewards, hearing that my Lord had a bad fit
to-night, called at my brother's, and found him sick in bed, of a pain
in the sole of one of his feet, without swelling, knowing not how it
came, but it will not suffer him to stand these two days. So to Mr.
Moore, and Mr. Lovell, our proctor, being there, discoursed of my law
business. Thence to Mr. Grant, to bid him come for money for Mr. Barlow,
and he and I to a coffee-house, where Sir J. Cutler was;

     [Citizen and grocer of London; most severely handled by Pope.  Two
     statues were erected to his memory--one in the College of
     Physicians, and the other in the Grocers' Hall.  They were erected
     and one removed (that in the College of Physicians) before Pope
     stigmatized "sage Cutler."  Pope says that Sir John Cutler had an
     only daughter; in fact, he had two: one married to Lord Radnor; the
     other, mentioned afterwards by Pepys, the wife of Sir William
     Portman.--B.]

and in discourse, among other things, he did fully make it out that the
trade of England is as great as ever it was, only in more hands; and
that of all trades there is a greater number than ever there was, by
reason of men taking more 'prentices, because of their having more money
than heretofore. His discourse was well worth hearing. Coming by Temple
Bar I bought "Audley's Way to be Rich," a serious pamphlett and some
good things worth my minding. Thence homewards, and meeting Sir W.
Batten, turned back again to a coffee-house, and there drunk more till I
was almost sick, and here much discourse, but little to be learned, but
of a design in the north of a rising, which is discovered, among some
men of condition, and they sent for up. Thence to the 'Change, and so
home with him by coach, and I to see how my wife do, who is pretty well
again, and so to dinner to Sir W. Batten's to a cod's head, and so to
my office, and after stopping to see Sir W. Pen, where was Sir J. Lawson
and his lady and daughter, which is pretty enough, I came back to my
office, and there set to business pretty late, finishing the margenting
my Navy-Manuscript. So home and to bed.

24th. Lay pretty long, and by lying with my sheet upon my lip, as I have
of old observed it, my upper lip was blistered in the morning. To the
office all the morning, sat till noon, then to the Exchange to look out
for a ship for Tangier, and delivered my manuscript to be bound at the
stationer's. So to dinner at home, and then down to Redriffe, to see a
ship hired for Tangier, what readiness she was in, and found her ready
to sail. Then home, and so by coach to Mr. Povy's, where Sir W.
Compton, Mr. Bland, Gawden, Sir J. Lawson and myself met to settle the
victualling of Tangier for the time past, which with much ado we did,
and for a six months' supply more. So home in Mr. Gawden's coach, and
to my office till late about business, and find that it is business that
must and do every day bring me to something.--[In earlier days Pepys
noted for us each few pounds or shillings of graft which he annexed at
each transaction in his office.]--So home to supper and to bed.

25th (Lord's day). Lay till 9 a-bed, then up, and being trimmed by the
barber, I walked towards White Hall, calling upon Mr. Moore, whom I
found still very ill of his ague. I discoursed with him about my Lord's
estate against I speak with my Lord this day. Thence to the King's Head
ordinary at Charing Cross, and sent for Mr. Creed, where we dined very
finely and good company, good discourse. I understand the King of France
is upon consulting his divines upon the old question, what the power of
the Pope is? and do intend to make war against him, unless he do right
him for the wrong his Embassador received;

     [On the 20th of August, the Duc de Crequi, then French ambassador at
     Rome, was insulted by the Corsican armed police, a force whose
     ignoble duty it was to assist the Sbirri; and the pope, Alexander
     VII., at first refused reparation for the affront offered to the
     French.  Louis, as in the case of D'Estrades, took prompt measures.
     He ordered the papal nuncio forthwith to quit France; he seized upon
     Avignon, and his army prepared to enter Italy.  Alexander found it
     necessary to submit.  In fulfilment of a treaty signed at Pisa in
     1664, Cardinal Chigi, the pope's nephew, came to Paris, to tender
     the pope's apology to Louis.  The guilty individuals were punished;
     the Corsicans banished for ever from the Roman States; and in front
     of the guard-house which they had occupied a pyramid was erected,
     bearing an inscription which embodied the pope's apology.  This
     pyramid Louis permitted Clement IX. to destroy on his accession.-B.]

and banish the Cardinall Imperiall,

     [Lorenzo Imperiali, of Genoa.  He had been appointed Governor of
     Rome by Innocent X., and he had acted in that capacity at
     the time of the tumult.--B.]

which I understand this day is not meant the Cardinall belonging or
chosen by the Emperor, but the name of his family is Imperiali. Thence
to walk in the Park, which we did two hours, it being a pleasant
sunshine day though cold. Our discourse upon the rise of most men that
we know, and observing them to be the results of chance, not policy, in
any of them, particularly Sir J. Lawson's, from his declaring against
Charles Stuart in the river of Thames, and for the Rump. Thence to my
Lord, who had his ague fit last night, but is now pretty well, and
I staid talking with him an hour alone in his chamber, about sundry
publique and private matters. Among others, he wonders what the project
should be of the Duke's going down to Portsmouth just now with his Lady,
at this time of the year: it being no way, we think, to increase his
popularity, which is not great; nor yet safe to do it, for that reason,
if it would have any such effect. By and by comes in my Lady Wright, and
so I went away, end after talking with Captn. Ferrers, who tells me
of my Lady Castlemaine's and Sir Charles Barkeley being the great
favourites at Court, and growing every day more and more; and that upon
a late dispute between my Lord Chesterfield, that is the Queen's Lord
Chamberlain, and Mr. Edward Montagu, her Master of the Horse, who should
have the precedence in taking the Queen's upperhand abroad out of
the house, which Mr. Montagu challenges, it was given to my Lord
Chesterfield. So that I perceive he goes down the wind in honour as well
as every thing else, every day. So walk to my brother's and talked with
him, who tells me that this day a messenger is come, that tells us how
Collonel Honiwood, who was well yesterday at Canterbury, was flung by
his horse in getting up, and broke his scull, and so is dead. So home
and to the office, despatching some business, and so home to supper, and
then to prayers and to bed.

26th. Up and by water with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, drinking a glass
of wormewood wine at the Stillyard, and so up to the Duke, and with
the rest of the officers did our common service; thence to my Lord
Sandwich's, but he was in bed, and had a bad fit last night, and so I
went to, Westminster Hall, it being Term time, it troubling me to think
that I should have any business there to trouble myself and thoughts
with. Here I met with Monsieur Raby, who is lately come from France.
[He] tells me that my Lord Hinchingbroke and his brother do little
improve there, and are much neglected in their habits and other things;
but I do believe he hath a mind to go over as their tutour, and so I am
not apt to believe what he says therein. But I had a great deal of very
good discourse with him, concerning the difference between the French
and the Pope, and the occasion, which he told me very particularly, and
to my great content; and of most of the chief affairs of France, which
I did enquire: and that the King is a most excellent Prince, doing all
business himself; and that it is true he hath a mistress, Mademoiselle
La Valiere, one of the Princess Henriette's women, that he courts for
his pleasure every other day, but not so as to make him neglect his
publique affairs. He tells me how the King do carry himself nobly to
the relations of the dead Cardinall,--[Cardinal Mazarin died March 9th,
1661.]--and will not suffer one pasquill to come forth against him; and
that he acts by what directions he received from him before his death.
Having discoursed long with him, I took him by coach and set him down at
my Lord Crew's, and myself went and dined at Mr. Povy's, where Orlando
Massam, Mr. Wilks, a Wardrobe man, myself and Mr. Gawden, and had just
such another dinner as I had the other day there. But above all things
I do the most admire his piece of perspective especially, he opening me
the closett door, and there I saw that there is nothing but only a plain
picture hung upon the wall. After dinner Mr. Gauden and I to settle the
business of the Tangier victualling, which I perceive none of them yet
have hitherto understood but myself. Thence by coach to White Hall, and
met upon the Tangier Commission, our greatest business the discoursing
of getting things ready for my Lord Rutherford to go about the middle
of March next, and a proposal of Sir J. Lawson's and Mr. Cholmely's
concerning undertaking the Mole, which is referred to another time. So
by coach home, being melancholy, overcharged with business, and methinks
I fear that I have some ill offices done to Mr. Coventry, or else he
observes that of late I have not despatched business so as I did use to
do, which I confess I do acknowledge. But it may be it is but my fear
only, he is not so fond as he used to be of me. But I do believe that
Sir W. Batten has made him believe that I do too much crow upon having
his kindness, and so he may on purpose to countenance him seem a little
more strange to me, but I will study hard to bring him back again to the
same degree of kindness. So home, and after a little talk with my wife,
to the office, and did a great deal of business there till very late,
and then home to supper and to bed.

27th. Up and to the office, where sat till two o'clock, and then home
to dinner, whither by and by comes Mr. Creed, and he and I talked of our
Tangier business, and do find that there is nothing in the world done
with true integrity, but there is design along with it, as in my
Lord Rutherford, who designs to have the profit of victualling of the
garrison himself, and others to have the benefit of making the Mole, so
that I am almost discouraged from coming any more to the Committee, were
it not that it will possibly hereafter bring me to some acquaintance of
great men. Then to the office again, where very busy till past ten
at night, and so home to supper and to bed. I have news this day from
Cambridge that my brother hath had his bachelor's cap put on; but that
which troubles me is, that he hath the pain of the stone, and makes
bloody water with great pain, it beginning just as mine did. I pray God
help him.

28th. Up and all the morning at my office doing business, and at home
seeing my painters' work measured. So to dinner and abroad with my
wife, carrying her to Unthank's, where she alights, and I to my Lord
Sandwich's, whom I find missing his ague fit to-day, and is pretty well,
playing at dice (and by this I see how time and example may alter a man;
he being now acquainted with all sorts of pleasures and vanities, which
heretofore he never thought of nor loved, nor, it may be, hath allowed)
with Ned Pickering and his page Laud. Thence to the Temple to my cozen
Roger Pepys, and thence to Serjt. Bernard to advise with him and retain
him against my uncle, my heart and head being very heavy with the
business. Thence to Wotton's, the shoemaker, and there bought another
pair of new boots, for the other I bought my last would not fit me, and
here I drank with him and his wife, a pretty woman, they broaching a
vessel of syder a-purpose for me. So home, and there found my wife come
home, and seeming to cry; for bringing home in a coach her new ferrandin

     [Ferrandin, which was sometimes spelt farendon, was a stuff made of
     silk mixed with some other material, like what is now called poplin.
     Both mohair and farendon are generally cheap materials; for in the
     case of Manby v. Scott, decided in the Exchequer Chamber in 1663,
     and reported in the first volume of "Modern Reports," the question
     being as to the liability of a husband to pay for goods supplied
     against his consent to his wife, who had separated from him, Mr.
     Justice Hyde (whose judgment is most amusing) observes, in putting
     various supposed cases, that "The wife will have a velvet gown and a
     satin petticoat, and the husband thinks a mohair or farendon for a
     gown, and watered tabby for a petticoat, is as fashionable, and
     fitter for her quality."--B.]

waistecoate, in Cheapside, a man asked her whether that was the way to
the Tower; and while she was answering him, another, on the other side,
snatched away her bundle out of her lap, and could not be recovered, but
ran away with it, which vexes me cruelly, but it cannot be helped. So to
my office, and there till almost 12 at night with Mr. Lewes, learning
to understand the manner of a purser's account, which is very hard and
little understood by my fellow officers, and yet mighty necessary. So at
last with great content broke up and home to supper and bed.

29th. Lay chiding, and then pleased with my wife in bed, and did
consent to her having a new waistcoate made her for that which she lost
yesterday. So to the office, and sat all the morning. At noon dined with
Mr. Coventry at Sir J. Minnes his lodgings, the first time that ever I
did yet, and am sorry for doing it now, because of obliging me to do the
like to him again. Here dined old Captn. Marsh of the Tower with us.
So to visit Sir W. Pen, and then to the office, and there late upon
business by myself, my wife being sick to-day. So home and to supper and
to bed.

30th. A solemn fast for the King's murther, and we were forced to keep
it more than we would have done, having forgot to take any victuals into
the house. I to church in the forenoon, and Mr. Mills made a good sermon
upon David's heart smiting him for cutting off the garment of Saul.

     [Samuel, chap.  xxiv.  v. 5, "And it came to pass afterward, that
     David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt."]

Home, and whiled away some of the afternoon at home talking with my
wife. So to my office, and all alone making up my month's accounts,
which to my great trouble I find that I am got no further than L640.
But I have had great expenses this month. I pray God the next may be
a little better, as I hope it will. In the evening my manuscript is
brought home handsomely bound, to my full content; and now I think I
have a better collection in reference to the Navy, and shall have by
the time I have filled it, than any of my predecessors. So home and eat
something such as we have, bread and butter and milk, and so to bed.

31st. Up and to my office, and there we sat till noon. I home to dinner,
and there found my plate of the Soverayne with the table to it come from
Mr. Christopher Pett, of which I am very glad. So to dinner late, and
not very good, only a rabbit not half roasted, which made me angry with
my wife. So to the office, and there till late, busy all the while. In
the evening examining my wife's letter intended to my Lady, and another
to Mademoiselle; they were so false spelt that I was ashamed of them,
and took occasion to fall out about them with my wife, and so she wrote
none, at which, however, I was, sorry, because it was in answer to a
letter of Madam about business. Late home to supper and to bed.




FEBRUARY 1662-1663

February 1st (Lord's day). Up and to church, where Mr. Mills, a good
sermon, and so home and had a good dinner with my wife, with which I was
pleased to see it neatly done, and this troubled me to think of parting
with Jane, that is come to be a very good cook. After dinner walked to
my Lord Sandwich, and staid with him in the chamber talking almost all
the afternoon, he being not yet got abroad since his sickness. Many
discourses we had; but, among others, how Sir R. Bernard is turned out
of his Recordership of Huntingdon by the Commissioners for Regulation,
&c., at which I am troubled, because he, thinking it is done by my Lord
Sandwich, will act some of his revenge, it is likely, upon me in my
business, so that I must cast about me to get some other counsel to rely
upon. In the evening came Mr. Povey and others to see my Lord, and they
gone, my Lord and I and Povey fell to the business of Tangier, as to
the victualling, and so broke up, and I, it being a fine frost, my boy
lighting me I walked home, and after supper up to prayers, and then
alone with my wife and Jane did fall to tell her what I did expect would
become of her since, after so long being my servant, she had carried
herself so as to make us be willing to put her away, and desired God to
bless [her], but bid her never to let me hear what became of her,
for that I could never pardon ingratitude. So I to bed, my mind
much troubled for the poor girl that she leaves us, and yet she not
submitting herself, for some words she spoke boldly and yet I believe
innocently and out of familiarity to her mistress about us weeks ago, I
could not recall my words that she should stay with me. This day Creed
and I walking in White Hall garden did see the King coming privately
from my Lady Castlemaine's; which is a poor thing for a Prince to do;
and I expressed my sense of it to Creed in terms which I should not have
done, but that I believe he is trusty in that point.

2nd. Up, and after paying Jane her wages, I went away, because I could
hardly forbear weeping, and she cried, saying it was not her fault that
she went away, and indeed it is hard to say what it is, but only her not
desiring to stay that she do now go. By coach with Sir J. Minnes and
Sir W. Batten to the Duke; and after discourse as usual with him in his
closett, I went to my Lord's: the King and Duke being gone to chappell,
it being collar-day, it being Candlemas-day; where I staid with him a
while until towards noon, there being Jonas Moore talking about some
mathematical businesses, and thence I walked at noon to Mr. Povey's,
where Mr. Gawden met me, and after a neat and plenteous dinner as is
usual, we fell to our victualling business, till Mr. Gawden and I did
almost fall out, he defending himself in the readiness of his provision,
when I know that the ships everywhere stay for them. Thence Mr. Povey
and I walked to White Hall, it being a great frost still, and after a
turn in the Park seeing them slide, we met at the Committee for Tangier,
a good full Committee, and agreed how to proceed in the dispatching of
my Lord Rutherford, and treating about this business of Mr. Cholmely and
Sir J. Lawson's proposal for the Mole. Thence with Mr. Coventry down to
his chamber, where among other discourse he did tell me how he did make
it not only his desire, but as his greatest pleasure, to make himself
an interest by doing business truly and justly, though he thwarts others
greater than himself, not striving to make himself friends by addresses;
and by this he thinks and observes he do live as contentedly (now
he finds himself secured from fear of want), and, take one time with
another, as void of fear or cares, or more, than they that (as his own
termes were) have quicker pleasures and sharper agonies than he. Thence
walking with Mr. Creed homewards we turned into a house and drank a
cup of Cock ale and so parted, and I to the Temple, where at my cozen
Roger's chamber I met Madam Turner, and after a little stay led her home
and there left her, she and her daughter having been at the play to-day
at the Temple, it being a revelling time with them.

     [The revels were held in the Inner Temple Hall.  The last revel in
     any of the Inns of Court was held in the Inner Temple in 1733.]

Thence called at my brother's, who is at church, at the buriall of young
Cumberland, a lusty young man. So home and there found Jane gone, for
which my wife and I are very much troubled, and myself could hardly
forbear shedding tears for fear the poor wench should come to any ill
condition after her being so long with me. So to my office and setting
papers to rights, and then home to supper and to bed. This day at my
Lord's I sent for Mr. Ashwell, and his wife came to me, and by discourse
I perceive their daughter is very fit for my turn if my family may be as
much for hers, but I doubt it will be to her loss to come to me for so
small wages, but that will be considered of.

3rd. To the office all the morning, at noon to dinner, where Mr. Creed
dined with me, and Mr. Ashwell, with whom after dinner I discoursed
concerning his daughter coming to live with us. I find that his daughter
will be very fit, I think, as any for our turn, but the conditions I
know not what they will be, he leaving it wholly to her, which will be
agreed on a while hence when my wife sees her. After an hour's discourse
after dinner with them, I to my office again, and there about business
of the office till late, and then home to supper and to bed.


4th. Up early and to Mr. Moore, and thence to Mr. Lovell about my law

business, and from him to Paul's School, it being Apposition-day there.
I heard some of their speeches, and they were just as schoolboys' used
to be, of the seven liberal sciences; but I think not so good as ours
were in our time. Away thence and to Bow Church, to the Court of Arches,
where a judge sits, and his proctors about him in their habits, and
their pleadings all in Latin. Here I was sworn to give a true answer to
my uncle's libells, and so paid my fee for swearing, and back again to
Paul's School, and went up to see the head forms posed in Latin, Greek,
and Hebrew, but I think they did not answer in any so well as we did,
only in geography they did pretty well: Dr. Wilkins and Outram were
examiners. So down to the school, where Dr. Crumlum did me much honour
by telling many what a present I had made to the school, shewing my
Stephanus, in four volumes, cost me L4 10s. He also shewed us, upon my
desire, an old edition of the grammar of Colett's, where his epistle
to the children is very pretty; and in rehearsing the creed it is said
"borne of the cleane Virgin Mary." Thence with Mr. Elborough (he being
all of my old acquaintance that I could meet with here) to a cook's shop
to dinner, but I found him a fool, as he ever was, or worse. Thence to
my cozen Roger Pepys and Mr. Phillips about my law businesses, which
stand very bad, and so home to the office, where after doing some
business I went home, where I found our new mayde Mary, that is come in
Jane's place.

5th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and then home
to dinner, and found it so well done, above what I did expect from
my mayde Susan, now Jane is gone, that I did call her in and give her
sixpence. Thence walked to the Temple, and there at my cozen Roger
Pepys's chamber met by appointment with my uncle Thomas and his son
Thomas, and there I shewing them a true state of my uncle's estate as
he has left it with the debts, &c., lying upon it, we did come to some
quiett talk and fair offers against an agreement on both sides, though I
do offer quite to the losing of the profit of the whole estate for 8 or
10 years together, yet if we can gain peace, and set my mind at a little
liberty, I shall be glad of it. I did give them a copy of this state,
and we are to meet tomorrow with their answer. So walked home, it being
a very great frost still, and to my office, there late writing letters
of office business, and so home to supper and to bed.

6th. Up and to my office about business, examining people what they
could swear against Field, and the whole is, that he has called us
cheating rogues and cheating knaves, for which we hope to be even with
him. Thence to Lincoln's Inn Fields; and it being too soon to go to
dinner, I walked up and down, and looked upon the outside of the new
theatre, now a-building in Covent Garden, which will be very fine. And
so to a bookseller's in the Strand, and there bought Hudibras again,
it being certainly some ill humour to be so against that which all the
world cries up to be the example of wit; for which I am resolved once
again to read him, and see whether I can find it or no. So to Mr.
Povy's, and there found them at dinner, and dined there, there being,
among others, Mr. Williamson, Latin Secretary, who, I perceive, is a
pretty knowing man and a scholler, but, it may be, thinks himself to
be too much so. Thence, after dinner, to the Temple, to my cozen Roger
Pepys, where met us my uncle Thomas and his son; and, after many high
demands, we at last came to a kind of agreement upon very hard terms,
which are to be prepared in writing against Tuesday next. But by the
way promising them to pay my cozen Mary's' legacys at the time of her
marriage, they afterwards told me that she was already married, and
married very well, so that I must be forced to pay it in some time. My
cozen Roger was so sensible of our coming to agreement that he could not
forbear weeping, and, indeed, though it is very hard, yet I am glad to
my heart that we are like to end our trouble. So we parted for to-night,
and I to my Lord Sandwich and there staid, there being a Committee to
sit upon the contract for the Mole, which I dare say none of us that
were there understood, but yet they agreed of things as Mr. Cholmely and
Sir J. Lawson demanded, who are the undertakers, and so I left them to
go on to agree, for I understood it not. So home, and being called by a
coachman who had a fare in him, he carried me beyond the Old Exchange,
and there set down his fare, who would not pay him what was his due,
because he carried a stranger with him, and so after wrangling he was
fain to be content with 6d., and being vexed the coachman would not
carry me home a great while, but set me down there for the other 6d.,
but with fair words he was willing to it, and so I came home and to my
office, setting business in order, and so to supper and to bed, my mind
being in disorder as to the greatness of this day's business that I have
done, but yet glad that my trouble therein is like to be over.

7th. Up and to my office, whither by agreement Mr. Coventry came
before the time of sitting to confer about preparing an account of the
extraordinary charge of the Navy since the King's coming, more than is
properly to be applied and called the Navy charge. So by and by we sat,
and so till noon. Then home to dinner, and in the afternoon some of us
met again upon something relating to the victualling, and thence to my
writing of letters late, and making my Alphabet to my new Navy book
very pretty. And so after writing to my father by the post about the
endeavour to come to a composition with my uncle, though a very bad one,
desiring him to be contented therewith, I went home to supper and to
bed.

8th (Lord's day). Up, and it being a very great frost, I walked to White
Hall, and to my Lord Sandwich's by the fireside till chapel time, and so
to chappell, where there preached little Dr. Duport, of Cambridge,
upon Josiah's words,--"But I and my house, we will serve the Lord." But
though a great scholler, he made the most flat dead sermon, both for
matter and manner of delivery, that ever I heard, and very long beyond
his hour, which made it worse. Thence with Mr. Creed to the King's Head
ordinary, where we dined well, and after dinner Sir Thomas Willis and
another stranger, and Creed and I, fell a-talking; they of the errours
and corruption of the Navy, and great expence thereof, not knowing who
I was, which at last I did undertake to confute, and disabuse them: and
they took it very well, and I hope it was to good purpose, they being
Parliament-men. By and by to my Lord's, and with him a good while
talking upon his want of money, and ways of his borrowing some, &c.,
and then by other visitants, I withdrew and away, Creed and I and Captn.
Ferrers to the Park, and there walked finely, seeing people slide, we
talking all the while; and Captn. Ferrers telling me, among other Court
passages, how about a month ago, at a ball at Court, a child was dropped
by one of the ladies in dancing, but nobody knew who, it being taken
up by somebody in their handkercher. The next morning all the Ladies
of Honour appeared early at Court for their vindication, so that nobody
could tell whose this mischance should be. But it seems Mrs. Wells

     [Winifred Wells, maid of honour to the Queen, who figures in the
     "Grammont Memoirs."  The king is supposed to have been father of the
     child.  A similar adventure is told of Mary Kirke (afterwards
     married to Sir Thomas Vernon), who figures in the "Grammont Memoirs"
     as Miss Warmestre.]

fell sick that afternoon, and hath disappeared ever since, so that it is
concluded that it was her. Another story was how my Lady Castlemaine, a
few days since, had Mrs. Stuart to an entertainment, and at night began
a frolique that they two must be married, and married they were, with
ring and all other ceremonies of church service, and ribbands and a sack
posset in bed, and flinging the stocking; but in the close, it is said
that my Lady Castlemaine, who was the bridegroom, rose, and the King
came and took her place with pretty Mrs. Stuart. This is said to be very
true. Another story was how Captain Ferrers and W. Howe both have often,
through my Lady Castlemaine's window, seen her go to bed and Sir Charles
Barkeley in the chamber all the while with her. But the other day Captn.
Ferrers going to Sir Charles to excuse his not being so timely at his
arms the other day, Sir Charles swearing and cursing told him before
a great many other gentlemen that he would not suffer any man of the
King's Guards to be absent from his lodging a night without leave. Not
but that, says he, once a week or so I know a gentleman must go..., and
I am not for denying it to any man, but however he shall be bound to
ask leave to lie abroad, and to give account of his absence, that we
may know what guard the King has to depend upon. The little Duke of
Monmouth, it seems, is ordered to take place of all Dukes, and so to
follow Prince Rupert now, before the Duke of Buckingham, or any else.
Whether the wind and the cold did cause it or no I know not, but having
been this day or two mightily troubled with an itching all over my
body' which I took to be a louse or two that might bite me, I found this
afternoon that all my body is inflamed, and my face in a sad redness and
swelling and pimpled, so that I was before we had done walking not only
sick but ashamed of myself to see myself so changed in my countenance,
so that after we had thus talked we parted and I walked home with much
ado (Captn. Ferrers with me as far as Ludgate Hill towards Mr. Moore
at the Wardrobe), the ways being so full of ice and water by peoples'
trampling. At last got home and to bed presently, and had a very bad
night of it, in great pain in my stomach, and in great fever.

9th. Could not rise and go to the Duke, as I should have done with the
rest, but keep my bed and by the Apothecary's advice, Mr. Battersby,
I am to sweat soundly, and that will carry all this matter away which
nature would of itself eject, but they will assist nature, it being some
disorder given the blood, but by what I know not, unless it be by my
late quantitys of Dantzic-girkins that I have eaten. In the evening came
Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten to see me, and Sir J. Minnes advises
me to the same thing, but would not have me take anything from the
apothecary, but from him, his Venice treacle being better than the
others, which I did consent to and did anon take and fell into a great
sweat, and about 10 or 11 o'clock came out of it and shifted myself, and
slept pretty well alone, my wife lying in the red chamber above.

10th. In the morning most of my disease, that is, itching and pimples,
were gone. In the morning visited by Mr. Coventry and others, and very
glad I am to see that I am so much inquired after and my sickness taken
notice of as I did. I keep my bed all day and sweat again at night, by
which I expect to be very well to-morrow. This evening Sir W. Warren
came himself to the door and left a letter and box for me, and went his
way. His letter mentions his giving me and my wife a pair of gloves;
but, opening the box, we found a pair of plain white gloves for my hand,
and a fair state dish of silver, and cup, with my arms, ready cut upon
them, worth, I believe, about L18, which is a very noble present, and
the best I ever had yet. So after some contentful talk with my wife, she
to bed and I to rest.

11th. Took a clyster in the morning and rose in the afternoon. My wife
and I dined on a pullet and I eat heartily, having eat nothing since
Sunday but water gruel and posset drink, but must needs say that our new
maid Mary has played her part very well in her readiness and discretion
in attending me, of which I am very glad. In the afternoon several
people came to see me, my uncle Thomas, Mr. Creed, Sir J. Minnes (who
has been, God knows to what end, mighty kind to me and careful of me in
my sickness). At night my wife read Sir H. Vane's tryall to me, which
she began last night, and I find it a very excellent thing, worth
reading, and him to have been a very wise man. So to supper and to bed.

12th. Up and find myself pretty well, and so to the office, and there
all the morning. Rose at noon and home to dinner in my green chamber,
having a good fire. Thither there came my wife's brother and brought
Mary Ashwell with him, whom we find a very likely person to please us,
both for person, discourse, and other qualitys. She dined with us, and
after dinner went away again, being agreed to come to us about three
weeks or a month hence. My wife and I well pleased with our choice, only
I pray God I may be able to maintain it. Then came an old man from Mr.
Povy, to give me some advice about his experience in the stone, which I
[am] beholden to him for, and was well pleased with it, his chief remedy
being Castle soap in a posset. Then in the evening to the office, late
writing letters and my Journall since Saturday, and so home to supper
and to bed.

13th. Lay very long with my wife in bed talking with great pleasure,
and then rose. This morning Mr. Cole, our timber merchant, sent me five
couple of ducks. Our maid Susan is very ill, and so the whole trouble of
the house lies upon our maid Mary, who do it very contentedly and mighty
well, but I am sorry she is forced to it. Dined upon one couple of ducks
to-day, and after dinner my wife and I by coach to Tom's, and I to the
Temple to discourse with my cozen Roger Pepys about my law business, and
so back again, it being a monstrous thaw after the long great frost, so
that there is no passing but by coach in the streets, and hardly that.
Took my wife home, and I to my office. Find myself pretty well but
fearful of cold, and so to my office, where late upon business; Mr.
Bland sitting with me, talking of my Lord Windsor's being come home from
Jamaica, unlooked-for; which makes us think that these young Lords are
not fit to do any service abroad, though it is said that he could not
have his health there, but hath razed a fort of the King of Spain upon
Cuba, which is considerable, or said to be so, for his honour. So home
to supper and to bed. This day I bought the second part of Dr. Bates's
Elenchus, which reaches to the fall of Richard, and no further, for
which I am sorry. This evening my wife had a great mind to choose
Valentines against to-morrow, I Mrs. Clerke, or Pierce, she Mr. Hunt or
Captain Ferrers, but I would not because of getting charge both to me
for mine and to them for her, which did not please her.

14th. Up and to my office, where we met and sate all the morning, only
Mr. Coventry, which I think is the first or second time he has missed
since he came to the office, was forced to be absent. So home to dinner,
my wife and I upon a couple of ducks, and then by coach to the Temple,
where my uncle Thomas, and his sons both, and I, did meet at my
cozen Roger's and there sign and seal to an agreement. Wherein I was
displeased at nothing but my cozen Roger's insisting upon my being
obliged to settle upon them as the will do all my uncle's estate that he
has left, without power of selling any for the payment of debts, but I
would not yield to it without leave of selling, my Lord Sandwich himself
and my cozen Thos. Pepys being judges of the necessity thereof, which
was done. One thing more that troubles me was my being forced to promise
to give half of what personal estate could be found more than L372,
which I reported to them, which though I do not know it to be less than
what we really have found, yet he would have been glad to have been at
liberty for that, but at last I did agree to it under my own handwriting
on the backside of the report I did make and did give them of the
estate, and have taken a copy of it upon the backside of one that I
have. All being done I took the father and his son Thos. home by coach,
and did pay them L30, the arrears of the father's annuity, and with
great seeming love parted, and I presently to bed, my head akeing
mightily with the hot dispute I did hold with my cozen Roger and them in
the business.

15th (Lord's day). This morning my wife did wake me being frighted with
the noise I made in my sleep, being a dream that one of our sea maisters
did desire to see the St. John's Isle of my drawing, which methought
I showed him, but methought he did handle it so hard that it put me to
very horrid pain.... Which what a strange extravagant dream it was. So
to sleep again and lay long in bed, and then trimmed by the barber, and
so sending Will to church, myself staid at home, hanging up in my green
chamber my picture of the Soveraigne, and putting some things in order
there. So to dinner, to three more ducks and two teals, my wife and
I. Then to Church, where a dull sermon, and so home, and after walking
about the house awhile discoursing with my wife, I to my office there to
set down something and to prepare businesses for tomorrow, having in the
morning read over my vows, which through sicknesse I could not do the
last Lord's day, and not through forgetfulness or negligence, so that
I hope it is no breach of my vow not to pay my forfeiture. So home, and
after prayers to bed, talking long with my wife and teaching her things
in astronomy.

16th. Up and by coach with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to White
Hall, and, after we had done our usual business with the Duke, to my
Lord Sandwich and by his desire to Sir W. Wheeler, who was brought down
in a sedan chair from his chamber, being lame of the gout, to borrow
L1000 of him for my Lord's occasions, but he gave me a very kind denial
that he could not, but if any body else would, he would be bond with my
Lord for it. So to Westminster Hall, and there find great expectation
what the Parliament will do, when they come two days hence to sit again,
in matters of religion. The great question is, whether the Presbyters
will be contented to have the Papists have the same liberty of
conscience with them, or no, or rather be denied it themselves: and
the Papists, I hear, are very busy designing how to make the Presbyters
consent to take their liberty, and to let them have the same with them,
which some are apt to think they will. It seems a priest was taken
in his vests officiating somewhere in Holborn the other day, and was
committed by Secretary Morris, according to law; and they say the Bishop
of London did give him thanks for it. Thence to my Lord Crew's and dined
there, there being much company, and the above-said matter is now the
present publique discourse. Thence about several businesses to Mr.
Phillips my attorney, to stop all proceedings at law, and so to the
Temple, where at the Solicitor General's I found Mr. Cholmely and Creed
reading to him the agreement for him to put into form about the contract
for the Mole at Tangier, which is done at 13s. the Cubical yard,
though upon my conscience not one of the Committee, besides the parties
concerned, do understand what they do therein, whether they give
too much or too little. Thence with Mr. Creed to see Mr. Moore, who
continues sick still, within doors, and here I staid a good while after
him talking of all the things either business or no that came into my
mind, and so home and to see Sir W. Pen, and sat and played at cards
with him, his daughter, and Mrs. Rooth, and so to my office a while, and
then home and to bed.

17th. Up and to my office, and there we sat all the morning, and at
noon my wife being gone to Chelsey with her brother and sister and Mrs.
Lodum, to see the wassell at the school, where Mary Ashwell is, I took
home Mr. Pett and he dined with me all alone, and much discourse we had
upon the business of the office, and so after dinner broke up and with
much ado, it raining hard, which it has not done a great while now,
but only frost a great while, I got a coach and so to the Temple, where
discoursed with Mr. W. Montagu about borrowing some money for my Lord,
and so by water (where I have not been a good while through cold) to
Westminster to Sir W. Wheeler's, whom I found busy at his own house with
the Commissioners of Sewers, but I spoke to him about my Lord's business
of borrowing money, and so to my Lord of Sandwich, to give him an
account of all, whom I found at cards with Pickering; but he made an end
soon: and so all alone, he and I, after I had given him an account,
he told me he had a great secret to tell me, such as no flesh knew but
himself, nor ought; which was this: that yesterday morning Eschar, Mr.
Edward Montagu's man, did come to him from his master with some of the
Clerks of the Exchequer, for my Lord to sign to their books for the
Embassy money; which my Lord very civilly desired not to do till he had
spoke with his master himself. In the afternoon, my Lord and my Lady
Wright being at cards in his chamber, in comes Mr. Montagu; and desiring
to speak with my Lord at the window in his chamber, he begun to charge
my Lord with the greatest ingratitude in the world: that he that had
received his earldom, garter, L4000 per annum, and whatever he is in the
world, from him, should now study him all the dishonour that he could;
and so fell to tell my Lord, that if he should speak all that he knew of
him, he could do so and so. In a word, he did rip up all that could be
said that was unworthy, and in the basest terms they could be spoken
in. To which my Lord answered with great temper, justifying himself,
but endeavouring to lessen his heat, which was a strange temper in him,
knowing that he did owe all he hath in the world to my Lord, and that he
is now all that he is by his means and favour. But my Lord did forbear
to increase the quarrel, knowing that it would be to no good purpose
for the world to see a difference in the family; but did allay him so
as that he fell to weeping. And after much talk (among other things Mr.
Montagu telling him that there was a fellow in the town, naming me, that
had done ill offices, and that if he knew it to be so, he would have
him cudgelled) my Lord did promise him that, if upon account he saw that
there was not many tradesmen unpaid, he would sign the books; but if
there was, he could not bear with taking too great a debt upon him. So
this day he sent him an account, and a letter assuring him there was not
above L200 unpaid; and so my Lord did sign to the Exchequer books. Upon
the whole, I understand fully what a rogue he is, and how my Lord do
think and will think of him for the future; telling me that thus he
has served his father my Lord Manchester, and his whole family, and now
himself: and which is worst, that he hath abused, and in speeches every
day do abuse, my Lord Chancellor, whose favour he hath lost; and hath
no friend but Sir H. Bennet, and that (I knowing the rise of the
friendship) only from the likeness of their pleasures, and acquaintance,
and concernments, they have in the same matters of lust and baseness;
for which, God forgive them! But he do flatter himself, from promises of
Sir H. Bennet, that he shall have a pension of L2000 per annum, and be
made an Earl. My Lord told me he expected a challenge from him, but told
me there was no great fear of him, for there was no man lies under such
an imputation as he do in the business of Mr. Cholmely, who, though a
simple sorry fellow, do brave him and struts before him with the Queen,
to the sport and observation of the whole Court. He did keep my Lord at
the window, thus reviling and braving him above an hour, my Lady Wright
being by; but my Lord tells me she could not hear every word, but did
well know what their discourse was; she could hear enough to know that.
So that he commands me to keep it as the greatest secret in the world,
and bids me beware of speaking words against Mr. Montagu, for fear I
should suffer by his passion thereby. After he had told me this I took
coach and home, where I found my wife come home and in bed with her
sister in law in the chamber with her, she not being able to stay to see
the wassel, being so ill..., which I was sorry for. Hither we sent for
her sister's viall, upon which she plays pretty well for a girl, but
my expectation is much deceived in her, not only for that, but in her
spirit, she being I perceive a very subtle witty jade, and one that will
give her husband trouble enough as little as she is, whereas I took her
heretofore for a very child and a simple fool. I played also, which I
have not done this long time before upon any instrument, and at last
broke up and I to my office a little while, being fearful of being too
much taken with musique, for fear of returning to my old dotage thereon,
and so neglect my business as I used to do. Then home and to bed. Coming
home I brought Mr. Pickering as far as the Temple, who tells me the
story is very true of a child being dropped at the ball at Court; and
that the King had it in his closett a week after, and did dissect it;
and making great sport of it, said that in his opinion it must have been
a month and three hours old; and that, whatever others think, he hath
the greatest loss (it being a boy, as he says), that hath lost a subject
by the business. He tells me, too, that the other story, of my Lady
Castlemaine's and Stuart's marriage, is certain, and that it was in
order to the King's coming to Stuart, as is believed generally. He tells
me that Sir H. Bennet is a Catholique, and how all the Court almost is
changed to the worse since his coming in, they being afeard of him. And
that the Queen-Mother's Court is now the greatest of all; and that our
own Queen hath little or no company come to her, which I know also to be
very true, and am sorry to see it.

18th. Up, leaving my wife sick as last night in bed. I to my office all
the morning, casting up with Captain Cocke their accounts of 500 tons
of hemp brought from Riga, and bought by him and partners upon account,
wherein are many things worth my knowledge. So at noon to dinner, taking
Mr. Hater with me because of losing them, and in the afternoon he and
I alone at the office, finishing our account of the extra charge of the
Navy, not properly belonging to the Navy, since the King's coming in to
Christmas last; and all extra things being abated, I find that the true
charge of the Navy to that time hath been after the rate of L374,743
a-year. I made an end by eleven o'clock at night, and so home to bed
almost weary. This day the Parliament met again, after their long
prorogation; but I know not any thing what they have done, being within
doors all day.

19th. Up and to my office, where abundance of business all the morning.
Dined by my wife's bedside, she not being yet well. We fell out almost
upon my discourse of delaying the having of Ashwell, where my wife
believing that I have a mind to have Pall, which I have not, though I
could wish she did deserve to be had. So to my office, where by and by
we sat, this afternoon being the first we have met upon a great while,
our times being changed because of the parliament sitting. Being rose, I
to my office till twelve at night, drawing out copies of the overcharge
of the Navy, one to send to Mr. Coventry early to-morrow. So home and to
bed, being weary, sleepy, and my eyes begin to fail me, looking so long
by candlelight upon white paper. This day I read the King's speech to
the Parliament yesterday; which is very short, and not very obliging;
but only telling them his desire to have a power of indulging tender
consciences, not that he will yield to have any mixture in the
uniformity of the Church's discipline; and says the same for the
Papists, but declares against their ever being admitted to have any
offices or places of trust in the kingdom; but, God knows, too many
have.

20th. Up and by water with Commissioner Pett to Deptford, and there
looked over the yard, and had a call, wherein I am very highly pleased
with our new manner of call-books, being my invention. Thence thinking
to have gone down to Woolwich in the Charles pleasure boat, but she
run aground, it being almost low water, and so by oars to the town, and
there dined, and then to the yard at Mr. Ackworth's, discoursing with
the officers of the yard about their stores of masts, which was our
chief business, and having done something therein, took boat and to the
pleasure boat, which was come down to fetch us back, and I could have
been sick if I would in going, the wind being very fresh, but very
pleasant it was, and the first time I have sailed in any one of them. It
carried us to Cuckold's Point, and so by oars to the Temple, it raining
hard, where missed speaking with my cosen Roger, and so walked home and
to my office; there spent the night till bed time, and so home to supper
and to bed.

21st. Up and to the office, where Sir J. Minnes (most of the rest being
at the Parliament-house), all the morning answering petitions and
other business. Towards noon there comes a man in as if upon ordinary
business, and shows me a writ from the Exchequer, called a Commission
of Rebellion, and tells me that I am his prisoner in Field's business;
which methought did strike me to the heart, to think that we could not
sit in the middle of the King's business. I told him how and where we
were employed, and bid him have a care; and perceiving that we were
busy, he said he would, and did withdraw for an hour: in which time Sir
J. Minnes took coach and to Court, to see what he could do from thence;
and our solicitor against Field came by chance and told me that he would
go and satisfy the fees of the Court, and would end the business. So he
went away about that, and I staid in my closett, till by and by the man
and four more of his fellows came to know what I would do; I told them
stay till I heard from the King or my Lord Chief Baron, to both whom
I had now sent. With that they consulted, and told me that if I would
promise to stay in the house they would go and refresh themselves, and
come again, and know what answer I had: so they away, and I home to
dinner, whither by chance comes Mr. Hawley and dined with me. Before I
had dined, the bayleys come back again with the constable, and at the
office knock for me, but found me not there; and I hearing in what
manner they were come, did forbear letting them know where I was; so
they stood knocking and enquiring for me. By and by at my parler-window
comes Sir W. Batten's Mungo, to tell me that his master and lady would
have me come to their house through Sir J. Minnes's lodgings, which I
could not do; but, however, by ladders, did get over the pale between
our yards, and so to their house, where I found them (as they have
reason) to be much concerned for me, my lady especially. The fellows
staid in the yard swearing with one or two constables, and some time we
locked them into the yard, and by and by let them out again, and so kept
them all the afternoon, not letting them see me, or know where I was.
One time I went up to the top of Sir W. Batten's house, and out of one
of their windows spoke to my wife out of one of ours; which methought,
though I did it in mirth, yet I was sad to think what a sad thing it
would be for me to be really in that condition. By and by comes Sir J.
Minnes, who (like himself and all that he do) tells us that he can do
no good, but that my Lord Chancellor wonders that we did not cause the
seamen to fall about their ears: which we wished we could have done
without our being seen in it; and Captain Grove being there, he did give
them some affront, and would have got some seamen to have drubbed them,
but he had not time, nor did we think it fit to have done it, they
having executed their commission; but there was occasion given that he
did draw upon one of them and he did complain that Grove had pricked him
in the breast, but no hurt done; but I see that Grove would have done
our business to them if we had bid him. By and by comes Mr. Clerke, our
solicitor, who brings us a release from our adverse atturney, we paying
the fees of the commission, which comes to five marks, and pay the
charges of these fellows, which are called the commissioners, but are
the most rake-shamed rogues that ever I saw in my life; so he showed
them this release, and they seemed satisfied, and went away with him to
their atturney to be paid by him. But before they went, Sir W. Batten
and my lady did begin to taunt them, but the rogues answered them as
high as themselves, and swore they would come again, and called me rogue
and rebel, and they would bring the sheriff and untile his house, before
he should harbour a rebel in his house, and that they would be here
again shortly. Well, at last they went away, and I by advice took
occasion to go abroad, and walked through the street to show myself
among the neighbours, that they might not think worse than the business
is. Being met by Captn. Taylor and Bowry, whose ship we have hired
for Tangier, they walked along with me to Cornhill talking about their
business, and after some difference about their prices we agreed, and so
they would have me to a tavern, and there I drank one glass of wine
and discoursed of something about freight of a ship that may bring me
a little money, and so broke up, and I home to Sir W. Batten's again,
where Sir J. Lawson, Captain Allen, Spragg, and several others, and all
our discourse about the disgrace done to our office to be liable to this
trouble, which we must get removed. Hither comes Mr. Clerke by and by,
and tells me that he hath paid the fees of the Court for the commission;
but the men are not contented with under; L5 for their charges, which
he will not give them, and therefore advises me not to stir abroad till
Monday that he comes or sends to me again, whereby I shall not be
able to go to White Hall to the Duke of York, as I ought. Here I staid
vexing, and yet pleased to see every body, man and woman, my Lady and
Mr. Turner especially, for me, till 10 at night; and so home, where my
people are mightily surprized to see this business, but it troubles me
not very much, it being nothing touching my particular person or estate.
Being in talk to-day with Sir W. Batten he tells me that little is done
yet in the Parliament-house, but only this day it was moved and ordered
that all the members of the House do subscribe to the renouncing of the
Covenant, which is thought will try some of them. There is also a bill
brought in for the wearing of nothing but cloth or stuffs of our own
manufacture, and is likely to be passed. Among other talk this evening,
my lady did speak concerning Commissioner Pett's calling the present
King bastard, and other high words heretofore; and Sir W. Batten did
tell us, that he did give the Duke or Mr. Coventry an account of that
and other like matters in writing under oath, of which I was ashamed,
and for which I was sorry, but I see there is an absolute hatred never
to be altered there, and Sir J. Minnes, the old coxcomb, has got it by
the end, which troubles me for the sake of the King's service, though
I do truly hate the expressions laid to him. To my office and set down
this day's journall, and so home with my mind out of order, though not
very sad with it, but ashamed for myself something, and for the honour
of the office much more. So home and to bed.

22d (Lord's day). Lay long in bed and went not out all day; but after
dinner to Sir W. Batten's and Sir W. Pen's, where discoursing much of
yesterday's trouble and scandal; but that which troubled me most was
Sir J. Minnes coming from Court at night, and instead of bringing great
comfort from thence (but I expected no better from him), he tells me
that the Duke and Mr. Coventry make no great matter of it. So at night
discontented to prayers, and to bed.

23d. Up by times; and not daring to go by land, did (Griffin going along
with me for fear), slip to White Hall by water; where to Mr. Coventry,
and, as we used to do, to the Duke; the other of my fellows being come.
But we said nothing of our business, the Duke being sent for to the
King, that he could not stay to speak with us. This morning came my Lord
Windsor to kiss the Duke's hand, being returned from Jamaica. He tells
the Duke, that from such a degree of latitude going thither he begun to
be sick, and was never well till his coming so far back again, and then
presently begun to be well. He told the Duke of their taking the fort of
St. Jago, upon Cuba, by his men; but, upon the whole, I believe that he
did matters like a young lord, and was weary of being upon service out
of his own country, where he might have pleasure. For methought it was a
shame to see him this very afternoon, being the first day of his coming
to town, to be at a playhouse. Thence to my Lord Sandwich, who though he
has been abroad again two or three days is falling ill again, and is let
blood this morning, though I hope it is only a great cold that he has
got. It was a great trouble to me (and I had great apprehensions of
it) that my Lord desired me to go to Westminster Hall, to the
Parliament-house door, about business; and to Sir Wm. Wheeler, which I
told him I would do, but durst not go for fear of being taken by these
rogues; but was forced to go to White Hall and take boat, and so land
below the Tower at the Iron-gate; and so the back way over Little Tower
Hill; and with my cloak over my face, took one of the watermen along
with me, and staid behind a wall in the New-buildings behind our garden,
while he went to see whether any body stood within the Merchants' Gate,
under which we pass to go into our garden, and there standing but a
little dirty boy before the gate, did make me quake and sweat to think
he might be a Trepan. But there was nobody, and so I got safe into the
garden, and coming to open my office door, something behind it fell
in the opening, which made me start. So that God knows in what a sad
condition I should be in if I were truly in the condition that many a
poor man is for debt: and therefore ought to bless God that I have
no such reall reason, and to endeavour to keep myself, by my good
deportment and good husbandry, out of any such condition. At home I
found Mr. Creed with my wife, and so he dined with us, I finding by a
note that Mr. Clerke in my absence hath left here, that I am free; and
that he hath stopped all matters in Court; I was very glad of it, and
immediately had a light thought of taking pleasure to rejoice my heart,
and so resolved to take my wife to a play at Court to-night, and the
rather because it is my birthday, being this day thirty years old, for
which let me praise God. While my wife dressed herself, Creed and
I walked out to see what play was acted to-day, and we find it "The
Slighted Mayde." But, Lord! to see that though I did know myself to be
out of danger, yet I durst not go through the street, but round by the
garden into Tower Street. By and by took coach, and to the Duke's house,
where we saw it well acted, though the play hath little good in it,
being most pleased to see the little girl dance in boy's apparel, she
having very fine legs, only bends in the hams, as I perceive all women
do. The play being done, we took coach and to Court, and there got good
places, and saw "The Wilde Gallant," performed by the King's house, but
it was ill acted, and the play so poor a thing as I never saw in my life
almost, and so little answering the name, that from beginning to end,
I could not, nor can at this time, tell certainly which was the Wild
Gallant. The King did not seem pleased at all, all the whole play, nor
any body else, though Mr. Clerke whom we met here did commend it to
us. My Lady Castlemaine was all worth seeing tonight, and little
Steward.--[Mrs. Stuart]--Mrs. Wells do appear at Court again, and looks
well; so that, it may be, the late report of laying the dropped child to
her was not true. It being done, we got a coach and got well home about
12 at night. Now as my mind was but very ill satisfied with these two
plays themselves, so was I in the midst of them sad to think of the
spending so much money and venturing upon the breach of my vow, which
I found myself sorry for, I bless God, though my nature would well be
contented to follow the pleasure still. But I did make payment of my
forfeiture presently, though I hope to save it back again by forbearing
two plays at Court for this one at the Theatre, or else to forbear that
to the Theatre which I am to have at Easter. But it being my birthday
and my day of liberty regained to me, and lastly, the last play that is
likely to be acted at Court before Easter, because of the Lent coming
in, I was the easier content to fling away so much money. So to bed.
This day I was told that my Lady Castlemaine hath all the King's
Christmas presents, made him by the peers, given to her, which is a
most abominable thing; and that at the great ball she was much richer in
jewells than the Queen and Duchess put both together.

24th. Slept hard till 8 o'clock, then waked by Mr. Clerke's being come
to consult me about Field's business, which we did by calling him up
to my bedside, and he says we shall trounce him. Then up, and to
the office, and at 11 o'clock by water to Westminster, and to Sir W.
Wheeler's about my Lord's borrowing of money that I was lately upon with
him, and then to my Lord, who continues ill, but will do well I doubt
not. Among other things, he tells me that he hears the Commons will not
agree to the King's late declaration, nor will yield that the Papists
have any ground given them to raise themselves up again in England,
which I perceive by my Lord was expected at Court. Thence home again
by water presently, and with a bad dinner, being not looked for, to
the office, and there we sat, and then Captn. Cocke and I upon his hemp
accounts till 9 at night, and then, I not very well, home to supper and
to bed. My late distemper of heat and itching being come upon me again,
so that I must think of sweating again as I did before.

25th. Up and to my office, where with Captain Cocke making an end of his
last night's accounts till noon, and so home to dinner, my wife being
come in from laying out about L4 in provision of several things against
Lent. In the afternoon to the Temple, my brother's, the Wardrobe, to
Mr. Moore, and other places, called at about small businesses, and so
at night home to my office and then to supper and to bed. The Commons in
Parliament, I hear, are very high to stand to the Act of Uniformity, and
will not indulge the Papists (which is endeavoured by the Court Party)
nor the Presbyters.

26th. Up and drinking a draft of wormewood wine with Sir W. Batten at
the Steelyard, he and I by water to the Parliament-house: he went
in, and I walked up and down the Hall. All the news is the great odds
yesterday in the votes between them that are for the Indulgence to the
Papists and Presbyters, and those that are against it, which did carry
it by 200 against 30. And pretty it is to consider how the King would
appear to be a stiff Protestant and son of the Church; and yet would
appear willing to give a liberty to these people, because of his promise
at Breda. And yet all the world do believe that the King would not have
this liberty given them at all. Thence to my Lord's, who, I hear, has
his ague again, for which I am sorry, and Creed and I to the King's Head
ordinary, where much good company. Among the rest a young gallant lately
come from France, who was full of his French, but methought not very
good, but he had enough to make him think himself a wise man a great
while. Thence by water from the New Exchange home to the Tower, and so
sat at the office, and then writing letters till 11 at night. Troubled
this evening that my wife is not come home from Chelsey, whither she
is gone to see the play at the school where Ashwell is, but she came
at last, it seems, by water, and tells me she is much pleased with
Ashwell's acting and carriage, which I am glad of. So home and to supper
and bed.

27th. Up and to my office, whither several persons came to me about
office business. About 11 o'clock, Commissioner Pett and I walked to
Chyrurgeon's Hall (we being all invited thither, and promised to dine
there); where we were led into the Theatre; and by and by comes the
reader, Dr. Tearne, with the Master and Company, in a very handsome
manner: and all being settled, he begun his lecture, this being the
second upon the kidneys, ureters, &c., which was very fine; and his
discourse being ended, we walked into the Hall, and there being great
store of company, we had a fine dinner and good learned company, many
Doctors of Phisique, and we used with extraordinary great respect. Among
other observables we drank the King's health out of a gilt cup given by
King Henry VIII. to this Company, with bells hanging at it, which every
man is to ring by shaking after he hath drunk up the whole cup. There is
also a very excellent piece of the King, done by Holbein, stands up in
the Hall, with the officers of the Company kneeling to him to receive
their Charter. After dinner Dr. Scarborough took some of his friends,
and I went along with them, to see the body alone, which we did, which
was a lusty fellow, a seaman, that was hanged for a robbery. I did touch
the dead body with my bare hand: it felt cold, but methought it was
a very unpleasant sight. It seems one Dillon, of a great family, was,
after much endeavours to have saved him, hanged with a silken halter
this Sessions (of his own preparing), not for honour only, but it seems,
it being soft and sleek, it do slip close and kills, that is, strangles
presently: whereas, a stiff one do not come so close together, and so
the party may live the longer before killed. But all the Doctors at
table conclude, that there is no pain at all in hanging, for that it do
stop the circulation of the blood; and so stops all sense and motion in
an instant. Thence we went into a private room, where I perceive they
prepare the bodies, and there were the kidneys, ureters [&c.], upon
which he read to-day, and Dr. Scarborough upon my desire and the
company's did show very clearly the manner of the disease of the stone
and the cutting and all other questions that I could think of... how the
water [comes] into the bladder through the three skins or coats just as
poor Dr. Jolly has heretofore told me. Thence with great satisfaction
to me back to the Company, where I heard good discourse, and so to the
afternoon Lecture upon the heart and lungs, &c., and that being done we
broke up, took leave, and back to the office, we two, Sir W. Batten, who
dined here also, being gone before. Here late, and to Sir W. Batten's
to speak upon some business, where I found Sir J. Minnes pretty well
fuddled I thought: he took me aside to tell me how being at my Lord
Chancellor's to-day, my Lord told him that there was a Great Seal
passing for Sir W. Pen, through the impossibility of the Comptroller's
duty to be performed by one man; to be as it were joynt-comptroller with
him, at which he is stark mad; and swears he will give up his place,
and do rail at Sir W. Pen the cruellest; he I made shift to encourage
as much as I could, but it pleased me heartily to hear him rail against
him, so that I do see thoroughly that they are not like to be great
friends, for he cries out against him for his house and yard and God
knows what. For my part, I do hope, when all is done, that my following
my business will keep me secure against all their envys. But to see
how the old man do strut, and swear that he understands all his duty as
easily as crack a nut, and easier, he told my Lord Chancellor, for
his teeth are gone; and that he understands it as well as any man in
England; and that he will never leave to record that he should be said
to be unable to do his duty alone; though, God knows, he cannot do it
more than a child. All this I am glad to see fall out between them and
myself safe, and yet I hope the King's service well done for all
this, for I would not that should be hindered by any of our private
differences. So to my office, and then home to supper and to bed.

28th. Waked with great pain in my right ear (which I find myself much
subject to) having taken cold. Up and to my office, where we sat all
the morning, and I dined with Sir W. Batten by chance, being in business
together about a bargain of New England masts. Then to the Temple to
meet my uncle Thomas, who I found there, but my cozen Roger not
being come home I took boat and to Westminster, where I found him in
Parliament this afternoon. The House have this noon been with the
King to give him their reasons for refusing to grant any indulgence
to Presbyters or Papists; which he, with great content and seeming
pleasure, took, saying, that he doubted not but he and they should
agree in all things, though there may seem a difference in judgement,
he having writ and declared for an indulgence: and that he did believe
never prince was happier in a House of Commons, than he was in them.
Thence he and I to my Lord Sandwich, who continues troubled with his
cold. Our discourse most upon the outing of Sir R. Bernard, and my
Lord's being made Recorder of Huntingdon in his stead, which he seems
well contented with, saying, that it may be for his convenience to have
the chief officer of the town dependent upon him, which is very true.
Thence he and I to the Temple, but my uncle being gone we parted, and I
walked home, and to my office, and at nine o'clock had a good supper of
an oxe's cheek, of my wife's dressing and baking, and so to my office
again till past eleven at night, making up my month's account, and find
that I am at a stay with what I was last, that is L640. So home and to
bed. Coming by, I put in at White Hall, and at the Privy Seal I did see
the docquet by which Sir W. Pen is made the Comptroller's assistant, as
Sir J. Minnes told me last night, which I must endeavour to prevent.




MARCH 1662-1663

March 1st (Lord's day). Up and walked to White Hall, to the Chappell,
where preached one Dr. Lewes, said heretofore to have been a great witt;
but he read his sermon every word, and that so brokenly and so low, that
nobody could hear at any distance, nor I anything worth hearing that
sat near. But, which was strange, he forgot to make any prayer before
sermon, which all wonder at, but they impute it to his forgetfulness.
After sermon a very fine anthem; so I up into the house among the
courtiers, seeing the fine ladies, and, above all, my Lady Castlemaine,
who is above all, that only she I can observe for true beauty. The King
and Queen being set to dinner I went to Mr. Fox's, and there dined with
him. Much genteel company, and, among other things, I hear for certain
that peace is concluded between the King of France and the Pope; and
also I heard the reasons given by our Parliament yesterday to the King
why they dissent from him in matter of Indulgence, which are very good
quite through, and which I was glad to hear. Thence to my Lord Sandwich,
who continues with a great cold, locked up; and, being alone, we fell
into discourse of my uncle the Captain's death and estate, and I took
the opportunity of telling my Lord how matters stand, and read his
will, and told him all, what a poor estate he hath left, at all which he
wonders strangely, which he may well do. Thence after singing some new
tunes with W. Howe I walked home, whither came Will. Joyce, whom I have
not seen here a great while, nor desire it a great while again, he is so
impertinent a coxcomb, and yet good natured, and mightily concerned for
my brother's late folly in his late wooing at the charge to no purpose,
nor could in any probability a it. He gone, we all to bed, without
prayers, it being washing day to-morrow.

2nd. Up early and by water with Commissioner Pett to Deptford, and there
took the Jemmy yacht (that the King and the Lords virtuosos built the
other day) down to Woolwich, where we discoursed of several matters both
there and at the Ropeyard, and so to the yacht again, and went down four
or five miles with extraordinary pleasure, it being a fine day, and a
brave gale of wind, and had some oysters brought us aboard newly taken,
which were excellent, and ate with great pleasure. There also coming
into the river two Dutchmen, we sent a couple of men on board and bought
three Hollands cheeses, cost 4d. a piece, excellent cheeses, whereof I
had two and Commissioner Pett one. So back again to Woolwich, and going
aboard the Hulke to see the manner of the iron bridles, which we are
making of for to save cordage to put to the chain, I did fall from the
shipside into the ship (Kent), and had like to have broke my left hand,
but I only sprained some of my fingers, which, when I came ashore I sent
to Mrs. Ackworth for some balsam, and put to my hand, and was pretty
well within a little while after. We dined at the White Hart with
several officers with us, and after dinner went and saw the Royal James
brought down to the stern of the Docke (the main business we came for),
and then to the Ropeyard, and saw a trial between Riga hemp and a sort
of Indian grass, which is pretty strong, but no comparison between it
and the other for strength, and it is doubtful whether it will take
tarre or no. So to the yacht again, and carried us almost to London, so
by our oars home to the office, and thence Mr. Pett and I to Mr. Grant's
coffee-house, whither he and Sir J. Cutler came to us and had much
discourse, mixed discourse, and so broke up, and so home where I found
my poor wife all alone at work, and the house foul, it being washing
day, which troubled me, because that tomorrow I must be forced to have
friends at dinner. So to my office, and then home to supper and to bed.

3rd (Shrove Tuesday). Up and walked to the Temple, and by promise
calling Commissioner Pett, he and I to White Hall to give Mr. Coventry
an account of what we did yesterday. Thence I to the Privy Seal Office,
and there got a copy of Sir W. Pen's grant to be assistant to Sir J.
Minnes, Comptroller, which, though there be not much in it, yet I intend
to stir up Sir J. Minnes to oppose, only to vex Sir W. Pen. Thence by
water home, and at noon, by promise, Mrs. Turner and her daughter, and
Mrs. Morrice, came along with Roger Pepys to dinner. We were as merry
as I could be, having but a bad dinner for them; but so much the better,
because of the dinner which I must have at the end of this month. And
here Mrs. The. shewed me my name upon her breast as her Valentine, which
will cost me 20s. After dinner I took them down into the wine-cellar,
and broached my tierce of claret for them. Towards the evening we
parted, and I to the office awhile, and then home to supper and to bed,
the sooner having taken some cold yesterday upon the water, which brings
me my usual pain. This afternoon Roger Pepys tells me, that for certain
the King is for all this very highly incensed at the Parliament's late
opposing the Indulgence; which I am sorry for, and fear it will breed
great discontent.

4th. Lay long talking with my wife about ordering things in our family,
and then rose and to my office, there collecting an alphabet for my
Navy Manuscript, which, after a short dinner, I returned to and by night
perfected to my great content. So to other business till 9 at night, and
so home to supper and to bed.

5th. Rose this morning early, only to try with intention to begin my
last summer's course in rising betimes. So to my office a little, and
then to Westminster by coach with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, in
our way talking of Sir W. Pen's business of his patent, which I think
I have put a stop to wholly, for Sir J. Minnes swears he will never
consent to it. Here to the Lobby, and spoke with my cozen Roger, who is
going to Cambridge to-morrow. In the Hall I do hear that the Catholiques
are in great hopes for all this, and do set hard upon the King to get
Indulgence. Matters, I hear, are all naught in Ireland, and that the
Parliament has voted, and the people, that is, the Papists, do cry out
against the Commissioners sent by the King; so that they say the English
interest will be lost there. Thence I went to see my Lord Sandwich, who
I found very ill, and by his cold being several nights hindered from
sleep, he is hardly able to open his eyes, and is very weak and sad
upon it, which troubled me much. So after talking with Mr. Cooke, whom
I found there, about his folly for looking and troubling me and other
friends in getting him a place (that is, storekeeper of the Navy at
Tangier) before there is any such thing, I returned to the Hall, and
thence back with the two knights home again by coach, where I found Mr.
Moore got abroad, and dined with me, which I was glad to see, he having
not been able to go abroad a great while. Then came in Mr. Hawley and
dined with us, and after dinner I left them, and to the office, where
we sat late, and I do find that I shall meet with nothing to oppose my
growing great in the office but Sir W. Pen, who is now well again, and
comes into the office very brisk, and, I think, to get up his time
that he has been out of the way by being mighty diligent at the office,
which, I pray God, he may be, but I hope by mine to weary him out, for
I am resolved to fall to business as hard as I can drive, God giving me
health. At my office late, and so home to supper and to bed.

6th. Up betimes, and about eight o'clock by coach with four horses, with
Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, to Woolwich, a pleasant day. There at
the yard we consulted and ordered several matters, and thence to the
rope yard and did the like, and so into Mr. Falconer's, where we had
some fish, which we brought with us, dressed; and there dined with us
his new wife, which had been his mayde, but seems to be a genteel woman,
well enough bred and discreet. Thence after dinner back to Deptford,
where we did as before, and so home, good discourse in our way, Sir J.
Minnes being good company, though a simple man enough as to the business
of his office, but we did discourse at large again about Sir W. Pen's
patent to be his assistant, and I perceive he is resolved never to let
it pass. To my office, and thence to Sir W. Batten's, where Major Holmes
was lately come from the Streights, but do tell me strange stories of
the faults of Cooper his master, put in by me, which I do not believe,
but am sorry to hear and must take some course to have him removed,
though I believe that the Captain is proud, and the fellow is not supple
enough to him. So to my office again to set down my Journall, and so
home and to bed. This evening my boy Waynman's brother was with me, and
I did tell him again that I must part with the boy, for I will not keep
him. He desires my keeping him a little longer till he can provide for
him, which I am willing for a while to do. This day it seems the House
of Commons have been very high against the Papists, being incensed by
the stir which they make for their having an Indulgence; which, without
doubt, is a great folly in them to be so hot upon at this time, when
they see how averse already the House have showed themselves from it.
This evening Mr. Povy was with me at my office, and tells me that my
Lord Sandwich is this day so ill that he is much afeard of him, which
puts me to great pain, not more for my own sake than for his poor
family's.

7th. Up betimes, and to the office, where some of us sat all the
morning. At noon Sir W. Pen began to talk with me like a counterfeit
rogue very kindly about his house and getting bills signed for all our
works, but he is a cheating fellow, and so I let him talk and answered
nothing. So we parted. I to dinner, and there met The. Turner, who is
come on foot in a frolique to beg me to get a place at sea for John,
their man, which is a rogue; but, however, it may be, the sea may do
him good in reclaiming him, and therefore I will see what I can do. She
dined with me; and after dinner I took coach, and carried her home; in
our way, in Cheapside, lighting and giving her a dozen pair of white
gloves as my Valentine. Thence to my Lord Sandwich, who is gone to Sir
W. Wheeler's for his more quiet being, where he slept well last night,
and I took him very merry, playing at cards, and much company with him.
So I left him, and Creed and I to Westminster Hall, and there walked a
good while. He told me how for some words of my Lady Gerard's

     [Jane, wife of Lord Gerard (see ante, January 1st, 1662-63).  The
     king had previously put a slight upon Lady Gerard, probably at the
     instigation of Lady Castlemaine, as the two ladies were not friends.
     On the 4th of January of this same year Lady Gerard had given a
     supper to the king and queen, when the king withdrew from the party
     and proceeded to the house of Lady Castlemaine, and remained there
     throughout the evening (see Steinman's "Memoir of Barbara, Duchess
     of Cleveland," 1871, p. 47).]

against my Lady Castlemaine to the Queen, the King did the other day
affront her in going out to dance with her at a ball, when she desired
it as the ladies do, and is since forbid attending the Queen by the
King; which is much talked of, my Lord her husband being a great
favourite. Thence by water home and to my office, wrote by the post and
so home to bed.

8th (Lord's day). Being sent to by Sir J. Minnes to know whether I would
go with him to White Hall to-day, I rose but could not get ready before
he was gone, but however I walked thither and heard Dr. King, Bishop of
Chichester, make a good and eloquent sermon upon these words, "They that
sow in tears, shall reap in joy." Thence (the chappell in Lent being
hung with black, and no anthem sung after sermon, as at other times), to
my Lord Sandwich at Sir W. Wheeler's. I found him out of order, thinking
himself to be in a fit of an ague, but in the afternoon he was very
cheery. I dined with Sir William, where a good but short dinner, not
better than one of mine commonly of a Sunday. After dinner up to my
Lord, there being Mr. Kumball. My Lord, among other discourse, did tell
us of his great difficultys passed in the business of the Sound, and
of his receiving letters from the King there, but his sending them by
Whetstone was a great folly; and the story how my Lord being at dinner
with Sydney, one of his fellow plenipotentiarys and his mortal enemy,
did see Whetstone, and put off his hat three times to him, but the
fellow would not be known, which my Lord imputed to his coxcombly humour
(of which he was full), and bid Sydney take notice of him too, when at
the very time he had letters in his pocket from the King, as it proved
afterwards. And Sydney afterwards did find it out at Copenhagen, the
Dutch Commissioners telling him how my Lord Sandwich had hired one
of their ships to carry back Whetstone to Lubeck, he being come from
Flanders from the King. But I cannot but remember my Lord's aequanimity
in all these affairs with admiration. Thence walked home, in my way
meeting Mr. Moore, with whom I took a turn or two in the street among
the drapers in Paul's Churchyard, talking of business, and so home to
bed.

9th. Up betimes, to my office, where all the morning. About noon Sir J.
Robinson, Lord Mayor, desiring way through the garden from the Tower,
called in at the office and there invited me (and Sir W. Pen, who
happened to be in the way) to dinner, which we did; and there had a
great Lent dinner of fish, little flesh. And thence he and I in his
coach, against my will (for I am resolved to shun too great fellowship
with him) to White Hall, but came too late, the Duke having been with
our fellow officers before we came, for which I was sorry. Thence he
and I to walk one turn in the Park, and so home by coach, and I to my
office, where late, and so home to supper and bed. There dined with us
to-day Mr. Slingsby, of the Mint, who showed us all the new pieces both
gold and silver (examples of them all), that are made for the King,
by Blondeau's' way; and compared them with those made for Oliver. The
pictures of the latter made by Symons, and of the King by one Rotyr, a
German, I think, that dined with us also. He extolls those of Rotyr's
above the others; and, indeed, I think they are the better, because the
sweeter of the two; but, upon my word, those of the Protector are more
like in my mind, than the King's, but both very well worth seeing. The
crowns of Cromwell are now sold, it seems, for 25s. and 30s. apiece.

10th. Up and to my office all the morning, and great pleasure it is to
be doing my business betimes. About noon Sir J. Minnes came to me and
staid half an hour with me in my office talking about his business with
Sir W. Pen, and (though with me an old doter) yet he told me freely how
sensible he is of Sir W. Pen's treachery in this business, and what poor
ways he has taken all along to ingratiate himself by making Mr. Turner
write out things for him and then he gives them to the Duke, and how
he directed him to give Mr. Coventry L100 for his place, but that Mr.
Coventry did give him L20 back again. All this I am pleased to hear that
his knavery is found out. Dined upon a poor Lenten dinner at home, my
wife being vexed at a fray this morning with my Lady Batten about my
boy's going thither to turn the watercock with their maydes' leave, but
my Lady was mighty high upon it and she would teach his mistress better
manners, which my wife answered aloud that she might hear, that she
could learn little manners of her. After dinner to my office, and there
we sat all the afternoon till 8 at night, and so wrote my letters by
the post and so before 9 home, which is rare with me of late, I staying
longer, but with multitude of business my head akes, and so I can stay
no longer, but home to supper and to bed.

11th. Up betimes, and to my office, walked a little in the garden with
Sir W. Batten, talking about the difference between his Lady and my wife
yesterday, and I doubt my wife is to blame. About noon had news by Mr.
Wood that Butler, our chief witness against Field, was sent by him to
New England contrary to our desire, which made me mad almost; and so
Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Pen, and I dined together at Trinity House, and
thither sent for him to us and told him our minds, which he seemed not
to value much, but went away. I wrote and sent an express to Walthamstow
to Sir W. Pen, who is gone thither this morning, to tell him of it.
However, in the afternoon Wood sends us word that he has appointed
another to go, who shall overtake the ship in the Downes. So I was
late at the office, among other things writing to the Downes, to the
Commander-in-Chief, and putting things into the surest course I could to
help the business. So home and to bed.

12th. Up betimes and to my office all the morning with Captain Cocke
ending their account of their Riga contract for hemp. So home to dinner,
my head full of business against the office. After dinner comes my uncle
Thomas with a letter to my father, wherein, as we desire, he and his son
do order their tenants to pay their rents to us, which pleases me well.
In discourse he tells me my uncle Wight thinks much that I do never see
them, and they have reason, but I do apprehend that they have been too
far concerned with my uncle Thomas against us, so that I have had no
mind hitherto, but now I shall go see them. He being gone, I to the
office, where at the choice of maisters and chyrurgeons for the fleet
now going out, I did my business as I could wish, both for the persons
I had a mind to serve, and in getting the warrants signed drawn by my
clerks, which I was afeard of. Sat late, and having done I went home,
where I found Mary Ashwell come to live with us, of whom I hope well,
and pray God she may please us, which, though it cost me something,
yet will give me much content. So to supper and to bed, and find by her
discourse and carriage to-night that she is not proud, but will do
what she is bid, but for want of being abroad knows not how to give the
respect to her mistress, as she will do when she is told it, she having
been used only to little children, and there was a kind of a mistress
over them. Troubled all night with my cold, I being quite hoarse with it
that I could not speak to be heard at all almost.

13th. Up pretty early and to my office all the morning busy. At noon
home to dinner expecting Ashwell's father, who was here in the morning
and promised to come but he did not, but there came in Captain Grove,
and I found him to be a very stout man, at least in his discourse he
would be thought so, and I do think that he is, and one that bears
me great respect and deserves to be encouraged for his care in all
business. Abroad by water with my wife and Ashwell, and left them at
Mr. Pierce's, and I to Whitehall and St. James's Park (there being no
Commission for Tangier sitting to-day as I looked for) where I walked
an hour or two with great pleasure, it being a most pleasant day. So to
Mrs. Hunt's, and there found my wife, and so took them up by coach, and
carried them to Hide Park, where store of coaches and good faces. Here
till night, and so home and to my office to write by the post, and so to
supper and to bed.

14th. Up betimes and to my office, where we sat all the morning, and a
great rant I did give to Mr. Davis, of Deptford, and others about
their usage of Michell, in his Bewpers,--[Bewpers is the old name for
bunting.]--which he serves in for flaggs, which did trouble me, but
yet it was in defence of what was truth. So home to dinner, where Creed
dined with me, and walked a good while in the garden with me after
dinner, talking, among other things, of the poor service which Sir J.
Lawson did really do in the Streights, for which all this great fame
and honour done him is risen. So to my office, where all the afternoon
giving maisters their warrants for this voyage, for which I hope
hereafter to get something at their coming home. In the evening my
wife and I and Ashwell walked in the garden, and I find she is a pretty
ingenuous

     [For ingenious.  The distinction of the two words ingenious and
     ingenuous by which the former indicates mental, and the second moral
     qualities, was not made in Pepys's day.]

girl at all sorts of fine work, which pleases me very well, and I hope
will be very good entertainment for my wife without much cost. So to
write by the post, and so home to supper and to bed.

15th (Lord's day). Up and with my wife and her woman Ashwell the first
time to church, where our pew was so full with Sir J. Minnes's sister
and her daughter, that I perceive, when we come all together, some of us
must be shut out, but I suppose we shall come to some order what to do
therein. Dined at home, and to church again in the afternoon, and so
home, and I to my office till the evening doing one thing or other and
reading my vows as I am bound every Lord's day, and so home to supper
and talk, and Ashwell is such good company that I think we shall be very
lucky in her. So to prayers and to bed. This day the weather, which of
late has been very hot and fair, turns very wet and cold, and all the
church time this afternoon it thundered mightily, which I have not heard
a great while.

16th. Up very betimes and to my office, where, with several Masters
of the King's ships, Sir J. Minnes and I advising upon the business of
Slopps, wherein the seaman is so much abused by the Pursers, and
that being done, then I home to dinner, and so carried my wife to her
mother's, set her down and Ashwell to my Lord's lodging, there left
her, and I to the Duke, where we met of course, and talked of our Navy
matters. Then to the Commission of Tangier, and there, among other
things, had my Lord Peterborough's Commission read over; and Mr.
Secretary Bennet did make his querys upon it, in order to the drawing
one for my Lord Rutherford more regularly, that being a very extravagant
thing. Here long discoursing upon my Lord Rutherford's despatch, and so
broke up, and so going out of the Court I met with Mr. Coventry, and
so he and I walked half an hour in the long Stone Gallery, where we
discoursed of many things, among others how the Treasurer doth intend to
come to pay in course, which is the thing of the world that will do the
King the greatest service in the Navy, and which joys my heart to hear
of. He tells me of the business of Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen, which
I knew before, but took no notice or little that I did know it. But
he told me it was chiefly to make Mr. Pett's being joyned with Sir
W. Batten to go down the better, and do tell me how he well sees that
neither one nor the other can do their duties without help. But however
will let it fall at present without doing more in it to see whether they
will do their duties themselves, which he will see, and saith they
do not. We discoursed of many other things to my great content and so
parted, and I to my wife at my Lord's lodgings, where I heard Ashwell
play first upon the harpsicon, and I find she do play pretty well, which
pleaseth me very well. Thence home by coach, buying at the Temple the
printed virginal-book for her, and so home and to my office a while, and
so home and to supper and to bed.

17th. Up betimes and to my office a while, and then home and to Sir W.
Batten, with whom by coach to St. Margaret's Hill in Southwark, where
the judge of the Admiralty came, and the rest of the Doctors of the
Civill law, and some other Commissioners, whose Commission of Oyer
and Terminer was read, and then the charge, given by Dr. Exton, which
methought was somewhat dull, though he would seem to intend it to be
very rhetoricall, saying that justice had two wings, one of which spread
itself over the land, and the other over the water, which was this
Admiralty Court. That being done, and the jury called, they broke up,
and to dinner to a tavern hard by, where a great dinner, and I with
them; but I perceive that this Court is yet but in its infancy (as
to its rising again), and their design and consultation was, I could
overhear them, how to proceed with the most solemnity, and spend time,
there being only two businesses to do, which of themselves could not
spend much time. In the afternoon to the court again, where, first,
Abraham, the boatswain of the King's pleasure boat, was tried for
drowning a man; and next, Turpin, accused by our wicked rogue Field, for
stealing the King's timber; but after full examination, they were both
acquitted, and as I was glad of the first, for the saving the man's
life, so I did take the other as a very good fortune to us; for if
Turpin had been found guilty, it would have sounded very ill in the ears
of all the world, in the business between Field and us. So home with my
mind at very great ease, over the water to the Tower, and thence, there
being nobody at the office, we being absent, and so no office could be
kept. Sir W. Batten and I to my Lord Mayor's, where we found my Lord
with Colonel Strangways and Sir Richard Floyd, Parliament-men, in the
cellar drinking, where we sat with them, and then up; and by and by
comes in Sir Richard Ford. In our drinking, which was always going, we
had many discourses, but from all of them I do find Sir R. Ford a very
able man of his brains and tongue, and a scholler. But my Lord Mayor
I find to be a talking, bragging Bufflehead, a fellow that would be
thought to have led all the City in the great business of bringing in
the King, and that nobody understood his plots, and the dark lanthorn he
walked by; but led them and plowed with them as oxen and asses (his own
words) to do what he had a mind when in every discourse I observe him to
be as very a coxcomb as I could have thought had been in the City.
But he is resolved to do great matters in pulling down the shops quite
through the City, as he hath done in many places, and will make a
thorough passage quite through the City, through Canning-street, which
indeed will be very fine. And then his precept, which he, in vain-glory,
said he had drawn up himself, and hath printed it, against coachmen and
carrmen affronting of the gentry in the street; it is drawn so like a
fool, and some faults were openly found in it, that I believe he will
have so much wit as not to proceed upon it though it be printed. Here we
staid talking till eleven at night, Sir R. Ford breaking to my Lord our
business of our patent to be justices of the Peace in the City, which he
stuck at mightily; but, however, Sir R. Ford knows him to be a fool, and
so in his discourse he made him appear, and cajoled him into a consent
to it: but so as I believe when he comes to his right mind tomorrow
he will be of another opinion; and though Sir R. Ford moved it very
weightily and neatly, yet I had rather it had been spared now. But to
see how he do rant, and pretend to sway all the City in the Court of
Aldermen, and says plainly that they cannot do, nor will he suffer them
to do, any thing but what he pleases; nor is there any officer of the
City but of his putting in; nor any man that could have kept the City
for the King thus well and long but him. And if the country can be
preserved, he will undertake that the City shall not dare to stir again.
When I am confident there is no man almost in the City cares a turd for
him, nor hath he brains to outwit any ordinary tradesman. So home and
wrote a letter to Commissioner Pett to Chatham by all means to compose
the business between Major Holmes and Cooper his master, and so to bed.

18th. Wake betimes and talk a while with my wife about a wench that she
has hired yesterday, which I would have enquired of before she comes,
she having lived in great families, and so up and to my office, where
all the morning, and at noon home to dinner. After dinner by water to
Redriffe, my wife and Ashwell with me, and so walked and left them at
Halfway house; I to Deptford, where up and down the store-houses, and
on board two or three ships now getting ready to go to sea, and so
back, and find my wife walking in the way. So home again, merry with our
Ashwell, who is a merry jade, and so awhile to my office, and then
home to supper, and to bed. This day my tryangle, which was put in tune
yesterday, did please me very well, Ashwell playing upon it pretty well.

19th. Up betimes and to Woolwich all alone by water, where took the
officers most abed. I walked and enquired how all matters and businesses
go, and by and by to the Clerk of the Cheque's house, and there eat some
of his good Jamaica brawne, and so walked to Greenwich. Part of the way
Deane walking with me; talking of the pride and corruption of most of
his fellow officers of the yard, and which I believe to be true. So
to Deptford, where I did the same to great content, and see the people
begin to value me as they do the rest. At noon Mr. Wayth took me to his
house, where I dined, and saw his wife, a pretty woman, and had a good
fish dinner, and after dinner he and I walked to Redriffe talking of
several errors in the Navy, by which I learned a great deal, and was
glad of his company. So by water home, and by and by to the office,
where we sat till almost 9 at night. So after doing my own business in
my office, writing letters, &c., home to supper, and to bed, being weary
and vexed that I do not find other people so willing to do business as
myself, when I have taken pains to find out what in the yards is wanting
and fitting to be done.

20th. Up betimes and over the water, and walked to Deptford, where up
and down the yarde, and met the two clerks of the Cheques to conclude by
our method their callbooks, which we have done to great perfection, and
so walked home again, where I found my wife in great pain abed.... I
staid and dined by her, and after dinner walked forth, and by water
to the Temple, and in Fleet Street bought me a little sword, with gilt
handle, cost 23s., and silk stockings to the colour of my riding cloth
suit, cost I 5s., and bought me a belt there too, cost 15s., and so
calling at my brother's I find he has got a new maid, very likely girl,
I wish he do not play the fool with her. Thence homewards, and
meeting with Mr. Kirton's kinsman in Paul's Church Yard, he and I to a
coffee-house; where I hear how there had like to have been a surprizall
of Dublin by some discontented protestants, and other things of like
nature; and it seems the Commissioners have carried themselves so high
for the Papists that the others will not endure it. Hewlett and some
others are taken and clapped up; and they say the King hath sent over
to dissolve the Parliament there, who went very high against the
Commissioners. Pray God send all well! Hence home and in comes Captain
Ferrers and by and by Mr. Bland to see me and sat talking with me till
9 or 10 at night, and so good night. The Captain to bid my wife to his
child's christening. So my wife being pretty well again and Ashwell
there we spent the evening pleasantly, and so to bed.

21st. Up betimes and to my office, where busy all the morning, and
at noon, after a very little dinner, to it again, and by and by, by
appointment, our full board met, and Sir Philip Warwick and Sir Robert
Long came from my Lord Treasurer to speak with us about the state of
the debts of the Navy; and how to settle it, so as to begin upon the new
foundation of L200,000 per annum, which the King is now resolved not to
exceed. This discourse done, and things put in a way of doing, they went
away, and Captain Holmes being called in he began his high complaint
against his Master Cooper, and would have him forthwith discharged.
Which I opposed, not in his defence but for the justice of proceeding
not to condemn a man unheard, upon [which] we fell from one word to
another that we came to very high terms, such as troubled me, though
all and the worst that I ever said was that that was insolently or ill
mannerdly spoken. When he told me that it was well it was here that I
said it. But all the officers, Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir
W. Batten, and Sir W. Pen cried shame of it. At last he parted and we
resolved to bring the dispute between him and his Master to a trial next
week, wherein I shall not at all concern myself in defence of any thing
that is unhandsome on the Master's part nor willingly suffer him to have
any wrong. So we rose and I to my office, troubled though sensible that
all the officers are of opinion that he has carried himself very much
unbecoming him. So wrote letters by the post, and home to supper and to
bed.

22d (Lord's day). Up betimes and in my office wrote out our bill for the
Parliament about our being made justices of Peace in the City. So home
and to church, where a dull formall fellow that prayed for the Right
Hon. John Lord Barkeley, Lord President of Connaught, &c. So home
to dinner, and after dinner my wife and I and her woman by coach to
Westminster, where being come too soon for the Christening we took up
Mr. Creed and went out to take some ayre, as far as Chelsey and further,
I lighting there and letting them go on with the coach while I went
to the church expecting to see the young ladies of the school, Ashwell
desiring me, but I could not get in far enough, and so came out and at
the coach's coming back went in again and so back to Westminster, and
led my wife and her to Captain Ferrers, and I to my Lord Sandwich,
and with him talking a good while; I find the Court would have this
Indulgence go on, but the Parliament are against it. Matters in Ireland
are full of discontent. Thence with Mr. Creed to Captain Ferrers, where
many fine ladies; the house well and prettily furnished. She [Mrs.
Ferrers] lies in, in great state, Mr. G. Montagu, Collonel Williams,
Cromwell that was,

     [Colonel Williams--"Cromwell that was"--appears to have been Henry
     Cromwell, grandson of Sir Oliver Cromwell, and first cousin, once
     removed, to the Protector.  He was seated at Bodsey House, in the
     parish of Ramsey, which had been his father's residence, and held
     the commission of a colonel.  He served in several Parliaments for
     Huntingdonshire, voting, in 1660, for the restoration of the
     monarchy; and as he knew the name of Cromwell would not be grateful
     to the Court, he disused it, and assumed that of Williams, which had
     belonged to his ancestors; and he is so styled in a list of knights
     of the proposed Order of the Royal Oak.  He died at Huntingdon, 3rd
     August, 1673.  (Abridged from Noble's "Memoirs of the Cromwells,"
     vol. i., p. 70.)--B.]

and Mrs. Wright as proxy for my Lady Jemimah, were witnesses. Very
pretty and plentiful entertainment, could not get away till nine at
night, and so home. My coach cost me 7s. So to prayers, and to bed. This
day though I was merry enough yet I could not get yesterday's quarrel
out of my mind, and a natural fear of being challenged by Holmes for
the words I did give him, though nothing but what did become me as a
principal officer.

23rd. Up betimes and to my office, before noon my wife and I eat
something, thinking to have gone abroad together, but in comes Mr. Hunt,
who we were forced to stay to dinner, and so while that was got ready
he and I abroad about 2 or 3 small businesses of mine, and so back to
dinner, and after dinner he went away, and my wife and I and Ashwell by
coach, set my wife down at her mother's and Ashwell at my Lord's, she
going to see her father and mother, and I to Whitehall, being fearful
almost, so poor a spirit I have, of meeting Major Holmes. By and by
the Duke comes, and we with him about our usual business, and then
the Committee for Tangier, where, after reading my Lord Rutherford's
commission and consented to, Sir R. Ford, Sir W. Rider, and I were
chosen to bring in some laws for the Civill government of it, which I am
little able to do, but am glad to be joyned with them, for I shall learn
something of them. Thence to see my Lord Sandwich, and who should I meet
at the door but Major Holmes. He would have gone away, but I told him I
would not spoil his visitt, and would have gone, but however we fell to
discourse and he did as good as desire excuse for the high words that
did pass in his heat the other day, which I was willing enough to close
with, and after telling him my mind we parted, and I left him to speak
with my Lord, and I by coach home, where I found Will. Howe come home
to-day with my wife, and staid with us all night, staying late up
singing songs, and then he and I to bed together in Ashwell's bed and
she with my wife. This the first time that I ever lay in the room. This
day Greatorex brought me a very pretty weather-glass for heat and cold.

     [The thermometer was invented in the sixteenth century, but it is
     disputed who the inventor was.  The claims of Santorio are supported
     by Borelli and Malpighi, while the title of Cornelius Drebbel is
     considered undoubted by Boerhaave.  Galileo's air thermometer, made
     before 1597, was the foundation of accurate thermometry.  Galileo
     also invented the alcohol thermometer about 1611 or 1612.  Spirit
     thermometers were made for the Accademia del Cimento, and described
     in the Memoirs of that academy.  When the academy was dissolved by
     order of the Pope, some of these thermometers were packed away in a
     box, and were not discovered until early in the nineteenth century.
     Robert Hooke describes the manufacture and graduation of
     thermometers in his "Micrographia" (1665).]

24th. Lay pretty long, that is, till past six o'clock, and them up and
W. Howe and I very merry together, till having eat our breakfast, he
went away, and I to my office. By and by Sir J. Minnes and I to the
Victualling Office by appointment to meet several persons upon stating
the demands of some people of money from the King. Here we went into
their Bakehouse, and saw all the ovens at work, and good bread too, as
ever I would desire to eat. Thence Sir J. Minnes and I homewards calling
at Browne's, the mathematician in the Minnerys, with a design of buying
White's ruler to measure timber with, but could not agree on the price.
So home, and to dinner, and so to my office, where we sat anon, and
among other things had Cooper's business tried against Captain Holmes,
but I find Cooper a fuddling, troublesome fellow, though a good artist,
and so am contented to have him turned out of his place, nor did I see
reason to say one word against it, though I know what they did against
him was with great envy and pride. So anon broke up, and after writing
letters, &c., home to supper and to bed.

25th (Lady-day). Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning, at
noon dined and to the Exchange, and thence to the Sun Tavern, to my
Lord Rutherford, and dined with him, and some others, his officers, and
Scotch gentlemen, of fine discourse and education. My Lord used me with
great respect, and discoursed upon his business as with one that he did
esteem of, and indeed I do believe that this garrison is likely to come
to something under him. By and by he went away, forgetting to take leave
of me, my back being turned, looking upon the aviary, which is there
very pretty, and the birds begin to sing well this spring. Thence home
and to my office till night, reading over and consulting upon the book
and Ruler that I bought this morning of Browne concerning the lyne of
numbers, in which I find much pleasure. This evening came Captain Grove
about hiring ships for Tangier. I did hint to him my desire that I could
make some lawfull profit thereof, which he promises that he will tell
me of all that he gets and that I shall have a share, which I did not
demand, but did silently consent to it, and money I perceive something
will be got thereby. At night Mr. Bland came and sat with me at my
office till late, and so I home and to bed. This day being washing day
and my maid Susan ill, or would be thought so, put my house so out of
order that we had no pleasure almost in anything, my wife being troubled
thereat for want of a good cook-maid, and moreover I cannot have my
dinner as I ought in memory of my being cut for the stone, but I must
have it a day or two hence.

26th. Up betimes and to my office, leaving my wife in bed to take her
physique, myself also not being out of some pain to-day by some cold
that I have got by the sudden change of the weather from hot to cold.
This day is five years since it pleased God to preserve me at my being
cut of the stone, of which I bless God I am in all respects well. Only
now and then upon taking cold I have some pain, but otherwise in very
good health always. But I could not get my feast to be kept to-day as
it used to be, because of my wife's being ill and other disorders by my
servants being out of order. This morning came a new cook-maid at L4 per
annum, the first time I ever did give so much, but we hope it will be
nothing lost by keeping a good cook. She did live last at my Lord Monk's
house, and indeed at dinner did get what there was very prettily ready
and neat for me, which did please me much. This morning my uncle Thomas
was with me according to agreement, and I paid him the L50, which was
against my heart to part with, and yet I must be contented; I used him
very kindly, and I desire to continue so voyd of any discontent as to
my estate, that I may follow my business the better. At the Change I
met him again, with intent to have met with my uncle Wight to have
made peace with him, with whom by my long absence I fear I shall have a
difference, but he was not there, so we missed. All the afternoon sat
at the office about business till 9 or 10 at night, and so dispatch
business and home to supper and to bed. My maid Susan went away to-day,
I giving her something for her lodging and diet somewhere else a while
that I might have room for my new maid.

27th. Up betimes and at my office all the morning, at noon to the
Exchange, and there by appointment met my uncles Thomas and Wight, and
from thence with them to a tavern, and there paid my uncle Wight three
pieces of gold for himself, my aunt, and their son that is dead, left
by my uncle Robert, and read over our agreement with my uncle Thomas and
the state of our debts and legacies, and so good friendship I think is
made up between us all, only we have the worst of it in having so much
money to pay. Thence I to the Exchequer again, and thence with Creed
into Fleet Street, and calling at several places about business; in
passing, at the Hercules pillars he and I dined though late, and thence
with one that we found there, a friend of Captain Ferrers I used to
meet at the playhouse, they would have gone to some gameing house, but I
would not but parted, and staying a little in Paul's Churchyard, at the
foreign Bookseller's looking over some Spanish books, and with much ado
keeping myself from laying out money there, as also with them, being
willing enough to have gone to some idle house with them, I got home,
and after a while at my office, to supper, and to bed.

28th. Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning. Dined at home
and Creed with me, and though a very cold day and high wind, yet I
took him by land to Deptford, my common walk, where I did some little
businesses, and so home again walking both forwards and backwards, as
much along the street as we could to save going by water. So home, and
after being a little while hearing Ashwell play on the tryangle, to
my office, and there late, writing a chiding letter--to my poor father
about his being so unwilling to come to an account with me, which I
desire he might do, that I may know what he spends, and how to order the
estate so as to pay debts and legacys as far as may be. So late home to
supper and to bed.

29th (Lord's day). Waked as I used to do betimes, but being Sunday and
very cold I lay long, it raining and snowing very hard, which I did
never think it would have done any more this year. Up and to church,
home to dinner. After dinner in comes Mr. Moore, and sat and talked with
us a good while; among other things telling me, that [neither] my Lord
nor he are under apprehensions of the late discourse in the House of
Commons, concerning resumption of Crowne lands, which I am very glad of.
He being gone, up to my chamber, where my wife and Ashwell and I all the
afternoon talking and laughing, and by and by I a while to my office,
reading over some papers which I found in my man William's chest of
drawers, among others some old precedents concerning the practice of
this office heretofore, which I am glad to find and shall make use of,
among others an oath, which the Principal Officers were bound to swear
at their entrance into their offices, which I would be glad were in use
still. So home and fell hard to make up my monthly accounts, letting my
family go to bed after prayers. I staid up long, and find myself, as
I think, fully worth L670. So with good comfort to bed, finding that
though it be but little, yet I do get ground every month. I pray God it
may continue so with me.

30th. Up betimes and found my weather-glass sunk again just to the
same position which it was last night before I had any fire made in my
chamber, which had made it rise in two hours time above half a degree.
So to my office where all the morning and at the Glass-house, and after
dinner by coach with Sir W. Pen I carried my wife and her woman to
Westminster, they to visit Mrs. Ferrers and Clerke, we to the Duke,
where we did our usual business, and afterwards to the Tangier
Committee, where among other things we all of us sealed and signed the
Contract for building the Mole with my Lord Tiviott, Sir J. Lawson, and
Mr. Cholmeley. A thing I did with a very ill will, because a thing which
I did not at all understand, nor any or few of the whole board. We
did also read over the propositions for the Civill government and
Law Merchant of the town, as they were agreed on this morning at the
Glasshouse by Sir R. Ford and Sir W. Rider, who drew them, Mr. Povy and
myself as a Committee appointed to prepare them, which were in substance
but not in the manner of executing them independent wholly upon the
Governor consenting to. Thence to see my Lord Sandwich, who I found
very merry and every day better and better. So to my wife, who waited my
coming at my Lord's lodgings, and took her up and by coach home, where
no sooner come but to bed, finding myself just in the same condition I
was lately by the extreme cold weather, my pores stopt and so my body
all inflamed and itching. So keeping myself warm and provoking myself to
a moderate sweat, and so somewhat better in the morning,

31st. And to that purpose I lay long talking with my wife about my
father's coming, which I expect to-day, coming up with the horses
brought up for my Lord. Up and to my office, where doing business all
the morning, and at Sir W. Batten's, whither Mr. Gauden and many others
came to us about business. Then home to dinner, where W. Joyce came,
and he still a talking impertinent fellow. So to the office again, and
hearing by and by that Madam Clerke, Pierce, and others were come to see
my wife I stepped in and staid a little with them, and so to the office
again, where late, and so home to supper and to bed.




APRIL 1663

April 1st. Up betimes and abroad to my brother's, but he being gone out
I went to the Temple to my Cozen Roger Pepys, to see and talk with him
a little; who tells me that, with much ado, the Parliament do agree to
throw down Popery; but he says it is with so much spite and passion, and
an endeavour of bringing all Non-conformists into the same condition,
that he is afeard matters will not yet go so well as he could wish.
Thence back to my brother's, in my way meeting Mr. Moore and talking
with him about getting me some money, and calling at my brother's they
tell me that my brother is still abroad, and that my father is not
yet up. At which I wondered, not thinking that he was come, though
I expected him, because I looked for him at my house. So I up to his
bedside and staid an hour or two talking with him. Among other things
he tells me how unquiett my mother is grown, that he is not able to live
almost with her, if it were not for Pall. All other matters are as well
as upon so hard conditions with my uncle Thomas we can expect them.
I left him in bed, being very weary, to come to my house to-night or
tomorrow, when he pleases, and so I home, calling on the virginall
maker, buying a rest for myself to tune my tryangle, and taking one of
his people along with me to put it in tune once more, by which I learned
how to go about it myself for the time to come. So to dinner, my
wife being lazily in bed all this morning. Ashwell and I dined below
together, and a pretty girl she is, and I hope will give my wife and
myself good content, being very humble and active, my cook maid do also
dress my meat very well and neatly. So to my office all the afternoon
till night, and then home, calling at Sir W. Batten's, where was Sir
J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen, I telling them how by my letter this day from
Commissioner Pett I hear that his Stempeese

     [Stemples, cross pieces which are put into a frame of woodwork to
     cure and strengthen a shaft.]

he undertook for the new ship at Woolwich, which we have been so long,
to our shame, in looking for, do prove knotty and not fit for service.
Lord! how Sir J. Minnes, like a mad coxcomb, did swear and stamp,
swearing that Commissioner Pett hath still the old heart against the
King that ever he had, and that this was his envy against his brother
that was to build the ship, and all the damnable reproaches in the
world, at which I was ashamed, but said little; but, upon the whole,
I find him still a fool, led by the nose with stories told by Sir W.
Batten, whether with or without reason. So, vexed in my mind to see
things ordered so unlike gentlemen, or men of reason, I went home and to
bed.

2nd. Up by very betimes and to my office, where all the morning till
towards noon, and then by coach to Westminster Hall with Sir W. Pen, and
while he went up to the House I walked in the Hall with Mr. Pierce, the
surgeon, that I met there, talking about my business the other day with
Holmes, whom I told my mind, and did freely tell how I do depend upon my
care and diligence in my employment to bear me out against the pride
of Holmes or any man else in things that are honest, and much to that
purpose which I know he will make good use of. But he did advise me to
take as few occasions as I can of disobliging Commanders, though this is
one that every body is glad to hear that he do receive a check. By and
by the House rises and I home again with Sir W. Pen, and all the way
talking of the same business, to whom I did on purpose tell him my mind
freely, and let him see that it must be a wiser man than Holmes (in
these very words) that shall do me any hurt while I do my duty. I to
remember him of Holmes's words against Sir J. Minnes, that he was a
knave, rogue, coward, and that he will kick him and pull him by the
ears, which he remembered all of them and may have occasion to do it
hereafter to his owne shame to suffer them to be spoke in his presence
without any reply but what I did give him, which, has caused all this
feud. But I am glad of it, for I would now and then take occasion to
let the world know that I will not be made a novice. Sir W. Pen took
occasion to speak about my wife's strangeness to him and his daughter,
and that believing at last that it was from his taking of Sarah to be
his maid, he hath now put her away, at which I am glad. He told me, that
this day the King hath sent to the House his concurrence wholly with
them against the Popish priests, Jesuits, &c., which gives great
content, and I am glad of it. So home, whither my father comes and dines
with us, and being willing to be merry with him I made myself so as much
as I could, and so to the office, where we sat all the afternoon, and at
night having done all my business I went home to my wife and father, and
supped, and so to bed, my father lying with me in Ashwell's bed in the
red chamber.

3rd. Waked betimes and talked half an hour with my father, and so I
rose and to my office, and about 9 o'clock by water from the Old Swan to
White Hall and to chappell, which being most monstrous full, I could
not go into my pew, but sat among the quire. Dr. Creeton, the Scotchman,
preached a most admirable, good, learned, honest and most severe
sermon, yet comicall, upon the words of the woman concerning the Virgin,
"Blessed is the womb that bare thee (meaning Christ) and the paps that
gave thee suck; and he answered, Nay; rather is he blessed that heareth
the word of God, and keepeth it." He railed bitterly ever and anon
against John Calvin, and his brood, the Presbyterians, and against the
present term, now in use, of "tender consciences." He ripped up Hugh
Peters (calling him the execrable skellum--[A villain or scoundrel; the
cant term for a thief.]--), his preaching and stirring up the maids of
the city to bring in their bodkins and thimbles. Thence going out of
White Hall, I met Captain Grove, who did give me a letter directed
to myself from himself. I discerned money to be in it, and took it,
knowing, as I found it to be, the proceed of the place I have got him to
be, the taking up of vessels for Tangier. But I did not open it till I
came home to my office, and there I broke it open, not looking into
it till all the money was out, that I might say I saw no money in the
paper, if ever I should be questioned about it. There was a piece in
gold and L4 in silver. So home to dinner with my father and wife, and
after dinner up to my tryangle, where I found that above my expectation
Ashwell has very good principles of musique and can take out a lesson
herself with very little pains, at which I am very glad. Thence away
back again by water to Whitehall, and there to the Tangier Committee,
where we find ourselves at a great stand; the establishment being but
L70,000 per annum, and the forces to be kept in the town at the least
estimate that my Lord Rutherford can be got to bring it is L53,000. The
charge of this year's work of the Mole will be L13,000; besides L1000
a-year to my Lord Peterborough as a pension, and the fortifications and
contingencys, which puts us to a great stand, and so unsettled what to
do therein we rose, and I to see my Lord Sandwich, whom I found merry at
cards, and so by coach home, and after supper a little to my office and
so home and to bed. I find at Court that there is some bad news from
Ireland of an insurrection of the Catholiques there, which puts them
into an alarm. I hear also in the City that for certain there is an
embargo upon all our ships in Spayne, upon this action of my Lord
Windsor's at Cuba, which signifies little or nothing, but only he hath a
mind to say that he hath done something before he comes back again.
Late tonight I sent to invite my uncle Wight and aunt with Mrs. Turner
to-morrow.

4th. Up betimes and to my office. By and by to Lombard street by
appointment to meet Mr. Moore, but the business not being ready I
returned to the office, where we sat a while, and, being sent for, I
returned to him and there signed to some papers in the conveying of some
lands mortgaged by Sir Rob. Parkhurst in my name to my Lord Sandwich,
which I having done I returned home to dinner, whither by and by comes
Roger Pepys, Mrs. Turner her daughter, Joyce Norton, and a young lady, a
daughter of Coll. Cockes, my uncle Wight, his wife and Mrs. Anne Wight.
This being my feast, in lieu of what I should have had a few days ago
for my cutting of the stone, for which the Lord make me truly thankful.
Very merry at, before, and after dinner, and the more for that my
dinner was great, and most neatly dressed by our own only maid. We had a
fricasee of rabbits and chickens, a leg of mutton boiled, three carps
in a dish, a great dish of a side of lamb, a dish of roasted pigeons, a
dish of four lobsters, three tarts, a lamprey pie (a most rare pie),
a dish of anchovies, good wine of several sorts, and all things mighty
noble and to my great content. After dinner to Hide Park; my aunt,
Mrs. Wight and I in one coach, and all the rest of the women in Mrs.
Turner's; Roger being gone in haste to the Parliament about the carrying
this business of the Papists, in which it seems there is great contest
on both sides, and my uncle and father staying together behind. At
the Park was the King, and in another coach my Lady Castlemaine, they
greeting one another at every tour.

     [The company drove round and round the Ring in Hyde Park.  The
     following two extracts illustrate this, and the second one shows
     how the circuit was called the Tour: "Here (1697) the people of
     fashion take the diversion of the Ring.  In a pretty high place,
     which lies very open, they have surrounded a circumference of two or
     three hundred paces diameter with a sorry kind of balustrade, or
     rather with postes placed upon stakes but three feet from the
     ground; and the coaches drive round this.  When they have turned for
     some time round one way they face about and turn t'other: so rowls
     the world!"--Wilson's Memoirs, 1719, p. 126.]

     ["It is in this Park where the Grand Tour or Ring is kept for the
     Ladies to take the air in their coaches, and in fine weather I have
     seen above three hundred at a time."--[Macky's] Journey through
     England, 1724, vol. i., p. 75.]

Here about an hour, and so leaving all by the way we home and found
the house as clean as if nothing had been done there to-day from top to
bottom, which made us give the cook 12d. a piece, each of us. So to
my office about writing letters by the post, one to my brother John at
Brampton telling him (hoping to work a good effect by it upon my mother)
how melancholy my father is, and bidding him use all means to get my
mother to live peaceably and quietly, which I am sure she neither do nor
I fear can ever do, but frightening her with his coming down no more,
and the danger of her condition if he should die I trust may do good. So
home and to bed.

5th (Lord's day). Up and spent the morning, till the Barber came, in
reading in my chamber part of Osborne's Advice to his Son (which I shall
not never enough admire for sense and language), and being by and
by trimmed, to Church, myself, wife, Ashwell, &c. Home to dinner, it
raining, while that was prepared to my office to read over my vows with
great affection and to very good purpose. So to dinner, and very well
pleased with it. Then to church again, where a simple bawling young Scot
preached. So home to my office alone till dark, reading some papers of
my old navy precedents, and so home to supper, and, after some pleasant
talk, my wife, Ashwell, and I to bed.

6th. Up very betimes and to my office, and there made an end of reading
my book that I have of Mr. Barlow's of the Journal of the Commissioners
of the Navy, who begun to act in the year 1628 and continued six years,
wherein is fine observations and precedents out of which I do purpose
to make a good collection. By and by, much against my will, being twice
sent for, to Sir G. Carteret's to pass his accounts there, upon which
Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, and myself all the morning,
and again after dinner to it, being vexed at my heart to see a thing
of that importance done so slightly and with that neglect for which God
pardon us, and I would I could mend it. Thence leaving them I made an
excuse and away home, and took my wife by coach and left her at Madam
Clerk's, to make a visit there, and I to the Committee of Tangier, where
I found, to my great joy, my Lord Sandwich, the first time I have seen
him abroad these some months, and by and by he rose and took leave,
being, it seems, this night to go to Kensington or Chelsey, where he
hath taken a lodging for a while to take the ayre. We staid, and after
business done I got Mr. Coventry into the Matted Gallery and told him
my whole mind concerning matters of our office, all my discontent to
see things of so great trust carried so neglectfully, and what pitiful
service the Controller and Surveyor make of their duties, and I
disburdened my mind wholly to him and he to me his own, many things,
telling me that he is much discouraged by seeing things not to grow
better and better as he did well hope they would have done. Upon the
whole, after a full hour's private discourse, telling one another our
minds, we with great content parted, and with very great satisfaction
for my [having] thus cleared my conscience, went to Dr. Clerk's and
thence fetched my wife, and by coach home. To my office a little to set
things in order, and so home to supper and to bed.

7th. Up very betimes, and angry with Will that he made no more haste to
rise after I called him. So to my office, and all the morning there. At
noon to the Exchange, and so home to dinner, where I found my wife had
been with Ashwell to La Roche's to have her tooth drawn, which it seems
aches much, but my wife could not get her to be contented to have it
drawn after the first twich, but would let it alone, and so they came
home with it undone, which made my wife and me good sport. After dinner
to the office, where Sir J. Minnes did make a great complaint to me
alone, how my clerk Mr. Hater had entered in one of the Sea books a
ticket to have been signed by him before it had been examined, which
makes the old fool mad almost, though there was upon enquiry the
greatest reason in the world for it. Which though it vexes me, yet it
is most to see from day to day what a coxcomb he is, and that so great a
trust should lie in the hands of such a fool. We sat all the afternoon,
and I late at my office, it being post night, and so home to supper, my
father being come again to my house, and after supper to bed, and after
some talk to sleep.

8th. Up betimes and to my office, and by and by, about 8 o'clock, to the
Temple to Commissioner Pett lately come to town and discoursed about the
affairs of our office, how ill they go through the corruption and folly
of Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes. Thence by water to White Hall, to
chappell; where preached Dr. Pierce, the famous man that preached the
sermon so much cried up, before the King against the Papists. His matter
was the Devil tempting our Saviour, being carried into the Wilderness
by the spirit. And he hath as much of natural eloquence as most men that
ever I heard in my life, mixed with so much learning. After sermon I
went up and saw the ceremony of the Bishop of Peterborough's paying
homage upon the knee to the King, while Sir H. Bennet, Secretary, read
the King's grant of the Bishopric of Lincoln, to which he is translated.
His name is Dr. Lany. Here I also saw the Duke of Monmouth, with his
Order of the Garter, the first time I ever saw it. I am told that the
University of Cambridge did treat him a little while since with all the
honour possible, with a comedy at Trinity College, and banquet; and made
him Master of Arts there. All which, they say, the King took very well.
Dr. Raynbow, Master of Magdalen, being now Vice-Chancellor. Home by
water to dinner, and with my father, wife, and Ashwell, after dinner,
by water towards Woolwich, and in our way I bethought myself that we had
left our poor little dog that followed us out of doors at the waterside,
and God knows whether he be not lost, which did not only strike my
wife into a great passion but I must confess myself also; more than was
becoming me. We immediately returned, I taking another boat and with my
father went to Woolwich, while they went back to find the dog. I took
my father on board the King's pleasure boat and down to Woolwich, and
walked to Greenwich thence and turning into the park to show my father
the steps up the hill, we found my wife, her woman, and dog attending
us, which made us all merry again, and so took boats, they to Deptford
and so by land to Half-way house, I into the King's yard and overlook
them there, and eat and drank with them, and saw a company of seamen
play drolly at our pence, and so home by water. I a little at the
office, and so home to supper and to bed, after having Ashwell play my
father and me a lesson upon her Tryangle.

9th. Up betimes and to my office, and anon we met upon finishing the
Treasurer's accounts. At noon dined at home and am vexed to hear my wife
tell me how our maid Mary do endeavour to corrupt our cook maid, which
did please me very well, but I am resolved to rid the house of her as
soon as I can. To the office and sat all the afternoon till 9 at night,
and an hour after home to supper and bed. My father lying at Tom's
to-night, he dining with my uncle Fenner and his sons and a great many
more of the gang at his own cost to-day. To bed vexed also to think
of Sir J. Minnes finding fault with Mr. Hater for what he had done the
other day, though there be no hurt in the thing at all but only the old
fool's jealousy, made worse by Sir W. Batten.

10th. Up very betimes and to my office, where most hard at business
alone all the morning. At noon to the Exchange, where I hear that after
great expectation from Ireland, and long stop of letters, there is good
news come, that all is quiett after our great noise of troubles there,
though some stir hath been as was reported. Off the Exchange with Sir J.
Cutler and Mr. Grant to the Royall Oak Tavern, in Lumbard Street, where
Alexander Broome the poet was, a merry and witty man, I believe, if he
be not a little conceited, and here drank a sort of French wine, called
Ho Bryan,

     [Haut Brion, a claret; one of the first growths of the red wines of
     Medoc.]

that hath a good and most particular taste that I never met with. Home
to dinner, and then by water abroad to Whitehall, my wife to see Mrs.
Ferrers, I to Whitehall and the Park, doing no business. Then to my
Lord's lodgings, met my wife, and walked to the New Exchange. There laid
out 10s. upon pendents and painted leather gloves, very pretty and all
the mode. So by coach home and to my office till late, and so to supper
and to bed.

11th. Up betimes and to my office, where we sat also all the morning
till noon, and then home to dinner, my father being there but not very
well. After dinner in comes Captain Lambert of the Norwich, this day
come from Tangier, whom I am glad to see. There came also with him
Captain Wager, and afterwards in came Captain Allen to see me, of the
Resolution. All staid a pretty while, and so away, and I a while to my
office, then abroad into the street with my father, and left him to go
to see my aunt Wight and uncle, intending to lie at Tom's to-night, or
my cozen Scott's, where it seems he has hitherto lain and is most kindly
used there. So I home and to my office very late making up my Lord's
navy accounts, wherein I find him to stand debtor L1200. So home to
supper and to bed.

12th (Lord's day). Lay till 8 o'clock, which I have not done a great
while, then up and to church, where I found our pew altered by taking
some of the hind pew to make ours bigger, because of the number of
women, more by Sir J. Minnes company than we used to have. Home
to dinner, and after dinner, intending to go to Chelsey to my Lord
Sandwich, my wife would needs go with me, though she walked on foot to
Whitehall. Which she did and staid at my Lord's lodgings while Creed and
I took a turn at Whitehall, but no coach to be had, and so I returned
to them and sat talking till evening, and then got a coach and to Gray's
Inn walks, where some handsome faces, and so home and there to supper,
and a little after 8 o'clock to bed, a thing I have not done God knows
when. Coming home to-night, a drunken boy was carrying by our constable
to our new pair of stocks to handsel them, being a new pair and very
handsome.

13th. Up by five o'clock and to my office, where hard at work till
towards noon, and home and eat a bit, and so going out met with Mr.
Mount my old acquaintance, and took him in and drank a glass or two of
wine to him and so parted, having not time to talk together, and I with
Sir W. Batten to the Stillyard, and there eat a lobster together, and
Wyse the King's fishmonger coming in we were very merry half an hour,
and so by water to Whitehall, and by and by being all met we went in to
the Duke and there did our business and so away, and anon to the Tangier
Committee, where we had very fine discourse from Dr. Walker and Wiseman,
civilians, against our erecting a court-merchant at Tangier, and well
answered in many things by my Lord Sandwich (whose speaking I never till
now observed so much to be very good) and Sir R. Ford. By and by the
discourse being ended, we fell to my Lord Rutherford's dispatch, which
do not please him, he being a Scott, and one resolved to scrape every
penny that he can get by any way, which the Committee will not agree to.
He took offence at something and rose away, without taking leave of the
board, which all took ill, though nothing said but only by the Duke of
Albemarle, who said that we ought to settle things as they ought to be,
and if he will not go upon these terms another man will, no doubt.
Here late, quite finishing things against his going, and so rose, and I
walked home, being accompanied by Creed to Temple Bar, talking of this
afternoon's passage, and so I called at the Wardrobe in my way home,
and there spoke at the Horn tavern with Mr. Moore a word or two, but
my business was with Mr. Townsend, who is gone this day to his country
house, about sparing Charles Pepys some money of his bills due to him
when he can, but missing him lost my labour. So walked home, finding my
wife abroad, at my aunt, Wight's, who coming home by and by, I home to
supper and to bed.

14th. Up betimes to my office, where busy till 8 o'clock that Sir W.
Batten, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Pen and I down by barge to Woolwich, to
see "The Royal James" launched, where she has been under repair a great
while. We staid in the yard till almost noon, and then to Mr. Falconer's
to a dinner of fish of our own sending, and when it was just ready to
come upon the table, word is brought that the King and Duke are come,
so they all went away to shew themselves, while I staid and had a little
dish or two by myself, resolving to go home, and by the time I had dined
they came again, having gone to little purpose, the King, I believe,
taking little notice of them. So they to dinner, and I staid a little
with them, and so good bye. I walked to Greenwich, studying the slide
rule for measuring of timber, which is very fine. Thence to Deptford by
water, and walked through the yard, and so walked to Redriffe, and so
home pretty weary, to my office, where anon they all came home, the ship
well launched, and so sat at the office till 9 at night, and I longer
doing business at my office, and so home to supper, my father being
come, and to bed. Sir G. Carteret tells me to-night that he perceives
the Parliament is likely to make a great bustle before they will give
the King any money; will call all things into question; and, above
all, the expences of the Navy; and do enquire into the King's expences
everywhere, and into the truth of the report of people being forced to
sell their bills at 15 per cent. loss in the Navy; and, lastly, that
they are in a very angry pettish mood at present, and not likely to be
better.

15th. Up betimes, and after talking with my father awhile, I to my
office, and there hard at it till almost noon, and then went down the
river with Maynes, the purveyor, to show a ship's lading of Norway
goods, and called at Sir W. Warren's yard, and so home to dinner. After
dinner up with my wife and Ashwell a little to the Tryangle, and so I
down to Deptford by land about looking out a couple of catches fitted
to be speedily set forth in answer to a letter of Mr. Coventry's to
me. Which done, I walked back again, all the way reading of my book of
Timber measure, comparing it with my new Sliding Rule brought home this
morning with great pleasure. Taking boat again I went to Shishe's yard,
but he being newly gone out towards Deptford I followed him thither
again, and there seeing him I went with him and pitched upon a couple,
and so by water home, it being late, past 8 at night, the wind cold, and
I a little weary. So home to my office, then to supper and bed.

16th. Up betimes and to my office, met to pass Mr. Pitt's (anon Sir J.
Lawson's Secretary and Deputy Treasurer) accounts for the voyage last to
the Streights, wherein the demands are strangely irregular, and I dare
not oppose it alone for making an enemy and do no good, but only bring a
review upon my Lord Sandwich, but God knows it troubles my heart to see
it, and to see the Comptroller, whose duty it is, to make no more matter
of it. At noon home for an hour to dinner, and so to the office public
and private till late at night, so home to supper and bed with my
father.

17th. Up by five o'clock as I have long done and to my office all the
morning, at noon home to dinner with my father with us. Our dinner, it
being Good Friday, was only sugarsopps and fish; the only time that
we have had a Lenten dinner all this Lent. This morning Mr. Hunt, the
instrument maker, brought me home a Basse Viall to see whether I like
it, which I do not very well, besides I am under a doubt whether I had
best buy one yet or no, because of spoiling my present mind and love to
business. After dinner my father and I walked into the city a little,
and parted and to Paul's Church Yard, to cause the title of my English
"Mare Clausum"

     [Selden's work was highly esteemed, and Charles I. made an order in
     council that a copy should be kept in the Council chest, another in
     the Court of Exchequer, and a third in the Court of Admiralty.  The
     book Pepys refers to is Nedham's translation, which was entitled,
     "Of the Dominion or Ownership of the Sea.  Two Books...,
     written at first in Latin and entituled Mare Clausum, by John
     Selden.  Translated into English by Marchamont Nedham.  London,
     1652."  This has the Commonwealth arms on the title-page and a
     dedication "To the Supreme Autoritie of the Nation-The Parliament of
     the Commonwealth of England."  The dedication to Charles I. in
     Selden's original work was left out.  Apparently a new title-page
     and dedication was prepared in 1663, but the copy in the British
     Museum, which formerly belonged to Charles Killigrew, does not
     contain these additions.]

to be changed, and the new title, dedicated to the King, to be put
to it, because I am ashamed to have the other seen dedicated to the
Commonwealth. So home and to my office till night, and so home to talk
with my father, and supper and to bed, I have not had yet one quarter of
an hour's leisure to sit down and talk with him since he came to town,
nor do I know till the holidays when I shall.

18th. Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning. At noon to
dinner. With us Mr. Creed, who has been deeply engaged at the office
this day about the ending of his accounts, wherein he is most unhappy
to have to do with a company of fools who after they have signed his
accounts and made bills upon them yet dare not boldly assert to the
Treasurer that they are satisfied with his accounts. Hereupon all
dinner, and walking in the garden the afternoon, he and I talking of the
ill management of our office, which God knows is very ill for the King's
advantage. I would I could make it better. In the evening to my office,
and at night home to supper and bed.

19th (Easter day). Up and this day put on my close-kneed coloured suit,
which, with new stockings of the colour, with belt, and new gilt-handled
sword, is very handsome. To church alone, and so to dinner, where my
father and brother Tom dined with us, and after dinner to church again,
my father sitting below in the chancel. After church done, where the
young Scotchman preaching I slept all the while, my father and I to see
my uncle and aunt Wight, and after a stay of an hour there my father to
my brother's and I home to supper, and after supper fell in discourse of
dancing, and I find that Ashwell hath a very fine carriage, which
makes my wife almost ashamed of herself to see herself so outdone, but
to-morrow she begins to learn to dance for a month or two. So to prayers
and to bed. Will being gone, with my leave, to his father's this day for
a day or two, to take physique these holydays.

20th. Up betimes as I use to do, and in my chamber begun to look over
my father's accounts, which he brought out of the country with him by
my desire, whereby I may see what he has received and spent, and I find
that he is not anything extravagant, and yet it do so far outdo his
estate that he must either think of lessening his charge, or I must be
forced to spare money out of my purse to help him through, which I would
willing do as far as L20 goes. So to my office the remaining part of
the morning till towards noon, and then to Mr. Grant's. There saw his
prints, which he shewed me, and indeed are the best collection of any
things almost that ever I saw, there being the prints of most of the
greatest houses, churches, and antiquitys in Italy and France and brave
cutts. I had not time to look them over as I ought, and which I will
take time hereafter to do, and therefore left them and home to dinner.
After dinner, it raining very hard, by coach to Whitehall, where, after
Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Mr. Coventry and I had been with the
Duke, we to the Committee of Tangier and did matters there dispatching
wholly my Lord Teviott, and so broke up. With Sir G. Carteret and Sir
John Minnes by coach to my Lord Treasurer's, thinking to have spoken
about getting money for paying the Yards; but we found him with some
ladies at cards: and so, it being a bad time to speak, we parted, and
Sir J. Minnes and I home, and after walking with my wife in the garden
late, to supper and to bed, being somewhat troubled at Ashwell's
desiring and insisting over eagerly upon her going to a ball to meet
some of her old companions at a dancing school here in town next Friday,
but I am resolved she shall not go. So to bed. This day the little
Duke of Monmouth was marryed at White Hall, in the King's chamber;
and tonight is a great supper and dancing at his lodgings, near
Charing-Cross. I observed his coat at the tail of his coach he gives the
arms of England, Scotland, and France, quartered upon some other fields,
but what it is that speaks his being a bastard I know not.

21st. Up betimes and to my office, where first I ruled with red ink my
English "Mare Clausum," which, with the new orthodox title, makes it now
very handsome. So to business, and then home to dinner, and after dinner
to sit at the office in the afternoon, and thence to my study late, and
so home to supper to play a game at cards with my wife, and so to bed.
Ashwell plays well at cards, and will teach us to play; I wish it do not
lose too much of my time, and put my wife too much upon it.

22nd. Up betimes and to my office very busy all the morning there,
entering things into my Book Manuscript, which pleases me very much.
So to the Change, and so to my uncle Wight's, by invitation, whither my
father, wife, and Ashwell came, where we had but a poor dinner, and
not well dressed; besides, the very sight of my aunt's hands and greasy
manner of carving, did almost turn my stomach. After dinner by coach
to the King's Playhouse, where we saw but part of "Witt without mony,"
which I do not like much, but coming late put me out of tune, and it
costing me four half-crowns for myself and company. So, the play done,
home, and I to my office a while and so home, where my father (who is so
very melancholy) and we played at cards, and so to supper and to bed.

23rd. St. George's day and Coronacion, the King and Court being at
Windsor, at the installing of the King of Denmark by proxy and the Duke
of Monmouth. I up betimes, and with my father, having a fire made in my
wife's new closet above, it being a wet and cold day, we sat there all
the morning looking over his country accounts ever since his going
into the country. I find his spending hitherto has been (without
extraordinary charges) at full L100 per annum, which troubles me, and
I did let him apprehend it, so as that the poor man wept, though he did
make it well appear to me that he could not have saved a farthing of
it. I did tell him how things stand with us, and did shew my distrust of
Pall, both for her good nature and housewifery, which he was sorry for,
telling me that indeed she carries herself very well and carefully,
which I am glad to hear, though I doubt it was but his doting and
not being able to find her miscarriages so well nowadays as he could
heretofore have done. We resolve upon sending for Will Stankes up to
town to give us a right understanding in all that we have in Brampton,
and before my father goes to settle every thing so as to resolve how to
find a living for my father and to pay debts and legacies, and also to
understand truly how Tom's condition is in the world, that we may know
what we are like to expect of his doing ill or well. So to dinner,
and after dinner to the office, where some of us met and did a little
business, and so to Sir W. Batten's to see a little picture drawing of
his by a Dutchman which is very well done. So to my office and put a
few things in order, and so home to spend the evening with my father. At
cards till late, and being at supper, my boy being sent for some mustard
to a neat's tongue, the rogue staid half an hour in the streets, it
seems at a bonfire, at which I was very angry, and resolve to beat him
to-morrow.

24th. Up betimes, and with my salt eel

     [A salt eel is a rope's end cut from the piece to be used on the
     back of a culprit.  "Yeow shall have salt eel for supper" is an
     emphatic threat.]

went down in the parler and there got my boy and did beat him till I was
fain to take breath two or three times, yet for all I am afeard it will
make the boy never the better, he is grown so hardened in his tricks,
which I am sorry for, he being capable of making a brave man, and is
a boy that I and my wife love very well. So made me ready, and to my
office, where all the morning, and at noon home, whither came Captain
Holland, who is lately come home from sea, and has been much harassed in
law about the ship which he has bought, so that it seems in a despair
he endeavoured to cut his own throat, but is recovered it; and it seems
whether by that or any other persuasion (his wife's mother being a great
zealot) he is turned almost a Quaker, his discourse being nothing but
holy, and that impertinent, that I was weary of him. At last pretending
to go to the Change we walked thither together, and there I left him and
home to dinner, sending my boy by the way to enquire after two dancing
masters at our end of the town for my wife to learn, of whose names
the boy brought word. After dinner all the afternoon fiddling upon my
viallin (which I have not done many a day) while Ashwell danced above in
my upper best chamber, which is a rare room for musique, expecting this
afternoon my wife to bring my cozen Scott and Stradwick, but they came
not, and so in the evening we by ourselves to Half-way house to walk,
but did not go in there, but only a walk and so home again and to
supper, my father with us, and had a good lobster intended for part of
our entertainment to these people to-day, and so to cards, and then
to bed, being the first day that I have spent so much to my pleasure a
great while.

25th. Up betimes and to my vyall and song book a pretty while, and so to
my office, and there we sat all the morning. Among other things Sir W.
Batten had a mind to cause Butler (our chief witness in the business of
Field, whom we did force back from an employment going to sea to come
back to attend our law sute) to be borne as a mate on the Rainbow in
the Downes in compensation for his loss for our sakes. This he orders
an order to be drawn by Mr. Turner for, and after Sir J. Minnes, Sir W.
Batten, and Sir W. Pen had signed it, it came to me and I was going
to put it up into my book, thinking to consider of it and give them my
opinion upon it before I parted with it, but Sir W. Pen told me I must
sign it or give it him again, for it should not go without my hand. I
told him what I meant to do, whereupon Sir W. Batten was very angry,
and in a great heat (which will bring out any thing which he has in his
mind, and I am glad of it, though it is base in him to have a thing so
long in his mind without speaking of it, though I am glad this is the
worst, for if he had worse it would out as well as this some time or
other) told me that I should not think as I have heretofore done, make
them sign orders and not sign them myself. Which what ignorance or worse
it implies is easy to judge, when he shall sign to things (and the rest
of the board too as appears in this business) for company and not out of
their judgment for. After some discourse I did convince them that it was
not fit to have it go, and Sir W. Batten first, and then the rest, did
willingly cancel all their hands and tear the order, for I told them,
Butler being such a rogue as I know him, and we have all signed him to
be to the Duke, it will be in his power to publish this to our great
reproach, that we should take such a course as this to serve ourselves
in wronging the King by putting him into a place he is no wise capable
of, and that in an Admiral ship. At noon we rose, Sir W. Batten ashamed
and vexed, and so home to dinner, and after dinner walked to the old
Exchange and so all along to Westminster Hall, White Hall, my Lord
Sandwich's lodgings, and going by water back to the Temple did pay my
debts in several places in order to my examining my accounts tomorrow to
my great content. So in the evening home, and after supper (my father at
my brother's) and merrily practising to dance, which my wife hath begun
to learn this day of Mr. Pembleton,

     [Pembleton, the dancing-master, made Pepys very jealous, and there
     are many allusions to him in the following pages.  His lessons
     ceased on May 27th.]

but I fear will hardly do any great good at it, because she is conceited
that she do well already, though I think no such thing. So to bed. At
Westminster Hall, this day, I buy a book lately printed and licensed by
Dr. Stradling, the Bishop of London's chaplin, being a book discovering
the practices and designs of the papists, and the fears of some of our
own fathers of the Protestant church heretofore of the return to Popery
as it were prefacing it.

The book is a very good book; but forasmuch as it touches one of the
Queenmother's fathers confessors, the Bishop, which troubles many good
men and members of Parliament, hath called it in, which I am sorry for.
Another book I bought, being a collection of many expressions of the
great Presbyterian Preachers upon publique occasions, in the late times,
against the King and his party, as some of Mr. Marshall, Case, Calamy,
Baxter, &c., which is good reading now, to see what they then did teach,
and the people believe, and what they would seem to believe now.
Lastly, I did hear that the Queen is much grieved of late at the King's
neglecting her, he having not supped once with her this quarter of a
year, and almost every night with my Lady Castlemaine; who hath been
with him this St. George's feast at Windsor, and came home with him last
night; and, which is more, they say is removed as to her bed from her
own home to a chamber in White Hall, next to the King's own; which I am
sorry to hear, though I love her much.

26th (Lord's-day). Lay pretty long in bed talking with my wife, and then
up and set to the making up of my monthly accounts, but Tom coming, with
whom I was angry for botching my camlott coat, to tell me that my father
and he would dine with me, and that my father was at our church, I got
me ready and had a very good sermon of a country minister upon "How
blessed a thing it is for brethren to live together in unity!" So home
and all to dinner, and then would have gone by coach to have seen my
Lord Sandwich at Chelsey if the man would have taken us, but he denying
it we staid at home, and I all the afternoon upon my accounts, and find
myself worth full L700, for which I bless God, it being the most I was
ever yet worth in money. In the evening (my father being gone to my
brother's to lie to-night) my wife, Ashwell, and the boy and I, and the
dogg, over the water and walked to Half-way house, and beyond into the
fields, gathering of cowslipps, and so to Half-way house, with some cold
lamb we carried with us, and there supped, and had a most pleasant walk
back again, Ashwell all along telling us some parts of their mask
at Chelsey School, which was very pretty, and I find she hath a most
prodigious memory, remembering so much of things acted six or seven
years ago. So home, and after reading my vows, being sleepy, without
prayers to bed, for which God forgive me!

27th. Up betimes and to my office, where doing business alone a good
while till people came about business to me. Will Griffin tells me this
morning that Captain Browne, Sir W. Batten's brother-in-law, is dead
of a blow given him two days ago by a seaman, a servant of his, being
drunk, with a stone striking him on the forehead, for which I am sorry,
he having a good woman and several small children. At the office all the
morning, at noon dined at home with my wife, merry, and after dinner by
water to White Hall; but found the Duke of York gone to St. James's for
this summer; and thence with Mr. Coventry, to whose chamber I went, and
Sir W. Pen up to the Duke's closett. And a good while with him about our
Navy business; and so I to White Hall, and there alone a while with my
Lord Sandwich discoursing about his debt to the Navy, wherein he hath
given me some things to resolve him in. Thence to my Lord's lodging,
and thither came Creed to me, and he and I walked a great while in the
garden, and thence to an alehouse in the market place to drink fine
Lambeth ale, and so to Westminster Hall, and after walking there a great
while, home by coach, where I found Mary gone from my wife, she being
too high for her, though a very good servant, and my boy too will be
going in a few days, for he is not for my family, he is grown so out
of order and not to be ruled, and do himself, against his brother's
counsel, desire to be gone, which I am sorry for, because I love the boy
and would be glad to bring him to good. At home with my wife and Ashwell
talking of her going into the country this year, wherein we had like to
have fallen out, she thinking that I have a design to have her go, which
I have not, and to let her stay here I perceive will not be convenient,
for she expects more pleasure than I can give her here, and I fear I
have done very ill in letting her begin to learn to dance. The Queen
(which I did not know) it seems was at Windsor, at the late St. George's
feast there; and the Duke of Monmouth dancing with her with his hat in
his hand, the King came in and kissed him, and made him put on his hat,
which every body took notice of. After being a while at my office home
to supper and to bed, my Will being come home again after being at his
father's all the last week taking physique.

28th. Up betimes and to my office, and there all the morning, only
stepped up to see my wife and her dancing master at it, and I think
after all she will do pretty well at it. So to dinner, Mr. Hunt dining
with us, and so to the office, where we sat late, and then I to my
office casting up my Lord's sea accounts over again, and putting them in
order for payment, and so home to supper and to bed.

29th. Up betimes, and after having at my office settled some accounts
for my Lord Sandwich, I went forth, and taking up my father at my
brother's, took coach and towards Chelsey, 'lighting at an alehouse near
the Gatehouse at Westminster to drink our morning draught, and so up
again and to Chelsey, where we found my Lord all alone at a little table
with one joynt of meat at dinner; we sat down and very merry talking,
and mightily extolling the manner of his retirement, and the goodness of
his diet, which indeed is so finely dressed: the mistress of the
house, Mrs. Becke, having been a woman of good condition heretofore,
a merchant's wife, and hath all things most excellently dressed; among
others, her cakes admirable, and so good that my Lord's words were, they
were fit to present to my Lady Castlemaine. From ordinary discourse my
Lord fell to talk of other matters to me, of which chiefly the second
part of the fray, which he told me a little while since of, between Mr.
Edward Montagu and himself, which is that after that he had since
been with him three times and no notice taken at all of any difference
between them, and yet since that he hath forborn coming to him almost
two months, and do speak not only slightly of my Lord every where, but
hath complained to my Lord Chancellor of him, and arrogated all that
ever my Lord hath done to be only by his direction and persuasion.
Whether he hath done the like to the King or no, my Lord knows not; but
my Lord hath been with the King since, and finds all things fair; and
my Lord Chancellor hath told him of it, but with so much contempt of Mr.
Montagu, as my Lord knows himself very secure against any thing the fool
can do; and notwithstanding all this, so noble is his nature, that he
professes himself ready to show kindness and pity to Mr. Montagu on any
occasion. My Lord told me of his presenting Sir H. Bennet with a gold
cupp of L100, which he refuses, with a compliment; but my Lord would
have been glad he had taken it, that he might have had some obligations
upon him which he thinks possible the other may refuse to prevent it;
not that he hath any reason to doubt his kindness. But I perceive great
differences there are at Court; and Sir H. Bennet and my Lord Bristol,
and their faction, are likely to carry all things before them (which my
Lord's judgment is, will not be for the best), and particularly against
the Chancellor, who, he tells me, is irrecoverably lost: but, however,
that he will not actually joyne in anything against the Chancellor, whom
he do own to be his most sure friend, and to have been his greatest;
and therefore will not openly act in either, but passively carry himself
even. The Queen, my Lord tells me, he thinks he hath incurred
some displeasure with, for his kindness to his neighbour, my Lady
Castlemaine. My Lord tells me he hath no reason to fall for her sake,
whose wit, management, nor interest, is not likely to hold up any man,
and therefore he thinks it not his obligation to stand for her against
his own interest. The Duke and Mr. Coventry my Lord says he is very well
with, and fears not but they will show themselves his very good friends,
specially at this time, he being able to serve them, and they needing
him, which he did not tell me wherein. Talking of the business of
Tangier, he tells me that my Lord Tiviott is gone away without the least
respect paid to him, nor indeed to any man, but without his commission;
and (if it be true what he says) having laid out seven or eight thousand
pounds in commodities for the place; and besides having not only
disobliged all the Commissioners for Tangier, but also Sir Charles
Barkeley the other day, who, speaking in behalf of Colonel Fitz-Gerald,
that having been deputy-governor there already, he ought to have
expected and had the governorship upon the death or removal of the
former governor. And whereas it is said that he and his men are Irish,
which is indeed the main thing that hath moved the King and Council
to put in Tiviott to prevent the Irish having too great and the whole
command there under Fitz-Gerald; he further said that there was never
an Englishman fit to command Tangier; my Lord Tiviott answered yes, that
there were many more fit than himself or Fitz-Gerald either. So that
Fitz-Gerald being so great with the Duke of York, and being already made
deputy-governor, independent of my Lord Tiviott, and he being also left
here behind him for a while, my Lord Sandwich do think that, putting all
these things together, the few friends he hath left, and the ill
posture of his affairs, my Lord Tiviott is not a man of the conduct and
management that either people take him to be, or is fit for the command
of the place. And here, speaking of the Duke of York and Sir Charles
Barkeley, my Lord tells me that he do very much admire the good
management, and discretion, and nobleness of the Duke, that whatever
he may be led by him or Mr. Coventry singly in private, yet he did not
observe that in publique matters, but he did give as ready hearing and
as good acceptance to any reasons offered by any other man against the
opinions of them, as he did to them, and would concur in the prosecution
of it. Then we came to discourse upon his own sea accompts, and came
to a resolution what and how to proceed in them; wherein he resolved,
though I offered him a way of evading the greatest part of his debt
honestly, by making himself debtor to the Parliament, before the King's
time, which he might justly do, yet he resolved to go openly and nakedly
in it, and put himself to the kindness of the King and Duke, which
humour, I must confess, and so did tell him (with which he was not a
little pleased) had thriven very well with him, being known to be a man
of candid and open dealing, without any private tricks or hidden designs
as other men commonly have in what they do. From that we had discourse
of Sir G. Carteret, who he finds kind to him, but it may be a little
envious, and most other men are, and of many others; and upon the whole
do find that it is a troublesome thing for a man of any condition at
Court to carry himself even, and without contracting enemys or envyers;
and that much discretion and dissimulation is necessary to do it. My
father staid a good while at the window and then sat down by himself
while my Lord and I were thus an hour together or two after dinner
discoursing, and by and by he took his leave, and told me he would
stay below for me. Anon I took leave, and coming down found my father
unexpectedly in great pain and desiring for God's sake to get him a bed
to lie upon, which I did, and W. Howe and I staid by him, in so great
pain as I never saw, poor wretch, and with that patience, crying only:
Terrible, terrible pain, God help me, God help me, with the mournful
voice, that made my heart ake. He desired to rest a little alone to see
whether it would abate, and W. Howe and I went down and walked in the
gardens, which are very fine, and a pretty fountayne, with which I was
finely wetted, and up to a banquetting house, with a very fine prospect,
and so back to my father, who I found in such pain that I could not bear
the sight of it without weeping, never thinking that I should be able to
get him from thence, but at last, finding it like to continue, I got him
to go to the coach, with great pain, and driving hard, he all the while
in a most unsufferable torment (meeting in the way with Captain Ferrers
going to my Lord, to tell him that my Lady Jemimah is come to town,
and that Will Stankes is come with my father's horses), not staying the
coach to speak with any body, but once, in St. Paul's Churchyard, we
were forced to stay, the jogging and pain making my father vomit, which
it never had done before. At last we got home, and all helping him we
got him to bed presently, and after half an hour's lying in his naked
bed (it being a rupture [with] which he is troubled, and has been this
20 years, but never in half the pain and with so great swelling as now,
and how this came but by drinking of cold small beer and sitting long
upon a low stool and then standing long after it he cannot tell)....
After which he was at good ease, and so continued, and so fell to sleep,
and we went down whither W. Stankes was come with his horses. But it is
very pleasant to hear how he rails at the rumbling and ado that is in
London over it is in the country, that he cannot endure it. He supped
with us, and very merry, and then he to his lodgings at the Inne with
the horses, and so we to bed, I to my father who is very well again, and
both slept very well.

30th. Up, and after drinking my morning draft with my father and W.
Stankes, I went forth to Sir W. Batten, who is going (to no purpose as
he uses to do) to Chatham upon a survey. So to my office, where till
towards noon, and then to the Exchange, and back home to dinner, where
Mrs. Hunt, my father, and W. Stankes; but, Lord! what a stir Stankes
makes with his being crowded in the streets and wearied in walking in
London, and would not be wooed by my wife and Ashwell to go to a play,
nor to White Hall, or to see the lyons,

     [The Tower menagerie, with its famous lions, which was one of the
     chief sights of London, and gave rise to a new English word, was not
     abolished until the early part of the present century.]

though he was carried in a coach. I never could have thought there had
been upon earth a man so little curious in the world as he is. At the
office all the afternoon till 9 at night, so home to cards with my
father, wife, and Ashwell, and so to bed.




MAY 1663

May 1st. Up betimes and my father with me, and he and I all the morning
and Will Stankes private, in my wife's closet above, settling our
matters concerning our Brampton estate, &c., and I find that there will
be, after all debts paid within L100, L50 per annum clear coming towards
my father's maintenance, besides L25 per annum annuities to my Uncle
Thomas and Aunt Perkins. Of which, though I was in my mind glad, yet
thought it not fit to let my father know it thoroughly, but after he had
gone out to visit my uncle Thomas and brought him to dinner with him,
and after dinner I got my father, brother Tom, and myself together, I
did make the business worse to them, and did promise L20 out of my own
purse to make it L50 a year to my father, propounding that Stortlow
may be sold to pay L200 for his satisfaction therein and the rest to go
towards payment of debts and legacies. The truth is I am fearful lest my
father should die before debts are paid, and then the land goes to Tom
and the burden of paying all debts will fall upon the rest of the land.
Not that I would do my brother any real hurt. I advised my father to
good husbandry and to living within the compass of L50 a year, and all
in such kind words, as not only made, them but myself to weep, and I
hope it will have a good effect. That being done, and all things agreed
on, we went down, and after a glass of wine we all took horse, and I,
upon a horse hired of Mr. Game, saw him out of London, at the end of
Bishopsgate Street, and so I turned and rode, with some trouble, through
the fields, and then Holborn, &c., towards Hide Park, whither all the
world, I think, are going, and in my going, almost thither, met W. Howe
coming galloping upon a little crop black nag; it seems one that was
taken in some ground of my Lord's, by some mischance being left by his
master, a thief; this horse being found with black cloth ears on, and
a false mayne, having none of his own; and I back again with him to the
Chequer, at Charing Cross, and there put up my own dull jade, and by
his advice saddled a delicate stone-horse of Captain Ferrers's, and with
that rid in state to the Park, where none better mounted than I almost,
but being in a throng of horses, seeing the King's riders showing tricks
with their managed horses, which were very strange, my stone-horse
was very troublesome, and begun to, fight with other horses, to the
dangering him and myself, and with much ado I got out, and kept myself
out of harm's way.. Here I saw nothing good, neither the King, nor my
Lady Castlemaine, nor any great ladies or beauties being there, there
being more pleasure a great deal at an ordinary day; or else those few
good faces that there were choked up with the many bad ones, there being
people of all sorts in coaches there, to some thousands, I think. Going
thither in the highway, just by the Park gate, I met a boy in a sculler
boat, carried by a dozen people at least, rowing as hard as he could
drive, it seems upon some wager. By and by, about seven or eight
o'clock, homeward; and changing my horse again, I rode home, coaches
going in great crowds to the further end of the town almost. In my way,
in Leadenhall Street, there was morris-dancing which I have not seen a
great while. So set my horse up at Game's, paying 5s. for him. And so
home to see Sir J. Minnes, who is well again, and after staying talking
with him awhile, I took leave and went to hear Mrs. Turner's daughter,
at whose house Sir J. Minnes lies, play on the harpsicon; but, Lord! it
was enough to make any man sick to hear her; yet I was forced to commend
her highly. So home to supper and to bed, Ashwell playing upon the
tryangle very well before I went to bed. This day Captain Grove sent me
a side of pork, which was the oddest present, sure, that was ever made
any man; and the next, I remember I told my wife, I believe would be
a pound of candles, or a shoulder of mutton; but the fellow do it in
kindness, and is one I am beholden to. So to bed very weary, and a
little galled for lack of riding, praying to God for a good journey to
my father, of whom I am afeard, he being so lately ill of his pain.

2nd. Being weary last night, I slept till almost seven o'clock, a thing
I have not done many a day. So up and to my office (being come to some
angry words with my wife about neglecting the keeping of the house
clean, I calling her beggar, and she me pricklouse, which vexed me) and
there all the morning. So to the Exchange and then home to dinner, and
very merry and well pleased with my wife, and so to the office again,
where we met extraordinary upon drawing up the debts of the Navy to my
Lord Treasurer. So rose and up to Sir W. Pen to drink a glass of bad
syder in his new far low dining room, which is very noble, and so home,
where Captain Ferrers and his lady are come to see my wife, he being to
go the beginning of next week to France to sea and I think to fetch
over my young Lord Hinchinbroke. They being gone I to my office to write
letters by the post, and so home to supper and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day). Up before 5 o'clock and alone at setting my Brampton
papers to rights according to my father's and my computation and
resolution the other day to my good content, I finding that there will
be clear saved to us L50 per annum, only a debt of it may be L100. So
made myself ready and to church, where Sir W. Pen showed me the young
lady which young Dawes, that sits in the new corner-pew in the church,
hath stole away from Sir Andrew Rickard, her guardian, worth L1000
per annum present, good land, and some money, and a very well-bred and
handsome lady: he, I doubt, but a simple fellow. However, he got this
good luck to get her, which methinks I could envy him with all my heart.
Home to dinner with my wife, who not being very well did not dress
herself but staid at home all day, and so I to church in the afternoon
and so home again, and up to teach Ashwell the grounds of time and other
things on the tryangle, and made her take out a Psalm very well, she
having a good ear and hand. And so a while to my office, and then home
to supper and prayers, to bed, my wife and I having a little falling out
because I would not leave my discourse below with her and Ashwell to go
up and talk with her alone upon something she has to say. She reproached
me but I had rather talk with any body than her, by which I find I think
she is jealous of my freedom with Ashwell, which I must avoid giving
occasion of.

4th. Up betimes and to setting my Brampton papers in order and looking
over my wardrobe against summer, and laying things in order to send to
my brother to alter. By and by took boat intending to have gone down
to Woolwich, but seeing I could not get back time enough to dinner,
I returned and home. Whither by and by the dancing-master' came, whom
standing by, seeing him instructing my wife, when he had done with her,
he would needs have me try the steps of a coranto, and what with his
desire and my wife's importunity, I did begin, and then was obliged to
give him entry-money 10s., and am become his scholler. The truth is, I
think it a thing very useful for a gentleman, and sometimes I may have
occasion of using it, and though it cost me what I am heartily sorry
it should, besides that I must by my oath give half as much more to the
poor, yet I am resolved to get it up some other way, and then it will
not be above a month or two in a year. So though it be against my
stomach yet I will try it a little while; if I see it comes to any great
inconvenience or charge I will fling it off. After I had begun with the
steps of half a coranto, which I think I shall learn well enough, he
went away, and we to dinner, and by and by out by coach, and set my wife
down at my Lord Crew's, going to see my Lady Jem. Montagu, who is lately
come to town, and I to St. James's; where Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Pen and
I staid a good while for the Duke's coming in, but not coming, we walked
to White Hall; and meeting the King, we followed him into the Park,
where Mr. Coventry and he talked of building a new yacht, which the
King is resolved to have built out of his privy purse, he having some
contrivance of his own. The talk being done, we fell off to White Hall,
leaving the King in the Park, and going back, met the Duke going towards
St. James's to meet us. So he turned back again, and to his closett
at White Hall; and there, my Lord Sandwich present, we did our weekly
errand, and so broke up; and I down into the garden with my Lord
Sandwich (after we had sat an hour at the Tangier Committee); and after
talking largely of his own businesses, we begun to talk how matters are
at Court: and though he did not flatly tell me any such thing, yet I do
suspect that all is not kind between the King and the Duke, and that the
King's fondness to the little Duke do occasion it; and it may be that
there is some fear of his being made heir to the Crown. But this my Lord
did not tell me, but is my guess only; and that my Lord Chancellor is
without doubt falling past hopes. He being gone to Chelsey by coach I
to his lodgings, where my wife staid for me, and she from thence to see
Mrs. Pierce and called me at Whitehall stairs (where I went before by
land to know whether there was any play at Court to-night) and there
being none she and I to Mr. Creed to the Exchange, where she bought
something, and from thence by water to White Fryars, and wife to see
Mrs. Turner, and then came to me at my brother's, where I did give him
order about my summer clothes, and so home by coach, and after supper
to bed to my wife, with whom I have not lain since I used to lie with my
father till to-night.

5th. Up betimes and to my office, and there busy all the morning, among
other things walked a good while up and down with Sir J. Minnes, he
telling many old stories of the Navy, and of the state of the Navy at
the beginning of the late troubles, and I am troubled at my heart to
think, and shall hereafter cease to wonder, at the bad success of the
King's cause, when such a knave as he (if it be true what he says) had
the whole management of the fleet, and the design of putting out of my
Lord Warwick, and carrying the fleet to the King, wherein he failed most
fatally to the King's ruin. Dined at home, and after dinner up to try
my dance, and so to the office again, where we sat all the afternoon. In
the evening Deane of Woolwich went home with me and showed me the use of
a little sliding ruler, less than that I bought the other day, which
is the same with that, but more portable; however I did not seem to
understand or even to have seen anything of it before, but I find him an
ingenious fellow, and a good servant in his place to the King. Thence to
my office busy writing letters, and then came Sir W. Warren, staying for
a letter in his business by the post, and while that was writing he and
I talked about merchandise, trade, and getting of money. I made it my
business to enquire what way there is for a man bred like me to come to
understand anything of trade. He did most discretely answer me in
all things, shewing me the danger for me to meddle either in ships or
merchandise of any sort or common stocks, but what I have to keep at
interest, which is a good, quiett, and easy profit, and once in a little
while something offers that with ready money you may make use of money
to good profit. Wherein I concur much with him, and parted late with
great pleasure and content in his discourse, and so home to supper and
to bed. It has been this afternoon very hot and this evening also, and
about 11 at night going to bed it fell a-thundering and lightening, the
greatest flashes enlightening the whole body of the yard, that ever I
saw in my life.

6th. Up betimes and to my office a good while at my new rulers, then to
business, and towards noon to the Exchange with Creed, where we met with
Sir J. Minnes coming in his coach from Westminster, who tells us, in
great heat, that, by God, the Parliament will make mad work; that they
will render all men incapable of any military or civil employment that
have borne arms in the late troubles against the King, excepting some
persons; which, if it be so, as I hope it is not, will give great cause
of discontent, and I doubt will have but bad effects. I left them at the
Exchange and walked to Paul's Churchyard to look upon a book or two, and
so back, and thence to the Trinity House, and there dined, where, among
other discourse worth hearing among the old seamen, they tell us that
they have catched often in Greenland in fishing whales with the iron
grapnells that had formerly been struck into their bodies covered over
with fat; that they have had eleven hogsheads of oyle out of the tongue
of a whale. Thence after dinner home to my office, and there busy till
the evening. Then home and to supper, and while at supper comes Mr.
Pembleton, and after supper we up to our dancing room and there danced
three or four country dances, and after that a practice of my coranto I
began with him the other day, and I begin to think that I shall be able
to do something at it in time. Late and merry at it, and so weary to
bed.

7th. Up betimes and to my office awhile, and then by water with my wife,
leaving her at the new Exchange, and I to see Dr. Williams, and spoke
with him about my business with Tom Trice, and so to my brother's, who
I find very careful now-a-days, more than ordinary in his business and
like to do well. From thence to Westminster, and there up and down from
the Hall to the Lobby, the Parliament sitting. Sir Thomas Crew this
day tells me that the Queen, hearing that there was L40,000 per annum
brought into her account among the other expences of the Crown to the
Committee of Parliament, she took order to let them know that she hath
yet for the payment of her whole family received but L4,000, which is
a notable act of spirit, and I believe is true. So by coach to my Lord
Crew's, and there dined with him. He tells me of the order the House of
Commons have made for the drawing an Act for the rendering none capable
of preferment or employment in the State, but who have been loyall and
constant to the King and Church; which will be fatal to a great many,
and makes me doubt lest I myself, with all my innocence during the late
times, should be brought in, being employed in the Exchequer; but, I
hope, God will provide for me. This day the new Theatre Royal begins to
act with scenes the Humourous Lieutenant, but I have not time to see it,
nor could stay to see my Lady Jemimah lately come to town, and who was
here in the house, but dined above with her grandmother. But taking my
wife at my brother's home by coach, and the officers being at Deptford
at a Pay we had no office, but I took my wife by water and so spent the
evening, and so home with great pleasure to supper, and then to bed.

8th. Up very early and to my office, there preparing letters to my
father of great import in the settling of our affairs, and putting him
upon a way [of] good husbandry, I promising to make out of my own purse
him up to L50 per annum, till either by my uncle Thomas's death or the
fall of the Wardrobe place he be otherwise provided. That done I by
water to the Strand, and there viewed the Queen-Mother's works at
Somersett House, and thence to the new playhouse, but could not get in
to see it. So to visit my Lady Jemimah, who is grown much since I saw
her; but lacks mightily to be brought into the fashion of the court
to set her off: Thence to the Temple, and there sat till one o'clock
reading at Playford's in Dr. Usher's 'Body of Divinity' his discourse of
the Scripture, which is as much, I believe, as is anywhere said by any
man, but yet there is room to cavill, if a man would use no faith to the
tradition of the Church in which he is born, which I think to be as good
an argument as most is brought for many things, and it may be for that
among others. Thence to my brother's, and there took up my wife and
Ashwell to the Theatre Royall, being the second day of its being opened.
The house is made with extraordinary good contrivance, and yet hath some
faults, as the narrowness of the passages in and out of the Pitt, and
the distance from the stage to the boxes, which I am confident cannot
hear; but for all other things it is well, only, above all, the musique
being below, and most of it sounding under the very stage, there is no
hearing of the bases at all, nor very well of the trebles, which sure
must be mended. The play was "The Humerous Lieutenant," a play that
hath little good in it, nor much in the very part which, by the King's
command, Lacy now acts instead of Clun. In the dance, the tall devil's
actions was very pretty. The play being done, we home by water, having
been a little shamed that my wife and woman were in such a pickle, all
the ladies being finer and better dressed in the pitt than they used, I
think, to be. To my office to set down this day's passage, and, though
my oath against going to plays do not oblige me against this house,
because it was not then in being, yet believing that at the time my
meaning was against all publique houses, I am resolved to deny myself
the liberty of two plays at Court, which are in arreare to me for the
months of March and April, which will more than countervail this excess,
so that this month of May is the first that I must claim a liberty of
going to a Court play according to my oath. So home to supper, and at
supper comes Pembleton, and afterwards we all up to dancing till late,
and so broke up and to bed, and they say that I am like to make a
dancer.

9th. Up betimes and to my office, whither sooner than ordinary comes
Mr. Hater desiring to speak a word to me alone, which I was from the
disorder of his countenance amused at, and so the poor man began telling
me that by Providence being the last Lord's day at a meeting of some
Friends upon doing of their duties, they were surprised, and he carried
to the Counter, but afterwards released; however, hearing that Sir W.
Batten do hear of [it,] he thought it good to give me an account of it,
lest it might tend to any prejudice to me. I was extraordinary surprised
with it, and troubled for him, knowing that now it is out it is
impossible for me to conceal it, or keep him in employment under me
without danger to myself. I cast about all I could, and did give him the
best advice I could, desiring to know if I should promise that he would
not for the time to come commit the same, he told me he desired that I
would rather forbear to promise that, for he durst not do it, whatever
God in His providence shall do with him, and that for my part he did
bless God and thank me for all the love and kindness I have shewed
him hitherto. I could not without tears in my eyes discourse with him
further, but at last did pitch upon telling the truth of the whole
to Mr. Coventry as soon as I could, and to that end did use means to
prevent Sir W. Batten (who came to town last night) from going to that
end to-day, lest he might doe it to Sir G. Carteret or Mr. Coventry
before me; which I did prevail and kept him at the office all the
morning. At noon dined at home with a heavy heart for the poor man, and
after dinner went out to my brother's, and thence to Westminster, where
at Mr. Jervas's, my old barber, I did try two or three borders and
perriwiggs, meaning to wear one; and yet I have no stomach [for it,] but
that the pains of keeping my hair clean is so great. He trimmed me, and
at last I parted, but my mind was almost altered from my first purpose,
from the trouble that I foresee will be in wearing them also. Thence by
water home and to the office, where busy late, and so home to supper and
bed, with my mind much troubled about T. Hater.

10th (Lord's day). Up betimes, and put on a black cloth suit, with
white lynings under all, as the fashion is to wear, to appear under the
breeches. So being ready walked to St. James's, where I sat talking with
Mr. Coventry, while he made himself ready, about several businesses of
the Navy, and afterwards, the Duke being gone out, he and I walked to
White Hall together over the Park, I telling him what had happened to
Tom Hater, at which he seems very sorry, but tells me that if it is not
made very publique, it will not be necessary to put him away at present,
but give him good caution for the time to come. However, he will speak
to the Duke about it and know his pleasure. Parted with him there, and I
walked back to St. James's, and was there at mass, and was forced in the
crowd to kneel down; and mass being done, to the King's Head
ordinary, whither I sent for Mr. Creed and there we dined, where many
Parliament-men; and most of their talk was about the news from Scotland,
that the Bishop of Galloway was besieged in his house by some woman, and
had like to have been outraged, but I know not how he was secured;
which is bad news, and looks just as it did in the beginning of the late
troubles. From thence they talked of rebellion; and I perceive they make
it their great maxime to be sure to master the City of London, whatever
comes of it or from it. After that to some other discourse, and,
among other things, talking of the way of ordinaries, that it is very
convenient, because a man knows what he hath to pay: one did wish that,
among many bad, we could learn two good things of France, which were
that we would not think it below the gentleman, or person of honour at a
tavern, to bargain for his meat before he eats it; and next, to take no
servant without certificate from some friend or gentleman of his good
behaviour and abilities. Hence with Creed into St. James's Park, and
there walked all the afternoon, and thence on foot home, and after a
little while at my office walked in the garden with my wife, and so home
to supper, and after prayers to bed. My brother Tom supped with me,
and should have brought my aunt Ellen with him; she was not free to go
abroad.

11th. Up betimes, and by water to Woolwich on board the Royall James,
to see in what dispatch she is to be carried about to Chatham. So to the
yard a little, and thence on foot to Greenwich, where going I was set
upon by a great dogg, who got hold of my garters, and might have done me
hurt; but, Lord, to see in what a maze I was, that, having a sword
about me, I never thought of it, or had the heart to make use of it, but
might, for want of that courage, have been worried. Took water there and
home, and both coming and going did con my lesson on my Ruler to measure
timber, which I think I can well undertake now to do. At home there
being Pembleton I danced, and I think shall come on to do something in a
little time, and after dinner by coach with Sir W. Pen (setting down his
daughter at Clerkenwell), to St. James's, where we attended the Duke of
York: and, among other things, Sir G. Carteret and I had a great dispute
about the different value of the pieces of eight rated by Mr. Creed
at 4s. and 5d., and by Pitts at 4s. and 9d., which was the greatest
husbandry to the King? he persisting that the greatest sum was; which is
as ridiculous a piece of ignorance as could be imagined. However, it is
to be argued at the Board, and reported to the Duke next week; which I
shall do with advantage, I hope. Thence to the Tangier Committee, where
we should have concluded in sending Captain Cuttance and the rest to
Tangier to deliberate upon the design of the Mole before they begin to
work upon it, but there being not a committee (my Lord intending to
be there but was taken up at my Lady Castlemayne's) I parted and went
homeward, after a little discourse with Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who
tells me that my Lady Castlemaine hath now got lodgings near the King's
chamber at Court; and that the other day Dr. Clerke and he did dissect
two bodies, a man and a woman; before the King, with which the King was
highly pleased. By water and called upon Tom Trice by appointment with
Dr. Williams, but the Dr. did not come, it seems by T. Trice's desire,
not thinking he should be at leisure. However, in general we talked of
our business, and I do not find that he will come to any lower terms
than L150, which I think I shall not give him but by law, and so
we parted, and I called upon Mr. Crumlum, and did give him the 10s.
remaining, not laid out of the L5 I promised him for the school, with
which he will buy strings, and golden letters upon the books I did give
them. I sat with him and his wife a great while talking, and she is [a]
pretty woman, never yet with child, and methinks looks as if her mouth
watered now and then upon some of her boys. Then upon Tom Pepys, the
Turner, desiring his father and his letter to Piggott signifying his
consent to the selling of his land for the paying of us his money, and
so home, and finding Pembleton there we did dance till it was late, and
so to supper and to bed.

12th. Up between four and five, and after dressing myself then to my
office to prepare business against the afternoon, where all the morning,
and dined at noon at home, where a little angry with my wife for minding
nothing now but the dancing-master, having him come twice a day, which
is a folly. Again, to my office. We sat till late, our chief business
being the reconciling the business of the pieces of eight mentioned
yesterday before the Duke of York, wherein I have got the day, and they
are all brought over to what I said, of which I am proud. Late writing
letters, and so home to supper and to bed. Here I found Creed staying
for me, and so after supper I staid him all night and lay with me, our
great discourse being the folly of our two doting knights, of which I am
ashamed.

13th. Lay till 6 o'clock and then up, and after a little talk and mirth,
he went away, and I to my office, where busy all the morning, and at
noon home to dinner, and after dinner Pembleton came and I practised.
But, Lord! to see how my wife will not be thought to need telling by me
or Ashwell, and yet will plead that she has learnt but a month, which
causes many short fallings out between us. So to my office, whither
one-eyed Cooper came to see me, and I made him to show me the use of
platts, and to understand the lines, and how to find how lands bear,
&c., to my great content. Then came Mr. Barrow, storekeeper of Chatham,
who tells me many things, how basely Sir W. Batten has carried himself
to him, and in all things else like a passionate dotard, to the King's
great wrong. God mend all, for I am sure we are but in an ill condition
in the Navy, however the King is served in other places. Home to supper,
to cards, and to bed.

14th. Up betimes and put up some things to send to Brampton. Then abroad
to the Temple, and up and down about business, and met Mr. Moore; and
with him to an alehouse in Holborn; where in discourse he told me that
he fears the King will be tempted to endeavour the setting the Crown
upon the little Duke, which may cause troubles; which God forbid, unless
it be his due! He told me my Lord do begin to settle to business again,
which I am glad of, for he must not sit out, now he has done his own
business by getting his estate settled, and that the King did send for
him the other day to my Lady Castlemaine's, to play at cards, where he
lost L50; for which I am sorry, though he says my Lord was pleased at
it, and said he would be glad at any time to lose L50 for the King to
send for him to play, which I do not so well like. Thence home, and
after dinner to the office, where we sat till night, and then made up
my papers and letters by the post, and so home to dance with Pembleton.
This day we received a baskett from my sister Pall, made by her of
paper, which hath a great deal of labour in it for country innocent
work. After supper to bed, and going to bed received a letter from Mr.
Coventry desiring my coming to him to-morrow morning, which troubled me
to think what the business should be, fearing it must be some bad news
in Tom Hater's business.

15th. Up betimes and walked to St. James's, where Mr. Coventry being in
bed I walked in the Park, discoursing with the keeper of the Pell Mell,
who was sweeping of it; who told me of what the earth is mixed that do
floor the Mall, and that over all there is cockle-shells powdered, and
spread to keep it fast; which, however, in dry weather, turns to dust
and deads the ball. Thence to Mr. Coventry; and sitting by his bedside,
he did tell me that he sent for me to discourse upon my Lord Sandwich's
allowances for his several pays, and what his thoughts are concerning
his demands; which he could not take the freedom to do face to face,
it being not so proper as by me: and did give me a most friendly and
ingenuous account of all; telling me how unsafe, at this juncture, while
every man's, and his actions particularly, are descanted upon, it is
either for him to put the Duke upon doing, or my Lord himself to desire
anything extraordinary, 'specially the King having been so bountifull
already; which the world takes notice of even to some repinings. All
which he did desire me to discourse with my Lord of; which I have
undertook to do. We talked also of our office in general, with which he
told me that he was now-a-days nothing so satisfied as he was wont to
be. I confess I told him things are ordered in that way that we must
of necessity break in a little time a pieces. After done with him about
these things, he told me that for Mr. Hater the Duke's word was in short
that he found he had a good servant, an Anabaptist, and unless he did
carry himself more to the scandal of the office, he would bear with
his opinion till he heard further, which do please me very much.
Thence walked to Westminster, and there up and down in the Hall and the
Parliament House all the morning; at noon by coach to my Lord Crew's,
hearing that Lord Sandwich did dine there; where I told him what had
passed between Mr. Coventry and myself; with which he was contented,
though I could perceive not very well pleased. And I do believe that my
Lord do find some other things go against his mind in the House; for in
the motion made the other day in the House by my Lord Bruce, that none
be capable of employment but such as have been loyal and constant to
the King and Church, the General [Monk] and my Lord were mentioned to be
excepted; and my Lord Bruce did come since to my Lord, to clear himself
that he meant nothing to his prejudice, nor could it have any such
effect if he did mean it. After discourse with my Lord; to dinner with
him; there dining there my Lord Montagu of Boughton, Mr. William Montagu
his brother, the Queen's Sollicitor, &c., and a fine dinner. Their
talk about a ridiculous falling-out two days ago at my Lord of Oxford's
house, at an entertainment of his, there being there my Lord of
Albemarle, Lynsey, two of the Porters, my Lord Bellasses, and others,
where there were high words and some blows, and pulling off of
perriwiggs; till my Lord Monk took away some of their swords, and sent
for some soldiers to guard the house till the fray was ended. To such a
degree of madness the nobility of this age is come! After dinner I went
up to Sir Thomas Crew, who lies there not very well in his head, being
troubled with vapours and fits of dizziness: and there I sat talking
with him all the afternoon from one discourse to another, the most was
upon the unhappy posture of things at this time; that the King do mind
nothing but pleasures, and hates the very sight or thoughts of business;
that my Lady Castlemaine rules him, who, he says, hath all the tricks of
Aretin

     [An allusion to Aretin's infamous letters and sonnets accompanying
     the as infamous "Postures" engraved by Marc Antonio from the designs
     of Julio Romano (Steinman's "Memoir of Barbara, Duchess of
     Cleveland," privately printed, 1871).]

that are to be practised to give pleasure. In which he is too able ....
but what is the unhappiness in that, as the Italian proverb says, "lazzo
dritto non vuolt consiglio." If any of the sober counsellors give him
good advice, and move him in anything that is to his good and honour,
the other part, which are his counsellers of pleasure, take him when
he is with my Lady Castlemaine, and in a humour of delight, and then
persuade him that he ought not to hear nor listen to the advice of those
old dotards or counsellors that were heretofore his enemies: when, God
knows! it is they that now-a-days do most study his honour. It seems the
present favourites now are my Lord Bristol, Duke of Buckingham, Sir H.
Bennet, my Lord Ashley, and Sir Charles Barkeley; who, among them, have
cast my Lord Chancellor upon his back, past ever getting up again; there
being now little for him to do, and he waits at Court attending to speak
to the King as others do: which I pray God may prove of good effects,
for it is feared it will be the same with my Lord Treasurer shortly. But
strange to hear how my Lord Ashley, by my Lord Bristol's means (he being
brought over to the Catholique party against the Bishopps, whom he hates
to the death, and publicly rails against them; not that he is become a
Catholique, but merely opposes the Bishopps; and yet, for aught I hear,
the Bishopp of London keeps as great with the King as ever) is got into
favour, so much that, being a man of great business and yet of pleasure,
and drolling too, he, it is thought, will be made Lord Treasurer upon
the death or removal of the good old man. My Lord Albemarle, I hear,
do bear through and bustle among them, and will not be removed from the
King's good opinion and favour, though none of the Cabinett; but yet
he is envied enough. It is made very doubtful whether the King do not
intend the making of the Duke of Monmouth legitimate;

     [Thomas Ross, Monmouth's tutor, put the idea into his head that
     Charles II. had married his mother.  The report was sedulously
     spread abroad, and obtained some kind of credence, until, in June,
     1678, the king set the matter at rest by publishing a declaration,
     which was entered in the Council book and registered in Chancery.
     The words of the declaration are: "That to avoid any dispute which
     might happen in time to come concerning the succession of the Crown,
     he (Charles) did declare, in the presence of Almighty God, that he
     never gave, nor made any contract of marriage, nor was married to
     Mrs. Barlow, alias Waters, the Duke of Monmouth's mother, nor to any
     other woman whatsoever, but to his present wife, Queen Catherine,
     then living."]

but surely the Commons of England will never do it, nor the Duke of
York suffer it, whose lady, I am told, is very troublesome to him by
her jealousy. But it is wonderful that Sir Charles Barkeley should be so
great still, not [only] with the King, but Duke also; who did so stiffly
swear that he had lain with her.

     [The conspiracy of Sir Charles Berkeley, Lord Arran, Jermyn, Talbot,
     and Killigrew to traduce Anne Hyde was peculiarly disgraceful, and
     the conduct of all the actors in the affair of the marriage, from
     Lord Clarendon downwards, was far from creditable (see Lister's
     "Life of Clarendon," ii. 68-79)]

And another one Armour that he rode before her on horseback in Holland I
think.... No care is observed to be taken of the main chance, either
for maintaining of trade or opposing of factions, which, God knows, are
ready to break out, if any of them (which God forbid!) should dare to
begin; the King and every man about him minding so much their pleasures
or profits. My Lord Hinchingbroke, I am told, hath had a mischance to
kill his boy by his birding-piece going off as he was a-fowling. The gun
was charged with small shot, and hit the boy in the face and about the
temples, and he lived four days. In Scotland, it seems, for all
the newes-books tell us every week that they are all so quiett, and
everything in the Church settled, the old woman had like to have killed,
the other day, the Bishop of Galloway, and not half the Churches of the
whole kingdom conform. Strange were the effects of the late thunder and
lightning about a week since at Northampton, coming with great rain,
which caused extraordinary floods in a few hours, bearing away bridges,
drowning horses, men, and cattle. Two men passing over a bridge on
horseback, the arches before and behind them were borne away, and that
left which they were upon: but, however, one of the horses fell over,
and was drowned. Stacks of faggots carried as high as a steeple, and
other dreadful things; which Sir Thomas Crew showed me letters to
him about from Mr. Freemantle and others, that it is very true. The
Portugalls have choused us,

     [The word chouse appears to have been introduced into the language
     at the beginning of the seventeenth century.  In 1609, a Chiaus sent
     by Sir Robert Shirley, from Constantinople to London, had chiaused
     (or choused) the Turkish and Persian merchants out of L4,000, before
     the arrival of his employer, and had decamped.  The affair was quite
     recent in 1610, when Jonson's "Alchemist" appeared, in which it is
     alluded to.]

it seems, in the Island of Bombay, in the East Indys; for after a great
charge of our fleets being sent thither with full commission from the
King of Portugall to receive it, the Governour by some pretence or other
will not deliver it to Sir Abraham Shipman, sent from the King, nor to
my Lord of Marlborough; which the King takes highly ill, and I fear our
Queen will fare the worse for it. The Dutch decay there exceedingly, it
being believed that their people will revolt from them there, and they
forced to give over their trade. This is talked of among us, but how
true I understand not. Sir Thomas showed me his picture and Sir Anthony
Vandike's, in crayon in little, done exceedingly well. Having thus
freely talked with him, and of many more things, I took leave, and by
coach to St. James's, and there told Mr. Coventry what I had done with
my Lord with great satisfaction, and so well pleased home, where I found
it almost night, and my wife and the dancing-master alone above, not
dancing but talking. Now so deadly full of jealousy I am that my heart
and head did so cast about and fret that I could not do any business
possibly, but went out to my office, and anon late home again and ready
to chide at every thing, and then suddenly to bed and could hardly
sleep, yet durst not say any thing, but was forced to say that I had bad
news from the Duke concerning Tom Hater as an excuse to my wife, who
by my folly has too much opportunity given her with the man, who is a
pretty neat black man, but married. But it is a deadly folly and plague
that I bring upon myself to be so jealous and by giving myself such
an occasion more than my wife desired of giving her another month's
dancing. Which however shall be ended as soon as I can possibly. But I
am ashamed to think what a course I did take by lying to see whether
my wife did wear drawers to-day as she used to do, and other things to
raise my suspicion of her, but I found no true cause of doing it.

16th. Up with my mind disturbed and with my last night's doubts upon me,
for which I deserve to be beaten if not really served as I am fearful of
being, especially since God knows that I do not find honesty enough in
my own mind but that upon a small temptation I could be false to her,
and therefore ought not to expect more justice from her, but God pardon
both my sin and my folly herein. To my office and there sitting all the
morning, and at noon dined at home. After dinner comes Pembleton, and I
being out of humour would not see him, pretending business, but, Lord!
with what jealousy did I walk up and down my chamber listening to hear
whether they danced or no, which they did, notwithstanding I afterwards
knew and did then believe that Ashwell was with them. So to my office
awhile, and, my jealousy still reigning, I went in and, not out of any
pleasure but from that only reason, did go up to them to practise, and
did make an end of "La Duchesse," which I think I should, with a little
pains, do very well. So broke up and saw him gone. Then Captain Cocke
coming to me to speak about my seeming discourtesy to him in the
business of his hemp, I went to the office with him, and there
discoursed it largely and I think to his satisfaction. Then to my
business, writing letters and other things till late at night, and so
home to supper and bed. My mind in some better ease resolving to prevent
matters for the time to come as much as I can, it being to no purpose to
trouble myself for what is past, being occasioned too by my own folly.

17th (Lord's day). Up and in my chamber all the morning, preparing my
great letters to my father, stating to him the perfect condition of our
estate. My wife and Ashwell to church, and after dinner they to church
again, and I all the afternoon making an end of my morning's work,
which I did about the evening, and then to talk with my wife till after
supper, and so to bed having another small falling out and myself vexed
with my old fit of jealousy about her dancing-master. But I am a fool
for doing it. So to bed by daylight, I having a very great cold, so as
I doubt whether I shall be able to speak to-morrow at our attending the
Duke, being now so hoarse.

18th. Up and after taking leave of Sir W. Batten, who is gone this day
towards Portsmouth (to little purpose, God knows) upon his survey, I
home and spent the morning at dancing; at noon Creed dined with us and
Mr. Deane Woolwich, and so after dinner came Mr. Howe, who however had
enough for his dinner, and so, having done, by coach to Westminster, she
to Mrs. Clerke and I to St. James's, where the Duke being gone down by
water to-day with the King I went thence to my Lord Sandwich's lodgings,
where Mr. Howe and I walked a while, and going towards Whitehall through
the garden Dr. Clerk and Creed called me across the bowling green,
and so I went thither and after a stay went up to Mrs. Clerke who was
dressing herself to go abroad with my wife. But, Lord! in what a poor
condition her best chamber is, and things about her, for all the outside
and show that she makes, but I found her just such a one as Mrs. Pierce,
contrary to my expectation, so much that I am sick and sorry to see it.
Thence for an hour Creed and I walked to White Hall, and into the Park,
seeing the Queen and Maids of Honour passing through the house going to
the Park. But above all, Mrs. Stuart is a fine woman, and they say now a
common mistress to the King,

     [The king said to 'la belle' Stuart, who resisted all his
     importunities, that he hoped he should live to see her "ugly and
     willing" (Lord Dartmouth's note to Burnet's "Own Time," vol. i.,
     p. 436, ed.  1823).]

as my Lady Castlemaine is; which is a great pity. Thence taking a coach
to Mrs. Clerke's, took her, and my wife, and Ashwell, and a Frenchman,
a kinsman of hers, to the Park, where we saw many fine faces, and one
exceeding handsome, in a white dress over her head, with many others
very beautiful. Staying there till past eight at night, I carried
Mrs. Clerke and her Frenchman, who sings well, home, and thence home
ourselves, talking much of what we had observed to-day of the poor
household stuff of Mrs. Clerke and mere show and flutter that she makes
in the world; and pleasing myself in my own house and manner of living
more than ever I did by seeing how much better and more substantially I
live than others do. So to supper and bed.

19th. Up pretty betimes, but yet I observe how my dancing and lying a
morning or two longer than ordinary for my cold do make me hard to rise
as I used to do, or look after my business as I am wont. To my chamber
to make an end of my papers to my father to be sent by the post
to-night, and taking copies of them, which was a great work, but I did
it this morning, and so to my office, and thence with Sir John Minnes to
the Tower; and by Mr. Slingsby, and Mr. Howard, Controller of the Mint,
we were shown the method of making this new money, from the beginning to
the end, which is so pretty that I did take a note of every part of it
and set them down by themselves for my remembrance hereafter. That being
done it was dinner time, and so the Controller would have us dine with
him and his company, the King giving them a dinner every day. And very
merry and good discourse about the business we have been upon, and after
dinner went to the Assay Office and there saw the manner of assaying
of gold and silver, and how silver melted down with gold do part, just
being put into aqua-fortis, the silver turning into water, and the gold
lying whole in the very form it was put in, mixed of gold and silver,
which is a miracle; and to see no silver at all but turned into water,
which they can bring again into itself out of the water. And here I
was made thoroughly to understand the business of the fineness and
coarseness of metals, and have put down my lessons with my other
observations therein. At table among other discourse they told us of two
cheats, the best I ever heard. One, of a labourer discovered to convey
away the bits of silver cut out pence by swallowing them down into
his belly, and so they could not find him out, though, of course, they
searched all the labourers; but, having reason to doubt him, they did,
by threats and promises, get him to confess, and did find L7 of it in
his house at one time. The other of one that got a way of coyning money
as good and passable and large as the true money is, and yet saved fifty
per cent. to himself, which was by getting moulds made to stamp groats
like old groats, which is done so well, and I did beg two of them which
I keep for rarities, that there is not better in the world, and is as
good, nay, better than those that commonly go, which was the only thing
that they could find out to doubt them by, besides the number that the
party do go to put off, and then coming to the Comptroller of the Mint,
he could not, I say, find out any other thing to raise any doubt upon,
but only their being so truly round or near it, though I should never
have doubted the thing neither. He was neither hanged nor burned, the
cheat was thought so ingenious, and being the first time they could ever
trap him in it, and so little hurt to any man in it, the money being as
good as commonly goes. Thence to the office till the evening, we sat,
and then by water (taking Pembleton with us), over the water to the
Halfway House, where we played at nine-pins, and there my damned
jealousy took fire, he and my wife being of a side and I seeing of him
take her by the hand in play, though I now believe he did [it] only in
passing and sport. Thence home and being 10 o'clock was forced to land
beyond the Custom House, and so walked home and to my office, and having
dispatched my great letters by the post to my father, of which I keep
copies to show by me and for my future understanding, I went home to
supper and bed, being late. The most observables in the making of money
which I observed to-day, is the steps of their doing it.

1. Before they do anything they assay the bullion, which is done, if
it be gold, by taking an equal weight of that and of silver, of each a
small weight, which they reckon to be six ounces or half a pound troy;
this they wrap up in within lead. If it be silver, they put such a
quantity of that alone and wrap it up in lead, and then putting them
into little earthen cupps made of stuff like tobacco pipes, and put
them into a burning hot furnace, where, after a while, the whole body is
melted, and at last the lead in both is sunk into the body of the cupp,
which carries away all the copper or dross with it, and left the pure
gold and silver embodyed together, of that which hath both been put into
the cupp together, and the silver alone in these where it was put alone
in the leaden case. And to part the silver and the gold in the first
experiment, they put the mixed body into a glass of aqua-fortis, which
separates them by spitting out the silver into such small parts that you
cannot tell what it becomes, but turns into the very water and leaves
the gold at the bottom clear of itself, with the silver wholly spit out,
and yet the gold in the form that it was doubled together in when it was
a mixed body of gold and silver, which is a great mystery; and after all
this is done to get the silver together out of the water is as strange.
But the nature of the assay is thus: the piece of gold that goes into
the furnace twelve ounces, if it comes out again eleven ounces, and the
piece of silver which goes in twelve and comes out again eleven and two
pennyweight, are just of the alloy of the standard of England. If it
comes out, either of them, either the gold above eleven, as very fine
will sometimes within very little of what it went in, or the silver
above eleven and two pennyweight, as that also will sometimes come out
eleven and ten penny weight or more, they are so much above the goodness
of the standard, and so they know what proportion of worse gold and
silver to put to such a quantity of the bullion to bring it to the exact
standard. And on the contrary, [if] it comes out lighter, then such a
weight is beneath the standard, and so requires such a proportion of
fine metal to be put to the bullion to bring it to the standard, and
this is the difference of good and bad, better and worse than the
standard, and also the difference of standards, that of Seville being
the best and that of Mexico worst, and I think they said none but
Seville is better than ours.

2. They melt it into long plates, which, if the mould do take ayre, then
the plate is not of an equal heaviness in every part of it, as it often
falls out.

3. They draw these plates between rollers to bring them to an even
thickness all along and every plate of the same thickness, and it is
very strange how the drawing it twice easily between the rollers will
make it as hot as fire, yet cannot touch it.

4. They bring it to another pair of rollers, which they call adjusting
it, which bring it to a greater exactness in its thickness than the
first could be.

5. They cut them into round pieces, which they do with the greatest
ease, speed, and exactness in the world.

6. They weigh these, and where they find any to be too heavy they file
them, which they call sizeing them; or light, they lay them by, which
is very seldom, but they are of a most exact weight, but however, in the
melting, all parts by some accident not being close alike, now and then
a difference will be, and, this filing being done, there shall not be
any imaginable difference almost between the weight of forty of these
against another forty chosen by chance out of all their heaps.

7. These round pieces having been cut out of the plates, which in
passing the rollers are bent, they are sometimes a little crooked or
swelling out or sinking in, and therefore they have a way of clapping
100 or 2 together into an engine, which with a screw presses them so
hard that they come out as flat as is possible.

8. They blanch them.

9. They mark the letters on the edges, which is kept as the great secret
by Blondeau, who was not in the way, and so I did not speak with him
to-day.

     [Professor W. C. Roberts-Austen, C.B., F.R.S., chemist to the Royal
     Mint, refers to Pepys's Diary and to Blondeau's machine in his
     Cantor Lectures on "Alloys used for Coinage," printed in the
     "journal of the Society of Arts" (vol. xxxii.).  He writes, "The
     hammer was still retained for coining in the Mint in the Tower of
     London, but the question of the adoption of the screw-press by the
     Moneyers appears to have been revived in 1649, when the Council of
     State had it represented to them that the coins of the Government
     might be more perfectly and beautifully done, and made equal to any
     coins in Europe.  It was proposed to send to France for Peter
     Blondeau, who had invented and improved a machine and method for
     making all coins 'with the most beautiful polish and equality on the
     edge, or with any proper inscription or graining.'  He came on the
     3rd of September, and although a Committee of the Mint reported in
     favour of his method of coining, the Company of Moneyers, who appear
     to have boasted of the success of their predecessors in opposing the
     introduction of the mill and screw-press in Queen Elizabeth's reign,
     prevented the introduction of the machinery, and consequently he did
     not produce pattern pieces until 1653....  It is certain that
     Blondeau did not invent, but only improved the method of coining by
     the screw-press, and I believe his improvements related chiefly to a
     method for 'rounding the pieces before they are sized, and in making
     the edges of the moneys with letters and graining,' which he
     undertook to reveal to the king.  Special stress is laid on the
     engines wherewith the rims were marked, 'which might be kept secret
     among few men.'  I cannot find that there is any record in the Paris
     mint of Blondeau's employment there, and the only reference to his
     invention in the Mint records of this country refers to the
     'collars,' or perforated discs of metal surrounding the 'blank'
     while it was struck into a coin.  There is, however, in the British
     Museum a MS. believed to be in Blondeau's hand, in which he claims
     his process, 'as a new invention, to make a handsome coyne, than can
     be found in all the world besides, viz., that shall not only be
     stamped on both flat sides, but shall even be marked with letters on
     the thickness of the brim.'  The letters were raised.  The press
     Blondeau used was, I believe, the ordinary screw-press, and I
     suppose that the presses drawn in Akerman's well-known plate of the
     coining-room of the Mint in the Tower, published in 1803 ['Microcosm
     of London,' vol.  ii., p. 202], if not actually the same machines,
     were similar to those erected in 1661-62 by Sir William Parkhurst
     and Sir Anthony St. Leger, wardens of the Mint, at a cost of L1400,
     Professor Roberts-Austen shows that Benvenuto Cellini used a similar
     press to that attributed to Blondeau, and he gives an illustration
     of this in his lecture (p. 810).  In a letter to the editor the
     professor writes: "Pepys's account of the operations of coining, and
     especially of assaying gold and silver, is very interesting and
     singularly accurate considering that he could not have had technical
     knowledge of the subject."]

10. They mill them, that is, put on the marks on both sides at once with
great exactness and speed, and then the money is perfect. The mill is
after this manner: one of the dyes, which has one side of the piece cut,
is fastened to a thing fixed below, and the other dye (and they tell me
a payre of dyes will last the marking of L10,000 before it be worn out,
they and all other their tools being made of hardened steel, and the
Dutchman who makes them is an admirable artist, and has so much by the
pound for every pound that is coyned to find a constant supply of dyes)
to an engine above, which is moveable by a screw, which is pulled by
men; and then a piece being clapped by one sitting below between the two
dyes, when they meet the impression is set, and then the man with his
finger strikes off the piece and claps another in, and then the other
men they pull again and that is marked, and then another and another
with great speed. They say that this way is more charge to the King than
the old way, but it is neater, freer from clipping or counterfeiting,
the putting of the words upon the edges being not to be done (though
counterfeited) without an engine of the charge and noise that no
counterfeit will be at or venture upon, and it employs as many men as
the old and speedier. They now coyne between L16 and L24,000 in a week.
At dinner they did discourse very finely to us of the probability that
there is a vast deal of money hid in the land, from this:--that in King
Charles's time there was near ten millions of money coyned, besides what
was then in being of King James's and Queene Elizabeth's, of which there
is a good deal at this day in being. Next, that there was but L750,000
coyned of the Harp and Crosse money,

     [The Commonwealth coins (stamped with the cross and harp, and the
     inscription, "The Commonwealth of England") were called in by
     proclamation, September, 1660, and when brought to the Mint an equal
     amount of lawful money was allowed for them, weight for weight,
     deducting only for the coinage (Ruding's "Annals of the Coinage," 18
     19, vol. iii., p. 293).  The harp was taken out of the naval flags
     in May, 1660.]

and of this there was L500,000 brought in upon its being called in. And
from very good arguments they find that there cannot be less of it
in Ireland and Scotland than L100,000; so that there is but L150,000
missing; and of that, suppose that there should be not above 650,000
still remaining, either melted down, hid, or lost, or hoarded up in
England, there will then be but L100,000 left to be thought to have been
transported. Now, if L750,000 in twelve years' time lost but a L100,000
in danger of being transported, then within thirty-five years' time
will have lost but L3,888,880 and odd pounds; and as there is L650,000
remaining after twelve years' time in England, so after thirty-five
years' time, which was within this two years, there ought in proportion
to have been resting L6,111,120 or thereabouts, beside King James's and
Queen Elizabeth's money. Now that most of this must be hid is evident,
as they reckon, because of the dearth of money immediately upon the
calling-in of the State's money, which was L500,000 that came in; and
yet there was not any money to be had in this City, which they say to
their own observation and knowledge was so. And therefore, though I can
say nothing in it myself, I do not dispute it.

20th. Up and to my office, and anon home and to see my wife dancing with
Pembleton about noon, and I to the Trinity House to dinner and after
dinner home, and there met Pembleton, who I perceive has dined with my
wife, which she takes no notice of, but whether that proceeds out of
design, or fear to displease me I know not, but it put me into a great
disorder again, that I could mind nothing but vexing, but however I
continued my resolution of going down by water to Woolwich, took my wife
and Ashwell; and going out met Mr. Howe come to see me, whose horse we
caused to be set up, and took him with us. The tide against us, so I
went ashore at Greenwich before, and did my business at the yard about
putting things in order as to their proceeding to build the new yacht
ordered to be built by Christopher Pett,

     [In the minutes of the Royal Society is the following entry: "June
     11, 1662.  Dr. Pett's brother shewed a draught of the pleasure boat
     which he intended to make for the king" (Birch's "History of the
     Royal Society," vol. i., p. 85).  Peter Pett had already built a
     yacht for the king at Deptford.]

and so to Woolwich town, where at an alehouse I found them ready to
attend my coming, and so took boat again, it being cold, and I sweating,
with my walk, which was very pleasant along the green come and pease,
and most of the way sang, he and I, and eat some cold meat we had, and
with great pleasure home, and so he took horse again, and Pembleton
coming, we danced a country dance or two and so broke up and to bed, my
mind restless and like to be so while she learns to dance. God forgive
my folly.

21st. Up, but cannot get up so early as I was wont, nor my mind to
business as it should be and used to be before this dancing. However, to
my office, where most of the morning talking of Captain Cox of Chatham
about his and the whole yard's difference against Mr. Barrow the
storekeeper, wherein I told him my mind clearly, that he would be upheld
against the design of any to ruin him, he being we all believed, but Sir
W. Batten his mortal enemy, as good a servant as any the King has in
the yard. After much good advice and other talk I home and danced with
Pembleton, and then the barber trimmed me, and so to dinner, my wife and
I having high words about her dancing to that degree that I did enter
and make a vow to myself not to oppose her or say anything to dispraise
or correct her therein as long as her month lasts, in pain of 2s. 6d.
for every time, which, if God pleases, I will observe, for this roguish
business has brought us more disquiett than anything [that] has happened
a great while. After dinner to my office, where late, and then home; and
Pembleton being there again, we fell to dance a country dance or two,
and so to supper and bed. But being at supper my wife did say something
that caused me to oppose her in, she used the word devil, which vexed
me, and among other things I said I would not have her to use that word,
upon which she took me up most scornfully, which, before Ashwell and
the rest of the world, I know not now-a-days how to check, as I would
heretofore, for less than that would have made me strike her. So that
I fear without great discretion I shall go near to lose too my command
over her, and nothing do it more than giving her this occasion of
dancing and other pleasures, whereby her mind is taken up from her
business and finds other sweets besides pleasing of me, and so makes her
that she begins not at all to take pleasure in me or study to please
me as heretofore. But if this month of her dancing were but out (as my
first was this night, and I paid off Pembleton for myself) I shall hope
with a little pains to bring her to her old wont. This day Susan that
lived with me lately being out of service, and I doubt a simple wench,
my wife do take her for a little time to try her at least till she goes
into the country, which I am yet doubtful whether it will be best for me
to send her or no, for fear of her running off in her liberty before I
have brought her to her right temper again.

22nd. Up pretty betimes, and shall, I hope, come to myself and business
again, after a small playing the truant, for I find that my interest and
profit do grow daily, for which God be praised and keep me to my duty.
To my office, and anon one tells me that Rundall, the house-carpenter of
Deptford, hath sent me a fine blackbird, which I went to see. He tells
me he was offered 20s. for him as he came along, he do so whistle. So
to my office, and busy all the morning, among other things, learning to
understand the course of the tides, and I think I do now do it. At noon
Mr. Creed comes to me, and he and I to the Exchange, where I had much
discourse with several merchants, and so home with him to dinner, and
then by water to Greenwich, and calling at the little alehouse at the
end of the town to wrap a rag about my little left toe, being new sore
with walking, we walked pleasantly to Woolwich, in our way hearing the
nightingales sing. So to Woolwich yard, and after doing many things
there, among others preparing myself for a dispute against Sir W. Pen in
the business of Bowyer's, wherein he is guilty of some corruption to the
King's wrong, we walked back again without drinking, which I never do
because I would not make my coming troublesome to any, nor would become
obliged too much to any. In our going back we were overtook by Mr.
Steventon, a purser, and uncle to my clerk Will, who told me how he was
abused in the passing of his accounts by Sir J. Minnes to the degree
that I am ashamed to hear it, and resolve to retrieve the matter if I
can though the poor man has given it over. And however am pleased enough
to see that others do see his folly and dotage as well as myself, though
I believe in my mind the man in general means well.

Took boat at Greenwich and to Deptford, where I did the same thing, and
found Davis, the storekeeper, a knave, and shuffling in the business of
Bewpers, being of the party with Young and Whistler to abuse the King,
but I hope I shall be even with them. So walked to Redriffe, drinking
at the Half-way house, and so walked and by water to White Hall, all our
way by water coming and going reading a little book said to be writ by
a person of Quality concerning English gentry to be preferred before
titular honours, but the most silly nonsense, no sense nor grammar, yet
in as good words that ever I saw in all my life, but from beginning to
end you met not with one entire and regular sentence. At White Hall Sir
G. Carteret was out of the way, and so returned back presently, and home
by water and to bed.

23rd. Waked this morning between four and five by my blackbird, which
whistles as well as ever I heard any; only it is the beginning of many
tunes very well, but there leaves them, and goes no further. So up and
to my office, where we sat, and among other things I had a fray with
Sir J. Minnes in defence of my Will in a business where the old coxcomb
would have put a foot upon him, which was only in Jack Davis and in him
a downright piece of knavery in procuring a double ticket and getting
the wrong one paid as well as the second was to the true party. But it
appeared clear enough to the board that Will was true in it. Home to
dinner, and after dinner by water to the Temple, and there took my
Lyra Viall book bound up with blank paper for new lessons. Thence to
Greatorex's, and there seeing Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen go by coach
I went in to them and to White Hall; where, in the Matted Gallery, Mr.
Coventry was, who told us how the Parliament have required of Sir G.
Carteret and him an account what money shall be necessary to be settled
upon the Navy for the ordinary charge, which they intend to report
L200,000 per annum. And how to allott this we met this afternoon, and
took their papers for our perusal, and so we parted. Only there was
walking in the gallery some of the Barbary company, and there we saw
a draught of the arms of the company, which the King is of, and so
is called the Royall Company, which is, in a field argent an elephant
proper, with a canton on which England and France is quartered,
supported by two Moors. The crest an anchor winged, I think it is,
and the motto too tedious: "Regio floret, patrocinio commercium,
commercioque Regnum." Thence back by water to Greatorex's, and there he
showed me his varnish which he had invented, which appears every whit as
good, upon a stick which he hath done, as the Indian, though it did not
do very well upon my paper ruled with musique lines, for it sunk and did
not shine. Thence home by water, and after a dance with Pembleton to my
office and wrote by the post to Sir W. Batten at Portsmouth to send for
him up against next Wednesday, being our triall day against Field at
Guildhall, in which God give us good end. So home: to supper and to bed.

24th (Lord's day). Having taken one of Mr. Holliard's pills last night
it brought a stool or two this morning, and so forebore going to church
this morning, but staid at home looking over my papers about Tom Trice's
business, and so at noon dined, and my wife telling me that there was a
pretty lady come to church with Peg Pen to-day, I against my intention
had a mind to go to church to see her, and did so, and she is pretty
handsome. But over against our gallery I espied Pembleton, and saw him
leer upon my wife all the sermon, I taking no notice of him, and my wife
upon him, and I observed she made a curtsey to him at coming out without
taking notice to me at all of it, which with the consideration of her
being desirous these two last Lord's days to go to church both forenoon
and afternoon do really make me suspect something more than ordinary,
though I am loth to think the worst, but yet it put and do still keep me
at a great loss in my mind, and makes me curse the time that I consented
to her dancing, and more my continuing it a second month, which was more
than she desired, even after I had seen too much of her carriage with
him. But I must have patience and get her into the country, or at least
to make an end of her learning to dance as soon as I can. After sermon
to Sir W. Pen's, with Sir J. Minnes to do a little business to answer
Mr. Coventry to-night. And so home and with my wife and Ashwell into the
garden walking a great while, discoursing what this pretty wench should
be by her garb and deportment; with respect to Mrs. Pen she may be her
woman, but only that she sat in the pew with her, which I believe he
would not let her do. So home, and read to my wife a fable or two in
Ogleby's AEsop, and so to supper, and then to prayers and to bed. My
wife this evening discoursing of making clothes for the country, which
I seem against, pleading lack of money, but I am glad of it in some
respects because of getting her out of the way from this fellow, and my
own liberty to look after my business more than of late I have done.
So to prayers and to bed. This morning it seems Susan, who I think is
distracted, or however is since she went from me taught to drink, and so
gets out of doors 2 or 3 times a day without leave to the alehouse, did
go before 5 o'clock to-day, making Griffin rise in his shirt to let her
out to the alehouse, she said to warm herself, but her mistress, falling
out with her about it, turned her out of doors this morning, and so she
is gone like an idle slut. I took a pill also this night.

25th. Up, and my pill working a little I staid within most of the
morning, and by and by the barber came and Sarah Kite my cozen, poor
woman, came to see me and borrow 40s. of me, telling me she will pay it
at Michaelmas again to me. I was glad it was no more, being indifferent
whether she pays it me or no, but it will be a good excuse to lend her
nor give her any more. So I did freely at first word do it, and give her
a crown more freely to buy her child something, she being a good-natured
and painful wretch, and one that I would do good for as far as I can
that I might not be burdened. My wife was not ready, and she coming
early did not see her, and I was glad of it. She gone, I up and then
hear that my wife and her maid Ashwell had between them spilled the
pot.... upon the floor and stool and God knows what, and were mighty
merry making of it clean. I took no great notice, but merrily. Ashwell
did by and by come to me with an errand from her mistress to desire
money to buy a country suit for her against she goes as we talked last
night, and so I did give her L4, and believe it will cost me the best
part of 4 more to fit her out, but with peace and honour I am willing to
spare anything so as to be able to keep all ends together, and my power
over her undisturbed. So to my office and by and by home, where my wife
and her master were dancing, and so I staid in my chamber till they had
done, and sat down myself to try a little upon the Lyra viall, my hand
being almost out, but easily brought to again. So by and by to dinner,
and then carried my wife and Ashwell to St. James's, and there they sat
in the coach while I went in, and finding nobody there likely to meet
with the Duke, but only Sir J. Minnes with my Lord Barkely (who speaks
very kindly, and invites me with great compliments to come now and then
and eat with him, which I am glad to hear, though I value not the thing,
but it implies that my esteem do increase rather than fall), and so I
staid not, but into the coach again, and taking up my wife's taylor,
it raining hard, they set me down, and who should our coachman be but
Carleton the Vintner, that should have had Mrs. Sarah, at Westminster,
my Lord Chancellor's, and then to Paternoster Row. I staid there to
speak with my Lord Sandwich, and in my staying, meeting Mr. Lewis
Phillips of Brampton, he and afterwards others tell me that news came
last night to Court, that the King of France is sick of the spotted
fever, and that they are struck in again; and this afternoon my Lord
Mandeville is gone from the King to make him a visit; which will be
great news, and of great import through Europe. By and by, out comes my
Lord Sandwich, and he and I talked a great while about his business, of
his accounts for his pay, and among other things he told me that this
day a vote hath passed that the King's grants of land to my Lord Monk
and him should be made good; which pleases him very well. He also tells
me that things don't go right in the House with Mr. Coventry; I suppose
he means in the business of selling of places; but I am sorry for it.
Thence by coach home, where I found Pembleton, and so I up to dance with
them till the evening, when there came Mr. Alsopp, the King's brewer,
and Lanyon of Plymouth to see me. Mr. Alsopp tells me of a horse of his
that lately, after four days' pain, voided at his fundament four stones,
bigger than that I was cut of, very heavy, and in the middle of each
of them either a piece of iron or wood. The King has two of them in his
closett, and a third the College of Physicians to keep for rarity, and
by the King's command he causes the turd of the horse to be every day
searched to find more. At night to see Sir W. Batten come home this day
from Portsmouth. I met with some that say that the King of France is
poisoned, but how true that is is not known. So home to supper and to
bed pleasant.

26th. Lay long in bed talking and pleasing myself with my wife. So up
and to my office a while and then home, where I found Pembleton, and
by many circumstances I am led to conclude that there is something more
than ordinary between my wife and him, which do so trouble me that I
know not at this very minute that I now write this almost what either
I write or am doing, nor how to carry myself to my wife in it, being
unwilling to speak of it to her for making of any breach and other
inconveniences, nor let it pass for fear of her continuing to offend
me and the matter grow worse thereby. So that I am grieved at the very
heart, but I am very unwise in being so. There dined with me Mr. Creed
and Captain Grove, and before dinner I had much discourse in my chamber
with Mr. Deane, the builder of Woolwich, about building of ships. But
nothing could get the business out of my head, I fearing that this
afternoon by my wife's sending every [one] abroad and knowing that I
must be at the office she has appointed him to come. This is my devilish
jealousy, which I pray God may be false, but it makes a very hell in my
mind, which the God of heaven remove, or I shall be very unhappy. So
to the office, where we sat awhile. By and by my mind being in great
trouble I went home to see how things were, and there I found as I
doubted Mr. Pembleton with my wife, and nobody else in the house, which
made me almost mad, and going up to my chamber after a turn or two I
went out again and called somebody on pretence of business and left him
in my little room at the door (it was the Dutchman, commander of the
King's pleasure boats, who having been beat by one of his men sadly, was
come to the office to-day to complain) telling him I would come again to
him to speak with him about his business. So in great trouble and doubt
to the office, and Mr. Coventry nor Sir G. Carteret being there I made a
quick end of our business and desired leave to be gone, pretending to go
to the Temple, but it was home, and so up to my chamber, and as I think
if they had any intention of hurt I did prevent doing anything at that
time, but I continued in my chamber vexed and angry till he went away,
pretending aloud, that I might hear, that he could not stay, and Mrs.
Ashwell not being within they could not dance. And, Lord! to see how my
jealousy wrought so far that I went softly up to see whether any of
the beds were out of order or no, which I found not, but that did not
content me, but I staid all the evening walking, and though anon my wife
came up to me and would have spoke of business to me, yet I construed
it to be but impudence, and though my heart full yet I did say nothing,
being in a great doubt what to do. So at night, suffered them to go all
to bed, and late put myself to bed in great discontent, and so to sleep.

27th. So I waked by 3 o'clock, my mind being troubled, and so took
occasion by making water to wake my wife, and after having lain till
past 4 o'clock seemed going to rise, though I did it only to see what
she would do, and so going out of the bed she took hold of me and would
know what ailed me, and after many kind and some cross words I began to
tax her discretion in yesterday's business, but she quickly told me my
own, knowing well enough that it was my old disease of jealousy, which I
denied, but to no purpose. After an hour's discourse, sometimes high and
sometimes kind, I found very good reason to think that her freedom with
him is very great and more than was convenient, but with no evil intent,
and so after awhile I caressed her and parted seeming friends, but she
crying in a great discontent. So I up and by water to the Temple, and
thence with Commissioner Pett to St. James's, where an hour with Mr.
Coventry talking of Mr. Pett's proceedings lately in the forest of
Sherwood, and thence with Pett to my Lord Ashley, Chancellor of the
Exchequer; where we met the auditors about settling the business of the
accounts of persons to whom money is due before the King's time in the
Navy, and the clearing of their imprests for what little of their debts
they have received. I find my Lord, as he is reported, a very ready,
quick, and diligent person. Thence I to Westminster Hall, where Term and
Parliament make the Hall full of people; no further news yet of the King
of France, whether he be dead or not. Here I met with my cozen Roger
Pepys, and walked a good while with him, and among other discourse as a
secret he hath committed to nobody but myself, and he tells me that his
sister Claxton now resolving to give over the keeping of his house at
Impington, he thinks it fit to marry again, and would have me, by the
help of my uncle Wight or others, to look him out a widow between thirty
and forty years old, without children, and with a fortune, which he will
answer in any degree with a joynture fit for her fortune. A woman sober,
and no high-flyer, as he calls it. I demanded his estate. He tells me,
which he says also he hath not done to any, that his estate is not full
L800 per annum, but it is L780 per annum, of which L200 is by the death
of his last wife, which he will allot for a joynture for a wife, but the
rest, which lies in Cambridgeshire, he is resolved to leave entire for
his eldest son. I undertook to do what I can in it, and so I shall. He
tells me that the King hath sent to them to hasten to make an end by
midsummer, because of his going into the country; so they have set upon
four bills to dispatch: the first of which is, he says, too devilish a
severe act against conventicles; so beyond all moderation, that he is
afeard it will ruin all: telling me that it is matter of the greatest
grief to him in the world, that he should be put upon this trust of
being a Parliament-man, because he says nothing is done, that he can
see, out of any truth and sincerity, but mere envy and design. Thence
by water to Chelsey, all the way reading a little book I bought of
"Improvement of Trade," a pretty book and many things useful in it. So
walked to Little Chelsey, where I found my Lord Sandwich with Mr. Becke,
the master of the house, and Mr. Creed at dinner, and I sat down with
them, and very merry. After dinner (Mr. Gibbons being come in also
before dinner done) to musique, they played a good Fancy, to which my
Lord is fallen again, and says he cannot endure a merry tune, which is
a strange turn of his humour, after he has for two or three years flung
off the practice of Fancies and played only fidlers' tunes. Then into
the Great Garden up to the Banqueting House; and there by his glass we
drew in the species very pretty. Afterwards to ninepins, where I won a
shilling, Creed and I playing against my Lord and Cooke. This day there
was great thronging to Banstead Downs, upon a great horse-race and
foot-race. I am sorry I could not go thither. So home back as I came, to
London Bridge, and so home, where I find my wife in a musty humour, and
tells me before Ashwell that Pembleton had been there, and she would
not have him come in unless I was there, which I was ashamed of; but
however, I had rather it should be so than the other way. So to my
office, to put things in order there, and by and by comes Pembleton,
and word is brought me from my wife thereof that I might come home. So I
sent word that I would have her go dance, and I would come presently.
So being at a great loss whether I should appear to Pembleton or no, and
what would most proclaim my jealousy to him, I at last resolved to go
home, and took Tom Hater with me, and staid a good while in my chamber,
and there took occasion to tell him how I hear that Parliament is
putting an act out against all sorts of conventicles,

     [16 Car. II., cap. 4, "An Act to prevent and suppresse seditious
     Conventicles."  It was enacted that anyone of the age of sixteen or
     upwards present at an unlawful assembly or conventicle was to incur
     fine or imprisonment.  A conventicle was defined as an assembly of
     more than five persons besides the members of a family met together
     for holding worship not according to the rites of the Church of
     England.  The act was amended 22 Car. II., cap. i (1670), and
     practically repealed by the Toleration Act of 1689, but the act 22
     Car. II., cap. i, was specially repealed 52 Geo. III., cap. 155, s.
     1.]

and did give him good counsel, not only in his own behalf, but my own,
that if he did hear or know anything that could be said to my prejudice,
that he would tell me, for in this wicked age (specially Sir W. Batten
being so open to my reproaches, and Sir J. Minnes, for the neglect of
their duty, and so will think themselves obliged to scandalize me all
they can to right themselves if there shall be any inquiry into the
matters of the Navy, as I doubt there will) a man ought to be prepared
to answer for himself in all things that can be inquired concerning him.
After much discourse of this nature to him I sent him away, and then
went up, and there we danced country dances, and single, my wife and
I; and my wife paid him off for this month also, and so he is cleared.
After dancing we took him down to supper, and were very merry, and
I made myself so, and kind to him as much as I could, to prevent his
discourse, though I perceive to my trouble that he knows all, and may do
me the disgrace to publish it as much as he can. Which I take very ill,
and if too much provoked shall witness it to her. After supper and he
gone we to bed.

28th. Up this morning, and my wife, I know not for what cause, being
against going to Chelsey to-day, it being a holy day (Ascension Day) and
I at leisure, it being the first holy day almost that we have observed
ever since we came to the office, we did give Ashwell leave to go by
herself, and I out to several places about business. Among others to
Dr. Williams, to reckon with him for physique that my wife has had for
a year or two, coming to almost L4. Then to the Exchange, where I hear
that the King had letters yesterday from France that the King there is
in a [way] of living again, which I am glad to hear. At the coffee-house
in Exchange Alley I bought a little book, "Counsell to Builders," by
Sir Balth. Gerbier. It is dedicated almost to all the men of any great
condition in England, so that the Epistles are more than the book
itself, and both it and them not worth a turd, that I am ashamed that
I bought it. Home and there found Creed, who dined with us, and after
dinner by water to the Royall Theatre; but that was so full they told
us we could have no room. And so to the Duke's House; and there
saw "Hamlett" done, giving us fresh reason never to think enough of
Betterton. Who should we see come upon the stage but Gosnell, my wife's
maid? but neither spoke, danced, nor sung; which I was sorry for. But
she becomes the stage very well. Thence by water home, after we had
walked to and fro, backwards and forwards, six or seven times in the
Temple walks, disputing whether to go by land or water. By land home,
and thence by water to Halfway House, and there eat some supper we
carried with us, and so walked home again, it being late we were forced
to land at the dock, my wife and they, but I in a humour not willing to
daub my shoes went round by the Custom House. So home, and by and by to
bed, Creed lying with me in the red chamber all night.

29th. This day is kept strictly as a holy-day, being the King's
Coronation. We lay long in bed, and it rained very hard, rain and hail,
almost all the morning. By and by Creed and I abroad, and called at
several churches; and it is a wonder to see, and by that to guess the
ill temper of the City at this time, either to religion in general, or
to the King, that in some churches there was hardly ten people in the
whole church, and those poor people. So to a coffee-house, and there in
discourse hear the King of France is likely to be well again. So home
to dinner, and out by water to the Royall Theatre, but they not acting
to-day, then to the Duke's house, and there saw "The Slighted Mayde,"
wherein Gosnell acted Pyramena, a great part, and did it very well, and
I believe will do it better and better, and prove a good actor. The play
is not very excellent, but is well acted, and in general the actors, in
all particulars, are better than at the other house. Thence to the Cocke
alehouse, and there having drunk, sent them with Creed to see the German
Princess,

     [Mary Moders, alias Stedman, a notorious impostor, who pretended to
     be a German princess.  Her arrival as the German princess "at the
     Exchange Tavern, right against the Stocks betwixt the Poultry and
     Cornhill, at 5 in the morning...., with her marriage to
     Carleton the taverner's wife's brother," are incidents fully
     narrated in Francis Kirkman's "Counterfeit Lady Unveiled," 1673
     ("Boyne's Tokens," ed.  Williamson, vol. i., p. 703).  Her
     adventures formed the plot of a tragi-comedy by T. P., entitled "A
     Witty Combat, or the Female Victor," 1663, which was acted with
     great applause by persons of quality in Whitsun week.  Mary Carleton
     was tried at the Old Bailey for bigamy and acquitted, after which
     she appeared on the stage in her own character as the heroine of a
     play entitled "The German Princess."  Pepys went to the Duke's House
     to see her on April 15th, 1664.  The rest of her life was one
     continued course of robbery and fraud, and in 1678 she was executed
     at Tyburn for stealing a piece of plate in Chancery Lane.]

at the Gatehouse, at Westminster, and I to my brother's, and thence to
my uncle Fenner's to have seen my aunt James (who has been long in town
and goes away to-morrow and I not seen her), but did find none of them
within, which I was glad of, and so back to my brother's to speak
with him, and so home, and in my way did take two turns forwards and
backwards through the Fleete Ally to see a couple of pretty [strumpets]
that stood off the doors there, and God forgive me I could scarce stay
myself from going into their houses with them, so apt is my nature to
evil after once, as I have these two days, set upon pleasure again. So
home and to my office to put down these two days' journalls, then home
again and to supper, and then Creed and I to bed with good discourse,
only my mind troubled about my spending my time so badly for these seven
or eight days; but I must impute it to the disquiet that my mind has
been in of late about my wife, and for my going these two days to plays,
for which I have paid the due forfeit by money and abating the times of
going to plays at Court, which I am now to remember that I have cleared
all my times that I am to go to Court plays to the end of this month,
and so June is the first time that I am to begin to reckon.

30th. Up betimes, and Creed and I by water to Fleet Street, and my
brother not being ready, he and I walked to the New Exchange, and there
drank our morning draught of whay, the first I have done this year; but
I perceive the lawyers come all in as they go to the Hall, and I believe
it is very good. So to my brother's, and there I found my aunt James,
a poor, religious, well-meaning, good soul, talking of nothing but God
Almighty, and that with so much innocence that mightily pleased me. Here
was a fellow that said grace so long like a prayer; I believe the fellow
is a cunning fellow, and yet I by my brother's desire did give him
a crown, he being in great want, and, it seems, a parson among the
fanatiques, and a cozen of my poor aunt's, whose prayers she told me
did do me good among the many good souls that did by my father's desires
pray for me when I was cut of the stone, and which God did hear, which
I also in complaisance did own; but, God forgive me, my mind was
otherwise. I had a couple of lobsters and some wine for her, and so, she
going out of town to-day, and being not willing to come home with me to
dinner, I parted and home, where we sat at the office all the morning,
and after dinner all the afternoon till night, there at my office
getting up the time that I have of late lost by not following my
business, but I hope now to settle my mind again very well to my
business. So home, and after supper did wash my feet, and so to bed.

31st (Lord's day). Lay long in bed talking with my wife, and do plainly
see that her distaste (which is beginning now in her again) against
Ashwell arises from her jealousy of me and her, and my neglect of
herself, which indeed is true, and I to blame; but for the time to come
I will take care to remedy all. So up and to church, where I think I did
see Pembleton, whatever the reason is I did not perceive him to look up
towards my wife, nor she much towards him; however, I could hardly keep
myself from being troubled that he was there, which is a madness not
to be excused now that his coming to my house is past, and I hope all
likelyhood of her having occasion to converse with him again. Home to
dinner, and after dinner up and read part of the new play of "The Five
Houres' Adventures," which though I have seen it twice; yet I never did
admire or understand it enough, it being a play of the greatest plot
that ever I expect to see, and of great vigour quite through the whole
play, from beginning to the end. To church again after dinner (my wife
finding herself ill.... did not go), and there the Scot preaching
I slept most of the sermon. This day Sir W. Batten's son's child is
christened in the country, whither Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W, Batten, and
Sir W. Pen are all gone. I wonder, and take it highly ill that I am not
invited by the father, though I know his father and mother, with whom I
am never likely to have much kindness, but rather I study the contrary,
are the cause of it, and in that respect I am glad of it. Being come
from church, I to make up my month's accounts, and find myself clear
worth L726, for which God be praised, but yet I might have been better
by L20 almost had I forborne some layings out in dancing and other
things upon my wife, and going to plays and other things merely to ease
my mind as to the business of the dancing-master, which I bless God is
now over and I falling to my quiet of mind and business again, which I
have for a fortnight neglected too much. This month the greatest news
is, the height and heat that the Parliament is in, in enquiring into the
revenue, which displeases the Court, and their backwardness to give the
King any money. Their enquiring into the selling of places do trouble
a great many among the chief, my Lord Chancellor (against whom
particularly it is carried), and Mr. Coventry; for which I am sorry. The
King of France was given out to be poisoned and dead; but it proves to
be the measles: and he is well, or likely to be soon well again. I find
myself growing in the esteem and credit that I have in the office, and I
hope falling to my business again will confirm me in it, and the saving
of money which God grant! So to supper, prayers, and bed. My whole
family lying longer this morning than was fit, and besides Will having
neglected to brush my clothes, as he ought to do, till I was ready to
go to church, and not then till I bade him, I was very angry, and
seeing him make little matter of it, but seeming to make it a matter
indifferent whether he did it or no, I did give him a box on the ear,
and had it been another day should have done more. This is the second
time I ever struck him.




JUNE 1663

June 1st. Begun again to rise betimes by 4 o'clock, and made an end of
"The Adventures of Five Houres," and it is a most excellent play. So to
my office, where a while and then about several businesses, in my way
to my brother's, where I dined (being invited) with Mr. Peter and
Dean Honiwood, where Tom did give us a very pretty dinner, and we very
pleasant, but not very merry, the Dean being but a weak man, though very
good. I was forced to rise, being in haste to St. James's to attend
the Duke, and left them to end their dinner; but the Duke having been
a-hunting to-day, and so lately come home and gone to bed, we could not
see him, and Mr. Coventry being out of the house too, we walked away to
White Hall and there took coach, and I with Sir J. Minnes to the Strand
May-pole; and there 'light out of his coach, and walked to the New
Theatre, which, since the King's players are gone to the Royal one, is
this day begun to be employed by the fencers to play prizes at. And here
I came and saw the first prize I ever saw in my life: and it was between
one Mathews, who did beat at all weapons, and one Westwicke, who was
soundly cut several times both in the head and legs, that he was all
over blood: and other deadly blows they did give and take in very good
earnest, till Westwicke was in a most sad pickle. They fought at eight
weapons, three bouts at each weapon. It was very well worth seeing,
because I did till this day think that it has only been a cheat; but
this being upon a private quarrel, they did it in good earnest; and
I felt one of their swords, and found it to be very little, if at all
blunter on the edge, than the common swords are. Strange to see what a
deal of money is flung to them both upon the stage between every bout.
But a woful rude rabble there was, and such noises, made my head ake all
this evening. So, well pleased for once with this sight, I walked
home, doing several businesses by the way. In my way calling to see
Commissioner Pett, who lies sick at his daughter, a pretty woman, in
Gracious Street, but is likely to be abroad again in a day or two. At
home I found my wife in bed all this day .... I went to see Sir Wm. Pen,
who has a little pain of his gout again, but will do well. So home to
supper and to bed. This day I hear at Court of the great plot which
was lately discovered in Ireland, made among the Presbyters and others,
designing to cry up the Covenant, and to secure Dublin Castle and other
places; and they have debauched a good part of the army there, promising
them ready money.

     [This  was known as "Blood's Plot," and was named after Colonel
     Thomas Blood, afterwards notorious for his desperate attack upon the
     Duke of Ormond in St. James's Street (1670) and for his robbery of
     the crown jewels in the Tower (1671).  He died August 24th, 1680.]

Some of the Parliament there, they say, are guilty, and some withdrawn
upon it; several persons taken, and among others a son of Scott's, that
was executed here for the King's murder. What reason the King hath, I
know not; but it seems he is doubtfull of Scotland: and this afternoon,
when I was there, the Council was called extraordinary; and they were
opening the letters this last post's coming and going between Scotland
and us and other places. Blessed be God, my head and hands are clear,
and therefore my sleep safe. The King of France is well again.

2d. Up and by water to White Hall and so to St. James's, to Mr.
Coventry; where I had an hour's private talk with him. Most of it was
discourse concerning his own condition, at present being under the
censure of the House, being concerned with others in the Bill for
selling of offices. He tells me, that though he thinks himself to suffer
much in his fame hereby, yet he values nothing more of evil to hang over
him for that it is against no statute, as is pretended, nor more than
what his predecessors time out of mind have taken; and that so soon as
he found himself to be in an errour, he did desire to have his fees
set, which was done; and since that he hath not taken a token more. He
undertakes to prove, that he did never take a token of any captain to
get him employed in his life beforehand, or demanded any thing: and for
the other accusation, that the Cavaliers are not employed, he looked
over the list of them now in the service, and of the twenty-seven that
are employed, thirteen have been heretofore always under the King; two
neutralls, and the other twelve men of great courage, and such as had
either the King's particular commands, or great recommendation to put
them in, and none by himself. Besides that, he says it is not the King's
nor Duke's opinion that the whole party of the late officers should
be rendered desperate. And lastly, he confesses that the more of the
Cavaliers are put in, the less of discipline hath followed in the fleet;
and that, whenever there comes occasion, it must be the old ones that
must do any good, there being only, he says, but Captain Allen good for
anything of them all. He tells me, that he cannot guess whom all this
should come from; but he suspects Sir G. Carteret, as I also do, at
least that he is pleased with it. But he tells me that he will bring Sir
G. Carteret to be the first adviser and instructor of him what to make
his place of benefit to him; telling him that Smith did make his
place worth L5000 and he believed L7000 to him the first year; besides
something else greater than all this, which he forbore to tell me. It
seems one Sir Thomas Tomkins of the House, that makes many mad motions,
did bring it into the House, saying that a letter was left at his
lodgings, subscribed by one Benson (which is a feigned name, for there
is no such man in the Navy), telling him how many places in the Navy
have been sold. And by another letter, left in the same manner since,
nobody appearing, he writes him that there is one Hughes and another
Butler (both rogues, that have for their roguery been turned out of
their places), that will swear that Mr. Coventry did sell their places
and other things. I offered him my service, and will with all my heart
serve him; but he tells me he do not think it convenient to meddle, or
to any purpose, but is sensible of my love therein. So I bade him good
morrow, he being out of order to speak anything of our office business,
and so away to Westminster Hall, where I hear more of the plot from
Ireland; which it seems hath been hatching, and known to the Lord
Lieutenant a great while, and kept close till within three days that
it should have taken effect. The term ended yesterday, and it seems the
Courts rose sooner, for want of causes, than it is remembered to have
done in the memory of man. Thence up and down about business in several
places, as to speak with Mr. Phillips, but missed him, and so to Mr.
Beacham, the goldsmith, he being one of the jury to-morrow in Sir W.
Batten's case against Field. I have been telling him our case, and I
believe he will do us good service there. So home, and seeing my wife
had dined I went, being invited, and dined with Sir W. Batten, Sir J.
Minnes, and others, at Sir W. Batten's, Captain Allen giving them a Foy'
dinner, he being to go down to lie Admiral in the Downs this summer. I
cannot but think it a little strange that having been so civil to him as
I have been he should not invite me to dinner, but I believe it was but
a sudden motion, and so I heard not of it. After dinner to the office,
where all the afternoon till late, and so to see Sir W. Pen, and so home
to supper and to bed. To-night I took occasion with the vintner's man,
who came by my direction to taste again my tierce of claret, to go down
to the cellar with him to consult about the drawing of it; and there,
to my great vexation, I find that the cellar door hath long been kept
unlocked, and above half the wine drunk. I was deadly mad at it, and
examined my people round, but nobody would confess it; but I did examine
the boy, and afterwards Will, and told him of his sitting up after we
were in bed with the maids, but as to that business he denies it, which
I can [not] remedy, but I shall endeavour to know how it went. My wife
did also this evening tell me a story of Ashwell stealing some new
ribbon from her, a yard or two, which I am sorry to hear, and I fear
my wife do take a displeasure against her, that they will hardly stay
together, which I should be sorry for, because I know not where to pick
such another out anywhere.

3rd. Up betimes, and studying of my double horizontal diall against Dean
Honiwood comes to me, who dotes mightily upon it, and I think I must
give it him. So after talking with Sir W. Batten, who is this morning
gone to Guildhall to his trial with Field, I to my office, and there
read all the morning in my statute-book, consulting among others the
statute against selling of offices, wherein Mr. Coventry is so much
concerned; and though he tells me that the statute do not reach him, yet
I much fear that it will. At noon, hearing that the trial is done, and
Sir W. Batten come to the Sun behind the Exchange I went thither, where
he tells me that he had much ado to carry it on his side, but that at
last he did, but the jury, by the judge's favour, did give us but; L10
damages and the charges of the suit, which troubles me; but it is well
it went not against us, which would have been much worse. So to the
Exchange, and thence home to dinner, taking Deane of Woolwich along with
me, and he dined alone with my wife being undressed, and he and I spent
all the afternoon finely, learning of him the method of drawing the
lines of a ship, to my great satisfaction, and which is well worth
my spending some time in, as I shall do when my wife is gone into the
country. In the evening to the office and did some business, then home,
and, God forgive me, did from my wife's unwillingness to tell me whither
she had sent the boy, presently suspect that he was gone to Pembleton's,
and from that occasion grew so discontented that I could hardly speak or
sleep all night.

4th. Up betimes, and my wife and Ashwell and I whiled away the morning
up and down while they got themselves ready, and I did so watch to see
my wife put on drawers, which poor soul she did, and yet I could not get
off my suspicions, she having a mind to go into Fenchurch Street before
she went out for good and all with me, which I must needs construe to be
to meet Pembleton, when she afterwards told me it was to buy a fan
that she had not a mind that I should know of, and I believe it is so.
Specially I did by a wile get out of my boy that he did not yesterday go
to Pembleton's or thereabouts, but only was sent all that time for some
starch, and I did see him bringing home some, and yet all this cannot
make my mind quiet. At last by coach I carried her to Westminster Hall,
and they two to Mrs. Bowyer to go from thence to my wife's father's and
Ashwell to hers, and by and by seeing my wife's father in the Hall, and
being loth that my wife should put me to another trouble and charge by
missing him to-day, I did employ a porter to go from a person unknown to
tell him his daughter was come to his lodgings, and I at a distance did
observe him, but, Lord! what a company of questions he did ask him, what
kind of man I was, and God knows what. So he went home, and after I
had staid in the Hall a good while, where I heard that this day the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Juxon, a man well spoken of by all for a good
man, is dead; and the Bishop of London is to have his seat. Home by
water, where by and by comes Dean Honiwood, and I showed him my double
horizontal diall, and promise to give him one, and that shall be it. So,
without eating or drinking, he went away to Mr. Turner's, where Sir J.
Minnes do treat my Lord Chancellor and a great deal of guests to-day
with a great dinner, which I thank God I do not pay for; and besides,
I doubt it is too late for any man to expect any great service from my
Lord Chancellor, for which I am sorry, and pray God a worse do not come
in his room. So I to dinner alone, and so to my chamber, and then to the
office alone, my head aching and my mind in trouble for my wife, being
jealous of her spending the day, though God knows I have no great
reason. Yet my mind is troubled. By and by comes Will Howe to see us,
and walked with me an hour in the garden, talking of my Lord's falling
to business again, which I am glad of, and his coming to lie at his
lodgings at White Hall again. The match between Sir J. Cutts and my Lady
Jemimah, he says, is likely to go on; for which I am glad. In the Hall
to-day Dr. Pierce tells me that the Queen begins to be brisk, and play
like other ladies, and is quite another woman from what she was, of
which I am glad. It may be, it may make the King like her the better,
and forsake his two mistresses, my Lady Castlemaine and Stewart. He gone
we sat at the office till night, and then home, where my wife is come,
and has been with her father all the afternoon, and so home, and she
and I to walk in the garden, giving ear to her discourse of her father's
affairs, and I found all well, so after putting things in order at my
office, home to supper and to bed.

5th. Up and to read a little, and by and by the carver coming, I
directed him how to make me a neat head for my viall that is making.
About 10 o'clock my wife and I, not without some discontent, abroad by
coach, and I set her at her father's; but their condition is such that
she will not let me see where they live, but goes by herself when I am
out of sight. Thence to my brother's, taking care for a passage for
my wife the next week in a coach to my father's, and thence to Paul's
Churchyard, where I found several books ready bound for me; among
others, the new Concordance of the Bible, which pleases me much, and is
a book I hope to make good use of. Thence, taking the little History of
England with me, I went by water to Deptford, where Sir J. Minnes
and Sir W. Batten attending the Pay; I dined with them, and there Dr.
Britton, parson of the town, a fine man and good company, dined with us,
and good discourse. After dinner I left them and walked to Redriffe,
and thence to White Hall, and at my Lord's lodgings found my wife, and
thence carried her to see my Lady Jemimah, but she was not within. So to
Mr. Turner's, and there saw Mr. Edward Pepys's lady, who my wife concurs
with me to be very pretty, as most women we ever saw. So home, and
after a walk in the garden a little troubled to see my wife take no more
pleasure with Ashwell, but neglect her and leave her at home. Home to
supper and to bed.

6th. Lay in bed till 7 o'clock, yet rose with an opinion that it was
not 5, and so continued though I heard the clock strike, till noon, and
would not believe that it was so late as it truly was. I was hardly ever
so mistaken in my life before. Up and to Sir G. Carteret at his house,
and spoke to him about business, but he being in a bad humour I had no
mind to stay with him, but walked, drinking my morning draft of whay, by
the way, to York House, where the Russia Embassador do lie; and there
I saw his people go up and down louseing themselves: they are all in a
great hurry, being to be gone the beginning of next week. But that that
pleased me best, was the remains of the noble soul of the late Duke of
Buckingham appearing in his house, in every place, in the doorcases and
the windows. By and by comes Sir John Hebden, the Russia Resident, to
me, and he and I in his coach to White Hall, to Secretary Morrice's,
to see the orders about the Russia hemp that is to be fetched from
Archangel for our King, and that being done, to coach again, and he
brought me into the City and so I home; and after dinner abroad by
water, and met by appointment Mr. Deane in the Temple Church, and he and
I over to Mr. Blackbury's yard, and thence to other places, and after
that to a drinking house, in all which places I did so practise and
improve my measuring of timber, that I can now do it with great ease
and perfection, which do please me mightily. This fellow Deane is a
conceited fellow, and one that means the King a great deal of service,
more of disservice to other people that go away with the profits
which he cannot make; but, however, I learn much of him, and he is, I
perceive, of great use to the King in his place, and so I shall give him
all the encouragement I can. Home by water, and having wrote a letter
for my wife to my Lady Sandwich to copy out to send this night's post,
I to the office, and wrote there myself several things, and so home to
supper and bed. My mind being troubled to think into what a temper of
neglect I have myself flung my wife into by my letting her learn to
dance, that it will require time to cure her of, and I fear her going
into the country will but make her worse; but only I do hope in the
meantime to spend my time well in my office, with more leisure than
while she is here. Hebden, to-day in the coach, did tell me how he is
vexed to see things at Court ordered as they are by nobody that attends
to business, but every man himself or his pleasures. He cries up my Lord
Ashley to be almost the only man that he sees to look after business;
and with that ease and mastery, that he wonders at him. He cries out
against the King's dealing so much with goldsmiths, and suffering
himself to have his purse kept and commanded by them. He tells me also
with what exact care and order the States of Holland's stores are kept
in their Yards, and every thing managed there by their builders
with such husbandry as is not imaginable; which I will endeavour to
understand further, if I can by any means learn.

7th (Lord's day). Whit Sunday. Lay long talking with my wife, sometimes
angry and ended pleased and hope to bring our matters to a better
posture in a little time, which God send. So up and to church, where Mr.
Mills preached, but, I know not how, I slept most of the sermon. Thence
home, and dined with my wife and Ashwell and after dinner discoursed
very pleasantly, and so I to church again in the afternoon, and, the
Scot preaching, again slept all the afternoon, and so home, and by and
by to Sir W. Batten's, to talk about business, where my Lady Batten
inveighed mightily against the German Princess, and I as high in the
defence of her wit and spirit, and glad that she is cleared at the
sessions. Thence to Sir W. Pen, who I found ill again of the gout, he
tells me that now Mr. Castle and Mrs. Martha Batten do own themselves to
be married, and have been this fortnight. Much good may it do him, for I
do not envy him his wife. So home, and there my wife and I had an angry
word or two upon discourse of our boy, compared with Sir W. Pen's boy
that he has now, whom I say is much prettier than ours and she the
contrary. It troubles me to see that every small thing is enough
now-a-days to bring a difference between us. So to my office and there
did a little business, and then home to supper and to bed. Mrs. Turner,
who is often at Court, do tell me to-day that for certain the Queen hath
much changed her humour, and is become very pleasant and sociable as
any; and they say is with child, or believed to be so.

8th. Up and to my office a while, and thence by coach with Sir J. Minnes
to St. James's to the Duke, where Mr. Coventry and us two did discourse
with the Duke a little about our office business, which saved our coming
in the afternoon, and so to rights home again and to dinner. After
dinner my wife and I had a little jangling, in which she did give me the
lie, which vexed me, so that finding my talking did but make her worse,
and that her spirit is lately come to be other than it used to be, and
now depends upon her having Ashwell by her, before whom she thinks I
shall not say nor do anything of force to her, which vexes me and
makes me wish that I had better considered all that I have of late done
concerning my bringing my wife to this condition of heat, I went up
vexed to my chamber and there fell examining my new concordance, that
I have bought, with Newman's, the best that ever was out before, and I
find mine altogether as copious as that and something larger, though
the order in some respects not so good, that a man may think a place
is missing, when it is only put in another place. Up by and by my wife
comes and good friends again, and to walk in the garden and so anon to
supper and to bed. My cozen John Angier the son, of Cambridge coming to
me late to see me, and I find his business is that he would be sent
to sea, but I dissuaded him from it, for I will not have to do with it
without his friends' consent.

9th. Up and after ordering some things towards my wife's going into
the country, to the office, where I spent the morning upon my measuring
rules very pleasantly till noon, and then comes Creed and he and I
talked about mathematiques, and he tells me of a way found out by Mr.
Jonas Moore which he calls duodecimal arithmetique, which is properly
applied to measuring, where all is ordered by inches, which are 12 in
a foot, which I have a mind to learn. So he with me home to dinner and
after dinner walk in the garden, and then we met at the office, where
Coventry, Sir J. Minnes, and I, and so in the evening, business done, I
went home and spent my time till night with my wife. Presently after my
coming home comes Pembleton, whether by appointment or no I know not,
or whether by a former promise that he would come once before my wife's
going into the country, but I took no notice of, let them go up and
Ashwell with them to dance, which they did, and I staid below in my
chamber, but, Lord! how I listened and laid my ear to the door, and how
I was troubled when I heard them stand still and not dance. Anon they
made an end and had done, and so I suffered him to go away, and spoke
not to him, though troubled in my mind, but showed no discontent to my
wife, believing that this is the last time I shall be troubled with him.
So my wife and I to walk in the garden, home and to supper and to bed.

10th. Up and all the morning helping my wife to put up her things
towards her going into the country and drawing the wine out of my vessel
to send. This morning came my cozen Thomas Pepys to desire me to furnish
him with some money, which I could not do till his father has wrote to
Piggott his consent to the sale of his lands, so by and by we parted and
I to the Exchange a while and so home and to dinner, and thence to
the Royal Theatre by water, and landing, met with Captain Ferrers his
friend, the little man that used to be with him, and he with us, and sat
by us while we saw "Love in a Maze." The play is pretty good, but the
life of the play is Lacy's part, the clown, which is most admirable;
but for the rest, which are counted such old and excellent actors, in my
life I never heard both men and women so ill pronounce their parts, even
to my making myself sick therewith. Thence, Creed happening to be with
us, we four to the Half-Moon Tavern, I buying some sugar and carrying
it with me, which we drank with wine and thence to the whay-house, and
drank a great deal of whay, and so by water home, and thence to see Sir
W. Pen, who is not in much pain, but his legs swell and so immoveable
that he cannot stir them, but as they are lifted by other people and I
doubt will have another fit of his late pain. Played a little at cards
with him and his daughter, who is grown every day a finer and finer
lady, and so home to supper and to bed. When my wife and I came first
home we took Ashwell and all the rest below in the cellar with the
vintner drawing out my wine, which I blamed Ashwell much for and told
her my mind that I would not endure it, nor was it fit for her to make
herself equal with the ordinary servants of the house.

11th. Up and spent most of the morning upon my measuring Ruler and with
great pleasure I have found out some things myself of great dispatch,
more than my book teaches me, which pleases me mightily. Sent my wife's
things and the wine to-day by the carrier to my father's, but staid my
boy from a letter of my father's, wherein he desires that he may not
come to trouble his family as he did the last year. Dined at home and
then to the office, where we sat all the afternoon, and at night home
and spent the evening with my wife, and she and I did jangle mightily
about her cushions that she wrought with worsteds the last year, which
are too little for any use, but were good friends by and by again. But
one thing I must confess I do observe, which I did not before, which is,
that I cannot blame my wife to be now in a worse humour than she used to
be, for I am taken up in my talk with Ashwell, who is a very witty girl,
that I am not so fond of her as I used and ought to be, which now I do
perceive I will remedy, but I would to the Lord I had never taken
any, though I cannot have a better than her. To supper and to bed.
The consideration that this is the longest day in the year is very
unpleasant to me.--[It is necessary to note that this was according to
the old style.]--This afternoon my wife had a visit from my Lady Jeminah
and Mr. Ferrers.

12th. Up and my office, there conning my measuring Ruler, which I shall
grow a master of in a very little time. At noon to the Exchange and so
home to dinner, and abroad with my wife by water to the Royall Theatre;
and there saw "The Committee," a merry but indifferent play, only
Lacey's part, an Irish footman, is beyond imagination. Here I saw my
Lord Falconbridge, and his Lady, my Lady Mary Cromwell, who looks as
well as I have known her, and well clad; but when the House began to
fill she put on her vizard,

     [Masks were commonly used by ladies in the reign of Elizabeth, and
     when their use was revived at the Restoration for respectable women
     attending the theatre, they became general.  They soon, however,
     became the mark of loose women, and their use was discontinued by
     women of repute.  On June 1st, 1704, a song was sung at the theatre
     in Lincoln's Inn Fields called "The Misses' Lamentation for want of
     their Vizard Masques at the Theatre."  Mr. R. W. Lowe gives several
     references to the use of vizard masks at the theatre in his
     interesting biography, "Thomas Betterton."]

and so kept it on all the play; which of late is become a great fashion
among the ladies, which hides their whole face. So to the Exchange, to
buy things with my wife; among others, a vizard for herself. And so by
water home and to my office to do a little business, and so to see Sir
W. Pen, but being going to bed and not well I could not see him. So
home and to supper and bed, being mightily troubled all night and next
morning with the palate of my mouth being down from some cold I took
to-day sitting sweating in the playhouse, and the wind blowing through
the windows upon my head.

13th. Up and betimes to Thames Street among the tarr men, to look the
price of tarr and so by water to Whitehall thinking to speak with Sir
G. Carteret, but he lying in the city all night, and meeting with Mr.
Cutler the merchant, I with him in his coach into the city to Sir G.
Carteret, but missing him there, he and I walked to find him at Sir Tho.
Allen's in Bread Street, where not finding him he and I walked towards
our office, he discoursing well of the business of the Navy, and
particularly of the victualling, in which he was once I perceive
concerned, and he and I parted and I to the office and there had a
difference with Sir W. Batten about Mr. Bowyer's tarr, which I am
resolved to cross, though he sent me last night, as a bribe, a barrel of
sturgeon, which, it may be, I shall send back, for I will not have
the King abused so abominably in the price of what we buy, by Sir W.
Batten's corruption and underhand dealing. So from the office, Mr. Wayth
with me, to the Parliament House, and there I spoke and told Sir
G. Carteret all, with which he is well pleased, and do recall his
willingness yesterday, it seems, to Sir W. Batten, that we should buy a
great quantity of tarr, being abused by him. Thence with Mr. Wayth after
drinking a cupp of ale at the Swan, talking of the corruption of the
Navy, by water. I landed him at Whitefriars, and I to the Exchange, and
so home to dinner, where I found my wife's brother, and thence after
dinner by water to the Royall Theatre, where I resolved to bid farewell,
as shall appear by my oaths tomorrow against all plays either at
publique houses or Court till Christmas be over. Here we saw "The
Faithfull Sheepheardesse," a most simple thing, and yet much thronged
after, and often shown, but it is only for the scenes' sake, which is
very fine indeed and worth seeing; but I am quite out of opinion with
any of their actings, but Lacy's, compared with the other house. Thence
to see Mrs. Hunt, which we did and were much made of; and in our way saw
my Lady Castlemaine, who, I fear, is not so handsome as I have taken her
for, and now she begins to decay something. This is my wife's opinion
also, for which I am sorry. Thence by coach, with a mad coachman, that
drove like mad, and down byeways, through Bucklersbury home, everybody
through the street cursing him, being ready to run over them. So
home, and after writing letters by the post, home to supper and bed.
Yesterday, upon conference with the King in the Banqueting House, the
Parliament did agree with much ado, it being carried but by forty-two
voices, that they would supply him with a sum of money; but what and how
is not yet known, but expected to be done with great disputes the next
week. But if done at all, it is well.

14th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed. So up and to church. Then to dinner,
and Tom dined with me, who I think grows a very thriving man, as he
himself tells me. He tells me that his man John has got a wife, and for
that he intends to part with him, which I am sorry for, and then that
Mr. Armiger comes to be a constant lodger at his house, and he says has
money in his purse and will be a good paymaster, but I do much doubt it.
He being gone, I up and sending my people to church, my wife and I did
even our reckonings, and had a great deal of serious talk, wherein I
took occasion to give her hints of the necessity of our saving all we
can. I do see great cause every day to curse the time that ever I did
give way to the taking of a woman for her, though I could never have had
a better, and also the letting of her learn to dance, by both which her
mind is so devilishly taken off her business and minding her occasions,
and besides has got such an opinion in her of my being jealous, that it
is never to be removed, I fear, nor hardly my trouble that attends it;
but I must have patience. I did give her 40s. to carry into the country
tomorrow with her, whereof 15s. is to go for the coach-hire for her and
Ashwell, there being 20s. paid here already in earnest. In the evening
our discourse turned to great content and love, and I hope that after
a little forgetting our late differences, and being a while absent one
from another, we shall come to agree as well as ever. So to Sir W. Pen's
to visit him, and finding him alone, sent for my wife, who is in her
riding-suit, to see him, which she hath not done these many months I
think. By and by in comes Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, and so we sat
talking. Among other things, Sir J. Minnes brought many fine expressions
of Chaucer, which he doats on mightily, and without doubt he is a very
fine poet.

     [Pepys continued through life an admirer of Chaucer, and we have the
     authority of Dryden himself for saying that we owe his character of
     the Good Parson to Pepys's recommendation.]

Sir W. Pen continues lame of the gout, that he cannot rise from his
chair. So after staying an hour with him, we went home and to supper,
and so to prayers and bed.

15th. Up betimes, and anon my wife rose and did give me her keys, and
put other things in order and herself against going this morning into
the country. I was forced to go to Thames Street and strike up a bargain
for some tarr, to prevent being abused therein by Hill, who was with me
this morning, and is mightily surprised that I should tell him what I
can have the same tarr with his for. Thence home, but finding my wife
gone, I took coach and after her to her inn, where I am troubled to see
her forced to sit in the back of the coach, though pleased to see her
company none but women and one parson; she I find is troubled at all,
and I seemed to make a promise to get a horse and ride after them; and
so, kissing her often, and Ashwell once, I bid them adieu. So home by
coach, and thence by water to Deptford to the Trinity House, where I
came a little late; but I found them reading their charter, which they
did like fools, only reading here and there a bit, whereas they ought to
do it all, every word, and then proceeded to the election of a maister,
which was Sir W. Batten, without any control, who made a heavy, short
speech to them, moving them to give thanks to the late Maister for his
pains, which he said was very great, and giving them thanks for their
choice of him, wherein he would serve them to the best of his power.
Then to the choice of their assistants and wardens, and so rose. I might
have received 2s. 6d. as a younger Brother, but I directed one of the
servants of the House to receive it and keep it. Thence to church, where
Dr. Britton preached a sermon full of words against the Nonconformists,
but no great matter in it, nor proper for the day at all. His text was,
"With one mind and one mouth give glory to God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ." That done, by water, I in the barge with the Maister,
to the Trinity House at London; where, among others, I found my Lords
Sandwich and Craven, and my cousin Roger Pepys, and Sir Wm. Wheeler.
Anon we sat down to dinner, which was very great, as they always have.
Great variety of talk. Mr. Prin, among many, had a pretty tale of one
that brought in a bill in parliament for the empowering him to dispose
his land to such children as he should have that should bear the name of
his wife. It was in Queen Elizabeth's time. One replied that there are
many species of creatures where the male gives the denomination to both
sexes, as swan and woodcock, but not above one where the female do, and
that is a goose. Both at and after dinner we had great discourses of the
nature and power of spirits, and whether they can animate dead bodies;
in all which, as of the general appearance of spirits, my Lord Sandwich
is very scepticall. He says the greatest warrants that ever he had to
believe any, is the present appearing of the Devil

     [In 1664, there being a generall report all over the kingdom of Mr.
     Monpesson his house being haunted, which hee himself affirming to
     the King and Queene to be true, the King sent the Lord Falmouth, and
     the Queene sent mee, to examine the truth of; but wee could neither
     see nor heare anything that was extraordinary; and about a year
     after, his Majesty told me that hee had discovered the cheat, and
     that Mr. Monpesson, upon his Majesty sending for him, confessed it
     to him.  And yet Mr. Monpesson, in a printed letter, had afterwards
     the confidence to deny that hee had ever made any such confession"
     ("Letters of the Second Earl of Chesterfield," p. 24, 1829, 8vo.).
     Joseph Glanville published a relation of the famous disturbance at
     the house of Mr. Monpesson, at Tedworth, Wilts, occasioned by the
     beating of an invisible drum every night for a year.  This story,
     which was believed at the time, furnished the plot for Addison's
     play of "The Drummer," or the "Haunted House."  In the "Mercurius
     Publicus," April 16-23, 1663, there is a curious examination on this
     subject, by which it appears that one William Drury, of Uscut,
     Wilts, was the invisible drummer.--B.]

in Wiltshire, much of late talked of, who beats a drum up and down.
There are books of it, and, they say, very true; but my Lord observes,
that though he do answer to any tune that you will play to him upon
another drum, yet one tune he tried to play and could not; which makes
him suspect the whole; and I think it is a good argument. Sometimes they
talked of handsome women, and Sir J. Minnes saying that there was no
beauty like what he sees in the country-markets, and specially at Bury,
in which I will agree with him that there is a prettiest women I
ever saw. My Lord replied thus: "Sir John, what do you think of your
neighbour's wife?" looking upon me. "Do you not think that he hath
a great beauty to his wife? Upon my word he hath." Which I was not a
little proud of. Thence by barge with my Lord to Blackfriars, where
we landed and I thence walked home, where vexed to find my boy (whom
I boxed at his coming for it) and Will abroad, though he was but upon
Tower Hill a very little while. My head akeing with the healths I was
forced to drink to-day I sent for the barber, and he having done, I up
to my wife's closett, and there played on my viallin a good while, and
without supper anon to bed, sad for want of my wife, whom I love with
all my heart, though of late she has given me some troubled thoughts.

16th. Up, but not so early as I intend now, and to my office, where
doing business all the morning. At noon by desire I dined with Sir W.
Batten, who tells me that the House have voted the supply, intended for
the King, shall be by subsidy. After dinner with Sir J. Minnes to see
some pictures at Brewer's, said to be of good hands, but I do not like
them. So I to the office and thence to Stacy's, his Tar merchant, whose
servant with whom I agreed yesterday for some tar do by combination
with Bowyer and Hill fall from our agreement, which vexes us all at the
office, even Sir W. Batten, who was so earnest for it. So to the office,
where we sat all the afternoon till night, and then to Sir W. Pen, who
continues ill, and so to bed about 10 o'clock.

17th. Up before 4 o'clock, which is the hour I intend now to rise at,
and to my office a while, and with great pleasure I fell to my business
again. Anon went with money to my tar merchant to pay for the tar, which
he refuses to sell me; but now the master is come home, and so he speaks
very civilly, and I believe we shall have it with peace. I brought back
my money to my office, and thence to White Hall, and in the garden spoke
to my Lord Sandwich, who is in his gold-buttoned suit, as the mode is,
and looks nobly. Captain Ferrers, I see, is come home from France. I
only spoke one word to him, my Lord being there. He tells me the young
gentlemen are well there; so my Lord went to my Lord Albemarle's to
dinner, and I by water home and dined alone, and at the office (after
half an hour's viallin practice after dinner) till late at night, and so
home and to bed. This day I sent my cozen Edward Pepys his Lady, at my
cozen Turner's, a piece of venison given me yesterday, and Madam Turner
I sent for a dozen bottles of her's, to fill with wine for her. This day
I met with Pierce the surgeon, who tells me that the King has made peace
between Mr. Edward Montagu and his father Lord Montagu, and that all is
well again; at which; for the family's sake, I am very glad, but do not
think it will hold long.

18th. Up by four o'clock and to my office, where all the morning writing
out in my Navy collections the ordinary estimate of the Navy, and did it
neatly. Then dined at home alone, my mind pleased with business, but sad
for the absence of my wife. After dinner half an hour at my viallin, and
then all the afternoon sitting at the office late, and so home and to
bed. This morning Mr. Cutler came and sat in my closet half an hour with
me, his discourse very excellent, being a wise man, and I do perceive by
him as well as many others that my diligence is taken notice of in the
world, for which I bless God and hope to continue doing so. Before I
went into my house this night I called at Sir W. Batten's, where finding
some great ladies at table at supper with him and his lady, I retreated
and went home, though they called to me again and again, and afterwards
sent for me. So I went, and who should it be but Sir Fr. Clerke and his
lady and another proper lady at supper there, and great cheer, where I
staid till 11 o'clock at night, and so home and to bed.

19th. Lay till 6 o'clock, and then up and to my office, where all the
morning, and at noon to the Exchange, and coming home met Mr. Creed, and
took him back, and he dined with me, and by and by came Mr. Moore, whom
I supplied with L30, and then abroad with them by water to Lambeth,
expecting to have seen the Archbishop lie in state; but it seems he
is not laid out yet. And so over to White Hall, and at the Privy Seal
Office examined the books, and found the grant of increase of salary
to the principall officers in the year 1639, L300 among the Controller,
Surveyor, and Clerk of the Shippes. Thence to Wilkinson's after a good
walk in the Park, where we met on horseback Captain Ferrers; who tells
us that the King of France is well again, and that he saw him train his
Guards, all brave men, at Paris; and that when he goes to his mistress,
Madame la Valiere, a pretty little woman, now with child by him, he goes
with his guards with him publiquely, and his trumpets and kettle-drums
with him, who stay before the house while he is with her; and yet he
says that, for all this, the Queen do not know of it, for that nobody
dares to tell her; but that I dare not believe. Thence I to Wilkinson's,
where we had bespoke a dish of pease, where we eat them very merrily,
and there being with us the little gentleman, a friend of Captain
Ferrers, that was with my wife and I at a play a little while ago, we
went thence to the Rhenish wine-house, where we called for a red Rhenish
wine called Bleahard, a pretty wine, and not mixed, as they say. Here
Mr. Moore showed us the French manner, when a health is drunk, to bow
to him that drunk to you, and then apply yourself to him, whose lady's
health is drunk, and then to the person that you drink to, which I never
knew before; but it seems it is now the fashion. Thence by water home
and to bed, having played out of my chamber window on my pipe before I
went to bed, and making Will read a part of a Latin chapter, in which I
perceive in a little while he will be pretty ready, if he spends but a
little pains in it.

20th. Up and to my office, where all the morning, and dined at home,
Mr. Deane, of Woolwich, with me, and he and I all the afternoon down by
water, and in a timber yard, measuring of timber, which I now understand
thoroughly, and shall be able in a little time to do the King great
service. Home in the evening, and after Will's reading a little in the
Latin Testament, to bed.

21st (Lord's day). Up betimes, and fell to reading my Latin grammar,
which I perceive I have great need of, having lately found it by my
calling Will to the reading of a chapter in Latin, and I am resolved
to go through it. After being trimmed, I by water to White Hall, and so
over the Park, it raining hard, to Mr. Coventry's chamber, where I spent
two hours with him about business of the Navy, and how by his absence
things are like to go with us, and with good content from my being with
him he carried me by coach and set me down at Whitehall, and thence to
right home by water. He shewed me a list, which he hath prepared for the
Parliament's view, if the business of his selling of offices should be
brought to further hearing, wherein he reckons up, as I remember, 236
offices of ships which have been disposed of without his taking one
farthing. This, of his own accord, he opened his cabinet on purpose to
shew me, meaning, I suppose, that I should discourse abroad of it, and
vindicate him therein, which I shall with all my power do. At home,
being wet, shifted my band and things, and then to dinner, and after
dinner went up and tried a little upon my tryangle, which I understand
fully, and with a little use I believe could bring myself to do
something. So to church, and slept all the sermon, the Scot, to whose
voice I am not to be reconciled, preaching. Thence with Sir J. Minnes
(who poor man had forgot that he carried me the other day to the
painter's to see some pictures which he has since bought and are brought
home) to his Jodgings to see some base things he calls them of great
masters of painting. So I said nothing that he had shown me them
already, but commended them, and I think they are indeed good enough.
Thence to see Sir W. Pen, who continues ill of the gout still. Here we
staid a good while, and then I to my office, and read my vows seriously
and with content, and so home to supper, to prayers, and to bed.

22nd. Up betimes and to my office, reading over all our letters of the
office that we have wrote since I came into the Navy, whereby to
bring the whole series of matters into my memory, and to enter in my
manuscript some of them that are needful and of great influence. By and
by with Sir W. Batten by coach to Westminster, where all along I find
the shops evening with the sides of the houses, even in the broadest
streets; which will make the City very much better than it was. I
walked in the Hall from one man to another. Hear that the House is still
divided about the manner of levying the subsidys which they intend to
give the King, both as to the manner, the time, and the number. It seems
the House do consent to send to the King to desire that he would be
graciously pleased to let them know who it was that did inform him of
what words Sir Richard Temple should say, which were to this purpose:
"That if the King would side with him, or be guided by him and his
party, that he should not lack money:" but without knowing who told it,
they do not think fit to call him to any account for it. Thence with
Creed and bought a lobster, and then to an alehouse, where the maid of
the house is a confident merry lass, and if modest is very pleasant to
the customers that come thither. Here we eat it, and thence to walk in
the Park a good while. The Duke being gone a-hunting, and by and by came
in and shifted himself; he having in his hunting, rather than go about,
'light and led his horse through a river up to his breast, and came so
home: and when we were come, which was by and by, we went on to him, and
being ready he retired with us, and we had a long discourse with him.
But Mr. Creed's accounts stick still through the perverse ignorance of
Sir G. Carteret, which I cannot safely control as I would. Thence to the
Park again, and there walked up and down an hour or two till night with
Creed, talking, who is so knowing, and a man of that reason, that I
cannot but love his company, though I do not love the man, because he
is too wise to be made a friend of, and acts all by interest and policy,
but is a man fit to learn of. So to White Hall, and by water to the
Temple, and calling at my brother's and several places, but to no
purpose, I came home, and meeting Strutt, the purser, he tells me for
a secret that he was told by Field that he had a judgment against me
in the Exchequer for L400. So I went to Sir W. Batten, and taking Mr.
Batten, his son the counsellor, with me, by coach, I went to Clerke, our
Solicitor, who tells me there can be no such thing, and after conferring
with them two together, who are resolved to look well after the
business, I returned home and to my office, setting down this day's
passages, and having a letter that all is well in the country I went
home to supper, and then a Latin chapter of Will and to bed.

23rd. Up by four o'clock, and so to my office; but before I went out,
calling, as I have of late done, for my boy's copybook, I found that
he had not done his task; so I beat him, and then went up to fetch
my rope's end, but before I got down the boy was gone. I searched the
cellar with a candle, and from top to bottom could not find him high nor
low. So to the office; and after an hour or two, by water to the
Temple, to my cozen Roger; who, I perceive, is a deadly high man in the
Parliament business, and against the Court, showing me how they have
computed that the King hath spent, at least hath received, about four
millions of money since he came in: and in Sir J. Winter's case, in
which I spoke to him, he is so high that he says he deserves to be
hanged, and all the high words he could give, which I was sorry to see,
though I am confident he means well. Thence by water home, and to the
'Change; and by and by comes the King and the Queen by in great state,
and the streets full of people. I stood in Mr.--------'s balcone. They
dine all at my Lord Mayor's; but what he do for victuals, or room for
them, I know not. So home to dinner alone, and there I found that my boy
had got out of doors, and came in for his hat and band, and so is gone
away to his brother; but I do resolve even to let him go away for good
and all. So I by and by to the office, and there had a great fray with
Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, who, like an old dotard, is led by the
nose by him. It was in Captain Cocke's business of hemp, wherein the
King is absolutely abused; but I was for peace sake contented to be
quiet and to sign to his bill, but in my manner so as to justify myself,
and so all was well; but to see what a knave Sir W. Batten is makes my
heart ake. So late at my office, and then home to supper and to bed, my
man Will not being well.

24th. Up before 4 o'clock, and so to my lute an hour or more, and then
by water, drinking my morning draft alone at an alehouse in Thames
Street, to the Temple, and thence after a little discourse with my cozen
Roger about some business, away by water to St. James's, and there an
hour's private discourse with Mr. Coventry, where he told me one thing
to my great joy, that in the business of Captain Cocke's hemp, disputed
before him the other day, Mr. Coventry absent, the Duke did himself tell
him since, that Mr. Pepys and he did stand up and carry it against the
rest that were there, Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten, which do please
me much to see that the Duke do take notice of me. We did talk highly of
Sir W. Batten's corruption, which Mr. Coventry did very kindly say that
it might be only his heaviness and unaptness for business, that he do
things without advice and rashly, and to gratify people that do eat and
drink and play with him, and that now and then he observes that he
signs bills only in anger and fury to be rid of men. Speaking of Sir G.
Carteret, of whom I perceive he speaks but slightly, and diminishing of
him in his services for the King in Jersey; that he was well rewarded,
and had good lands and rents, and other profits from the King, all the
time he was there; and that it was always his humour to have things done
his way. He brought an example how he would not let the Castle there be
victualled for more than a month, that so he might keep it at his
beck, though the people of the town did offer to supply it more often
themselves, which, when one did propose to the King, Sir George Carteret
being by, says Sir George, "Let me know who they are that would do it, I
would with all my heart pay them." "Ah, by God," says the Commander that
spoke of it, "that is it that they are afeard of, that you would hug
them," meaning that he would not endure them. Another thing he told me,
how the Duke of York did give Sir G. Carteret and the Island his profits
as Admirall, and other things, toward the building of a pier there. But
it was never laid out, nor like to be. So it falling out that a lady
being brought to bed, the Duke was to be desired to be one of the
godfathers; and it being objected that that would not be proper, there
being no peer of the land to be joyned with him, the lady replied, "Why,
let him choose; and if he will not be a godfather without a peer, then
let him even stay till he hath made a pier of his own."

     [In the same spirit, long after this, some question arising as to
     the best material to be used in building Westminster Bridge, Lord
     Chesterfield remarked, that there were too many wooden piers (peers)
     at Westminster already.--B.]

He tells me, too, that he hath lately been observed to tack about at
Court, and to endeavour to strike in with the persons that are against
the Chancellor; but this he says of him, that he do not say nor do
anything to the prejudice of the Chancellor. But he told me that the
Chancellor was rising again, and that of late Sir G. Carteret's
business and employment hath not been so full as it used to be while the
Chancellor stood up. From that we discoursed of the evil of putting out
men of experience in business as the Chancellor, and from that to speak
of the condition of the King's party at present, who, as the Papists,
though otherwise fine persons, yet being by law kept for these fourscore
years out of employment, they are now wholly uncapable of business; and
so the Cavaliers for twenty years, who, says he, for the most part have
either given themselves over to look after country and family business,
and those the best of them, and the rest to debauchery, &c.; and that
was it that hath made him high against the late Bill brought into the
House for the making all men incapable of employment that had served
against the King. Why, says he, in the sea-service, it is impossible to
do any thing without them, there being not more than three men of the
whole King's side that are fit to command almost; and these were Captain
Allen, Smith, and Beech; and it may be Holmes, and Utber, and Batts
might do something. I desired him to tell me if he thought that I did
speak anything that I do against Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes out of
ill will or design. He told me quite the contrary, and that there was
reason enough. After a good deal of good and fine discourse, I took
leave, and so to my Lord Sandwich's house, where I met my Lord, and
there did discourse of our office businesses, and how the Duke do show
me kindness, though I have endeavoured to displease more or less of my
fellow officers, all but Mr. Coventry and Pett; but it matters not. Yes,
says my Lord, Sir J. Minnes, who is great with the Chancellor; I told
him the Chancellor I have thought was declining, and however that the
esteem he has among them is nothing but for a jester or a ballad maker;
at which my Lord laughs, and asks me whether I believe he ever could do
that well. Thence with Mr. Creed up and down to an ordinary, and, the
King's Head being full, went to the other over against it, a pretty man
that keeps it, and good and much meat, better than the other, but
the company and room so small that he must break, and there wants the
pleasure that the other house has in its company. Here however dined an
old courtier that is now so, who did bring many examples and arguments
to prove that seldom any man that brings any thing to Court gets any
thing, but rather the contrary; for knowing that they have wherewith to
live, will not enslave themselves to the attendance, and flattery, and
fawning condition of a courtier, whereas another that brings nothing,
and will be contented to cog, and lie, and flatter every man and woman
that has any interest with the persons that are great in favour, and can
cheat the King, as nothing is to be got without offending God and the
King, there he for the most part, and he alone, saves any thing. Thence
to St. James Park, and there walked two or three hours talking of the
difference between Sir G. Carteret and Mr. Creed about his accounts,
and how to obviate him, but I find Creed a deadly cunning fellow and one
that never do any thing openly, but has intrigues in all he do or says.
Thence by water home to see all well, and thence down to Greenwich, and
there walked into a pretty common garden and there played with him at
nine pins for some drink, and to make the fellows drink that set up the
pins, and so home again being very cold, and taking a very great cold,
being to-day the first time in my tabby doublet this year. Home, and
after a small supper Creed and I to bed. This day I observed the house,
which I took to be the new tennis-court, newly built next my Lord's
lodgings, to be fallen down by the badness of the foundation or slight
working, which my cozen Roger and his discontented party cry out upon,
as an example how the King's work is done, which I am sorry to see him
and others so apt to think ill of things. It hath beaten down a good
deal of my Lord's lodgings, and had like to have killed Mrs. Sarah, she
having but newly gone out of it.

25th. Up both of us pretty early and to my chamber, where he and I did
draw up a letter to Sir G. Carteret in excuse and preparation for Creed
against we meet before the Duke upon his accounts, which I drew up and
it proved very well, but I am pleased to see with what secret cunning
and variety of artifice this Creed has carried on his business even
unknown to me, which he is now forced by an accident to communicate
to me. So that taking up all the papers of moment which lead to the
clearing of his accounts unobserved out of the Controller's hand, which
he now makes great use of; knowing that the Controller has not wherewith
to betray him. About this all the morning, only Mr. Bland came to me
about some business of his, and told me the news, which holds to be
true, that the Portuguese did let in the Spaniard by a plot, and they
being in the midst of the country and we believing that they would have
taken the whole country, they did all rise and kill the whole body, near
8,000 men, and Don John of Austria having two horses killed under him,
was forced with one man to flee away. Sir George Carteret at the office
(after dinner, and Creed being gone, for both now and yesterday I was
afraid to have him seen by Sir G. Carteret with me, for fear that he
should increase his doubt that I am of a plot with Creed in the business
of his accounts) did tell us that upon Tuesday last, being with my Lord
Treasurer, he showed him a letter from Portugall speaking of the advance
of the Spaniards into their country, and yet that the Portuguese were
never more courageous than now; for by an old prophecy, from France,
sent thither some years, though not many since, from the French King,
it is foretold that the Spaniards should come into their country, and in
such a valley they should be all killed, and then their country should
be wholly delivered from the Spaniards. This was on Tuesday last, and
yesterday came the very first news that in this very valley they had
thus routed and killed the Spaniards, which is very strange but true.
So late at the office, and then home to supper and to bed. This noon I
received a letter from the country from my wife, wherein she seems much
pleased with the country; God continue that she may have pleasure while
she is there. She, by my Lady's advice, desires a new petticoat of
the new silk striped stuff, very pretty. So I went to Paternoster Row'
presently, and bought her one, with Mr. Creed's help, a very fine rich
one, the best I did see there, and much better than she desires or
expects, and sent it by Creed to Unthanke to be made against tomorrow
to send by the carrier, thinking it had been but Wednesday to-day, but
I found myself mistaken, and also the taylor being out of the way, it
could not be done, but the stuff was sent me back at night by Creed to
dispose of some other way to make, but now I shall keep it to next week.

26th. Up betimes, and Mr. Moore coming to see me, he and

     [Paternoster Row, now famous as the headquarters of the publishing
     houses, was at this time chiefly inhabited by mercers.  "This
     street, before the Fire of London, was taken up by eminent Mercers,
     Silkmen and Lacemen; and their shops were so resorted to by the
     nobility and gentry in their coaches, that oft times the street was
     so stop'd up that there was no passage for foot passengers"
     (Strype's "Stow," book iii., p. 195)].

I discoursed of going to Oxford this Commencement, Mr. Nathaniel Crew
being Proctor and Mr. Childe commencing Doctor of Musique this year,
which I have a great mind to do, and, if I can, will order my matters so
that I may do it. By and by, he and I to the Temple, it raining hard, my
cozen Roger being got out, he and I walked a good while among the Temple
trees discoursing of my getting my Lord to let me have security upon
his estate for L100 per ann. for two lives, my own and my wife, for my
money. But upon second thoughts Mr. Moore tells me it is very likely
my Lord will think that I beg something, and may take it ill, and so we
resolved not to move it there, but to look for it somewhere else. Here
it raining hard he and I walked into the King's Bench Court, where
I never was before, and there staid an hour almost, till it had done
raining, which is a sad season, that it is said there hath not been one
fair day these three months, and I think it is true, and then by water
to Westminster, and at the Parliament House I spoke with Roger Pepys.
The House is upon the King's answer to their message about Temple, which
is, that my Lord of Bristoll did tell him that Temple did say those
words; so the House are resolved upon sending some of their members to
him to know the truth, and to demand satisfaction if it be not true. So
by water home, and after a little while getting me ready, Sir W. Batten,
Sir J. Minnes, my Lady Batten, and I by coach to Bednall Green, to Sir
W. Rider's to dinner, where a fine place, good lady mother, and their
daughter, Mrs. Middleton, a fine woman. A noble dinner, and a fine merry
walk with the ladies alone after dinner in the garden, which is very
pleasant; the greatest quantity of strawberrys I ever saw, and good,
and a collation of great mirth, Sir J. Minnes reading a book of scolding
very prettily. This very house

     [Sir William Rider's house was known as Kirby Castle, and was
     supposed to have been built in 1570 by John Thorpe for John Kirby.
     It was associated in rhyme with other follies of the time in bricks
     and mortar, as recorded by Stow

                   "Kirkebyes Castell, and Fisher's Follie,
                    Spinila's pleasure, and Megse's glorie."

     The place was known in Strype's time as the "Blind Beggar's House,"
     but he knew nothing of the ballad, "The Beggar's Daughter of Bednall
     Green," for he remarks, "perhaps Kirby beggared himself by it."  Sr.
     William Rider died at this house in 1669.]

was built by the Blind Beggar of Bednall Green, so much talked of and
sang in ballads; but they say it was only some of the outhouses of it.
We drank great store of wine, and a beer glass at last which made me
almost sick. At table, discoursing of thunder and lightning, they
told many stories of their own knowledge at table of their masts being
shivered from top to bottom, and sometimes only within and the outside
whole, but among the rest Sir W. Rider did tell a story of his own
knowledge, that a Genoese gaily in Leghorn Roads was struck by thunder,
so as the mast was broke a-pieces, and the shackle upon one of the
slaves was melted clear off of his leg without hurting his leg. Sir
William went on board the vessel, and would have contributed towards
the release of the slave whom Heaven had thus set free, but he could not
compass it, and so he was brought to his fetters again. In the evening
home, and a little to my Tryangle, and so to bed.

27th. Up by 4 o'clock and a little to my office. Then comes by agreement
Sir W. Warren, and he and I from ship to ship to see deals of all sorts,
whereby I have encreased my knowledge and with great pleasure. Then to
his yard and house, where I staid two hours or more discoursing of the
expense of the navy and the corruption of Sir W. Batten and his man
Wood that he brings or would bring to sell all that is to be sold by the
Navy. Then home to the office, where we sat a little, and at noon home
to dinner, alone, and thence, it raining hard, by water to the Temple,
and so to Lincoln's Inn, and there walked up and down to see the new
garden which they are making, and will be very pretty, and so to walk
under the Chappell by agreement, whither Mr. Clerke our Solicitor came
to me, and he fetched Mr. Long, our Attorney in the Exchequer in the
business against Field, and I directed him to come to the best and
speediest composition he could, which he will do. So home on foot,
calling upon my brother's and elsewhere upon business, and so home to
my office, and there wrote letters to my father and wife, and so home to
bed, taking three pills overnight.

28th (Lord's day). Early in the morning my last night's physic worked
and did give me a good stool, and then I rose and had three or four
stools, and walked up and down my chamber. Then up, my maid rose and
made me a posset, and by and by comes Mr. Creed, and he and I spent all
the morning discoursing against to-morrow before the Duke the business
of his pieces of eight, in which the Treasurer makes so many queries. At
noon, my physic having done working, I went down to dinner, and then
he and I up again and spent most of the afternoon reading in Cicero and
other books of good discourse, and then he went away, and then came my
brother Tom to see me, telling me how the Joyces do make themselves fine
clothes against Mary is brought to bed. He being gone I went to cast up
my monthly accounts, and to my great trouble I find myself L7 worse than
I was the last month, but I confess it is by my reckoning beforehand a
great many things, yet however I am troubled to see that I can hardly
promise myself to lay up much from month's end to month's end, about
L4 or L5 at most, one month with another, without some extraordinary
gettings, but I must and I hope I shall continue to have a care of my
own expenses. So to the reading my vows seriously and then to supper.
This evening there came my boy's brother to see for him, and tells me he
knows not where he is, himself being out of town this week and is very
sorry that he is gone, and so am I, but he shall come no more. So to
prayers, and to bed.

29th. Up betimes and to my office, and by and by to the Temple, and
there appointed to meet in the evening about my business, and thence
I walked home, and up and down the streets is cried mightily the great
victory got by the Portugalls against the Spaniards, where 10,000 slain,
3 or 4,000 taken prisoners, with all the artillery, baggage, money, &c.,
and Don John of Austria

     [He was natural son of Philip IV., King of Spain, who, after his
     father's death in 1665, exerted his whole influence to overthrow the
     Regency appointed during the young king's minority.--B.]

forced to flee with a man or two with him, which is very great news.
Thence home and at my office all the morning, and then by water to St.
James's, but no meeting to-day being holy day, but met Mr. Creed in the
Park, and after a walk or two, discoursing his business, took leave of
him in Westminster Hall, whither we walked, and then came again to the
Hall and fell to talk with Mrs. Lane, and after great talk that she
never went abroad with any man as she used heretofore to do, I with
one word got her to go with me and to meet me at the further Rhenish
wine-house, where I did give her a Lobster and do so touse her and feel
her all over, making her believe how fair and good a skin she has, and
indeed she has a very white thigh and leg, but monstrous fat. When weary
I did give over and somebody, having seen some of our dalliance, called
aloud in the street, "Sir! why do you kiss the gentlewoman so?" and
flung a stone at the window, which vexed me, but I believe they could
not see my touzing her, and so we broke up and I went out the back way,
without being observed I think, and so she towards the Hall and I to
White Hall, where taking water I to the Temple with my cozen Roger and
Mr. Goldsborough to Gray's Inn to his counsel, one Mr. Rawworth, a very
fine man, where it being the question whether I as executor should give
a warrant to Goldsborough in my reconveying her estate back again, the
mortgage being performed against all acts of the testator, but only my
own, my cozen said he never heard it asked before; and the other that it
was always asked, and he never heard it denied, or scrupled before,
so great a distance was there in their opinions, enough to make a man
forswear ever having to do with the law; so they agreed to refer it to
Serjeant Maynard. So we broke up, and I by water home from the Temple,
and there to Sir W. Batten and eat with him, he and his lady and Sir J.
Minnes having been below to-day upon the East India men that are come
in, but never tell me so, but that they have been at Woolwich and
Deptford, and done great deal of business. God help them. So home and
up to my lute long, and then, after a little Latin chapter with Will, to
bed. But I have used of late, since my wife went, to make a bad use of
my fancy with whatever woman I have a mind to, which I am ashamed of,
and shall endeavour to do so no more. So to sleep.

30th. Up betimes yesterday and to-day, the sun rising very bright and
glorious; and yet yesterday, as it hath been these two months and more,
was a foul day the most part of the day. By and by by water to White
Hall, and there to my Lord's lodgings by appointment, whither Mr. Creed
comes to me, having been at Chelsey this morning to fetch my Lord to St.
James's. So he and I to the Park, where we understand that the King and
Duke are gone out betimes this morning on board the East India ships
lately come in, and so our meeting appointed is lost. But he and I
walked at the further end of the Park, not to be observed, whither by
and by comes my Lord Sandwich, and he and we walked two hours and more
in the Park and then in White Hall Gallery, and lastly in White Hall
garden, discoursing of Mr. Creed's accounts, and how to answer the
Treasurer's objections. I find that the business is L500 deep, the
advantage of Creed, and why my Lord and I should be concerned to promote
his profit with so much dishonour and trouble to us I know not, but
however we shall do what we can, though he deserves it not, for there
is nothing even to his own advantage that can be got out of him, but
by mere force. So full of policy he is in the smallest matters, that I
perceive him to be made up of nothing but design. I left him here, being
in my mind vexed at the trouble that this business gets me, and the
distance that it makes between Sir G. Carteret and myself, which I ought
to avoyd. Thence by water home and to dinner, and afterwards to the
office, and there sat till evening, and then I by water to Deptford to
see Sir W. Pen, who lies ill at Captain Rooth's, but in a way to be well
again this weather, this day being the only fair day we have had these
two or three months. Among other discourse I did tell him plainly some
of my thoughts concerning Sir W. Batten. and the office in general, upon
design for him to understand that I do mind things and will not balk to
take notice of them, that when he comes to be well again he may know how
to look upon me. Thence homeward walked, and in my way met Creed coming
to meet me, and then turned back and walk a while, and so to boat and
home by water, I being not very forward to talk of his business, and he
by design the same, to see how I would speak of it, but I did not, but
in general terms, and so after supper with general discourse to bed and
sleep. Thus, by God's blessing, ends this book of two years; I being
in all points in good health and a good way to thrive and do well. Some
money I do and can lay up, but not much, being worth now above L700,
besides goods of all sorts. My wife in the country with Ashwell, her
woman, with my father; myself at home with W. Hewer and my cooke-maid
Hannah, my boy Wayneman being lately run away from me. In my office,
my repute and understanding good, especially with the Duke and Mr.
Coventry; only the rest of the officers do rather envy than love me, I
standing in most of their lights, specially Sir W. Batten, whose cheats
I do daily oppose to his great trouble, though he appears mighty kind
and willing to keep friendship with me, while Sir J. Minnes, like a
dotard, is led by the nose by him. My wife and I, by my late jealousy,
for which I am truly to be blamed, have not the kindness between us
which we used and ought to have, and I fear will be lost hereafter if I
do not take course to oblige her and yet preserve my authority. Publique
matters are in an ill condition; Parliament sitting and raising four
subsidys for the King, which is but a little, considering his wants; and
yet that parted withal with great hardness. They being offended to see
so much money go, and no debts of the publique's paid, but all swallowed
by a luxurious Court: which the King it is believed and hoped will
retrench in a little time, when he comes to see the utmost of the
revenue which shall be settled on him: he expecting to have his
L1,200,000 made good to him, which is not yet done by above L150,000, as
he himself reports to the House. My differences with my uncle Thomas at
a good quiett, blessed be God! and other matters. The town full of the
great overthrow lately given to the Spaniards by the Portugalls, they
being advanced into the very middle of Portugall. The weather wet for
two or three months together beyond belief, almost not one fair day
coming between till this day, which has been a very pleasant [day] and
the first pleasant [day] this summer. The charge of the Navy intended to
be limited to L200,000 per annum, the ordinary charge of it, and that
to be settled upon the Customs. The King yet greatly taken up with Madam
Castlemaine and Mrs. Stewart, which God of Heaven put an end to! Myself
very studious to learn what I can of all things necessary for my place
as an officer of the Navy, reading lately what concerns measuring of
timber and knowledge of the tides. I have of late spent much time with
Creed, being led to it by his business of his accounts, but I find him
a fellow of those designs and tricks, that there is no degree of true
friendship to be made with him, and therefore I must cast him off,
though he be a very understanding man, and one that much may be learned
of as to cunning and judging of other men. Besides, too, I do perceive
more and more that my time of pleasure and idleness of any sort must
be flung off to attend to getting of some money and the keeping of my
family in order, which I fear by my wife's liberty may be otherwise
lost.




JULY 1663

July 1st. This morning it rained so hard (though it was fair yesterday,
and we thereupon in hopes of having some fair weather, which we have
wanted these three months) that it wakened Creed, who lay with me last
night, and me, and so we up and fell to discourse of the business of
his accounts now under dispute, in which I have taken much trouble upon
myself and raised a distance between Sir G. Carteret and myself, which
troubles me, but I hope we have this morning light on an expedient that
will right all, that will answer their queries, and yet save Creed the
L500 which he did propose to make of the exchange abroad of the pieces
of eight which he disbursed. Being ready, he and I by water to White
Hall, where I left him before we came into the Court, for fear I should
be seen by Sir G. Carteret with him, which of late I have been forced
to avoid to remove suspicion. I to St. James's, and there discoursed
a while with Mr. Coventry, between whom and myself there is very good
understanding and friendship, and so to Westminster Hall, and being
in the Parliament lobby, I there saw my Lord of Bristoll come to the
Commons House to give his answer to their question, about some words he
should tell the King that were spoke by Sir Richard Temple, a member of
their House. A chair was set at the bar of the House for him, which he
used but little, but made an harangue of half an hour bareheaded, the
House covered. His speech being done, he came out and withdrew into a
little room till the House had concluded of an answer to his speech;
which they staying long upon, I went away. And by and by out comes
Sir W. Batten; and he told me that his Lordship had made a long and a
comedian-like speech, and delivered with such action as was not becoming
his Lordship. He confesses he did tell the King such a thing of Sir
Richard Temple, but that upon his honour they were not spoke by Sir
Richard, he having taken a liberty of enlarging to the King upon the
discourse which had been between Sir Richard and himself lately; and so
took upon himself the whole blame, and desired their pardon, it being
not to do any wrong to their fellow-member, but out of zeal to the King.
He told them, among many other things, that as to his religion he was a
Roman Catholique, but such a one as thought no man to have right to the
Crown of England but the Prince that hath it; and such a one as, if the
King should desire his counsel as to his own, he would not advise him to
another religion than the old true reformed religion of this country, it
being the properest of this kingdom as it now stands; and concluded with
a submission to what the House shall do with him, saying, that whatever
they shall do, says he, "thanks be to God, this head, this heart, and
this sword (pointing to them all), will find me a being in any place in
Europe." The House hath hereupon voted clearly Sir Richard Temple to
be free from the imputation of saying those words; but when Sir William
Batten came out, had not concluded what to say to my Lord, it being
argued that to own any satisfaction as to my Lord from his speech, would
be to lay some fault upon the King for the message he should upon no
better accounts send to the impeaching of one of their members. Walking
out, I hear that the House of Lords are offended that my Lord Digby
should come to this House and make a speech there without leave first
asked of the House of Lords. I hear also of another difficulty now upon
him; that my Lord of Sunderland (whom I do not know) was so near to
the marriage of his daughter as that the wedding-clothes were made, and
portion and every thing agreed on and ready; and the other day he goes
away nobody yet knows whither, sending her the next morning a release of
his right or claim to her, and advice to his friends not to enquire into
the reason of this doing, for he hath enough for it; but that he gives
them liberty to say and think what they will of him, so they do not
demand the reason of his leaving her, being resolved never to have her,
but the reason desires and resolves not to give. Thence by water with
Sir W. Batten to Trinity House, there to dine with him, which we did;
and after dinner we fell talking, Sir J. Minnes, Mr. Batten and I; Mr.
Batten telling us of a late triall of Sir Charles Sydly the other
day, before my Lord Chief Justice Foster and the whole bench, for his
debauchery a little while since at Oxford Kate's,

     [The details in the original are very gross.  Dr. Johnson relates
     the story in the "Lives of the Poets," in his life of Sackville,
     Lord Dorset "Sackville, who was then Lord Buckhurst, with Sir
     Charles Sedley and Sir Thomas Ogle, got drunk at the Cock, in Bow
     Street, by Covent Garden, and going into the balcony exposed
     themselves to the populace in very indecent postures.  At last, as
     they grew warmer, Sedley stood forth naked, and harangued the
     populace in such profane language, that the publick indignation was
     awakened; the crowd attempted to force the door, and being repulsed,
     drove in the performers with stones, and broke the windows of the
     house.  For this misdemeanour they were indicted, and Sedley was
     fined five hundred pounds; what was the sentence of the others is
     not known.  Sedley employed [Henry] Killigrew and another to procure
     a remission from the King, but (mark the friendship of the
     dissolute!) they begged the fine for themselves, and exacted it to
     the last groat."  The woman known as Oxford Kate appears to have
     kept the notorious Cock Tavern in Bow Street at this date.]

coming in open day into the Balcone and showed his nakedness,.... and
abusing of scripture and as it were from thence preaching a mountebank
sermon from the pulpit, saying that there he had to sell such a powder
as should make all the [women] in town run after him, 1000 people
standing underneath to see and hear him, and that being done he took a
glass of wine.... and then drank it off, and then took another and drank
the King's health. It seems my Lord and the rest of the judges did
all of them round give him a most high reproof; my Lord Chief justice
saying, that it was for him, and such wicked wretches as he was, that
God's anger and judgments hung over us, calling him sirrah many times.
It's said they have bound him to his good behaviour (there being no law
against him for it) in L5000. It being told that my Lord Buckhurst was
there, my Lord asked whether it was that Buckhurst that was lately tried
for robbery; and when answered Yes, he asked whether he had so soon
forgot his deliverance at that time, and that it would have more become
him to have been at his prayers begging God's forgiveness, than now
running into such courses again.... Thence home, and my clerks being
gone by my leave to see the East India ships that are lately come home,
I staid all alone within my office all the afternoon. This day I hear at
dinner that Don John of Austria, since his flight out of Portugall, is
dead of his wounds:--[not true]--so there is a great man gone, and a
great dispute like to be ended for the crown of Spayne, if the King
should have died before him. I received this morning a letter from my
wife, brought by John Gower to town, wherein I find a sad falling out
between my wife and my father and sister and Ashwell upon my writing
to my father to advise Pall not to keep Ashwell from her mistress, or
making any difference between them. Which Pall telling to Ashwell, and
she speaking some words that her mistress heard, caused great difference
among them; all which I am sorry from my heart to hear of, and I fear
will breed ill blood not to be laid again. So that I fear my wife and I
may have some falling out about it, or at least my father and I, but I
shall endeavour to salve up all as well as I can, or send for her out
of the country before the time intended, which I would be loth to do. In
the evening by water to my coz. Roger Pepys' chamber, where he was not
come, but I found Dr. John newly come to town, and is well again after
his sickness; but, Lord! what a simple man he is as to any public matter
of state, and talks so sillily to his brother Dr. Tom. What the matter
is I know not, but he has taken (as my father told me a good while
since) such displeasure that he hardly would touch his hat to me, and
I as little to him. By and by comes Roger, and he told us the whole
passage of my Lord Digby to-day, much as I have said here above; only
that he did say that he would draw his sword against the Pope himself,
if he should offer any thing against his Majesty, and the good of
these nations; and that he never was the man that did either look for a
Cardinal's cap for himself, or any body else, meaning Abbot Montagu; and
the House upon the whole did vote Sir Richard Temple innocent; and that
my Lord Digby hath cleared the honour of his Majesty, and Sir Richard
Temple's, and given perfect satisfaction of his own respects to the
House. Thence to my brother's, and being vexed with his not minding my
father's business here in getting his Landscape done, I went away in an
anger, and walked home, and so up to my lute and then to bed.

2d. Up betimes to my office, and there all the morning doing business,
at noon to the Change, and there met with several people, among others
Captain Cox, and with him to a Coffee [House], and drank with him and
some other merchants. Good discourse. Thence home and to dinner, and,
after a little alone at my viol, to the office, where we sat all the
afternoon, and so rose at the evening, and then home to supper and to
bed, after a little musique. My mind troubled me with the thoughts of
the difference between my wife and my father in the country. Walking in
the garden this evening with Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes, Sir G.
Carteret told us with great contempt how like a stage-player my Lord
Digby spoke yesterday, pointing to his head as my Lord did, and saying,
"First, for his head," says Sir G. Carteret, "I know what a calf's
head would have done better by half for his heart and his sword, I have
nothing to say to them." He told us that for certain his head cost the
late King his, for it was he that broke off the treaty at Uxbridge. He
told us also how great a man he was raised from a private gentleman in
France by Monsieur Grandmont,

     [Antoine, Duc de Gramont, marshal of France, who died July 12th,
     1678, aged seventy-four.  His memoirs have been published.]

and afterwards by the Cardinall,--[Mazarin]--who raised him to be a
Lieutenant-generall, and then higher; and entrusted by the Cardinall,
when he was banished out of France, with great matters, and recommended
by him to the Queen as a man to be trusted and ruled by: yet when he
came to have some power over the Queen, he begun to dissuade her from
her opinion of the Cardinal; which she said nothing to till the Cardinal
was returned, and then she told him of it; who told my Lord Digby, "Eh
bien, Monsieur, vous estes un fort bon amy donc:" but presently put him
out of all; and then he was, from a certainty of coming in two or three
years' time to be Mareschall of France (to which all strangers, even
Protestants, and those as often as French themselves, are capable of
coming, though it be one of the greatest places in France), he was
driven to go out of France into Flanders; but there was not trusted, nor
received any kindness from the Prince of Conde, as one to whom also he
had been false, as he had been to the Cardinal and Grandmont. In fine,
he told us how he is a man of excellent parts, but of no great faith nor
judgment, and one very easy to get up to great height of preferment,
but never able to hold it. So home and to my musique; and then comes Mr.
Creed to me giving me an account of his accounts, how he has now settled
them fit for perusal the most strict, at which I am glad. So he and I to
bed together.

3d. Up and he home, and I with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten by coach
to Westminster, to St. James's, thinking to meet Sir G. Carteret, and
to attend the Duke, but he not coming we broke up, and so to Westminster
Hall, and there meeting with Mr. Moore he tells me great news that my
Lady Castlemaine is fallen from Court, and this morning retired. He
gives me no account of the reason of it, but that it is so: for which
I am sorry: and yet if the King do it to leave off not only her but all
other mistresses, I should be heartily glad of it, that he may fall to
look after business. I hear my Lord Digby is condemned at Court for his
speech, and that my Lord Chancellor grows great again. Thence with Mr.
Creed, whom I called at his chamber, over the water to Lambeth; but
could not, it being morning, get to see the Archbishop's hearse: so he
and I walked over the fields to Southwark, and there parted, and I spent
half an hour in Mary Overy's Church, where are fine monuments of great
antiquity, I believe, and has been a fine church. Thence to the Change,
and meeting Sir J. Minnes there, he and I walked to look upon Backwell's
design of making another alley from his shop through over against the
Exchange door, which will be very noble and quite put down the other
two.

So home to dinner and then to the office, and entered in my manuscript
book the Victualler's contract, and then over the water and walked to
see Sir W. Pen, and sat with him a while, and so home late, and to my
viall. So up comes Creed again to me and stays all night, to-morrow
morning being a hearing before the Duke. So to bed full of discourse of
his business.

4th. Up by 4 o'clock and sent him to get matters ready, and I to my
office looking over papers and mending my manuscript by scraping out the
blots and other things, which is now a very fine book. So to St. James's
by water with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, I giving occasion to a
wager about the tide, that it did flow through bridge, by which Sir W.
Batten won 5s. of Sir J. Minnes. At St. James's we staid while the Duke
made himself ready. Among other things Sir Allen Apsley showed the
Duke the Lisbon Gazette in Spanish, where the late victory is set down
particularly, and to the great honour of the English beyond measure.
They have since taken back Evora, which was lost to the Spaniards, the
English making the assault, and lost not more than three men. Here I
learnt that the English foot are highly esteemed all over the world, but
the horse not so much, which yet we count among ourselves the best; but
they abroad have had no great knowledge of our horse, it seems. The
Duke being ready, we retired with him, and there fell upon Mr. Creed's
business, where the Treasurer did, like a mad coxcomb, without reason or
method run over a great many things against the account, and so did Sir
J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, which the Duke himself and Mr. Coventry
and my Lord Barkely and myself did remove, and Creed being called in did
answer all with great method and excellently to the purpose (myself I
am a little conscious did not speak so well as I purposed and do think
I used to do, that is, not so intelligibly and persuasively, as I well
hoped I should), not that what I said was not well taken, and did carry
the business with what was urged and answered by Creed and Mr. Coventry,
till the Duke himself did declare that he was satisfied, and my Lord
Barkely offered to lay L100 that the King would receive no wrong in the
account, and the two last knights held their tongues, or at least by not
understanding it did say what made for Mr. Creed, and so Sir G. Carteret
was left alone, but yet persisted to say that the account was not good,
but full of corruption and foul dealing. And so we broke up to his
shame, but I do fear to the loss of his friendship to me a good while,
which I am heartily troubled for. Thence with Creed to the King's Head
ordinary; but, coming late, dined at the second table very well for
12d.; and a pretty gentleman in our company, who confirms my Lady
Castlemaine's being gone from Court, but knows not the reason; he told
us of one wipe the Queen a little while ago did give her, when she came
in and found the Queen under the dresser's hands, and had been so long:

"I wonder your Majesty," says she, "can have the patience to sit so long
a-dressing?"--"I have so much reason to use patience," says the Queen,
"that I can very well bear with it." He thinks that it may be the Queen
hath commanded her to retire, though that is not likely. Thence with
Creed to hire a coach to carry us to Hide Park, to-day there being a
general muster of the King's Guards, horse and foot: but they demand so
high, that I, spying Mr. Cutler the merchant, did take notice of him,
and he going into his coach, and telling me that he was going to shew a
couple of Swedish strangers the muster, I asked and went along with him;
where a goodly sight to see so many fine horses and officers, and the
King, Duke, and others come by a-horseback, and the two Queens in the
Queen-Mother's coach, my Lady Castlemaine not being there. And after
long being there, I 'light, and walked to the place where the King,
Duke, &c., did stand to see the horse and foot march by and discharge
their guns, to show a French Marquisse (for whom this muster was caused)
the goodness of our firemen; which indeed was very good, though not
without a slip now and then; and one broadside close to our coach we had
going out of the Park, even to the nearness as to be ready to burn our
hairs. Yet methought all these gay men are not the soldiers that must do
the King's business, it being such as these that lost the old King all
he had, and were beat by the most ordinary fellows that could be. Thence
with much ado out of the Park, and I 'lighted and through St. James's
down the waterside over, to Lambeth, to see the Archbishop's corps (who
is to be carried away to Oxford on Monday), but came too late, and
so walked over the fields and bridge home (calling by the way at old
George's), but find that he is dead, and there wrote several letters,
and so home to supper and to bed. This day in the Duke's chamber there
being a Roman story in the hangings, and upon the standards written
these four letters--S. P. Q. R., Sir G. Carteret came to me to know what
the meaning of those four letters were; which ignorance is not to be
borne in a Privy Counsellor, methinks, that a schoolboy should be whipt
for not knowing.

5th (Lord's day). Lady Batten had sent twice to invite me to go with
them to Walthamstow to-day, Mrs. Martha' being married already this
morning to Mr. Castle, at this parish church. I could not rise soon
enough to go with them, but got myself ready, and so to Games's, where I
got a horse and rode thither very pleasantly, only coming to make water
I found a stopping, which makes me fearful of my old pain. Being come
thither, I was well received, and had two pair of gloves, as the rest,
and walked up and down with my Lady in the garden, she mighty kind
to me, and I have the way to please her. A good dinner and merry, but
methinks none of the kindness nor bridall respect between the bridegroom
and bride, that was between my wife and I, but as persons that marry
purely for convenience. After dinner to church by coach, and there my
Lady, Mrs. Turner, Mrs. Lemon, and I only, we, in spite to one another,
kept one another awake; and sometimes I read in my book of Latin plays,
which I took in my pocket, thinking to have walked it. An old doting
parson preached. So home again, and by and by up and homewards, calling
in our way (Sir J. Minnes and I only) at Mr. Batten's (who with his lady
and child went in another coach by us), which is a very pretty house,
and himself in all things within and without very ingenious, and I find
a very fine study and good books. So set out, Sir J. Minnes and I in
his coach together, talking all the way of chymistry, wherein he do
know something, at least, seems so to me, that cannot correct him, Mr.
Batten's man riding my horse, and so home and to my office a while to
read my vows, then home to prayers and to bed.

6th. Up pretty early and to my office all the morning, writing out a
list of the King's ships in my Navy collections with great pleasure. At
noon Creed comes to me, who tells me how well he has sped with Sir G.
Carteret after all our trouble, that he had his tallys up and all the
kind words possible from him, which I believe is out of an apprehension
what a fool he has made of himself hitherto in making so great a stop
therein. But I find, and so my Lord Sandwich may, that Sir G. Carteret
had a design to do him a disgrace, if he could possibly, otherwise he
would never have carried the business so far after that manner, but
would first have consulted my Lord and given him advice what to do
therein for his own honour, which he thought endangered. Creed dined
with me and then walked a while, and so away, and I to my office at
my morning's work till dark night, and so with good content home. To
supper, a little musique, and then to bed.

7th. Up by 4 o'clock and to my office, and there continued all the
morning upon my Navy book to my great content. At noon down by barge
with Sir J. Minnes (who is going to Chatham) to Woolwich, in our way
eating of some venison pasty in the barge, I having neither eat nor
drank to-day, which fills me full of wind. Here also in Mr. Pett's
garden I eat some and the first cherries I have eat this year, off the
tree where the King himself had been gathering some this morning. Thence
walked alone, only part of the way Deane walked with me, complaining
of many abuses in the Yard, to Greenwich, and so by water to Deptford,
where I found Mr. Coventry, and with him up and down all the stores, to
the great trouble of the officers, and by his help I am resolved to fall
hard to work again, as I used to do. So thence he and I by water talking
of many things, and I see he puts his trust most upon me in the Navy,
and talks, as there is reason, slightly of the two old knights, and
I should be glad by any drudgery to see the King's stores and service
looked to as they ought, but I fear I shall never understand half the
miscarriages and tricks that the King suffers by. He tells me what
Mr. Pett did to-day, that my Lord Bristoll told the King that he will
impeach the Chancellor of High Treason: but I find that my Lord
Bristoll hath undone himself already in every body's opinion, and now
he endeavours to raise dust to put out other men's eyes, as well as his
own; but I hope it will not take, in consideration merely that it is
hard for a Prince to spare an experienced old officer, be he never so
corrupt; though I hope this man is not so, as some report him to be. He
tells me that Don John is yet alive, and not killed, as was said, in the
great victory against the Spaniards in Portugall of late. So home,
and late at my office. Thence home and to my musique. This night Mr.
Turner's house being to be emptied out of my cellar, and therefore I
think to sit up a little longer than ordinary. This afternoon, coming
from the waterside with Mr. Coventry, I spied my boy upon Tower Hill
playing with the rest of the boys; so I sent W. Griffin to take him, and
he did bring him to me, and so I said nothing to him, but caused him to
be stripped (for he was run away with his best suit), and so putting on
his other, I sent him going, without saying one word hard to him, though
I am troubled for the rogue, though he do not deserve it. Being come
home I find my stomach not well for want of eating to-day my dinner as
I should do, and so am become full of wind. I called late for some
victuals, and so to bed, leaving the men below in the cellar emptying
the vats up through Mr. Turner's own house, and so with more content to
bed late.

8th. Being weary, and going to bed late last night, I slept till 7
o'clock, it raining mighty hard, and so did every minute of the day
after sadly. But I know not what will become of the corn this year, we
having had but two fair days these many months. Up and to my office,
where all the morning busy, and then at noon home to dinner alone upon
a good dish of eeles, given me by Michell, the Bewpers' man, and then
to my viall a little, and then down into the cellar and up and down with
Mr. Turner to see where his vault may be made bigger, or another made
him, which I think may well be. And so to my office, where very busy
all day setting things in order my contract books and preparing things
against the next sitting. In the evening I received letters out of the
country, among others from my wife, who methinks writes so coldly that
I am much troubled at it, and I fear shall have much ado to bring her
to her old good temper. So home to supper and musique, which is all
the pleasure I have of late given myself, or is fit I should, others
spending too much time and money. Going in I stepped to Sir W. Batten,
and there staid and talked with him (my Lady being in the country), and
sent for some lobsters, and Mrs. Turner came in, and did bring us an
umble pie hot out of her oven, extraordinary good, and afterwards some
spirits of her making, in which she has great judgment, very good, and
so home, merry with this night's refreshment.

9th. Up. Making water this morning, which I do every morning as soon as
I am awake, with greater plenty and freedom than I used to do, which I
think I may impute to last night's drinking of elder spirits. Abroad, it
raining, to Blackfriars, and there went into a little alehouse and staid
while I sent to the Wardrobe, but Mr. Moore was gone out. Here I kissed
three or four times the maid of the house, who is a pretty girl, but
very modest, and, God forgive me, had a mind to something more. Thence
to my lawyer's; up and down to the Six Clerks' Office, where I found my
bill against Tom Trice dismissed, which troubles me, it being through my
neglect, and will put me to charges. So to Mr. Phillips, and discoursed
with him about finding me out somebody that will let me have for money
an annuity of about L100 per annum for two lives. So home, and there
put up my riding things against the evening, in case Mr. Moore should
continue his mind to go to Oxford, which I have little mind to do, the
weather continuing so bad and the waters high. Dined at home, and Mr.
Moore in the afternoon comes to me and concluded not to go. Sir W.
Batten and I sat a little this afternoon at the office, and thence I by
water to Deptford, and there mustered the Yard, purposely, God forgive
me, to find out Bagwell, a carpenter, whose wife is a pretty woman, that
I might have some occasion of knowing him and forcing her to come to the
office again, which I did so luckily that going thence he and his wife
did of themselves meet me in the way to thank me for my old kindness,
but I spoke little to her, but shall give occasion for her coming to me.
Her husband went along with me to show me Sir W. Pen's lodging, which
I knew before, but only to have a time of speaking to him and sounding
him. So left and I went in to Sir W. Pen, who continues ill, and worse,
I think, than before. He tells me my Lady Castlemaine was at Court, for
all this talk this week, which I am glad to hear; but it seems the King
is stranger than ordinary to her. Thence walked home as I used to do,
and to bed presently, having taken great cold in my feet by walking in
the dirt this day in thin shoes or some other way, so that I begun to be
in pain, and with warm clothes made myself better by morning, but yet in
pain.

10th. Up late and by water to Westminster Hall, where I met Pierce the
chirurgeon, who tells me that for certain the King is grown colder to my
Lady Castlemaine than ordinary, and that he believes he begins to love
the Queen, and do make much of her, more than he used to do. Up to the
Lobby, and there sent out for Mr. Coventry and Sir W. Batten, and told
them if they thought convenient I would go to Chatham today, Sir John
Minnes being already there at a Pay, and I would do such and such
business there, which they thought well of, and so I went home and
prepared myself to go after, dinner with Sir W. Batten. Sir W. Batten
and Mr. Coventry tell me that my Lord Bristoll hath this day impeached
my Lord Chancellor in the House of Lords of High Treason. The chief of
the articles are these: 1st. That he should be the occasion of the peace
made with Holland lately upon such disadvantageous terms, and that he
was bribed to it. 2d. That Dunkirke was also sold by his advice chiefly,
so much to the damage of England. 3d. That he had L6000 given him for
the drawing-up or promoting of the Irish declaration lately, concerning
the division of the lands there. 4th. He did carry on the design of
the Portugall match, so much to the prejudice of the Crown of England,
notwithstanding that he knew the Queen is not capable of bearing
children. 5th. That the Duke's marrying of his daughter was a practice
of his, thereby to raise his family; and that it was done by indirect
courses. 6th. That the breaking-off of the match with Parma, in which he
was employed at the very time when the match with Portugall was made
up here, which he took as a great slur to him, and so it was; and that,
indeed, is the chief occasion of all this fewde. 7th. That he hath
endeavoured to bring in Popery, and wrote to the Pope for a cap for a
subject of the King of England's (my Lord Aubigny ); and some say that
he lays it to the Chancellor, that a good Protestant Secretary (Sir
Edward Nicholas) was laid aside, and a Papist, Sir H. Bennet, put in
his room: which is very strange, when the last of these two is his own
creature, and such an enemy accounted to the Chancellor, that they
never did nor do agree; and all the world did judge the Chancellor to be
falling from the time that Sir H. Bennet was brought in. Besides my Lord
Bristoll being a Catholique himself, all this is very strange. These are
the main of the Articles. Upon which my Lord Chancellor desired that the
noble Lord that brought in these Articles, would sign to them with his
hand; which my Lord Bristoll did presently. Then the House did order
that the judges should, against Monday next, bring in their opinion,
Whether these articles are treason, or no? and next, they would know,
Whether they were brought in regularly or no, without leave of the
Lords' House? After dinner I took boat (H. Russell) and down to
Gravesend in good time, and thence with a guide post to Chatham, where I
found Sir J. Minnes and Mr. Wayth walking in the garden, whom I told all
this day's news, which I left the town full of, and it is great news,
and will certainly be in the consequence of it. By and by to supper,
and after long discourse, Sir J. Minnes and I, he saw me to my chamber,
which not pleasing me, I sent word so to Mrs. Bradford, that I should be
crowded into such a hole, while the clerks and boarders of her own take
up the best rooms. However I lay there and slept well.

11th. Up early and to the Dock, and with the Storekeeper and other
officers all the morning from one office to another. At noon to
the Hill-house in Commissioner Pett's coach, and after seeing the
guard-ships, to dinner, and after dining done to the Dock by coach, it
raining hard, to see "The Prince" launched, which hath lain in the Dock
in repairing these three years. I went into her and was launched in her.
Thence by boat ashore, it raining, and I went to Mr. Barrow's, where
Sir J. Minnes and Commissioner Pett; we staid long eating sweetmeats
and drinking, and looking over some antiquities of Mr. Barrow's, among
others an old manuscript Almanac, that I believe was made for some
monastery, in parchment, which I could spend much time upon to
understand. Here was a pretty young lady, a niece of Barrow's, which I
took much pleasure to look on. Thence by barge to St. Mary Creek; where
Commissioner Pett (doubtful of the growing greatness of Portsmouth by
the finding of those creeks there), do design a wett dock at no great
charge, and yet no little one; he thinks towards L10,000. And the place,
indeed, is likely to be a very fit place, when the King hath money to do
it with. Thence, it raining as hard as it could pour down, home to the
Hillhouse, and anon to supper, and after supper, Sir J. Minnes and I had
great discourse with Captain Cox and Mr. Hempson about business of
the yard, and particularly of pursers' accounts with Hempson, who is a
cunning knave in that point. So late to bed and, Mr. Wayth being gone, I
lay above in the Treasurer's bed and slept well. About one or two in
the morning the curtains of my bed being drawn waked me, and I saw a man
stand there by the inside of my bed calling me French dogg 20 times, one
after another, and I starting, as if I would get out of the bed, he fell
a-laughing as hard as he could drive, still calling me French dogg, and
laid his hand on my shoulder. At last, whether I said anything or no I
cannot tell, but I perceived the man, after he had looked wistly upon
me, and found that I did not answer him to the names that he called me
by, which was Salmon, Sir Carteret's clerk, and Robt. Maddox, another of
the clerks, he put off his hat on a suddaine, and forebore laughing, and
asked who I was, saying, "Are you Mr. Pepys?" I told him yes, and now
being come a little better to myself, I found him to be Tom Willson, Sir
W. Batten's clerk, and fearing he might be in some melancholy fit, I
was at a loss what to do or say. At last I asked him what he meant. He
desired my pardon for that he was mistaken, for he thought verily,
not knowing of my coming to lie there, that it had been Salmon, the
Frenchman, with whom he intended to have made some sport. So I made
nothing of it, but bade him good night, and I, after a little pause,
to sleep again, being well pleased that it ended no worse, and being a
little the better pleased with it, because it was the Surveyor's clerk,
which will make sport when I come to tell Sir W. Batten of it, it being
a report that old Edgeborough, the former Surveyor, who died here, do
now and then walk.

12th (Lord's day). Up, and meeting Tom Willson he asked my pardon again,
which I easily did give him, telling him only that it was well I was
not a woman with child, for it might have made me miscarry. With Sir
J. Minnes to church, where an indifferent good sermon. Here I saw Mrs.
Becky Allen, who hath been married, and is this day churched, after her
bearing a child. She is grown tall, but looks very white and thin, and I
can find no occasion while I am here to come to have her company, which
I desire and expected in my coming, but only coming out of the church
I kissed her and her sister and mother-in-law. So to dinner, Sir J.
Minnes, Commissioner Pett, and I, &c., and after dinner walked in the
garden, it being a very fine day, the best we have had this great while,
if not this whole summer. To church again, and after that walked through
the Rope-ground to the Dock, and there over and over the Dock and
grounds about it, and storehouses, &c., with the officers of the Yard,
and then to Commissioner Pett's and had a good sullybub and other good
things, and merry. Commissioner Pett showed me alone his bodys as a
secrett, which I found afterwards by discourse with Sir J. Minnes that
he had shown them him, wherein he seems to suppose great mystery in the
nature of Lynes to be hid, but I do not understand it at all. Thence
walked to the Hill-house, being myself much dissatisfied, and more than
I thought I should have been with Commissioner Pett, being, by what I
saw since I came hither, convinced that he is not able to exercise the
command in the Yard over the officers that he ought to do, or somebody
else, if ever the service be well looked after there. Sat up and with
Sir J. Minnes talking, and he speaking his mind in slighting of the
Commissioner, for which I wish there was not so much reason. For I do
see he is but a man of words, though indeed he is the ablest man that
we have to do service if he would or durst. Sir J. Minnes being gone
to bed, I took Mr. Whitfield, one of the clerks, and walked to the Dock
about eleven at night, and there got a boat and a crew, and rowed down
to the guard-ships, it being a most pleasant moonshine evening that ever
I saw almost. The guard-ships were very ready to hail us, being no doubt
commanded thereto by their Captain, who remembers how I surprised them
the last time I was here. However, I found him ashore, but the ship in
pretty good order, and the arms well fixed, charged, and primed. Thence
to the Soveraign, where I found no officers aboard, no arms fixed, nor
any powder to prime their few guns, which were charged, without bullet
though. So to the London, where neither officers nor any body awake; I
boarded her, and might have done what I would, and at last could find
but three little boys; and so spent the whole night in visiting all the
ships, in which I found, for the most part, neither an officer aboard,
nor any men so much as awake, which I was grieved to find, specially so
soon after a great Larum, as Commissioner Pett brought us word that he
[had] provided against, and put all in a posture of defence but a week
ago, all which I am resolved to represent to the Duke.

13th. So, it being high day, I put in to shore and to bed for two
hours just, and so up again, and with the Storekeeper and Clerk of the
Rope-yard up and down the Dock and Rope-house, and by and by mustered
the Yard, and instructed the Clerks of the Cheque in my new way of
Callbook, and that and other things done, to the Hill-house, and there
we eat something, and so by barge to Rochester, and there took coach
hired for our passage to London, and Mrs. Allen, the clerk of the
Rope-yard's wife with us, desiring her passage, and it being a most
pleasant and warm day, we got by four o'clock home. In our way she
telling us in what condition Becky Allen is married against all
expectation a fellow that proves to be a coxcomb and worth little if
any thing at all, and yet are entered into a way of living above their
condition that will ruin them presently, for which, for the lady's sake,
I am much troubled. Home I found all well there, and after dressing
myself, I walked to the Temple; and there, from my cozen Roger, hear
that the judges have this day brought in their answer to the Lords, That
the articles against my Lord Chancellor are not Treason; and to-morrow
they are to bring in their arguments to the House for the same. This day
also the King did send by my Lord Chamberlain to the Lords, to tell them
from him, that the most of the articles against my Lord Chancellor he
himself knows to be false. Thence by water to Whitehall, and so walked
to St. James's, but missed Mr. Coventry. I met the Queen-Mother walking
in the Pell Mell, led by my Lord St. Alban's. And finding many coaches
at the Gate, I found upon enquiry that the Duchess is brought to bed
of a boy; and hearing that the King and Queen are rode abroad with
the Ladies of Honour to the Park, and seeing a great crowd of gallants
staying here to see their return, I also staid walking up and down,
and among others spying a man like Mr. Pembleton (though I have little
reason to think it should be he, speaking and discoursing long with my
Lord D'Aubigne), yet how my blood did rise in my face, and I fell into a
sweat from my old jealousy and hate, which I pray God remove from me.
By and by the King and Queen, who looked in this dress (a white laced
waistcoat and a crimson short pettycoat, and her hair dressed ci la
negligence) mighty pretty; and the King rode hand in hand with her. Here
was also my Lady Castlemaine rode among the rest of the ladies; but the
King took, methought, no notice of her; nor when they 'light did any
body press (as she seemed to expect, and staid for it) to take her
down, but was taken down by her own gentleman. She looked mighty out of
humour, and had a yellow plume in her hat (which all took notice of),
and yet is very handsome, but very melancholy: nor did any body speak
to her, or she so much as smile or speak to any body. I followed them
up into White Hall, and into the Queen's presence, where all the ladies
walked, talking and fiddling with their hats and feathers, and changing
and trying one another's by one another's heads, and laughing. But it
was the finest sight to me, considering their great beautys and dress,
that ever I did see in all my life. But, above all, Mrs. Stewart in this
dress, with her hat cocked and a red plume, with her sweet eye, little
Roman nose, and excellent taille, is now the greatest beauty I ever
saw, I think, in my life; and, if ever woman can, do exceed my Lady
Castlemaine, at least in this dress nor do I wonder if the King
changes, which I verily believe is the reason of his coldness to my Lady
Castlemaine. Here late, with much ado I left to look upon them, and went
away, and by water, in a boat with other strange company, there being no
other to be had, and out of him into a sculler half to the bridge,
and so home and to Sir W. Batten, where I staid telling him and Sir J.
Minnes and Mrs. Turner, with great mirth, my being frighted at Chatham
by young Edgeborough, and so home to supper and to bed, before I sleep
fancying myself to sport with Mrs. Stewart with great pleasure.

14th. Up a little late, last night recovering my sleepiness for the
night before, which was lost, and so to my office to put papers and
things to right, and making up my journal from Wednesday last to this
day. All the morning at my office doing of business; at noon Mr. Hunt
came to me, and he and I to the Exchange, and a Coffee House, and drank
there, and thence to my house to dinner, whither my uncle Thomas came,
and he tells me that he is going down to Wisbech, there to try what he
can recover of my uncle Day's estate, and seems to have good arguments
for what he do go about, in which I wish him good speed. I made him
almost foxed, the poor man having but a bad head, and not used I believe
nowadays to drink much wine. So after dinner, they being gone, I to my
office, and so home to bed. This day I hear the judges, according to
order yesterday, did bring into the Lords' House their reasons of their
judgment in the business between my Lord Bristoll and the Chancellor;
and the Lords do concur with the Judges that the articles are not
treason, nor regularly brought into the House, and so voted that a
Committee should be chosen to examine them; but nothing to be done
therein till the next sitting of this Parliament (which is like to
be adjourned in a day or two), and in the mean time the two Lords to,
remain without prejudice done to either of them.

15th. Up and all the morning at the office, among other things with
Cooper the Purveyor, whose dullness in his proceeding in his work I was
vexed at, and find that though he understands it may be as much as other
men that profess skill in timber, yet I perceive that many things, they
do by rote, and very dully. Thence home to dinner, whither Captain Grove
came and dined with me, he going into the country to-day; among other
discourse he told me of discourse very much to my honour, both as to my
care and ability, happening at the Duke of Albemarle's table the other
day, both from the Duke, and the Duchess themselves; and how I paid so
much a year to him whose place it was of right, and that Mr. Coventry
did report thus of me; which was greatly to my content, knowing how
against their minds I was brought into the Navy. Thence by water to
Westminster, and there spent a good deal of time walking in the Hall,
which is going to be repaired, and, God forgive me, had a mind to have
got Mrs. Lane abroad, or fallen in with any woman else (in that hot
humour). But it so happened she could not go out, nor I meet with any
body else, and so I walked homeward, and in my way did many and great
businesses of my own at the Temple among my lawyers and others to my
great content, thanking God that I did not fall into any company to
occasion spending time and money. To supper, and then to a little viall
and to bed, sporting in my fancy with the Queen.

16th. Up and dispatched things into the country and to my father's, and
two keggs of Sturgeon and a dozen bottles of wine to Cambridge for my
cozen Roger Pepys, which I give him. By and by down by water on
several Deall ships, and stood upon a stage in one place seeing calkers
sheathing of a ship. Then at Wapping to my carver's about my Viall head.
So home, and thence to my Viall maker's in Bishops, gate Street; his
name is Wise, who is a pretty fellow at it. Thence to the Exchange, and
so home to dinner, and then to my office, where a full board, and busy
all the afternoon, and among other things made a great contract with Sir
W. Warren for 40,000 deals Swinsound, at L3 17s. od. per hundred. In
the morning before I went on the water I was at Thames Street about some
pitch, and there meeting Anthony Joyce, I took him and Mr. Stacy, the
Tarr merchant, to the tavern, where Stacy told me many old stories of my
Lady Batten's former poor condition, and how her former husband broke,
and how she came to her state. At night, after office done, I went
to Sir W. Batten's, where my Lady and I [had] some high words about
emptying our house of office, where I did tell her my mind, and at last
agreed that it should be done through my office, and so all well. So
home to bed.

17th. Up, and after doing some business at my office, Creed came to me,
and I took him to my viall maker's, and there I heard the famous Mr.
Stefkins play admirably well, and yet I found it as it is always, I over
expected. I took him to the tavern and found him a temperate sober man,
at least he seems so to me. I commit the direction of my viall to him.
Thence to the Change, and so home, Creed and I to dinner, and after
dinner Sir W. Warren came to me, and he and I in my closet about his
last night's contract, and from thence to discourse of measuring of
timber, wherein I made him see that I could understand the matter well,
and did both learn of and teach him something. Creed being gone through
my staying talking to him so long, I went alone by water down to
Redriffe, and so to sit and talk with Sir W. Pen, where I did speak very
plainly concerning my thoughts of Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes. So
as it may cost me some trouble if he should tell them again, but he said
as much or more to me concerning them both, which I may remember if ever
it should come forth, and nothing but what is true and my real opinion
of them, that they neither do understand to this day Creed's accounts,
nor do deserve to be employed in their places without better care, but
that the King had better give them greater salaries to stand still and
do nothing. Thence coming home I was saluted by Bagwell and his wife
(the woman I have a kindness for), and they would have me into their
little house, which I was willing enough to, and did salute his wife.
They had got wine for me, and I perceive live prettily, and I believe
the woman a virtuous modest woman. Her husband walked through to
Redriffe with me, telling me things that I asked of in the yard, and so
by water home, it being likely to rain again to-night, which God forbid.
To supper and to bed.

18th. Up and to my office, where all the morning, and Sir J. Minnes and
I did a little, and but a little business at the office. So I eat a
bit of victuals at home, and so abroad to several places, as my
bookseller's, and then to Thomson the instrument maker's to bespeak a
ruler for my pocket for timber, &c., which I believe he will do to my
mind. So to the Temple, Wardrobe, and lastly to Westminster Hall, where
I expected some bands made me by Mrs. Lane, and while she went to the
starchers for them, I staid at Mrs. Howlett's, who with her husband were
abroad, and only their daughter (which I call my wife) was in the shop,
and I took occasion to buy a pair of gloves to talk to her, and I find
her a pretty spoken girl, and will prove a mighty handsome wench. I
could love her very well. By and by Mrs. Lane comes, and my bands not
being done she and I posted and met at the Crown in the Palace Yard,
where we eat a chicken I sent for, and drank, and were mighty merry,
and I had my full liberty of towzing her and doing what I would, but the
last thing of all.... Of which I am heartily ashamed, but I do resolve
never to do more so. But, Lord! to see what a mind she has to a husband,
and how she showed me her hands to tell her her fortune, and every
thing that she asked ended always whom and when she was to marry. And I
pleased her so well, saying as. I know she would have me, and then
she would say that she had been with all the artists in town, and they
always told her the same things, as that she should live long, and rich,
and have a good husband, but few children, and a great fit of sickness,
and 20 other things, which she says she has always been told by others.
Here I staid late before my bands were done, and then they came, and so
I by water to the Temple, and thence walked home, all in a sweat with my
tumbling of her and walking, and so a little supper and to bed, fearful
of having taken cold.

19th (Lord's day). Lay very long in pleasant dreams till Church time,
and so up, and it being foul weather so that I cannot walk as I intended
to meet my Cozen Roger at Thomas Pepys's house (whither he rode last
night), to Hatcham, I went to church, where a sober Doctor made a good
sermon. So home to dinner alone, and then to read a little, and so to
church again, where the Scot made an ordinary sermon, and so home to my
office, and there read over my vows and increased them by a vow against
all strong drink till November next of any sort or quantity, by which I
shall try how I can forbear it. God send it may not prejudice my health,
and then I care not. Then I fell to read over a silly play writ by a
person of honour (which is, I find, as much as to say a coxcomb), called
"Love a la Mode,"' and that being ended, home, and played on my lute and
sung psalms till bedtime, then to prayers and to bed.

20th. Up and to my office, and then walked to Woolwich, reading Bacon's
"Faber fortunae,"

     [Pepys may here refer either to Essay XLI. (of Fortune) or to a
     chapter' in the "Advancement of Learning."  The sentence, "Faber
     quisque fortunae propria," said to be by Appius Claudian, is quoted
     more than once in the "De Augmentis Scientiarum," lib. viii., cap.
     2.]

which the oftener I read the more I admire. There found Captain Cocke,
and up and down to many places to look after matters, and so walked back
again with him to his house, and there dined very finely. With much ado
obtained an excuse from drinking of wine, and did only taste a drop of
Sack which he had for his lady, who is, he fears, a little consumptive,
and her beauty begins to want its colour. It was Malago Sack, which, he
says, is certainly 30 years old, and I tasted a drop of it, and it was
excellent wine, like a spirit rather than wine. Thence by water to the
office, and taking some papers by water to White Hall and St. James's,
but there being no meeting with the Duke to-day, I returned by water and
down to Greenwich, to look after some blocks that I saw a load carried
off by a cart from Woolwich, the King's Yard. But I could not find them,
and so returned, and being heartily weary I made haste to bed, and being
in bed made Will read and construe three or four Latin verses in the
Bible, and chide him for forgetting his grammar. So to sleep, and sleep
ill all the night, being so weary, and feverish with it.

21st. And so lay long in the morning, till I heard people knock at my
door, and I took it to be about 8 o'clock (but afterwards found myself
a little mistaken), and so I rose and ranted at Will and the maid, and
swore I could find my heart to kick them down stairs, which the maid
mumbled at mightily. It was my brother, who staid and talked with me,
his chief business being about his going about to build his house new at
the top, which will be a great charge for him, and above his judgment.
By and by comes Mr. Deane, of Woolwich, with his draught of a ship, and
the bend and main lines in the body of a ship very finely, and which do
please me mightily, and so am resolved to study hard, and learn of him
to understand a body, and I find him a very pretty fellow in it, and
rational, but a little conceited, but that's no matter to me. At noon,
by my Lady Batten's desire, I went over the water to Mr. Castle's, who
brings his wife home to his own house to-day, where I found a great many
good old women, and my Lady, Sir W. Batten, and Sir J. Minnes. A good,
handsome, plain dinner, and then walked in the garden; which is pleasant
enough, more than I expected there, and so Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten,
and I by water to the office, and there sat, and then I by water to the
Temple about my law business, and back again home and wrote letters to
my father and wife about my desire that they should observe the feast
at Brampton, and have my Lady and the family, and so home to supper
and bed, my head aching all the day from my last night's bad rest, and
yesterday's distempering myself with over walking, and to-day knocking
my head against a low door in Mr. Castle's house. This day the
Parliament kept a fast for the present unseasonable weather.

22nd. Up, and by and by comes my uncle Thomas, to whom I paid L10 for
his last half year's annuity, and did get his and his son's hand and
seal for the confirming to us Piggott's mortgage, which was forgot to be
expressed in our late agreement with him, though intended, and therefore
they might have cavilled at it, if they would. Thence abroad calling
at several places upon some errands, among others to my brother Tom's
barber and had my hair cut, while his boy played on the viallin, a plain
boy, but has a very good genius, and understands the book very well, but
to see what a shift he made for a string of red silk was very pleasant.
Thence to my Lord Crew's. My Lord not being come home, I met and staid
below with Captain Ferrers, who was come to wait upon my Lady Jemimah to
St. James's, she being one of the four ladies that hold up the mantle at
the christening this afternoon of the Duke's child (a boy). In
discourse of the ladies at Court, Captain Ferrers tells me that my Lady
Castlemaine is now as great again as ever she was; and that her going
away was only a fit of her own upon some slighting words of the King,
so that she called for her coach at a quarter of an hour's warning, and
went to Richmond; and the King the next morning, under pretence of going
a-hunting, went to see her and make friends, and never was a-hunting at
all. After which she came back to Court, and commands the King as much
as ever, and hath and doth what she will. No longer ago than last night,
there was a private entertainment made for the King and Queen at the
Duke of Buckingham's, and she: was not invited: but being at my Lady
Suffolk's, her aunt's (where my Lady Jemimah and Lord Sandwich dined)
yesterday, she was heard to say, "Well; much good may it do them, and
for all that I will be as merry as they:" and so she went home and
caused a great supper to be prepared. And after the King had been with
the Queen at Wallingford House, he came to my Lady Castlemaine's, and
was there all night, and my Lord Sandwich with him, which was the reason
my Lord lay in town all night, which he has not done a great while
before. He tells me he believes that, as soon as the King can get a
husband for Mrs. Stewart however, my Lady Castlemaine's nose will be out
of joynt; for that she comes to be in great esteem, and is more handsome
than she. I found by his words that my Lord Sandwich finds some pleasure
in the country where he now is, whether he means one of the daughters of
the house or no I know not, but hope the contrary, that he thinks he is
very well pleased with staying there, but yet upon breaking up of the
Parliament, which the King by a message to-day says shall be on Monday
next, he resolves to go. Ned Pickering, the coxcomb, notwithstanding all
his hopes of my Lord's assistance, wherein I am sorry to hear my Lord
has much concerned himself, is defeated of the place he expected under
the Queen. He came hither by and by and brought some jewells for my Lady
Jem. to put on, with which and her other clothes she looks passing well.
I staid and dined with my Lord Crew, who whether he was not so well
pleased with me as he used to be, or that his head was full of business,
as I believe it was, he hardly spoke one word to me all dinner time,
we dining alone, only young Jack Crew, Sir Thomas's son, with us. After
dinner I bade him farewell. Sir Thomas I hear has gone this morning ill
to bed, so I had no mind to see him. Thence homewards, and in the way
first called at Wotton's, the shoemaker's, who tells me the reason of
Harris's' going from Sir Wm. Davenant's house, that he grew very proud
and demanded L20 for himself extraordinary, more than Betterton or any
body else, upon every new play, and L10 upon every revive; which with
other things Sir W. Davenant would not give him, and so he swore he
would never act there more, in expectation of being received in the
other House; but the King will not suffer it, upon Sir W. Davenant's
desire that he would not, for then he might shut up house, and that
is true. He tells me that his going is at present a great loss to
the House, and that he fears he hath a stipend from the other House
privately. He tells the that the fellow grew very proud of late,
the King and every body else crying him up so high, and that above
Betterton, he being a more ayery man, as he is indeed. But yet
Betterton, he says, they all say do act: some parts that none but
himself can do. Thence to my bookseller's, and found my Waggoners done.
The very binding cost me 14s., but they are well done, and so with a
porter home with them, and so by water to Ratcliffe, and there went
to speak with Cumberford the platt-maker, and there saw his manner of
working, which is very fine and laborious. So down to Deptford, reading
Ben Jonson's "Devil is an asse," and so to see Sir W. Pen, who I find
walking out of doors a little, but could not stand long; but in doors
and I with him, and staid a great while talking, I taking a liberty to
tell him my thoughts in things of the office; that when he comes abroad
again, he may know what to think of me, and to value me as he ought.
Walked home as I used to do, and being weary, and after some discourse
with Mr. Barrow, who came to see and take his leave of me, he being
to-morrow to set out toward the Isle of Man, I went to bed. This day
I hear that the Moores have made some attaques upon the outworks of
Tangier; but my Lord Tiviott; with the loss of about 200 men, did beat
them off, and killed many of them. To-morrow the King and Queen for
certain go down to Tunbridge. But the King comes hack again against
Monday to raise the Parliament.

23rd. Up and to my office, and thence by information from, Mr. Ackworth
I went down to Woolwich, and mustered the three East India ships that
lie there, believing that there is great-juggling between the Pursers
and Clerks of the Cheque in cheating the King of the wages and victuals
of men that do not give attendance, and I found very few on board. So
to the yard, and there mustered the yard, and found many faults, and
discharged several fellows that were absent from their business. I staid
also at Mr. Ackworth's desire at dinner with him and his wife, and there
was a simple fellow, a gentleman I believe of the Court, their kinsmen,
that threatened me I could have little discourse or begin, acquaintance
with Ackworth's wife, and so after dinner away, with all haste home, and
there found Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten at the office, and by Sir
W. Batten's testimony and Sir G. Carteret's concurrence was forced to
consent to a business of Captain Cocke's timber, as bad as anything we
have lately disputed about, and all through Mr. Coventry's not being
with us. So up and to supper with Sir W. Batten upon a soused mullett,
very good meat, and so home and to bed.

24th. Up pretty early (though of late I have been faulty by an hour or
two every morning of what I should do) and by water to the Temple, and
there took leave of my cozen Roger Pepys, who goes out of town to-day.
So to Westminster Hall, and there at Mrs. Michell's shop sent for beer
and sugar and drink, and made great cheer with it among her and Mrs.
Howlett, her neighbour, and their daughters, especially Mrs. Howlett's
daughter, Betty, which is a pretty girl, and one I have long called
wife, being, I formerly thought, like my own wife. After this good
neighbourhood, which I do to give them occasion of speaking well and
commending me in some company that now and then I know comes to their
shop, I went to the Six clerks' office, and there had a writ for Tom
Trice, and paid 20s. for it to Wilkinson, and so up and down to many
places, among others to the viall maker's, and there saw the head, which
now pleases me mightily, and so home, and being sent for presently to
Mr. Bland's, where Mr. Povy and Gauden and I were invited to dinner,
which we had very finely and great plenty, but for drink, though many
and good, I drank nothing but small beer and water, which I drank so
much that I wish it may not do me hurt. They had a kinswoman, they call
daughter, in the house, a short, ugly, red-haired slut, that plays upon
the virginalls, and sings, but after such a country manner I was weary
of it, but yet could not but commend it. So by and by after dinner comes
Monsr. Gotier, who is beginning to teach her, but, Lord! what a droll
fellow it is to make her hold open her mouth, and telling this and that
so drolly would make a man burst, but himself I perceive sings very
well. Anon we sat dawn again to a collacon of cheesecakes, tarts,
custards, and such like, very handsome, and so up and away home, where
I at the office a while, till disturbed by, Mr. Hill, of Cambridge,
with whom I walked in the garden a while, and thence home and then in
my dining room walked, talking of several matters of state till 11 at
night, giving him a glass of wine. I was not unwilling to hear him talk,
though he is full of words, yet a man of large conversation, especially
among the Presbyters and Independents; he tells me that certainly, let
the Bishops alone, and they will ruin themselves, and he is confident
that the King's declaration about two years since will be the foundation
of the settlement of the Church some time or other, for the King will
find it hard to banish all those that will appear Nonconformists upon
this Act that is coming out against them. He being gone, I to bed.

25th. Up and to my office setting papers in order for these two or three
days, in which I have been hindered a little, and then having intended
this day to go to Banstead Downs to see a famous race, I sent Will to
get himself ready to go with me, and I also by and by home and put on my
riding suit, and being ready came to the office to Sir J. Minnes and Sir
W. Batten, and did a little of course at the office this morning, and
so by boat to White Hall, where I hear that the race is put off, because
the Lords do sit in Parliament to-day. However, having appointed Mr.
Creed to come to me to Fox Hall, I went over thither, and after some
debate, Creed and I resolved to go to Clapham, to Mr. Gauden's, who had
sent his coach to their place for me because I was to have my horse of
him to go to the race. So I went thither by coach and my Will by horse
with me; Mr. Creed he went over back again to Westminster to fetch his
horse. When I came to Mr. Gauden's one first thing was to show me his
house, which is almost built, wherein he and his family live. I find it
very regular and finely contrived, and the gardens and offices about it
as convenient and as full of good variety as ever I saw in my life. It
is true he hath been censured for laying out so much money; but he tells
me that he built it for his brother, who is since dead (the Bishop), who
when he should come to be Bishop of Winchester, which he was promised
(to which bishoprick at present there is no house), he did intend to
dwell here. Besides, with the good husbandry in making his bricks and
other things I do not think it costs him so much money as people think
and discourse. By and by to dinner, and in comes Mr. Creed. I saluted
Mr. Gauden's lady, and the young ladies, he having many pretty children,
and his sister, the Bishop's widow; who was, it seems, Sir W. Russel's
daughter, the Treasurer of the Navy; who by her discourse at dinner I
find to be very well-bred, and a woman of excellent discourse, even so
much as to have my attention all dinner with much more pleasure than I
did give to Mr. Creed, whose discourse was mighty merry in inveighing
at Mr. Gauden's victuals that they had at sea the last voyage that he
prosecuted, till methought the woman began to take it seriously. After
dinner by Mr. Gauden's motion we got Mrs. Gauden and her sister to sing
to a viall, on which Mr. Gauden's eldest son (a pretty man, but a simple
one methinks) played but very poorly, and the musique bad, but yet I
commended it. Only I do find that the ladies have been taught to sing
and do sing well now, but that the viall puts them out. I took the viall
and played some things from one of their books, Lyra lessons, which
they seemed to like well. Thus we pass an hour or two after dinner and
towards the evening we bade them Adieu! and took horse; being resolved
that, instead of the race which fails us, we would go to Epsum. So we
set out, and being gone a little way I sent home Will to look to the
house, and Creed and I rode forward; the road being full of citizens
going and coming toward Epsum, where, when we came, we could hear of no
lodging, the town so full; but which was better, I went towards Ashted,
my old place of pleasure; and there by direction of one goodman Arthur,
whom we met on the way, we went to Farmer Page's, at which direction he
and I made good sport, and there we got a lodging in a little hole we
could not stand upright in, but rather than go further to look we staid
there, and while supper was getting ready I took him to walk up and down
behind my cozen Pepys's house that was, which I find comes little short
of what I took it to be when I was a little boy, as things use commonly
to appear greater than then when one comes to be a man and knows more,
and so up and down in the closes, which I know so well methinks, and
account it good fortune that I lie here that I may have opportunity to
renew my old walks. It seems there is one Mr. Rouse, they call him the
Queen's Tailor, that lives there now. So to our lodging to supper, and
among other meats had a brave dish of cream, the best I ever eat in my
life, and with which we pleased ourselves much, and by and by to bed,
where, with much ado yet good sport, we made shift to lie, but with
little ease, and a little spaniel by us, which has followed us all the
way, a pretty dogg, and we believe that follows my horse, and do belong
to Mrs. Gauden, which we, therefore, are very careful of.

26th (Lord's-day). Up and to the Wells,

     [Epsom medicinal wells were discovered about 1618, but they did not
     become fashionable until the Restoration.  John Toland, in his
     "Description of Epsom," says that he often counted seventy coaches in
     the Ring (the present racecourse on the Downs) on a Sunday evening;
     but by the end of the eighteenth century Epsom had entirely lost its
     vogue.]

where great store of citizens, which was the greatest part of the
company, though there were some others of better quality. I met many
that I knew, and we drank each of us two pots and so walked away, it
being very pleasant to see how everybody turns up his tail, here one
and there another, in a bush, and the women in their quarters the like.
Thence I walked with Creed to Mr. Minnes's house, which has now a very
good way made to it, and thence to Durdans and walked round it and
within the Court Yard and to the Bowling-green, where I have seen so
much mirth in my time; but now no family in it (my Lord Barkeley, whose
it is, being with his family at London), and so up and down by Minnes's
wood, with great pleasure viewing my old walks, and where Mrs. Hely and
I did use to walk and talk, with whom I had the first sentiments of love
and pleasure in woman's company, discourse, and taking her by the hand,
she being a pretty woman. So I led him to Ashted Church (by the place
where Peter, my cozen's man, went blindfold and found a certain place
we chose for him upon a wager), where we had a dull Doctor, one Downe,
worse than I think even parson King was, of whom we made so much scorn,
and after sermon home, and staid while our dinner, a couple of large
chickens, were dressed, and a good mess of cream, which anon we had with
good content, and after dinner (we taking no notice of other lodgers in
the house, though there was one that I knew, and knew and spoke to
me, one Mr. Rider, a merchant), he and I to walk, and I led him to the
pretty little wood behind my cozens house, into which we got at last by
clambering, and our little dog with us, but when we were among the hazel
trees and bushes, Lord! what a course did we run for an hour together,
losing ourselves, and indeed I despaired I should ever come to any path,
but still from thicket to thicket, a thing I could hardly have believed
a man could have been lost so long in so small a room. At last I found
out a delicate walk in the middle that goes quite through the wood, and
then went out of the wood, and holloed Mr. Creed, and made him hunt me
from place to place, and at last went in and called him into my fine
walk, the little dog still hunting with us through the wood. In this
walk being all bewildered and weary and sweating, Creed he lay down upon
the ground, which I did a little, but I durst not long, but walked from
him in the fine green walk, which is half a mile long, there reading
my vows as I used to on Sundays. And after that was done, and going and
lying by Creed an hour, he and I rose and went to our lodging and paid
our reckoning, and so mounted, whether to go toward London home or to
find a new lodging, and so rode through Epsum, the whole town over,
seeing the various companys that were there walking; which was very
pleasant to see how they are there without knowing almost what to do,
but only in the morning to drink waters. But, Lord! to see how many I
met there of citizens, that I could not have thought to have seen
there, or that they had ever had it in their heads or purses to go down
thither. We rode out of the town through Yowell beyond Nonesuch House a
mile, and there our little dogg, as he used to do, fell a-running after
a flock of sheep feeding on the common, till he was out of sight, and
then endeavoured to come back again, and went to the last gate that he
parted with us at, and there the poor thing mistakes our scent, instead
of coming forward he hunts us backward, and runs as hard as he could
drive back towards Nonesuch, Creed and I after him, and being by many
told of his going that way and the haste he made, we rode still and
passed him through Yowell, and there we lost any further information of
him. However, we went as far as Epsum almost, hearing nothing of him,
we went back to Yowell, and there was told that he did pass through
the town. We rode back to Nonesuch to see whether he might be gone back
again, but hearing nothing we with great trouble and discontent for the
loss of our dogg came back once more to Yowell, and there set up our
horses and selves for all night, employing people to look for the dogg
in the town, but can hear nothing of him. However, we gave order for
supper, and while that was dressing walked out through Nonesuch Park
to the house, and there viewed as much as we could of the outside, and
looked through the great gates, and found a noble court; and altogether
believe it to have been a very noble house, and a delicate park about
it, where just now there was a doe killed, for the King to carry up to
Court. So walked back again, and by and by our supper being ready, a
good leg of mutton boiled, we supped and to bed, upon two beds in the
same room, wherein we slept most excellently all night.

27th. Up in the morning about 7 o'clock, and after a little study,
resolved of riding to the Wells to look for our dogg, which we did, but
could hear nothing; but it being much a warmer day than yesterday
there was great store of gallant company, more than then, to my greater
pleasure. There was at a distance, under one of the trees on the common,
a company got together that sung. I, at the distance, and so all the
rest being a quarter of a mile off, took them for the Waytes, so I rode
up to them, and found them only voices, some citizens met by chance,
that sung four or five parts excellently. I have not been more pleased
with a snapp of musique, considering the circumstances of the time and
place, in all my life anything so pleasant. We drank each of us, three
cupps, and so, after riding up to the horsemen upon the hill, where
they were making of matches to run, we went away and to Yowell, where we
found our breakfast, the remains of our supper last night hashed, and
by and by, after the smith had set on two new shoes to Creed's horse, we
mounted, and with little discourse, I being intent upon getting home in
time, we rode hard home, observing Mr. Gauden's house, but not calling
there (it being too late for me to stay, and wanting their dog too). The
house stands very finely, and has a graceful view to the highway. Set
up our horses at Fox Hall, and I by water (observing the King's barge
attending his going to the House this day) home, it being about one
o'clock. So got myself ready and shifting myself, and so by water to
Westminster, and there came most luckily to the Lords' House as the
House of Commons were going into the Lord's House, and there I crowded
in along with the Speaker, and got to stand close behind him, where he
made his speech to the King (who sat with his crown on and robes, and so
all the Lords in their robes, a fine sight); wherein he told his Majesty
what they have done this Parliament, and now offered for his royall
consent. The greatest matters were a bill for the Lord's day (which it
seems the Lords have lost, and so cannot be passed, at which the Commons
are displeased); the bills against Conventicles and Papists (but it
seems the Lords have not passed them), and giving his Majesty four
entire subsidys; which last, with about twenty smaller Acts, were passed
with this form: The Clerk of the House reads the title of the bill, and
then looks at the end and there finds (writ by the King I suppose) "Le
Roy le veult," and that he reads. And to others he reads, "Soit fait
comme vous desirez." And to the Subsidys, as well that for the
Commons, I mean the layety, as for the Clergy, the King writes, "Le Roy
remerciant les Seigneurs, &c., Prelats, &c., accepte leur benevolences."
The Speaker's speech was far from any oratory, but was as plain (though
good matter) as any thing could be, and void of elocution. After the
bills passed, the King, sitting on his throne, with his speech writ in a
paper which he held in his lap, and scarce looked off of it, I thought,
all the time he made his speech to them, giving them thanks for their
subsidys, of which, had he not need, he would not have asked or received
them; and that need, not from any extravagancys of his, he was sure,
in any thing, but the disorders of the times compelling him to be at
greater charge than he hoped for the future, by their care in their
country, he should be: and that for his family expenses and others, he
would labour however to retrench in many things convenient, and would
have all others to do so too. He desired that nothing of old faults
should be remembered, or severity for the same used to any in the
country, it being his desire to have all forgot as well as forgiven.
But, however, to use all care in suppressing any tumults, &c.; assuring
them that the restless spirits of his and their adversaries have great
expectations of something to be done this summer. And promised that
though the Acts about Conventicles and Papists were not ripe for passing
this Session, yet he would take care himself that neither of them should
in this intervall be encouraged to the endangering of the peace; and
that at their next meeting he would himself prepare two bills for them
concerning them. So he concluded, that for the better proceeding of
justice he did think fit to make this a Session, and to prorogue them
to the 16th of March next. His speech was very plain, nothing at all
of spirit in it, nor spoke with any; but rather on the contrary
imperfectly, repeating many times his words though he read all which I
was sorry to see, it having not been hard for him to have got all the
speech without book. So they all went away, the King out of the House at
the upper end, he being by and by to go to Tunbridge to the Queen; and I
in the Painted Chamber spoke with my Lord Sandwich while he was putting
off his robes, who tells me he will now hasten down into the country,
as soon as he can get some money settled on the Wardrobe. Here meeting
Creed, he and I down to the Hall, and I having at Michell's shop wrote
a little letter to Mr. Gauden, to go with his horse, and excusing my not
taking leave or so much as asking after the old lady the widow when we
came away the other day from them, he and I over the water to Fox Hall,
and there sent away the horse with my letter, and then to the new Spring
Garden, walking up and down, but things being dear and little attendance
to be had we went away, leaving much brave company there, and so to a
less house hard by, where we liked very well their Codlin tarts, having
not time, as we intended, to stay the getting ready of a dish of pease.
And there came to us an idle boy to show us some tumbling tricks, which
he did very well, and the greatest bending of his body that ever I
observed in my life. Thence by water to White Hall, and walked over the
Park to St. James's; but missed Mr. Coventry, he not being within; and
so out again, and there the Duke was coming along the Pell-Mell. It
being a little darkish, I staid not to take notice of him, but we went
directly back again. And in our walk over the Park, one of the Duke's
footmen came running behind us, and came looking just in our faces to
see who we were, and went back again. What his meaning is I know not,
but was fearful that I might not go far enough with my hat off, though
methinks that should not be it, besides, there were others covered
nearer than myself was, but only it was my fear. So to White Hall and by
water to the Bridge, and so home to bed, weary and well pleased with my
journey in all respects. Only it cost me about 20s., but it was for my
health, and I hope will prove so, only I do find by my riding a little
swelling to rise just by my anus. I had the same the last time I rode,
and then it fell again, and now it is up again about the bigness of the
bag of a silkworm, makes me fearful of a rupture. But I will speak to
Mr. Hollyard about it, and I am glad to find it now, that I may prevent
it before it goes too far.

28th. Up after sleeping very well, and so to my office setting down the
Journall of this last three days, and so settled to business again, I
hope with greater cheerfulness and success by this refreshment. At the
office all the morning, and at noon to Wise's about my viall that is
a-doing, and so home to dinner and then to the office, where we sat all
the afternoon till night, and I late at it till after the office was
risen. Late came my Jane and her brother Will: to entreat for my taking
of the boy again, but I will not hear her, though I would yet be glad to
do anything for her sake to the boy, but receive him again I will not,
nor give him anything. She would have me send him to sea; which if I
could I would do, but there is no ship going out. The poor girl cried
all the time she was with me, and would not go from me, staying about
two hours with me till 10 or 11 o'clock, expecting that she might obtain
something of me, but receive him I will not. So the poor girl was fain
to go away crying and saying little. So from thence home, where my
house of office was emptying, and I find they will do, it with much more
cleanness than I expected. I went up and down among them a good while,
but knowing that Mr. Coventry was to call me in the morning, I went to
bed and left them to look after the people. So to bed.

29th. Up about 6 o'clock, and found the people to have just done,
and Hannah not gone to bed yet, but was making clean of the yard and
kitchen. Will newly gone to bed. So I to my office, and having given
some order to Tom Hater, to whom I gave leave for his recreation to go
down to Portsmouth this Pay, I went down to Wapping to Sir W. Warren,
and there staid an hour or two discoursing of some of his goods and then
things in general relating to this office, &c., and so home, and there
going to Sir William Batten (having no stomach to dine at home, it being
yet hardly clean of last night's [mess])and there I dined with my Lady
and her daughter and son Castle, and mighty kind she is and I kind to
her, but, Lord! how freely and plainly she rails against Commissioner
Pett, calling him rogue, and wondering that the King keeps such a fellow
in the Navy. Thence by and by walked to see Sir W. Pen at Deptford,
reading by the way a most ridiculous play, a new one, called "The
Politician Cheated." After a little sitting with him I walked to the
yard a little and so home again, my Will with me, whom I bade to stay in
the yard for me, and so to bed. This morning my brother Tom was with me,
and we had some discourse again concerning his country mistress, but I
believe the most that is fit for us to condescend to, will not content
her friends.

30th. Up and to the office to get business ready for our sitting, this
being the first day of altering it from afternoon during the Parliament
sitting to the fore-noon again. By and by Mr. Coventry only came (Sir
John Minnes and Sir William Batten being gone this morning to Portsmouth
to pay some ships and the yard there), and after doing a little business
he and I down to Woolwich, and there up and down the yard, and by and by
came Sir G. Carteret and we all looked into matters, and then by water
back to Deptford, where we dined with him at his house, a very good
dinner and mightily tempted with wines of all sorts and brave French
Syder, but I drunk none. But that which is a great wonder I find his
little daughter Betty, that was in hanging sleeves but a month or two
ago, and is a very little young child; married, and to whom, but to
young Scott, son to Madam Catharine Scott, that was so long in law,
and at whose triall I was with her husband; he pleading that it was
unlawfully got and would not own it, she, it seems, being brought to
bed of it, if not got by somebody else at Oxford, but it seems a little
before his death he did own the child, and hath left him his estate, not
long since. So Sir G. Carteret hath struck up of a sudden a match with
him for his little daughter. He hath about L2000 per annum; and it seems
Sir G. Carteret hath by this means over-reached Sir H. Bennet, who did
endeavour to get this gentleman for a sister of his, but Sir G. Carteret
I say has over-reached him. By this means Sir G. Carteret hath married
two daughters this year both very well. After dinner into Deptford yard,
but our bellies being full we could do no great business, and so parted,
and Mr. Coventry and I to White Hall by water, where we also parted, and
I to several places about business, and so calling for my five books of
the Variorum print bound according to my common binding instead of the
other which is more gaudy I went home. The town talk this day is of
nothing but the great foot-race run this day on Banstead Downes, between
Lee, the Duke of Richmond's footman, and a tyler, a famous runner. And
Lee hath beat him; though the King and Duke of York and all men almost
did bet three or four to one upon the tyler's head.

31st. Up early to my accounts this month, and I find myself worth clear
L730, the most I ever had yet, which contents me though I encrease but
very little. Thence to my office doing business, and at noon to my
viall maker's, who has begun it and has a good appearance, and so to the
Exchange, where I met Dr. Pierce, who tells me of his good luck to
get to be groom of the Privy-Chamber to the Queen, and without my Lord
Sandwich's help; but only by his good fortune, meeting a man that hath
let him have his right for a small matter, about L60, for which he can
every day have L400. But he tells me my Lord hath lost much honour in
standing so long and so much for that coxcomb Pickering, and at last not
carrying it for him; but hath his name struck out by the King and Queen
themselves after he had been in ever since the Queen's coming. But he
tells me he believes that either Sir H. Bennet, my Lady Castlemaine, or
Sir Charles Barkeley had received some money for the place, and so the
King could not disappoint them, but was forced to put out this fool
rather than a better man. And I am sorry to hear what he tells me that
Sir Charles Barkeley hath still such power over the King, as to be
able to fetch him from the Council-table to my Lady Castlemaine when he
pleases. He tells me also, as a friend, the great injury that he
thinks I do myself by being so severe in the Yards, and contracting the
ill-will of the whole Navy for those offices, singly upon myself. Now I
discharge a good conscience therein, and I tell him that no man can (nor
do he say any say it) charge me with doing wrong; but rather do as many
good offices as any man. They think, he says, that I have a mind to get
a good name with the King and Duke, who he tells me do not consider any
such thing; but I shall have as good thanks to let all alone, and do as
the rest. But I believe the contrary; and yet I told him I never go to
the Duke alone, as others do, to talk of my own services. However, I
will make use of his council, and take some course to prevent having the
single ill-will of the office. Before I went to the office I went to
the Coffee House, where Sir J. Cutler and Mr. Grant were, and there Mr.
Grant showed me letters of Sir William Petty's, wherein he says, that
his vessel which he hath built upon two keeles (a modell whereof,
built for the King, he showed me) hath this month won a wager of L50
in sailing between Dublin and Holyhead with the pacquett-boat, the best
ship or vessel the King hath there; and he offers to lay with any vessel
in the world. It is about thirty ton in burden, and carries thirty men,
with good accommodation, (as much more as any ship of her burden,)
and so any vessel of this figure shall carry more men, with better
accommodation by half, than any other ship. This carries also ten guns,
of about five tons weight. In their coming back from Holyhead they
started together, and this vessel came to Dublin by five at night, and
the pacquett-boat not before eight the next morning; and when they came
they did believe that, this vessel had been drowned, or at least behind,
not thinking she could have lived in that sea. Strange things are told
of this vessel, and he concludes his letter with this position, "I only
affirm that the perfection of sayling lies in my principle, finde it
out who can." Thence home, in my way meeting Mr. Rawlinson, who tells me
that my uncle Wight is off of his Hampshire purchase and likes less of
the Wights, and would have me to be kind and study to please him, which
I am resolved to do. Being at home he sent for me to dinner to meet Mr.
Moore, so I went thither and dined well, but it was strange for me to
refuse, and yet I did without any reluctancy to drink wine in a tavern,
where nothing else almost was drunk, and that excellent good. Thence
with Mr. Moore to the Wardrobe, and there sat while my Lord was private
with Mr. Townsend about his accounts an hour or two, we reading of a
merry book against the Presbyters called Cabbala, extraordinary witty.
Thence walked home and to my office, setting papers of all sorts and
writing letters and putting myself into a condition to go to Chatham
with Mr. Coventry to-morrow. So, at almost 12 o'clock, and my eyes tired
with seeing to write, I went home and to bed. Ending the month with
pretty good content of mind, my wife in the country and myself in good
esteem, and likely by pains to become considerable, I think, with God's
blessing upon my diligence.




AUGUST 1663

Aug. 1st. Up betimes and got me ready, and so to the office and put
things in order for my going. By and by comes Sir G. Carteret, and
he and I did some business, and then Mr. Coventry sending for me, he
staying in the boat, I got myself presently ready and down to him, he
and I by water to Gravesend (his man Lambert with us), and there eat
a bit and so mounted, I upon one of his horses which met him there, a
brave proud horse, all the way talking of businesses of the office and
other matters to good purpose. Being come to Chatham, we put on our
boots and so walked to the yard, where we met Commissioner Pett, and
there walked up and down looking and inquiring into many businesses, and
in the evening went to the Commissioner's and there in his upper Arbor
sat and talked, and there pressed upon the Commissioner to take upon him
a power to correct and suspend officers that do not their duty and other
things, which he unwillingly answered he would if we would own him in
it. Being gone thence Mr. Coventry and I did discourse about him, and
conclude that he is not able to do the same in that yard that he might
and can and it maybe will do in another, what with his old faults and
the relations that he has to most people that act there. After an hour
or two's discourse at the Hill-house before going to bed, I see him to
his and he me to my chamber, he lying in the Treasurer's and I in the
Controller's chambers.

2nd (Lord's day). Up and after the barber had done he and I walked to
the Docke, and so on board the Mathias, where Commissioner Pett and he
and I and a good many of the officers and others of the yard did hear an
excellent sermon of Mr. Hudson's upon "All is yours and you are God's,"
a most ready, learned, and good sermon, such as I have not heard a good
while, nor ever thought he could have preached. We took him with us to
the Hill-house, and there we dined, and an officer or two with us. So
after dinner the company withdrew, and we three to private discourse
and laid the matters of the yard home again to the Commissioner, and
discoursed largely of several matters. Then to the parish church, and
there heard a poor sermon with a great deal of false Greek in it, upon
these words, "Ye are my friends, if ye do these things which I command
you." Thence to the Docke and by water to view St. Mary Creeke, but
do not find it so proper for a wet docks as we would have it, it being
uneven ground and hard in the bottom and no, great depth of water in
many places. Returned and walked from the Docke home, Mr. Coventry and I
very much troubled to see how backward Commissioner Pett is to tell any
of the faults of the officers, and to see nothing in better condition
here for his being here than they are in other yards where there is
none. After some discourse to bed. But I sat up an hour after Mr.
Coventry was gone to read my vows, it raining a wonderful hard showre
about 11 at night for an hour together. So to bed.

3rd. Up both of us very betimes and to the Yard, and see the men called
over and choose some to be discharged. Then to the Ropehouses and viewed
them all and made an experiment which was the stronger, English or Riga
hemp, the latter proved the stronger, but the other is very good, and
much better we believe than any but Riga. We did many other things this
morning, and I caused the Timber measurer to measure some timber, where
I found much fault and with reason, which we took public notice of, and
did give them admonition for the time to come. At noon Mr. Pett did give
us a very great dinner, too big in all conscience, so that most of
it was left untouched. Here was Collonell Newman and several other
gentlemen of the country and officers of the yard. After dinner they
withdrew and Commissioner Pett, Mr. Coventry and I sat close to our
business all the noon in his parler, and there run through much business
and answered several people. And then in the evening walked in the
garden, where we conjured him to look after the yard, and for the time
to come that he would take the whole faults and ill management of the
yard upon himself, he having full power and our concurrence to suspend
or do anything else that he thinks fit to keep people and officers to
their duty. He having made good promises, though I fear his performance,
we parted (though I spoke so freely that he could have been angry) good
friends, and in some hopes that matters will be better for the time to
come. So walked to the Hillhouse (which we did view and the yard about
it, and do think to put it off as soon as we can conveniently) and there
made ourselves ready and mounted and rode to Gravesend (my riding Coate
not being to be found I fear it is stole) on our way being overtaken by
Captain Browne that serves the office of the Ordnance at Chatham. All
the way, though he was a rogue and served the late times all along, yet
he kept us in discourse of the many services that he did for many of the
King's party, lords and Dukes, and among others he recovered a dog that
was stolne from Mr. Cary (head-keeper of the buck-hounds to the King)
and preserved several horses of the Duke of Richmond's, and his best
horse he was forst to put out his eyes and keep him for a stallion
to preserve him from being carried away. But he gone at last upon
my enquiry to tell us how (he having been here too for survey of the
Ropeyard) the day's work of the Rope-makers become settled, which
pleased me very well. Being come to our Inn Mr. Coventry and I sat, and
talked till 9 or 10 a-clock and then to bed.

4th. We were called up about four a-clock, and being ready went and took
a Gravesend boat, and to London by nine a-clock. By the way talking of
several businesses of the navy. So to the office, where Sir Wm. Pen (the
first time that he has been with us a great while, he having been long
sick) met us, and there we sat all the morning. My brother John I find
come to town to my house, as I sent for him, on Saturday last; so at
noon home and dined with him, and after dinner and the barber been with
me I walked out with him to my viall maker's and other places and then
left him, and I by water to Blackbury's, and there talked with him about
some masts (and by the way he tells me that Paul's is now going to be
repaired in good earnest), and so with him to his garden close by his
house, where I eat some peaches and apricots; a very pretty place. So
over the water to Westminster hall, and not finding Mrs. Lane, with whom
I purposed to be merry, I went to Jervas's and took him and his wife
over the water to their mother Palmer's (the woman that speaks in the
belly, and with whom I have two or three years ago made good sport with
Mr. Mallard), thinking because I had heard that she is a woman of that
sort that I might there have lit upon some lady of pleasure (for which
God forgive me), but blest be God there was none, nor anything that
pleased me, but a poor little house that she has set out as fine as she
can, and for her singing which she pretends to is only some old body
songs and those sung abominably, only she pretends to be able to sing
both bass and treble, which she do something like, but not what I
thought formerly and expected now; nor do her speaking in her belly take
me now as it did then, but it may be that is because I know it and see
her mouth when she speaks, which should not be. After I had spent a
shilling there in wine I took boat with Jervas and his wife and set them
at Westminster, and it being late forbore Mrs. Lane and went by water to
the Old Swan by a boat, where I had good sport with one of the young men
about his travells as far as Voxhall, in mockery, which yet the fellow
answered me most prettily and traveller-like unto my very good mirth. So
home, and with my brother eat a bit of bread and cheese, and so to bed,
he with me. This day I received a letter from my wife, which troubles me
mightily, wherein she tells me how Ashwell did give her the lie to her
teeth, and that thereupon my wife giving her a box on the eare, the
other struck her again, and a deal of stir which troubles me, and that
my Lady has been told by my father or mother something of my wife's
carriage, which altogether vexes me, and I fear I shall find a trouble
of my wife when she comes home to get down her head again, but if
Ashwell goes I am resolved to have no more, but to live poorly and low
again for a good while, and save money and keep my wife within bounds if
I can, or else I shall bid Adieu to all content in the world. So to
bed, my mind somewhat disturbed at this, but yet I shall take care, by
prudence, to avoid the ill consequences which I fear, things not
being gone too far yet, and this height that my wife is come to being
occasioned from my own folly in giving her too much head heretofore for
the year past.

5th. All the morning at the office, whither Deane of Woolwich came to
me and discoursed of the body of ships, which I am now going about to
understand, and then I took him to the coffee-house, where he was very
earnest against Mr. Grant's report in favour of Sir W. Petty's vessel,
even to some passion on both sides almost. So to the Exchange,
and thence home to dinner with my brother, and in the afternoon to
Westminster hall, and there found Mrs. Lane, and by and by by agreement
we met at the Parliament stairs (in my way down to the boat who should
meet us but my lady Jemimah, who saw me lead her but said nothing to
me of her, though I ought to speak to her to see whether she would take
notice of it or no) and off to Stangate and so to the King's Head at
Lambeth marsh, and had variety of meats and drinks, but I did so towse
her and handled her, but could get nothing more from her though I
was very near it; but as wanton and bucksome as she is she dares not
adventure upon the business, in which I very much commend and like her.
Staid pretty late, and so over with her by water, and being in a great
sweat with my towsing of her durst not go home by water, but took coach,
and at home my brother and I fell upon Des Cartes, and I perceive he has
studied him well, and I cannot find but he has minded his book, and do
love it. This evening came a letter about business from Mr. Coventry,
and with it a silver pen he promised me to carry inke in, which is very
necessary. So to prayers and to bed.

6th. Up and was angry with my maid Hannah for keeping the house no
better, it being more dirty now-a-days than ever it was while my whole
family was together. So to my office, whither Mr. Coventry came and Sir
William Pen, and we sat all the morning. This day Mr. Coventry borrowed
of me my manuscript of the Navy. At noon I to the 'Change, and meeting
with Sir W. Warren, to a coffee-house, and there finished a contract
with him for the office, and so parted, and I to my cozen Mary Joyce's
at a gossiping, where much company and good cheer. There was the King's
Falconer, that lives by Paul's, and his wife, an ugly pusse, but brought
him money. He speaking of the strength of hawkes, which will strike a
fowle to the ground with that force that shall make the fowle rebound a
great way from ground, which no force of man or art can do, but it was
very pleasant to hear what reasons he and another, one Ballard, a rich
man of the same Company of Leathersellers of which the Joyces are, did
give for this. Ballard's wife, a pretty and a very well-bred woman, I
took occasion to kiss several times, and she to carve, drink, and show
me great respect. After dinner to talk and laugh. I drank no wine, but
sent for some water; the beer not being good. A fiddler was sent for,
and there one Mrs. Lurkin, a neighbour, a good, and merry poor woman,
but a very tall woman, did dance and show such tricks that made us
all merry, but above all a daughter of Mr. Brumfield's, black, but
well-shaped and modest, did dance very well, which pleased me mightily.
I begun the Duchess with her, but could not do it; but, however, I came
off well enough, and made mighty much of her, kissing and leading her
home, with her cozen Anthony and Kate Joyce (Kate being very handsome
and well, that is, handsomely dressed to-day, and I grew mighty kind and
familiar with her, and kissed her soundly, which she takes very well)
to their house, and there I left them, having in our way, though nine
o'clock at night, carried them into a puppet play in Lincolnes Inn
Fields, where there was the story of Holofernes, and other clockwork,
well done. There was at this house today Mr. Lawrence, who did give the
name, it seems, to my cozen Joyce's child, Samuel, who is a very civil
gentleman, and his wife a pretty woman, who, with Kate Joyce, were
stewards of the feast to-day, and a double share cost for a man and a
woman came to 16s., which I also would pay, though they would not by
any means have had me do so. I walked home very well contented with this
afternoon's work, I thinking it convenient to keep in with the Joyces
against a bad day, if I should have occasion to make use of them. So I
walked home, and after a letter to my wife by the post and my father, I
home to supper, and after a little talk with my brother to bed.

7th. Up and to my office a little, and then to Brown's for my measuring
rule, which is made, and is certainly the best and the most commodious
for carrying in one's pocket, and most useful that ever was made, and
myself have the honour of being as it were the inventor of this form of
it. Here I staid discoursing an hour with him and then home, and thither
came Sir Fairbrother to me, and we walked a while together in the garden
and then abroad into the cittie, and then we parted for a while and I
to my Viall, which I find done and once varnished, and it will please
me very well when it is quite varnished. Thence home and to study my new
rule till my head aked cruelly. So by and by to dinner and the Doctor
and Mr. Creed came to me. The Doctor's discourse, which (though he be
a very good-natured man) is but simple, was some sport to me and Creed,
though my head akeing I took no great pleasure in it. We parted after
dinner, and I walked to Deptford and there found Sir W. Pen, and I fell
to measuring of some planks that was serving into the yard, which the
people took notice of, and the measurer himself was amused at, for I
did it much more ready than he, and I believe Sir W. Pen would be glad
I could have done less or he more. By and by he went away and I staid
walking up and down, discoursing with the officers of the yard of
several things, and so walked back again, and on my way young Bagwell
and his wife waylayd me to desire my favour about getting him a better
ship, which I shall pretend to be willing to do for them, but my mind is
to know his wife a little better. They being parted I went with Cadbury
the mast maker to view a parcel of good masts which I think it were
good to buy, and resolve to speak to the board about it. So home, and
my brother John and I up and I to my musique, and then to discourse
with him, and I find him not so thorough a philosopher, at least
in Aristotle, as I took him for, he not being able to tell me the
definition of final nor which of the 4 Qualitys belonged to each of the
4 Elements. So to prayers, and to bed, among other things being much
satisfied with my new rule.

8th. Up and to my office, whither I search for Brown the mathematical
instrument maker, who now brought me a ruler for measuring timber and
other things so well done and in all things to my mind that I do set up
my trust upon it that I cannot have a better, nor any man else have so
good for this purpose, this being of my own ordering. By and by we sat
all the morning dispatching of business, and then at noon rose, and I
with Mr. Coventry down to the water-side, talking, wherein I see so much
goodness and endeavours of doing the King service, that I do more and
more admire him. It being the greatest trouble to me, he says, in the
world to see not only in the Navy, but in the greatest matters of State,
where he can lay his finger upon the soare (meaning this man's faults,
and this man's office the fault lies in), and yet dare or can not remedy
matters. Thence to the Exchange about several businesses, and so home
to dinner, and in the afternoon took my brother John and Will down to
Woolwich by water, and after being there a good while, and eating of
fruit in Sheldon's garden, we began our walk back again, I asking many
things in physiques of my brother John, to which he gives me so bad or
no answer at all, as in the regions of the ayre he told me that he
knew of no such thing, for he never read Aristotle's philosophy and Des
Cartes ownes no such thing, which vexed me to hear him say. But I shall
call him to task, and see what it is that he has studied since his going
to the University. It was late before we could get from Greenwich to
London by water, the tide being against us and almost past, so that to
save time and to be clear of anchors I landed at Wapping, and so walked
home weary enough, walking over the stones. This night Sir W. Batten and
Sir J. Minnes returned [from] Portsmouth, but I did not go see them.

9th (Lord's day). Up, and leaving my brother John to go somewhere else,
I to church, and heard Mr. Mills (who is lately returned out of the
country, and it seems was fetched in by many of the parishioners, with
great state,) preach upon the authority of the ministers, upon these
words, "We are therefore embassadors of Christ." Wherein, among other
high expressions, he said, that such a learned man used to say, that if
a minister of the word and an angell should meet him together, he would
salute the minister first; which methought was a little too high. This
day I begun to make use of the silver pen (Mr. Coventry did give me) in
writing of this sermon, taking only the heads of it in Latin, which
I shall, I think, continue to do. So home and at my office reading my
vowes, and so to Sir W. Batten to dinner, being invited and sent for,
and being willing to hear how they left things at Portsmouth, which I
found but ill enough, and are mightily for a Commissioner to be at seat
there to keep the yard in order. Thence in the afternoon with my Lady
Batten, leading her through the streets by the hand to St. Dunstan's
Church, hard by us (where by Mrs. Russell's means we were set well),
and heard an excellent sermon of one Mr. Gifford, the parson there, upon
"Remember Lot's wife." So from thence walked back to Mrs. Russell's, and
there drank and sat talking a great while. Among other things talked of
young Dawes that married the great fortune, who it seems has a Baronet's
patent given him, and is now Sir Thos. Dawes, and a very fine bred man
they say he is. Thence home, and my brother being abroad I walked to my
uncle Wight's and there staid, though with little pleasure, and supped,
there being the husband of Mrs. Anne Wight, who it seems is lately
married to one Mr. Bentley, a Norwich factor. Home, and staid up a good
while examining Will in his Latin below, and my brother along with him
in his Greeke, and so to prayers and to bed. This afternoon I was amused
at the tune set to the Psalm by the Clerke of the parish, and thought
at first that he was out, but I find him to be a good songster, and the
parish could sing it very well, and was a good tune. But I wonder that
there should be a tune in the Psalms that I never heard of.

10th. Up, though not so early this summer as I did all the last, for
which I am sorry, and though late am resolved to get up betimes before
the season of rising be quite past. To my office to fit myself to wait
on the Duke this day. By and by by water to White Hall, and so to St.
James's, and anon called into the Duke's chamber, and being dressed we
were all as usual taken in with him and discoursed of our matters, and
that being done, he walked, and I in the company with him, to White
Hall, and there he took barge for Woolwich, and, I up to the Committee
of Tangier, where my Lord Sandwich, pay Lord Peterborough, (whom I have
not seen before since his coming back,) Sir W. Compton, and Mr. Povy.
Our discourse about supplying my Lord Teviott with money, wherein I am
sorry to see, though they do not care for him, yet they are willing
to let him for civility and compliment only have money almost without
expecting any account of it; but by this means, he being such a cunning
fellow as he is, the King is like to pay dear for our courtiers'
ceremony. Thence by coach with my Lords Peterborough and Sandwich to my
Lord Peterborough's house; and there, after an hour's looking over some
fine books of the Italian buildings, with fine cuts; and also my Lord
Peterborough's bowes and arrows, of which he is a great lover, we sat
down to dinner, my Lady coming down to dinner also, and there being
Mr. Williamson, that belongs to Sir H. Bennet, whom I find a pretty
understanding and accomplished man, but a little conceited. After dinner
I took leave and went to Greatorex's, whom I found in his garden, and
set him to work upon my ruler, to engrave an almanac and other things
upon the brasses of it, which a little before night he did, but the
latter part he slubbered over, that I must get him to do it over better,
or else I shall not fancy my rule, which is such a folly that I am come
to now, that whereas before my delight was in multitude of books, and
spending money in that and buying alway of other things, now that I am
become a better husband, and have left off buying, now my delight is
in the neatness of everything, and so cannot be pleased with anything
unless it be very neat, which is a strange folly. Hither came W. Howe
about business, and he and I had a great deal of discourse about my
Lord Sandwich, and I find by him that my Lord do dote upon one of the
daughters of Mrs. [Becke] where he lies, so that he spends his time and
money upon her. He tells me she is a woman of a very bad fame and very
impudent, and has told my Lord so, yet for all that my Lord do spend all
his evenings with her, though he be at court in the day time, and that
the world do take notice of it, and that Pickering is only there as a
blind, that the world may think that my Lord spends his time with him
when he do worse, and that hence it is that my Lord has no more mind to
go into the country than he has. In fine, I perceive my Lord is dabbling
with this wench, for which I am sorry, though I do not wonder at it,
being a man amorous enough, and now begins to allow himself the liberty
that he says every body else at Court takes. Here I am told that my Lord
Bristoll is either fled or concealed himself; having been sent for to
the King, it is believed to be sent to the Tower, but he is gone out of
the way. Yesterday, I am told also, that Sir J. Lenthall, in Southwarke,
did apprehend about one hundred Quakers, and other such people, and hath
sent some of them to the gaole at Kingston, it being now the time of
the Assizes. Hence home and examined a piece of, Latin of Will's with my
brother, and so to prayers and to bed. This evening I had a letter from
my father that says that my wife will come to town this week, at which I
wonder that she should come to town without my knowing more of it. But
I find they have lived very ill together since she went, and I must use
all the brains I have to bring her to any good when she do come home,
which I fear will be hard to do, and do much disgust me the thoughts of
it.

11th. Up and to my office, whither, by and by, my brother Tom came, and
I did soundly rattle him for his neglecting to see and please the Joyces
as he has of late done. I confess I do fear that he do not understand
his business, nor will do any good in his trade, though he tells me that
he do please every body and that he gets money, but I shall not believe
it till I see a state of his accounts, which I have ordered him to bring
me before he sees me any more. We met and sat at the office all the
morning, and at noon I to the 'Change, where I met Dr. Pierce, who tells
me that the King comes to towne this day, from Tunbridge, to stay a day
or two, and then fetch the Queen from thence, who he says is grown a
very debonnaire lady, and now hugs him, and meets him gallopping upon
the road, and all the actions of a fond and pleasant lady that can be,
that he believes has a chat now and then of Mrs. Stewart, but that there
is no great danger of her, she being only an innocent, young, raw girl;
but my Lady Castlemaine, who rules the King in matters of state, and do
what she list with him, he believes is now falling quite out of favour.
After the Queen is come back she goes to the Bath; and so to Oxford,
where great entertainments are making for her. This day I am told that
my Lord Bristoll hath warrants issued out against him, to have carried
him to the Tower; but he is fled away, or hid himself. So much the
Chancellor hath got the better of him. Upon the 'Change my brother, and
Will bring me word that Madam Turner would come and dine with me to-day,
so I hasted home and found her and Mrs. Morrice there (The. Joyce being
gone into the country), which is the reason of the mother rambling. I
got a dinner for them, and after dinner my uncle Thomas and aunt Bell
came and saw me, and I made them almost foxed with wine till they were
very kind (but I did not carry them up to my ladies). So they went away,
and so my two ladies and I in Mrs. Turner's coach to Mr. Povy's,
who being not within, we went in and there shewed Mrs. Turner his
perspective and volary,

     [A large birdcage, in which the birds can fly about; French
     'voliere'.  Ben Jonson uses the word volary.]

and the fine things that he is building of now, which is a most neat
thing. Thence to the Temple and by water to Westminster; and there
Morrice and I went to Sir R. Ling's to have fetched a niece of his, but
she was not within, and so we went to boat again and then down to the
bridge, and there tried to find a sister of Mrs. Morrice's, but she was
not within neither, and so we went through bridge, and I carried them
on board the King's pleasure-boat, all the way reading in a book of
Receipts of making fine meats and sweetmeats, among others to make
my own sweet water, which made us good sport. So I landed them at
Greenwich, and there to a garden, and gave them fruit and wine, and so
to boat again, and finally, in the cool of the evening, to Lyon Kee,

     [Lion Key, Lower Thames Street, where the famous Duchess of Suffolk
     in the time of Bishop Gardiner's persecution took boat for the
     continent.  James, Duke of York, also left the country from this
     same place on the night of April 20th, 1648, when he escaped from
     St. James's Palace.]

the tide against us, and so landed and walked to the Bridge, and there
took a coach by chance passing by, and so I saw them home, and there eat
some cold venison with them, and drunk and bade them good night, having
been mighty merry with them, and I think it is not amiss to preserve,
though it cost me a little, such a friend as Mrs. Turner. So home and to
bed, my head running upon what to do to-morrow to fit things against my
wife's coming, as to buy a bedstead, because my brother John is here,
and I have now no more beds than are used.

12th. A little to my office, to put down my yesterday's journall, and so
abroad to buy a bedstead and do other things. So home again, and having
put up the bedstead and done other things in order to my wife's coming,
I went out to several places and to Mrs. Turner's, she inviting me last
night, and there dined; with her and Madam Morrice and a stranger we
were very merry and had a fine dinner, and thence I took leave and to
White Hall, where my Lords Sandwich, Peterborough, and others made a
Tangier Committee; spent the afternoon in reading and ordering with a
great deal of alteration, and yet methinks never a whit the better, of
a letter drawn by Creed to my Lord Rutherford. The Lords being against
anything that looked to be rough, though it was in matter of money and
accounts, wherein their courtship may cost the King dear. Only I do see
by them, that speaking in matters distasteful to him that we write
to, it is best to do it in the plainest way and without ambages or
reasoning, but only say matters of fact, and leave the party to collect
your meaning. Thence by water to my brother's, and there I hear my wife
is come and gone home, and my father is come to town also, at which
I wondered. But I discern it is to give my brother advice about his
business, and it may be to pacify me about the differences that have
been between my wife and him and my mother at her late being with them.
Though by and by he coming to Mr. Holden's (where I was buying a hat)
he took no notice to me of anything. I talked to him a little while and
left him to lie at the end of the town, and I home, where methought I
found my wife strange, not knowing, I believe, in what temper she could
expect me to be in, but I fell to kind words, and so we were very kind,
only she could not forbear telling me how she had been used by them and
her mayde, Ashwell, in the country, but I find it will be best not to
examine it, for I doubt she's in fault too, and therefore I seek to put
it off from my hearing, and so to bed and there entertained her with
great content, and so to sleep.

13th. Lay long in bed with my wife talking of family matters, and so
up and to the office, where we sat all the' morning, and then home to
dinner, and after dinner my wife and I to talk again about getting of a
couple of good mayds and to part with Ashwell, which troubles me for her
father's sake, though I shall be glad to have the charge taken away of
keeping a woman. Thence a little to the office, and so abroad with my
wife by water to White Hall, and there at my Lord's lodgings met my Lady
Jemimah, with whom we staid a good while. Thence to Mrs. Hunt's, where
I left my wife, and I to walk a little in St. James's Park, while Mrs.
Harper might come home, with whom we came to speak about her kinswoman
Jane Gentleman to come and live with us as a chamber mayde, and there
met with Mr. Hoole my old acquaintance of Magdalen, and walked with him
an hour in the Parke, discoursing chiefly of Sir Samuel Morland, whose
lady is gone into France. It seems he buys ground and a farm in the
country, and lays out money upon building, and God knows what! so that
most of the money he sold his pension of L500 per annum for, to Sir
Arthur Slingsby, is believed is gone. It seems he hath very great
promises from the King, and Hoole hath seen some of the King's letters,
under his own hand, to Morland, promising him great things (and among
others, the order of the Garter, as Sir Samuel says); but his lady
thought it below her to ask any thing at the King's first coming,
believing the King would do it of himself, when as Hoole do really think
if he had asked to be Secretary of State at the King's first coming, he
might have had it. And the other day at her going into France, she did
speak largely to the King herself, how her husband hath failed of what
his Majesty had promised, and she was sure intended him; and the King
did promise still, as he is a King and a gentleman, to be as good as his
word in a little time, to a tittle: but I never believe it. Here in the
Park I met with Mr. Coventry, where he sent for a letter he had
newly writ to me, wherein he had enclosed one from Commissioner Pett
complaining of his being defeated in his attempt to suspend two pursers,
wherein the manner of his doing it, and complaint of our seeing him
(contrary to our promises the other day), deserted, did make us laugh
mightily, and was good sport to think how awkwardly he goes about a
thing that he has no courage of his own nor mind to do. Mr. Coventry
answered it very handsomely, but I perceive Pett has left off his
corresponding with me any more. Thence to fetch my wife from Mrs.
Hunt's, where now he was come in, and we eat and drunk, and so away
(their child being at home, a very lively, but not pretty at all), by
water to Mrs. Turner's, and there made a short visit, and so home by
coach, and after supper to prayers and to bed, and before going to bed
Ashwell began to make her complaint, and by her I do perceive that she
has received most base usage from my wife, which my wife sillily
denies, but it is impossible the wench could invent words and matter
so particularly, against which my wife has nothing to say but flatly to
deny, which I am sorry to see, and blows to have past, and high words
even at Hinchinbrooke House among my Lady's people, of which I am
mightily ashamed. I said nothing to either of them, but let them talk
till she was gone and left us abed, and then I told my wife my mind with
great sobriety of grief, and so to sleep.

14th. Awake, and to chide my wife again, and I find that my wife has
got too great head to be brought down soon, nor is it possible with any
convenience to keep Ashwell longer, my wife is so set and convinced, as
she was in Sarah, to make her appear a Lyer in every small thing that
we shall have no peace while she stays. So I up and to my office doing
several businesses in my study, and so home to dinner. The time having
outslipt me and my stomach, it being past, two a-clock, and yet before
we could sit down to dinner Mrs. Harper and her cousin Jane came, and
we treated and discoursed long about her coming to my wife for a chamber
mayd, and I think she will do well. So they went away expecting notice
when she shall come, and so we sat down to dinner at four a-clock
almost, and then I walked forth to my brother's, where I found my father
very discontented, and has no mind to come to my house, and would have
begun some of the differences between my wife and him, but I desired to
hear none of them, and am sorry at my folly in forcing it and theirs in
not telling me of it at the beginning, and therefore am resolved to make
the best of a bad market, and to bring my wife to herself again as soon
and as well as I can. So we parted very kindly, and he will dine with me
to-morrow or next day. Thence walked home, doing several errands by the
way, and at home took my wife to visit Sir W. Pen, who is still lame,
and after an hour with him went home and supped, and with great content
to bed.

15th. Lay pretty long in bed, being a little troubled with some pain got
by wind and cold, and so up with good peace of mind, hoping that my wife
will mind her house and servants, and so to the office, and being too
soon to sit walked to my viail, which is well nigh done, and I believe
I may have it home to my mind next week. So back to my office, and there
we sat all the morning, I till 2 o'clock before I could go to dinner
again. After dinner walked forth to my instrument maker, and there had
my rule he made me lay now so perfected, that I think in all points I
have never need or desire a better, or think that any man yet had one
so good in all the several points of it for my use. So by water down to
Deptford, taking into my boat with me Mr. Palmer, one whom I knew and
his wife when I was first married, being an acquaintance of my wife's
and her friends lodging at Charing Cross during our differences. He
joyed me in my condition, and himself it seems is forced to follow the
law in a common ordinary way, but seems to do well, and is a sober man,
enough by his discourse. He landed with me at Deptford, where he saw by
the officers' respect to me a piece of my command, and took notice of
it, though God knows I hope I shall not be elated with that, but rather
desire to be known for serving the King well, and doing my duty. He gone
I walked up and down the yard a while discoursing with the officers, and
so by water home meditating on my new Rule with great pleasure. So to my
office, and there by candle light doing business, and so home to supper
and to bed.

16th (Lord's day). Up and with my wife to church, and finding her
desirous to go to church, I did suspect her meeting of Pembleton, but
he was not there, and so I thought my jealousy in vain, and treat the
sermon with great quiet. And home to dinner very pleasant, only some
angry, notwithstanding my wife could not forbear to give Ashwell, and
after dinner to church again, and there, looking up and down, I found
Pembleton to stand in the isle against us, he coming too late to get
a pew. Which, Lord! into what a sweat did it put me! I do not think my
wife did see him, which did a little satisfy me. But it makes me mad to
see of what a jealous temper I am and cannot helpe it, though let him do
what he can I do not see, as I am going to reduce my family, what hurt
he can do me, there being no more occasion now for my wife to learn of
him. Here preached a confident young coxcomb. So home, and I staid a
while with Sir J. Minnes, at Mrs. Turner's, hearing his parrat talk,
laugh, and crow, which it do to admiration. So home and with my wife to
see Sir W. Pen, and thence to my uncle Wight, and took him at supper and
sat down, where methinks my uncle is more kind than he used to be both
to me now, and my father tell me to him also, which I am glad at. After
supper home, it being extraordinary dark, and by chance a lanthorn came
by, and so we hired it to light us home, otherwise were we no sooner
within doors but a great showre fell that had doused us cruelly if we
had not been within, it being as dark as pitch. So to prayers and to
bed.

17th. Up, and then fell into discourse, my wife and I to Ashwell, and
much against my will I am fain to express a willingness to Ashwell that
she should go from us, and yet in my mind I am glad of it, to ease me of
the charge. So she is to go to her father this day. And leaving my wife
and her talking highly, I went away by coach with Sir J. Minnes and Sir
W. Batten to St. James's, and there attended of course the Duke. And so
to White Hall, where I met Mr. Moore, and he tells me with great sorrow
of my lord's being debauched he fears by this woman at Chelsey, which I
am troubled at, and resolve to speak to him of it if I can seasonably.
Thence home, where I dined, and after dinner comes our old mayde Susan
to look for a gorgett that she says she has lost by leaving it here,
and by many circumstances it being clear to me that Hannah, our present
cook-mayde, not only has it, but had it on upon her necke when Susan
came in, and shifted it off presently upon her coming in, I did charge
her so home with it (having a mind to have her gone from us), that in
a huff she told us she would be gone to-night if I would pay her her
wages, which I was glad and my wife of, and so fetched her her wages,
and though I am doubtful that she may convey some things away with her
clothes, my wife searching them, yet we are glad of her being so gone,
and so she went away in a quarter of an hour's time. Being much amused
at this to have never a maid but Ashwell, that we do not intend to keep,
nor a boy, and my wife and I being left for an hour, till my brother
came in, alone in the house, I grew very melancholy, and so my brother
being come in I went forth to Mrs. Holden's, to whom I formerly spoke
about a girle to come to me instead of a boy, and the like I did to
Mrs. Standing and also to my brother Tom, whom I found at an alehouse in
Popinjay ally drinking, and I standing with him at the gate of the
ally, Ashwell came by, and so I left Tom and went almost home with her,
talking of her going away. I find that she is willing to go, and told
her (though behind my back my wife has told her that it was more my
desire than hers that she should go, which was not well), that seeing
my wife and she could not agree I did choose rather (was she my sister)
have her gone, it would be better for us and for her too. To which she
willing agreed, and will not tell me anything but that she do believe
that my wife would have some body there that might not be so liable to
give me information of things as she takes her to be. But, however, I
must later to prevent all that. I parted with her near home, agreeing to
take no notice of my coming along with her, and so by and by came home
after her. Where I find a sad distracted house, which troubles me.
However, to supper and prayers and to bed. And while we were getting to
bed my wife began to discourse to her, and plainly asked whether she had
got a place or no. And the other answered that she could go if we would
to one of our own office, to which we agreed if she would. She thereupon
said no; she would not go to any but where she might teach children,
because of keeping herself in use of what things she had earnt, which
she do not here nor will there, but only dressing. By which I
perceive the wench is cunning, but one very fit for such a place, and
accomplished to be woman to any lady in the land. So quietly to sleep,
it being a cold night. But till my house is settled, I do not see that I
can mind my business of the office, which grieves me to the heart. But I
hope all will over in a little time, and I hope to the best. This day at
Mrs. Holden's I found my new low crowned beaver according to the present
fashion made, and will be sent home to-morrow.

18th. Up and to my office, where we sat all the morning. And at noon
home, and my father came and dined with me, Susan being come and helped
my wife to dress dinner. After dinner my father and I talked about our
country-matters, and in fine I find that he thinks L50 per ann. will go
near to keep them all, which I am glad of. He having taken his leave of
me and my wife without any mention of the differences between them and
my wife in the country, I went forth to several places about businesses,
and so home again, and after prayers to bed.

19th. Up betimes, and my wife up and about the house, Susan beginning to
have her drunken tricks, and put us in mind of her old faults and folly
and distractednesse, which we had forgot, so that I became mightily
troubled with her. This morning came my joyners to new lay the floors,
and begun with the dining room. I out and see my viall again, and it is
very well, and to Mr. Hollyard, and took some pills of him and a note
under his hand to drink wine with my beere, without which I was obliged,
by my private vowe, to drink none a good while, and have strictly
observed it, and by my drinking of small beere and not eating, I am so
mightily troubled with wind, that I know not what to do almost. Thence
to White Hall, and there met Mr. Moore, and fell a-talking about my
Lord's folly at Chelsey, and it was our discourse by water to London
and to the great coffee house against the Exchange, where we sat a good
while talking; and I find that my lord is wholly given up to this
wench, who it seems has been reputed a common strumpett. I have little
encouragement from Mr. Moore to meddle with it to tell my Lord, for fear
it may do him no good, but me hurt. Thence homewards, taking leave of
him, and met Tom Marsh, my old acquaintance at Westminster, who talks
mightily of the honour of his place, being Clerke Assistant to the
Clerke of the House of Commons, and I take him to be a coxcombe, and so
did give him half a pint of wine, but drink none myself, and so got shut
of him. So home, and there found my wife almost mad with Susan's tricks,
so as she is forced to let her go and leave the house all in dirt and
the clothes all wet, and gets Goody Taylour to do the business for
her till another comes. Here came Will Howe, and he and I alone in my
chamber talking of my Lord, who drives me out of love to my Lord to tell
my Lord of the matter we discoursed of, which tend so much to the ruin
of his state, and so I resolved to take a good heart and do whatever
comes of it. He gone, we sat down and eat a bit of dinner fetched from
the cooke's, and so up again and to my joyners, who will make my floors
very handsome. By and by comes in Pembleton, which begun to make me
sweat, but I did give him so little countenance, and declared at one
word against dancing any more, and bid him a short (God be with you)
myself, and so he took as short a leave of my wife and so went away,
and I think without any time of receiving any great satisfaction from
my wife or invitation to come again. To my office till it was dark doing
business, and so home by candle light to make up my accounts for my Lord
and Mr. Moore. By and by comes Mr. Moore to me, and staid a good while
with me making up his accounts and mine, and we did not come to any end
therein for want of his papers, and so put it off to another time. He
supped with me in all my dirt and disorder, and so went away and we to
bed. I discoursed with him a great while about my speaking to my Lord
of his business, and I apprehend from him that it is likely to prove
perhaps of bad effect to me and no good to him, and therefore I shall
even let it alone and let God do his will, at least till my Lord is
in the country, and then we shall see whether he resolves to come to
Chelsey again or no, and so order the stopping of him therein if we can.

20th. Up betimes and to my office (having first been angry with my
brother John, and in the heat of my sudden passion called him Asse and
coxcomb, for which I am sorry, it being but for leaving the key of his
chamber with a spring lock within side of his door), and there we sat
all the morning, and at noon dined at home, and there found a little
girl, which she told my wife her name was Jinny, by which name we shall
call her. I think a good likely girl, and a parish child of St. Bride's,
of honest parentage, and recommended by the churchwarden. After dinner
among my joyners laying my floors, which please me well, and so to my
office, and we sat this afternoon upon an extraordinary business of
victualling. In the evening came Commissioner Pett, who fell foule on
mee for my carriage to him at Chatham, wherein, after protestation of my
love and good meaning to him, he was quiet; but I doubt he will not be
able to do the service there that any other man of his ability would.
Home in the evening my viall (and lute new strung being brought home
too), and I would have paid Mr. Hunt for it, but he did not come along
with it himself, which I expected and was angry for it, so much is it
against my nature to owe anything to any body. This evening the girle
that was brought to me to-day for so good a one, being cleansed of lice
this day by my wife, and good, new clothes put on her back, she run away
from Goody Taylour that was shewing her the way to the bakehouse, and we
heard no more of her. So to supper and to bed.

21st. Up betimes and among my joyners, and to my office, where the
joyners are also laying mouldings in the inside of my closet. Then
abroad and by water to White Hall, and there got Sir G. Carteret to sign
me my last quarter's bills for my wages, and meeting with Mr. Creed he
told me how my Lord Teviott hath received another attaque from Guyland
at Tangier with 10,000 men, and at last, as is said, is come, after a
personal treaty with him, to a good understanding and peace with him.
Thence to my brother's, and there told him how my girl has served us
which he sent me, and directed him to get my clothes again, and get the
girl whipped. So to other places by the way about small businesses, and
so home, and after looking over all my workmen, I went by water and land
to Deptford, and there found by appointment Sir W. Batten, but he was
got to Mr. Waith's to dinner, where I dined with him, a good dinner
and good discourse, and his wife, I believe, a good woman. We fell in
discourse of Captain Cocke, and how his lady has lost all her fine linen
almost, but besides that they say she gives out she had L3000 worth of
linen, which we all laugh at, and Sir W. Batten (who I perceive is
not so fond of the Captain as he used to be, and less of her, from
her slight receiving of him and his lady it seems once) told me how he
should say that he see he must spend L700 per ann. get it how he could,
which was a high speech, and by all men's discover, his estate not
good enough to spend so much. After dinner altered our design to go
to Woolwich, and put it off to to-morrow morning, and so went all to
Greenwich (Mrs. Waith excepted, who went thither, but not to the
same house with us, but to her father's, that lives there), to the
musique-house, where we had paltry musique, till the master organist
came, whom by discourse I afterwards knew, having employed him for my
Lord Sandwich, to prick out something (his name Arundell), and he did
give me a fine voluntary or two, and so home by water, and at home I
find my girl that run away brought by a bedel of St. Bride's Parish,
and stripped her and sent her away, and a newe one come, of Griffin's
helping to, which I think will prove a pretty girl. Her name, Susan,
and so to supper after having this evening paid Mr. Hunt L3 for my viall
(besides the carving which I paid this day 10s. for to the carver), and
he tells me that I may, without flattery, say, I have as good a Theorbo
viall and viallin as is in England. So to bed.

22nd. Up by four o'clock to go with Sir W. Batten to Woolwich and Sir
J. Minnes, which we did, though not before 6 or 7 by their laying a-bed.
Our business was to survey the new wharf building there, in order to the
giving more to him that do it (Mr. Randall) than contracted for, but
I see no reason for it, though it be well done, yet no better than
contracted to be. Here we eat and drank at the Clerke of the Cheques,
and in taking water at the Tower gate, we drank a cup of strong water,
which I did out of pure conscience to my health, and I think is not
excepted by my oaths, but it is a thing I shall not do again, hoping
to have no such occasion. After breakfast Mr. Castle and I walked to
Greenwich, and in our way met some gypsys, who would needs tell me my
fortune, and I suffered one of them, who told me many things common as
others do, but bade me beware of a John and a Thomas, for they did seek
to do me hurt, and that somebody should be with me this day se'nnight to
borrow money of me, but I should lend him none. She got ninepence of me.
And so I left them and to Greenwich and so to Deptford, where the two
knights were come, and thence home by water, where I find my closet done
at my office to my mind and work gone well on at home; and Ashwell gone
abroad to her father, my wife having spoken plainly to her. After dinner
to my office, getting my closet made clean and setting some papers in
order, and so in the evening home and to bed. This day Sir W. Batten
tells me that Mr. Newburne (of whom the nickname came up among us
forarse Tom Newburne) is dead of eating cowcumbers, of which, the other
day, I heard another, I think Sir Nicholas Crisp's son.

23rd (Lord's day). Up and to church without my wife, she being all
dirty, as my house is. God forgive me, I looked about to see if I could
spy Pembleton, but I could not, which did please me not a little.
Home to dinner, and then to walk up and down in my house with my wife,
discoursing of our family matters, and I hope, after all my troubles of
mind and jealousy, we shall live happily still. To church again, and so
home to my wife; and with her read "Iter Boreale," a poem, made just
at the King's coming home; but I never read it before, and now like it
pretty well, but not so as it was cried up. So to supper. No pleasure or
discourse with Ashwell, with whom for her neglect and unconcernment to
do any thing in this time of dirt and trouble in the house, but gadding
abroad as she has been all this afternoon, I know not whither. After
supper to prayers and to bed, having been, by a sudden letter coming to
me from Mr. Coventry, been with Sir W. Pen, to discourse with him about
sending 500 soldiers into Ireland. I doubt matters do not go very right
there.

24th. Up very early, and my joyners came to work. I to Mr. Moore; from
him came back home again, and drew up an account to my Lord, and that
being done met him at my Lord Sandwich's, where I was a good while alone
with my Lord; and I perceive he confides in me and loves me as he uses
to do, and tells me his condition, which is now very well all I fear
is that he will not live within compass, for I am told this morning of
strange dotages of his upon the slut at Chelsea, even in the presence
of his daughter, my Lady Jem, and Mrs. Ferrets, who took notice of it.
There come to him this morning his prints of the river Tagus and the
City of Lisbon, which he measured with his own hand, and printed by
command of the King. My Lord pleases himself with it, but methinks it
ought to have been better done than by jobing. Besides I put him upon
having some took off upon white sattin, which he ordered presently. I
offered my Lord my accounts, and did give him up his old bond for L500
and took a new one of him for L700, which I am by lending him more money
to make up: and I am glad of it. My Lord would have had me dine with
him, but I had a mind to go home to my workmen, and so took a kind good
bye of him, and so with Creed to St. James's, and, missing Mr. Coventry,
walked to the New Exchange, and there drank some whey, and so I by water
home, and found my closett at my office made very clean and neat to my
mind mightily, and home to dinner, and then to my office to brush my
books, and put them and my papers in order again, and all the afternoon
till late at night doing business there, and so home to supper, and then
to work in my chamber, making matters of this day's accounts clear in my
books, they being a little extraordinary, and so being very late I put
myself to bed, the rest being long ago gone.

25th. Up very early and removed the things out of my chamber into the
dining room, it being to be new floored this day. So the workmen being
come and falling to work there, I to the office, and thence down to
Lymehouse to Phin. Pett's about masts, and so back to the office, where
we sat; and being rose, and Mr. Coventry being gone, taking his leave,
for that he is to go to the Bath with the Duke to-morrow, I to the
'Change and there spoke with several persons, and lastly with Sir W.
Warren, and with him to a Coffee House, and there sat two hours talking
of office business and Mr. Wood's knavery, which I verily believe, and
lastly he tells me that he hears that Captain Cocke is like to become a
principal officer, either a Controller or a Surveyor, at which I am not
sorry so either of the other may be gone, and I think it probable enough
that it may be so. So home at 2 o'clock, and there I found Ashwell gone,
and her wages come to 50s., and my wife, by a mistake from me, did give
her 20s. more; but I am glad that she is gone and the charge saved.
After dinner among my joyners, and with them till dark night, and this
night they made an end of all; and so having paid them 40s. for their
six days' work, I am glad they have ended and are gone, for I am weary
and my wife too of this dirt. My wife growing peevish at night, being
weary, and I a little vexed to see that she do not retain things in her
memory that belong to the house as she ought and I myself do, I went out
in a little seeming discontent to the office, and after being there a
while, home to supper and to bed. To-morrow they say the King and the
Duke set out for the Bath. This noon going to the Exchange, I met a fine
fellow with trumpets before him in Leadenhall-street, and upon enquiry
I find that he is the clerk of the City Market; and three or four men
carried each of them an arrow of a pound weight in their hands. It seems
this Lord Mayor begins again an old custome, that upon the three first
days of Bartholomew Fayre, the first, there is a match of wrestling,
which was done, and the Lord Mayor there and Aldermen in Moorefields
yesterday: to-day, shooting: and to-morrow, hunting. And this officer of
course is to perform this ceremony of riding through the city, I think
to proclaim or challenge any to shoot. It seems that the people of the
fayre cry out upon it as a great hindrance to them.

26th. Up, and after doing something in order to the putting of my house
in order now the joynery is done, I went by water to White Hall, where
the Court full of waggons and horses, the King and Court going this day
out towards the Bath, and I to St. James's, where I spent an hour or
more talking of many things to my great content with Mr. Coventry in his
chamber, he being ready to set forth too with the Duke to-day, and so
left him, and I meeting Mr. Gauden, with him to our offices and in Sir
W. Pen's chamber did discourse by a meeting on purpose with Mr. Waith
about the victualling business and came to some issue in it. So home to
dinner, and Mr. Moore came and dined with me, and after dinner I paid
him some money which evened all reckonings between him and me to this
day, and for my Lord also I paid him some money, so that now my Lord
owes me, for which I have his bond, just L700. After long discourse with
him of the fitness of his giving me a receipt for this money, which I
for my security think necessary and he otherwise do not think so, at
last, after being a little angry, and I resolving not to let go my money
without it, he did give me one. Thence I took him, and he and I took a
pleasant walk to Deptford and back again, I doing much business there.
He went home and I home also, indoors to supper, being very glad to see
my house begin to look like itself again, hoping after this is over not
to be in any dirt a great while again, but it is very handsome, and
will be more when the floors come to be of one colour. So weary to bed.
Pleased this day to see Captain Hickes come to me with a list of all
the officers of Deptford Yard, wherein he, being a high old Cavalier,
do give me an account of every one of them to their reproach in all
respects, and discovers many of their knaverys; and tells me, and so I
thank God I hear every where, that my name is up for a good husband for
the King, and a good man, for which I bless God; and that he did this by
particular direction of Mr. Coventry.

27th. Up, after much pleasant talke with my wife and a little that
vexes me, for I see that she is confirmed in it that all that I do is by
design, and that my very keeping of the house in dirt, and the doing of
this and any thing else in the house, is but to find her employment to
keep her within and from minding of her pleasure, in which, though I
am sorry to see she minds it, is true enough in a great degree. To my
office, and there we sat and despatched much business. Home and dined
with my wife well, and then up and made clean my closet of books, and
had my chamber a third time made very clean, so that it is now in a very
fine condition. Thence down to see some good plank in the river with Sir
W. Batten and back again, it being a very cold day and a cold wind. Home
again, and after seeing Sir W. Pen, to my office, and there till late
doing of business, being mightily encouraged by every body that I meet
withal upon the 'Change and every where else, that I am taken notice
of for a man that do the King's business wholly and well. For which the
Lord be praised, for I know no honour I desire more. Home to supper,
where I find my house very clean from top to bottom again to my great
content. I found a feacho (as he calls it) of fine sugar and a case of
orange-flower water come from Mr. Cocke, of Lisbon, the fruits of my
last year's service to him, which I did in great justice to the man, a
perfect stranger. He sends it me desiring that I would not let Sir J.
Minnes know it, from whom he expected to have found the service done
that he had from me, from whom he could expect nothing, and the other
failed him, and would have done I am sure to this day had not I brought
it to some end. After supper to bed.

28th. At the office betimes (it being cold all night and this morning,
and a very great frost they say abroad, which is much, having had no
summer at all almost), where we sat, and in the afternoon also about
settling the establishment of the number of men borne on ships, &c.,
till the evening, and after that in my closet till late, and quite tired
with business, home to supper and to bed.

29th. Abroad with my wife by water to Westminster, and there left her at
my Lord's lodgings, and I to Jervas the barber's, and there was trimmed,
and did deliver back a periwigg, which he brought by my desire the
other day to show me, having some thoughts, though no great desire or
resolution yet to wear one, and so I put it off for a while. Thence to
my wife, and calling at both the Exchanges, buying stockings for her and
myself, and also at Leadenhall, where she and I, it being candlelight,
bought meat for to-morrow, having never a mayde to do it, and I myself
bought, while my wife was gone to another shop, a leg of beef, a good
one, for six pense, and my wife says is worth my money. So walked home
with a woman carrying our things. I am mightily displeased at a letter
Tom sent me last night, to borrow L20 more of me, and yet gives me
no account, as I have long desired, how matters stand with him in the
world. I am troubled also to see how, contrary to my expectation, my
brother John neither is the scholler nor minds his studies as I thought
would have done, but loiters away his time, so that I must send him soon
to Cambridge again.

31st. Up and to my office all the morning, where Sir W. Batten and Sir
J. Minnes did pay the short allowance money to the East India companies,
and by the assistance of the City Marshall and his men, did lay hold of
two or three of the chief of the companies that were in the mutiny the
other day, and sent them to prison. This noon came Jane Gentleman to
serve my wife as her chamber mayde. I wish she may prove well. So ends
this month, with my mind pretty well in quiett, and in good disposition
of health since my drinking at home of a little wine with my beer; but
no where else do I drink any wine at all. The King and Queen and the
Court at the Bath, my Lord Sandwich in the country newly gone.




SEPTEMBER 1663

Sept. 1st. Up pretty betimes, and after a little at my viall to my
office, where we sat all the morning, and I got my bill among others for
my carved work (which I expected to have paid for myself) signed at the
table, and hope to get the money back again, though if the rest had not
got it paid by the King, I never intended nor did desire to have him pay
for my vanity. In the evening my brother John coming to me to complain
that my wife seems to be discontented at his being here, and shows
him great disrespect; so I took and walked with him in the garden, and
discoursed long with him about my affairs, and how imprudent it is for
my father and mother and him to take exceptions without great cause at
my wife, considering how much it concerns them to keep her their friend
and for my peace; not that I would ever be led by her to forget or
desert them in the main, but yet she deserves to be pleased and complied
with a little, considering the manner of life that I keep her to, and
how convenient it were for me to have Brampton for her to be sent to
when I have a mind or occasion to go abroad to Portsmouth or elsewhere.
So directed him how to behave himself to her, and gave him other
counsel; and so to my office, where late.

2nd. Up betimes and to my office, and thence with Sir J. Minnes by
coach to White Hall, where met us Sir W. Batten, and there staid by the
Council Chamber till the Lords called us in, being appointed four days
ago to attend them with an account of the riott among the seamen the
other day, when Sir J. Minnes did as like a coxcomb as ever I saw any
man speak in my life, and so we were dismissed, they making nothing
almost of the matter. We staid long without, till by and by my Lord
Mayor comes, who also was commanded to be there, and he having, we not
being within with him, an admonition from the Lords to take better
care of preserving the peace, we joyned with him, and the Lords having
commanded Sir J. Minnes to prosecute the fellows for the riott, we rode
along with my Lord Mayor in his coach to the Sessions House in the Old
Bayley, where the Sessions are now sitting. Here I heard two or three
ordinary tryalls, among others one (which, they say, is very common
now-a-days, and therefore in my now taking of mayds I resolve to look to
have some body to answer for them) a woman that went and was indicted
by four names for entering herself a cookemayde to a gentleman that
prosecuted her there, and after 3 days run away with a silver tankard,
a porringer of silver, and a couple of spoons, and being now found is
found guilty, and likely will be hanged. By and by up to dinner with my
Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, and a very great dinner and most excellent
venison, but it almost made me sick by not daring to drink wine. After
dinner into a withdrawing room; and there we talked, among other things,
of the Lord Mayor's sword. They tell me this sword, they believe, is
at least a hundred or two hundred years old; and another that he hath,
which is called the Black Sword, which the Lord Mayor wears when he
mournes, but properly is their Lenten sword to wear upon Good Friday and
other Lent days, is older than that. Thence I, leaving Sir J. Minnes to
look after his indictment drawing up, I home by water, and there found
my wife mightily pleased with a present of shells, fine shells given her
by Captain Hickes, and so she and I up and look them over, and indeed
they are very pleasant ones. By and by in comes Mr. Lewellin, lately
come from Ireland, to see me, and he tells me how the English interest
falls mightily there, the Irish party being too great, so that most
of the old rebells are found innocent, and their lands, which were
forfeited and bought or given to the English, are restored to them;
which gives great discontent there among the English. He being gone, I
to my office, where late, putting things in order, and so home to supper
and to bed. Going through the City, my Lord Mayor told me how the piller
set up by Exeter House is only to show where the pipes of water run to
the City; and observed that this City is as well watered as any city
in the world, and that the bringing the water to the City hath cost it
first and last above L300,000; but by the new building, and the building
of St. James's by my Lord St. Albans,

     [It was at this time that the Earl of St. Albans planned St. James's
     Square, which was first styled "The Piazza."  The "Warrant for a
     grant to Baptist May and Abraham Cowley on nomination of the Earl of
     St. Albans of several parcels of ground in Pall Mall described, on
     rental of L80, for building thereon a square of 13 or 14 great and
     good houses," was dated September 24th, 1664.]

which is now about (and which the City stomach I perceive highly, but
dare not oppose it), were it now to be done, it would not be done for a
million of money.

3rd. Up betimes, and for an hour at my viall before my people rise. Then
up and to the office a while, and then to Sir W. Batten, who is going
this day for pleasure down to the Downes. I eat a breakfast with them,
and at my Lady's desire with them by coach to Greenwich, where I went
aboard with them on the Charlotte yacht. The wind very fresh, and
I believe they will be all sicke enough, besides that she is mighty
troublesome on the water. Methinks she makes over much of her husband's
ward, young Mr. Griffin, as if she expected some service from him when
he comes to it, being a pretty young boy. I left them under sayle, and
I to Deptford, and, after a word or two with Sir J. Minnes, walked to
Redriffe and so home. In my way, it coming into my head, overtaking of a
beggar or two on the way that looked like Gypsys, what the Gypsys 8 or
9 days ago had foretold, that somebody that day se'nnight should be with
me to borrow money, but I should lend none; and looking, when I came to
my office, upon my journall, that my brother John had brought a letter
that day from my brother Tom to borrow L20 more of me, which had vexed
me so that I had sent the letter to my father into the country, to
acquaint him of it, and how little he is beforehand that he is still
forced to borrow. But it pleased me mightily to see how, contrary to
my expectations, having so lately lent him L20, and belief that he had
money by him to spare, and that after some days not thinking of it,
I should look back and find what the Gypsy had told me to be so true.
After dinner at home to my office, and there till late doing business,
being very well pleased with Mr. Cutler's coming to me about some
business, and among other things tells me that they value me as a man of
business, which he accounts the best virtuoso, and I know his thinking
me so, and speaking where he comes, may be of good use to me. Home to
supper, and to bed.

4th. Up betimes, and an hour at my viall, and then abroad by water to
White Hall and Westminster Hall, and there bought the first newes-books
of L'Estrange's writing;

     [Roger L'Estrange, a voluminous writer of pamphlets and periodical
     papers, and translator of classics, &c.  Born 1616.  He was Licenser
     of the Press to Charles II. and James II.; and M.P. for Winchester
     in James II.'s parliament.  L'Estrange was knighted in the reign of
     James II., and died 1704.  In 1663 L'Estrange set up a paper called
     "The Public Intelligencer," which came out on August 31st, and
     continued to be published twice a week till January 19th, 1665, when
     it was superseded by the scheme of publishing the "London Gazette,"
     the first number of which appeared on February 4th following.]

he beginning this week; and makes, methinks, but a simple beginning.
Then to speak to Mrs. Lane, who seems desirous to have me come to see
her and to have her company as I had a little while ago, which methinks
if she were very modest, considering how I tumbled her and tost her, she
should not. Thence to Mrs. Harper, and sent for Creed, and there Mrs.
Harper sent for a maid for me to come to live with my wife. I like the
maid's looks well enough, and I believe may do well, she looking very
modestly and speaking so too. I directed her to speak with my wife, and
so Creed and I away to Mr. Povy's, and he not being at home, walked
to Lincoln's Inn walks, which they are making very fine, and about one
o'clock went back to Povy's; and by and by in comes he, and so we sat
and down to dinner, and his lady, whom I never saw before (a handsome
old woman that brought him money that makes him do as he does), and so
we had plenty of meat and drink, though I drunk no wine, though mightily
urged to it, and in the exact manner that I never saw in my life any
where, and he the most full and satisfied in it that man can be in this
world with any thing. After dinner done, to see his new cellars, which
he has made so fine with so noble an arch and such contrivances for
his barrels and bottles, and in a room next to it such a grotto and
fountayne, which in summer will be so pleasant as nothing in the world
can be almost. But to see how he himself do pride himself too much
in it, and command and expect to have all admiration, though indeed
everything do highly deserve it, is a little troublesome. Thence Creed
and I away, and by his importunity away by coach to Bartholomew Fayre,
where I have no mind to go without my wife, and therefore rode through
the fayre without 'lighting, and away home, leaving him there; and at
home made my wife get herself presently ready, and so carried her by
coach to the fayre, and showed her the monkeys dancing on the ropes,
which was strange, but such dirty sport that I was not pleased with it.
There was also a horse with hoofs like rams hornes, a goose with four
feet, and a cock with three. Thence to another place, and saw some
German Clocke works, the Salutation of the Virgin Mary, and several
Scriptural stories; but above all there was at last represented the sea,
with Neptune, Venus, mermaids, and Ayrid on a dolphin, the sea rocking,
so well done, that had it been in a gaudy manner and place, and at a
little distance, it had been admirable. Thence home by coach with my
wife, and I awhile to the office, and so to supper and to bed. This
day I read a Proclamation for calling in and commanding every body to
apprehend my Lord Bristoll.

5th. Up betimes and to my viall awhile, and so to the office, and there
sat, and busy all the morning. So at noon to the Exchange, and so
home to dinner, where I met Creed, who dined with me, and after dinner
mightily importuned by Captain Hicks, who came to tell my wife the names
and story of all the shells, which was a pretty present he made her the
other day. He being gone, Creed, my wife, and I to Cornhill, and after
many tryalls bought my wife a chintz, that is, a painted Indian callico,
for to line her new study, which is very pretty. So home with her, and
then I away (Creed being gone) to Captain Minors upon Tower Hill, and
there, abating only some impertinence of his, I did inform myself
well in things relating to the East Indys; both of the country and the
disappointment the King met with the last voyage, by the knavery of the
Portugall Viceroy, and the inconsiderablenesse of the place of Bombaim,

     [Bombay, which was transferred to the East India Company in 1669.
     The seat of the Western Presidency of India was removed from Surat
     to Bombay in 1685-87.]

if we had had it. But, above all things, it seems strange to me that
matters should not be understood before they went out; and also that
such a thing as this, which was expected to be one of the best parts of
the Queen's portion, should not be better understood; it being, if we
had it, but a poor place, and not really so as was described to our King
in the draught of it, but a poor little island; whereas they made the
King and Lord Chancellor, and other learned men about the King, believe
that that, and other islands which are near it, were all one piece; and
so the draught was drawn and presented to the King, and believed by the
King and expected to prove so when our men came thither; but it is quite
otherwise. Thence to my office, and after several letters writ, home to
supper and to bed, and took a pill. I hear this day that Sir W. Batten
was fain to put ashore at Queenborough with my Lady, who has been so
sick she swears never to go to sea again. But it happens well that
Holmes is come home into the Downes, where he will meet my Lady, and it
may be do her more good than she looked for. He brings news of the peace
between Tangier and the Moors, but the particulars I know not. He is
come but yesterday.

6th (Lord's day). My pill I took last night worked very well, and I lay
long in bed and sweat to get away the itching all about my body from
head to foot, which is beginning again as it did the last winter, and
I find after I am up that it is abated. I staid at home all day and my
wife also, whom, God forgive me, I staid along with me for fear of her
seeing of Pembleton. But she and I entertained one another all day
long with great pleasure, contriving about my wife's closet and the
bedchamber, whither we intend to go up she and I to-day. We dined alone
and supped also at night, my brother John with us, and so to prayers and
to bed.

7th. Up pretty betimes, and awhile to my vyall, and then abroad to
several places, to buy things for the furnishing my house and my wife's
closet, and then met my uncle Thomas, by appointment, and he and I to
the Prerogative Office in Paternoster Row, and there searched and found
my uncle Day's will, end read it over and advised upon it, and his
wife's after him, and though my aunt Perkins testimony is very good, yet
I fear the estate being great, and the rest that are able to inform us
in the matter are all possessed of more or less of the estate, it will
be hard for us ever to do anything, nor will I adventure anything till
I see what part will be given to us by my uncle Thomas of all that is
gained. But I had another end of putting my uncle into some doubt, that
so I might keep him: yet from going into the country that he may be
there against the Court at his own charge, and so I left him and his son
at a loss what to do till I see them again. And so I to my Lord Crew's,
thinking to have dined there, but it was too late, and so back and
called at my brother's and Mr. Holden's about several businesses, and
went all alone to the Black Spread Eagle in Bride Lane, and there had a
chopp of veale and some bread, cheese, and beer, cost me a shilling to
my dinner, and so through Fleet Ally, God forgive me, out of an itch
to look upon the sluts there, against which when I saw them my stomach
turned, and so to Bartholomew Fayre, where I met with Mr. Pickering, and
he and I to see the monkeys at the Dutch house, which is far beyond
the other that my wife and I saw the other day; and thence to see the
dancing on the ropes, which was very poor and tedious. But he and I fell
in discourse about my Lord Sandwich. He tells me how he is sorry for
my Lord at his being at Chelsey, and that his but seeming so to my Lord
without speaking one word, had put him clear out of my Lord's favour,
so as that he was fain to leave him before he went into the country, for
that he was put to eat with his servants; but I could not fish from him,
though I knew it, what was the matter; but am very sorry to see that
my Lord hath thus much forgot his honour, but am resolved not to meddle
with it. The play being done, I stole from him and hied home, buying
several things at the ironmonger's--dogs, tongs, and shovels--for my
wife's closett and the rest of my house, and so home, and thence to
my office awhile, and so home to supper and to bed. By my letters from
Tangier today I hear that it grows very strong by land, and the Mole
goes on. They have lately killed two hundred of the Moores, and lost
about forty or fifty. I am mightily afeard of laying out too much money
in goods upon my house, but it is not money flung away, though I
reckon nothing money but when it is in the bank, till I have a good sum
beforehand in the world.

8th. Up and to my viall a while, and then to my office on Phillips
having brought me a draught of the Katherine yacht, prettily well done
for the common way of doing it. At the office all the morning making
up our last half year's account to my Lord Treasurer, which comes to
L160,000 or there abouts, the proper expense of this half year, only
with an addition of L13,000 for the third due of the last account to the
Treasurer for his disbursements, and L1100 for this half year's; so that
in three years and a half his thirds come to L14,100. Dined at home
with my wife. It being washing day, we had a good pie baked of a leg of
mutton; and then to my office, and then abroad, and among other places
to Moxon's, and there bought a payre of globes cost me L3 10s., with
which I am well pleased, I buying them principally for my wife, who has
a mind to understand them, and I shall take pleasure to teach her. But
here I saw his great window in his dining room, where there is the two
Terrestrial Hemispheres, so painted as I never saw in my life, and
nobly done and to good purpose, done by his own hand. Thence home to my
office, and there at business late, and then to supper home and to bed,
my people sitting up longer than ordinary before they had done their
washing.

9th. Up by break of day, and then to my vials a while, and so to Sir W.
Warren's by agreement, and after talking and eating something with him,
he and I down by water to Woolwich, and there I did several businesses,
and had good discourse, and thence walked to Greenwich; in my way a
little boy overtook us with a fine cupp turned out of Lignum Vitae,
which the poor child confessed was made in the King's yard by his
father, a turner there, and that he do often do it, and that I might
have one, and God knows what, which I shall examine. Thence to Sir W.
Warren's again, and there drew up a contract for masts which he is to
sell us, and so home to dinner, finding my poor wife busy. I, after
dinner, to the office, and then to White Hall, to Sir G. Carteret's,
but did not speak with him, and so to Westminster Hall, God forgive me,
thinking to meet Mrs. Lane, but she was not there, but here I met with
Ned Pickering, with whom I walked 3 or 4 hours till evening, he telling
me the whole business of my Lord's folly with this Mrs. Becke, at
Chelsey, of all which I am ashamed to see my Lord so grossly play the
beast and fool, to the flinging off of all honour, friends, servants,
and every thing and person that is good, and only will have his private
lust undisturbed with this common.... his sitting up night after night
alone, suffering nobody to come to them, and all the day too, casting
off Pickering, basely reproaching him with his small estate, which yet
is a good one, and other poor courses to obtain privacy beneath his
honour, and with his carrying her abroad and playing on his lute under
her window, and forty other poor sordid things, which I am grieved to
hear; but believe it to no purpose for me to meddle with it, but let him
go on till God Almighty and his own conscience and thoughts of his lady
and family do it. So after long discourse, to my full satisfaction but
great trouble, I home by water and at my office late, and so to supper
to my poor wife, and so to bed, being troubled to think that I shall be
forced to go to Brampton the next Court, next week.

10th. Up betimes and to my office, and there sat all the morning making
a great contract with Sir W. Warren for L3,000 worth of masts; but, good
God! to see what a man might do, were I a knave, the whole business from
beginning to end being done by me out of the office, and signed to by
them upon the once reading of it to them, without the least care or
consultation either of quality, price, number, or need of them, only in
general that it was good to have a store. But I hope my pains was such,
as the King has the best bargain of masts has been bought these 27 years
in this office. Dined at home and then to my office again, many people
about business with me, and then stepped a little abroad about business
to the Wardrobe, but missed Mr. Moore, and elswhere, and in my way met
Mr. Moore, who tells me of the good peace that is made at Tangier with
the Moores, but to continue but from six months to six months, and
that the Mole is laid out, and likely to be done with great ease and
successe, we to have a quantity of ground for our cattle about the town
to our use. To my office late, and then home to supper, after writing
letters, and to bed. This day our cook maid (we having no luck in maids
now-adays), which was likely to prove a good servant, though none of the
best cooks, fell sick and is gone to her friends, having been with us
but 4 days.

11th. This morning, about two or three o'clock, knocked up in our back
yard, and rising to the window, being moonshine, I found it was the
constable and his watch, who had found our back yard door open, and so
came in to see what the matter was. So I desired them to shut the door,
and bid them good night, and so to bed again, and at 6 o'clock up and
a while to my vyall, and then to the office, where all the morning upon
the victualler's accounts, and then with him to dinner at the Dolphin,
where I eat well but drank no wine neither; which keeps me in such good
order that I am mightily pleased with myself for it. Hither Mr. Moore
came to me, and he and I home and advised about business, and so after
an hour's examining the state of the Navy debts lately cast up, I took
coach to Sir Philip Warwick's, but finding Sir G. Carteret there I did
not go in, but directly home, again, it raining hard, having first of
all been with Creed and Mrs. Harper about a cook maid, and am like to
have one from Creed's lodging. In my way home visited my Lord Crew and
Sir Thomas, thinking they might have enquired by the by of me touching
my Lord's matters at Chelsey, but they said nothing, and so after some
slight common talk I bid them good night. At home to my office, and
after a while doing business home to supper and bed.

12th. Up betimes, and by water to White Hall; and thence to Sir Philip
Warwick, and there had half an hour's private discourse with him; and
did give him some good satisfaction in our Navy matters, and he also me,
as to the money paid and due to the Navy; so as he makes me assured by
particulars, that Sir G. Carteret is paid within L80,000 every farthing
that we to this day, nay to Michaelmas day next have demanded; and that,
I am sure, is above L50,000 snore than truly our expenses have been,
whatever is become of the money. Home with great content that I have
thus begun an acquaintance with him, who is a great man, and a man of as
much business as any man in England; which I will endeavour to deserve
and keep. Thence by water to my office, in here all the morning, and so
to the 'Change at noon, and there by appointment met and bring home my
uncle Thomas, who resolves to go with me to Brampton on Monday next. I
wish he may hold his mind. I do not tell him, and yet he believes that
there is a Court to be that he is to do some business for us there. The
truth is I do find him a much more cunning fellow than I ever took him
for, nay in his very drink he has his wits about him. I took him home
to dinner, and after dinner he began, after a glass of wine or two, to
exclaim against Sir G. Carteret and his family in Jersey, bidding me to
have a care of him, and how high, proud, false, and politique a fellow
he is, and how low he has been under his command in the island. After
dinner, and long discourse, he went away to meet on Monday morning, and
I to my office, and thence by water to White Hall and Westminster
Hall about several businesses, and so home, and to my office writing a
laborious letter about our last account to my Lord Treasurer, which took
me to one o'clock in the morning,

13th (Lord's day). So that Griffin was fain to carry it to Westminster
to go by express, and my other letters of import to my father and
elsewhere could not go at all. To bed between one and two and slept till
8, and lay talking till 9 with great pleasure with my wife. So up and
put my clothes in order against tomorrow's journey, and then at noon
at dinner, and all the afternoon almost playing and discoursing with my
wife with great content, and then to my office there to put papers in
order against my going. And by and by comes my uncle Wight to bid us to
dinner to-morrow to a haunch of venison I sent them yesterday, given me
by Mr. Povy, but I cannot go, but my wife will. Then into the garden to
read my weekly vows, and then home, where at supper saying to my wife,
in ordinary fondness, "Well! shall you and I never travel together
again?" she took me up and offered and desired to go along with me. I
thinking by that means to have her safe from harm's way at home here,
was willing enough to feign, and after some difficulties made did send
about for a horse and other things, and so I think she will go. So, in a
hurry getting myself and her things ready, to bed.

14th. Up betimes, and my wife's mind and mine holding for her going,
so she to get her ready, and I abroad to do the like for myself, and so
home, and after setting every thing at my office and at home in order,
by coach to Bishop's Gate, it being a very promising fair day. There
at the Dolphin we met my uncle Thomas and his son-in-law, which seems a
very sober man, and Mr. Moore. So Mr. Moore and my wife set out
before, and my uncle and I staid for his son Thomas, who, by a sudden
resolution, is preparing to go with us, which makes me fear something of
mischief which they design to do us. He staying a great while, the old
man and I before, and about eight miles off, his son comes after us, and
about six miles further we overtake Mr. Moore and my wife, which makes
me mightily consider what a great deal of ground is lost in a little
time, when it is to be got up again by another, that is to go his own
ground and the other's too; and so after a little bayte (I paying all
the reckonings the whole journey) at Ware, to Buntingford, where my
wife, by drinking some cold beer, being hot herself, presently after
'lighting, begins to be sick, and became so pale, and I alone with her
in a great chamber there, that I thought she would have died, and so in
great horror, and having a great tryall of my true love and passion
for her, called the mayds and mistresse of the house, and so with some
strong water, and after a little vomit, she came to be pretty well
again; and so to bed, and I having put her to bed with great content, I
called in my company, and supped in the chamber by her, and being very
merry in talk, supped and then parted, and I to bed and lay very well.
This day my cozen Thomas dropped his hanger, and it was lost.

15th. Up pretty betimes and rode as far as Godmanehester, Mr. Moore
having two falls, once in water and another in dirt, and there 'light
and eat and drunk, being all of us very weary, but especially my uncle
and wife. Thence to Brampton to my father's, and there found all well,
but not sensible how they ought to treat my uncle and his son, at least
till the Court be over, which vexed me, but on my counsel they
carried it fair to them; and so my father, cozen Thomas, and I up to
Hinchingbroke, where I find my Lord and his company gone to Boughton,
which vexed me; but there I find my Lady and the young ladies, and there
I alone with my Lady two hours, she carrying me through every part of
the house and gardens, which are, and will be, mighty noble indeed. Here
I saw Mrs. Betty Pickering, who is a very well-bred and comely lady, but
very fat. Thence, without so much as drinking, home with my father and
cozen, who staid for me, and to a good supper; after I had had an hour's
talk with my father abroad in the fields, wherein he begun to talk very
highly of my promises to him of giving him the profits of Sturtlow, as
if it were nothing that I give him out of my purse, and that he would
have me to give this also from myself to my brothers and sister; I mean
Brampton and all, I think: I confess I was angry to hear him talk in
that manner, and took him up roundly in it, and advised him if he could
not live upon L50 per ann., which was another part of his discourse,
that he would think to come and live at Tom's again, where L50 per ann.
will be a good addition to Tom's trade, and I think that must be done
when all is done. But my father spoke nothing more of it all the time I
was in the country, though at the time he seemed to like it well enough.
I also spoke with Piggott too this evening before I went in to supper,
and doubt that I shall meet with some knots in my business to-morrow
before I can do it at the Court, but I shall do my best. After supper
my uncle and his son to Stankes's to bed, which troubles me, all our
father's beds being lent to Hinchingbroke, and so my wife and I to bed,
she very weary.

16th. Up betimes, and with my wife to Hinchingbroke to see my Lady, she
being to go to my Lord this morning, and there I left her, and so back
to the Court, and heard Sir R. Bernard's charges to the Courts Baron
and Leete, which took up till noon, and were worth hearing, and after
putting my business into some way, went home to my father's to dinner,
and after dinner to the Court, where Sir Robert and his son came again
by and by, and then to our business, and my father and I having given
bond to him for the L21 Piggott owed him, my uncle Thomas did quietly
admit himself and surrender to us the lands first mortgaged for our
whole debt, and Sir Robert added to it what makes it up L209, to be paid
in six months. But when I came to give him an account of more lands
to be surrendered to us, wherein Piggott's wife was concerned, and she
there to give her consent, Sir Robert would not hear of it, but began
to talk very high that we were very cruel, and we had caution enough
for our money, and he could not in conscience let the woman do it, and
reproached my uncle, both he and his son, with taking use upon use for
this money. To all which I did give him such answers and spoke so well,
and kept him so to it, that all the Court was silent to hear us, and by
report since do confess they did never hear the like in the place. But
he by a wile had got our bond, and I was content to have as much as I
could though I could not get all, and so took Piggott's surrender of
them without his wife, and by Sir Robert's own consent did tell the
Court that if the money were not paid in the time, and the security
prove not sufficient, I would conclude myself wronged by Sir Robert,
which he granted I should do. This kept us till night, but am heartily
glad it ended so well on my uncle's part, he doing that and Prior's
little house very willingly. So the Court broke up, and my father and
Mr. Shepley and I to Gorrum's to drink, and then I left them, and to
the Bull, where my uncle was to hear what he and the people said of our
business, and here nothing but what liked me very well. So by and by
home and to supper, and with my mind in pretty good quiett, to bed.

17th. Up, and my father being gone to bed ill last night and continuing
so this morning, I was forced to come to a new consideration, whether
it was fit for to let my uncle and his son go to Wisbeach about my uncle
Day's estate alone or no, and concluded it unfit; and so resolved to go
with them myself, leaving my wife there, I begun a journey with them,
and with much ado, through the fens, along dikes, where sometimes we
were ready to have our horses sink to the belly, we got by night, with
great deal of stir and hard riding, to Parson's Drove, a heathen place,
where I found my uncle and aunt Perkins, and their daughters, poor
wretches! in a sad, poor thatched cottage, like a poor barn, or stable,
peeling of hemp, in which I did give myself good content to see their
manner of preparing of hemp; and in a poor condition of habitt took them
to our miserable inn, and there, after long stay, and hearing of Frank,
their son, the miller, play, upon his treble, as he calls it, with which
he earns part of his living, and singing of a country bawdy song, we
sat down to supper; the whole crew, and Frank's wife and child, a sad
company, of which I was ashamed, supped with us. And after supper I,
talking with my aunt about her report concerning my uncle Day's will and
surrender, I found her in such different reports from what she writes
and says to the people, and short of what I expected, that I fear little
will be done of good in it. By and by newes is brought to us that one of
our horses is stole out of the stable, which proves my uncle's, at which
I am inwardly glad--I mean, that it was not mine; and at this we were
at a great loss; and they doubting a person that lay at next door, a
Londoner, some lawyer's clerk, we caused him to be secured in his bed,
and other care to be taken to seize the horse; and so about twelve at
night or more, to bed in a sad, cold, nasty chamber, only the mayde was
indifferent handsome, and so I had a kiss or two of her, and I to bed,
and a little after I was asleep they waked me to tell me that the horse
was found, which was good newes, and so to sleep till the morning, but
was bit cruelly, and nobody else of our company, which I wonder at, by
the gnatts.

18th. Up, and got our people together as soon as we could; and after
eating a dish of cold cream, which was my supper last night too, we took
leave of our beggarly company, though they seem good people, too; and
over most sad Fenns, all the way observing the sad life which the people
of the place which if they be born there, they do call the Breedlings'
of the place, do live, sometimes rowing from one spot to another, and
then wadeing, to Wisbeach, a pretty town, and a fine church and library,
where sundry very old abbey manuscripts; and a fine house, built on the
church ground by Secretary Thurlow, and a fine gallery built for him in
the church, but now all in the Bishop of Ely's hands. After visiting
the church, &c., we went out of the towne, by the help of a stranger, to
find out one Blinkhorne, a miller, of whom we might inquire something of
old Day's disposal of his estate, and in whose hands it now is; and
by great chance we met him, and brought him to our inn to dinner; and
instead of being informed in his estate by this fellow, we find that he
is the next heir to the estate, which was matter, of great sport to my
cozen Thomas and me, to see such a fellow prevent us in our hopes, he
being Day's brother's, daughter's son, whereas we are but his sister's
sons and grandsons; so that, after all, we were fain to propose our
matter to him, and to get him to give us leave to look after the
business, and so he to have one-third part, and we two to have the other
two-third parts, of what should be recovered of the estate, which he
consented to; and after some discourse and paying the reckoning, we
mounted again, and rode, being very merry at our defeat, to Chatteris,
my uncle very weary, and after supper, and my telling of three stories,
to their good liking, of spirits, we all three in a chamber went to bed.

19th. Up pretty betimes, and after eating something, we set out and I
(being willing thereto) went by a mistake with them to St. Ives, and
there, it being known that it was their nearer way to London, I took
leave of them there, they going straight to London and I to Brampton,
where I find my father ill in bed still, and Madam Norbery (whom and her
fair daughter and sister I was ashamed to kiss, but did, my lip being
sore with riding in the wind and bit with the gnatts), lately come to
town, come to see my father and mother, and they after a little stay
being gone, I told my father my success. And after dinner my wife and
I took horse, and rode with marvellous, and the first and only hour of,
pleasure, that ever I had in this estate since I had to do with it, to
Brampton woods; and through the wood rode, and gathered nuts in my way,
and then at Graffam to an old woman's house to drink, where my wife used
to go; and being in all circumstances highly pleased, and in my wife's
riding and good company at this time, I rode, and she showed me the
river behind my father's house, which is very pleasant, and so saw her
home, and I straight to Huntingdon, and there met Mr. Shepley and to the
Crown (having sent home my horse by Stankes), and there a barber came
and trimmed me, and thence walked to Hinchingbroke, where my Lord and
ladies all are just alighted. And so I in among them, and my Lord glad
to see me, and the whole company. Here I staid and supped with them,
and after a good stay talking, but yet observing my Lord not to be so
mightily ingulphed in his pleasure in the country as I expected and
hoped, I took leave of them, and after a walk in the courtyard in the
dark with Mr. Howe, who tells me that my Lord do not enjoy himself and
please himself as he used to do, but will hasten up to London, and that
he is resolved to go to Chelsey again, which we are heartily grieved for
and studious how to prevent if it be possible, I took horse, there being
one appointed for me, and a groom to attend me, and so home, where my
wife: staid up and sister for me, and so to bed, troubled for what I
hear of my Lord.

20th (Lord's day). Up, and finding my father somewhat better, walked to
Huntingdon church, where in my Lord's pew, with the young ladies, by
my Lord's own showing me the place, I stayed the sermon, and so to
Hinchingbroke, walking with Mr. Shepley and Dr. King, whom they account
a witty man here, as well as a good physician, and there my Lord took
me with the rest of the company, and singly demanded my opinion in the
walks in his garden, about the bringing of the crooked wall on the mount
to a shape; and so to dinner, there being Collonel Williams and much
other company, and a noble dinner. But having before got my Lord's
warrant for travelling to-day, there being a proclamation read yesterday
against it at Huntingdon, at which I am very glad, I took leave, leaving
them at dinner, and walked alone to my father's, and there, after a
word or two to my father and mother, my wife and I mounted, and, with
my father's boy, upon a horse I borrowed of Captain Ferrers, we rode to
Bigglesworth by the help of a couple of countrymen, that led us through
the very long and dangerous waters, because of the ditches on each
side, though it begun to be very dark, and there we had a good breast of
mutton roasted for us, and supped, and to bed.

21st. Up very betimes by break of day, and got my wife up, whom the
thought of this day's long journey do discourage; and after eating
something, and changing of a piece of gold to pay the reckoning, we
mounted, and through Baldwicke, where a fayre is kept to-day, and a
great one for cheese and other such commodities, and so to Hatfield, it
being most curious weather from the time we set out to our getting home,
and here we dined, and my wife being very weary, and believing that it
would be hard to get her home to-night, and a great charge to keep her
longer abroad, I took the opportunity of an empty coach that was to go
to London, and left her to come in it to London, for half-a-crown, and
so I and the boy home as fast as we could drive, and it was even night
before we got home. So that I account it very good fortune that we took
this course, being myself very weary, much more would my wife have been.
At home found all very well and my house in good order. To see Sir W.
Pen, who is pretty well, and Sir J. Minnes, who is a little lame on one
foot, and the rest gone to Chatham, viz.: Sir G. Carteret and Sir W.
Batten, who has in my absence inveighed against my contract the other
day for Warren's masts, in which he is a knave, and I shall find matter
of tryumph, but it vexes me a little. So home, and by and by comes my
wife by coach well home, and having got a good fowl ready for supper
against her coming, we eat heartily, and so with great content and ease
to our own bed, there nothing appearing so to our content as to be at
our own home, after being abroad awhile.

22nd. I up, well refreshed after my journey, and to my office and there
set some things in order, and then Sir W. Pen and I met and held
an office, and at noon to dinner, and so by water with my wife to
Westminster, she to see her father and mother, and we met again at my
Lord's lodgings, and thence by water home again, where at the door we
met Sir W. Pen and his daughter coming to visit us, and after their
visit I to my office, and after some discourse to my great satisfaction
with Sir W. Warren about our bargain of masts, I wrote my letters by the
post, and so home to supper and to bed. This day my wife showed me bills
printed, wherein her father, with Sir John Collidon and Sir Edward Ford,
have got a patent for curing of smoky chimneys.

     [The Patent numbered 138 is printed in the appendix to Wheatley's
     "Samuel Pepys and the World he lived in" (p. 241).  It is drawn in
     favour of John Colladon, Doctor in Physicke, and of Alexander
     Marchant, of St. Michall, and describes "a way to prevent and cure
     the smoakeing of Chimneys, either by stopping the tunnell towards
     the top, and altering the former course of the smoake, or by setting
     tunnells with checke within the chimneyes."  Sir Edward Ford's name
     does not appear in the patent.]

I wish they may do good thereof, but fear it will prove but a poor
project. This day the King and Queen are to come to Oxford. I hear my
Lady Castlemaine is for certain gone to Oxford to meet him, having lain
within here at home this week or two, supposed to have miscarried; but
for certain is as great in favour as heretofore;

     [According to Collins, Henry Fitzroy, Lady Castlemaine's second son
     by Charles II., was born on September 20th, 1663.  He was the first
     Duke of Grafton.--B.]

at least Mrs. Sarah at my Lord's, who hears all from their own family,
do say so. Every day brings newes of the Turke's advance into Germany,
to the awakeing of all the Christian Princes thereabouts, and possessing
himself of Hungary. My present care is fitting my wife's closett and my
house, and making her a velvet coate, and me a new black cloth suit,
and coate and cloake, and evening my reckoning as well as I can against
Michaelmas Day, hoping for all that to have my balance as great or
greater than ever I had yet.

23rd. Up betimes and to my office, where setting down my journall
while I was in the country to this day, and at noon by water to my Lord
Crew's, and there dined with him and Sir Thomas, thinking to have them
inquire something about my Lord's lodgings at Chelsey, or any thing of
that sort, but they did not, nor seem to take the least notice of it,
which is their discretion, though it might be better for my Lord and
them too if they did, that so we might advise together for the best,
which cannot be while we seem ignorant one to another, and it is not
fit for me to begin the discourse. Thence walked to several places about
business and to Westminster Hall, thinking to meet Mrs. Lane, which is
my great vanity upon me at present, but I must correct it. She was not
in the way. So by water home and to my office, whither by and by came my
brother John, who is to go to Cambridge to-morrow, and I did give him
a most severe reprimand for his bad account he gives me of his studies.
This I did with great passion and sharp words, which I was sorry to
be forced to say, but that I think it for his good, forswearing doing
anything for him, and that which I have yet, and now do give him, is
against my heart, and will also be hereafter, till I do see him give
me a better account of his studies. I was sorry to see him give me no
answer, but, for aught I see, to hear me without great resentment, and
such as I should have had: in his condition. But I have done my duty,
let him do his, for I am resolved to be as good as my word. After two
hours walking in the garden, till after it was dark, I ended with him
and to my office, and there set some papers in order, and so to supper,
and my poor wife, who is mighty busy at home; fitting her closet. So to
bed.

24th. Up betimes, and after taking leave of my brother, John, who went
from me to my father's this day, I went forth by water to Sir Philip
Warwick's, where I was with him a pretty while; and in discourse he
tells me, and made it; appear to me, that the King cannot be in debt to
the Navy at this time L5,000; and it is my opinion that Sir G. Carteret
do owe the King money, and yet the whole Navy debt paid. Thence I
parted, being doubtful of myself that I have not, spoke with the gravity
and weight that I ought to do in so great a business. But I rather hope
it is my doubtfulness of myself, and the haste which he was in, some
very great personages waiting for him without, while he was with me,
that made him willing to be gone. To the office by water, where we sat
doing little, now Mr. Coventry is not here, but only vex myself to see
what a sort of coxcombs we are when he is not here to undertake such
a business as we do. In the afternoon telling my wife that I go to
Deptford, I went, by water to Westminster Hall, and there finding Mrs.
Lane, took her over to Lambeth, where we were lately, and there, did
what I would with her, but only the main thing, which she; would not
consent to, for which God be praised..... But, trust in the Lord, I
shall never do so again while I live. After being tired with her company
I landed her at White; Hall, and so home and at my office writing
letters till 12 at night almost, and then home to supper and bed, and
there found my poor wife hard at work, which grieved my heart to see
that I should abuse so good a wretch, and that is just with God to make
her bad with me for my wrongin of her, but I do resolve never to do the
like again. So to bed.

25th. Lay pretty long in bed, and so to my office all the morning till
by and by called out by Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, with them by
water to Deptford, where it of a sudden did lighten, thunder, and rain
so as we could do nothing but stay in Davis's house, and by and by Sir
J. Minnes and I home again by water, and I home to dinner, and after
dinner to the office, and there till night all alone, even of my clerks
being there, doing of business, and so home and to bed.

26th. Up and to my office, and there we sat till noon, and then I to the
Exchange, but did little there, but meeting Mr. Rawlinson he would needs
have me home to dinner, and Mr. Deane of Woolwich being with me I took
him with me, and there we dined very well at his own dinner, only no
invitation, but here I sat with little pleasure, considering my wife at
home alone, and so I made what haste home I could, and was forced to sit
down again at dinner with her, being unwilling to neglect her by being
known to dine abroad. My doing so being only to keep Deane from dining
at home with me, being doubtful what I have to eat. So to the office,
and there till late at night, and so home to supper and bed, being
mightily pleased to find my wife so mindful of her house.

27th (Lord's day). Lay chatting with my wife a good while, then up and
got me ready and to church, without my man William, whom I have not seen
to-day, nor care, but would be glad to have him put himself far enough
out of my favour that he may not wonder to have me put him away. So home
to dinner, being a little troubled to see Pembleton out again, but I
do not discern in my wife the least memory of him. Dined, and so to my
office a little, and then to church again, where a drowsy sermon, and
so home to spend the evening with my poor wife, consulting about her
closett, clothes, and other things. At night to supper, though with
little comfort, I finding myself both head and breast in great pain, and
what troubles me most my right ear is almost deaf. It is a cold, which
God Almighty in justice did give me while I sat lewdly sporting with
Mrs. Lane the other day with the broken window in my neck. I went to bed
with a posset, being very melancholy in consideration of the loss of my
hearing.

28th. Up, though with pain in my head, stomach, and ear, and that deaf
so as in my way by coach to White Hall with Sir J. Minnes I called at
Mr. Holliard's, who did give me some pills, and tells me I shall have my
hearing again and be well. So to White Hall, where Sir J. Minnes and I
did spend an hour in the Gallery, looking upon the pictures, in which he
hath some judgment. And by and by the Commissioners for Tangier met: and
there my Lord Teviott, together with Captain Cuttance, Captain Evans,
and Jonas Moore, sent to that purpose, did bring us a brave draught of
the Mole to be built there; and report that it is likely to be the most
considerable place the King of England hath in the world; and so I am
apt to think it will. After discourse of this, and of supplying the
garrison with some more horse, we rose; and Sir J. Minnes and I home
again, finding the street about our house full, Sir R. Ford beginning
his shrievalty to-day and, what with his and our houses being new
painted, the street begins to look a great deal better than it did, and
more gracefull. Home and eat one bit of meat, and then by water with him
and Sir W. Batten to a sale of old provisions at Deptford, which we did
at Captain Boddily's house, to the value of L600 or L700, but I am not
satisfied with the method used in this thing. Then home again by water,
and after a little at my office, and visit Sir W. Pen, who is not very
well again, with his late pain, home to supper, being hungry, and my
ear and cold not so bad I think as it was. So to bed, taking one of my
pills. Newes that the King comes to town for certain on Thursday next
from his progresse.

29th. Took two pills more in the morning and they worked all day, and I
kept the house. About noon dined, and then to carry several heavy things
with my wife up and down stairs, in order to our going to lie above, and
Will to come down to the Wardrobe, and that put me into a violent sweat,
so I had a fire made, and then, being dry again, she and I to put up
some paper pictures in the red chamber, where we go to lie very pretty,
and the map of Paris. Then in the evening, towards night, it fell to
thunder, lighten, and rain so violently that my house was all afloat,
and I in all the rain up to the gutters, and there dabbled in the rain
and wet half an hour, enough to have killed a man. That done downstairs
to dry myself again, and by and by come Mr. Sympson to set up my wife's
chimney-piece in her closett, which pleases me, and so that being done,
I to supper and to bed, shifting myself from top to toe, and doubtful of
my doing myself hurt.

30th. Rose very well, and my hearing pretty well again, and so to my
office, by and by Mr. Holliard come, and at my house he searched my ear,
and I hope all will be well, though I do not yet hear so well as I used
to do with my right ear. So to my office till noon, and then home to
dinner, and in the afternoon by water to White Hall, to the Tangier
Committee; where my Lord Tiviott about his accounts; which grieves me to
see that his accounts being to be examined by us, there are none of the
great men at the Board that in compliment will except against any thing
in his accounts, and so none of the little persons dare do it: so the
King is abused. Thence home again by water with Sir W. Rider, and so
to my office, and there I sat late making up my month's accounts, and,
blessed be God, do find myself L760 creditor, notwithstanding that for
clothes for myself and wife, and layings out on her closett, I have
spent this month L47. So home, where I found our new cooke-mayde
Elizabeth, whom my wife never saw at all, nor I but once at a distance
before, but recommended well by Mr. Creed, and I hope will prove well.
So to supper, prayers, and bed. This evening Mr. Coventry is come to St.
James's, but I did not go see him, and tomorrow the King, Queen, Duke
and his Lady, and the whole Court comes to towne from their progresse.
Myself and family well, only my father sicke in the country. All the
common talke for newes is the Turke's advance in Hungary, &c.




OCTOBER 1663

October 1st. Up and betimes to my office, and then to sit, where Sir
G. Carteret, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, Sir J. Minnes, Mr. Coventry and
myself, a fuller board than by the King's progresse and the late pays
and my absence has been a great while. Sat late, and then home to
dinner. After dinner I by water to Deptford about a little business,
and so back again, buying a couple of good eeles by the way, and after
writing by the post, home to see the painter at work, late, in my wife's
closet, and so to supper and to bed, having been very merry with the
painter, late, while he was doing his work. This day the King and Court
returned from their progress.

2nd. Up betimes and by water to St. James's, and there visited Mr.
Coventry as a compliment after his new coming to town, but had no
great talk with him, he being full of business. So back by foot through
London, doing several errands, and at the 'Change met with Mr. Cutler,
and he and I to a coffee-house, and there discoursed, and he do assure
me that there is great likelyhood of a war with Holland, but I hope
we shall be in good condition before it comes to break out. I like his
company, and will make much of his acquaintance. So home to dinner with
my wife, who is over head and eares in getting her house up, and so to
the office, and with Mr. Lewes, late, upon some of the old victuallers'
accounts, and so home to supper and to bed, up to our red chamber, where
we purpose always to lie. This day I received a letter from Mr. Barlow,
with a Terella,

     [Professor Silvanus P. Thompson, F.R.S., has kindly supplied me with
     the following interesting note on the terrella (or terella): The
     name given by Dr. William Gilbert, author of the famous treatise,
     "De Magnete" (Lond.  1600), to a spherical loadstone, on account of
     its acting as a model, magnetically, of the earth; compass-needles
     pointing to its poles, as mariners' compasses do to the poles of
     the earth.  The term was adopted by other writers who followed
     Gilbert, as the following passage from Wm.  Barlowe's "Magneticall
     Advertisements" (Lond.  1616) shows: "Wherefore the round Loadstone
     is significantly termed by Doct. Gilbert Terrella, that is, a
     little, or rather a very little Earth: For it representeth in an
     exceeding small model (as it were) the admirable properties
     magneticall of the huge Globe of the earth" (op. cit, p. 55).
     Gilbert set great store by his invention of the terrella, since it
     led him to propound the true theory of the mariners' compass.  In
     his portrait of himself which he had painted for the University of
     Oxford he was represented as holding in his hand a globe inscribed
     terella.  In the Galileo Museum in Florence there is a terrella
     twenty-seven inches in diameter, of loadstone from Elba, constructed
     for Cosmo de' Medici.  A smaller one contrived by Sir Christopher
     Wren was long preserved in the museum of the Royal Society (Grew's
     "Rarities belonging to the Royal Society," p.  364).  Evelyn was
     shown "a pretty terrella described with all ye circles and skewing
     all y magnetic deviations" (Diary, July 3rd, 1655).]

which I had hoped he had sent me, but to my trouble I find it is to
present from him to my Lord Sandwich, but I will make a little use of it
first, and then give it him.

3rd. Up, being well pleased with my new lodging and the convenience of
having our mayds and none else about us, Will lying below. So to the
office, and there we sat full of business all the morning. At noon I
home to dinner, and then abroad to buy a bell to hang by our chamber
door to call the mayds. Then to the office, and met Mr. Blackburne, who
came to know the reason of his kinsman (my Will) his being observed
by his friends of late to droop much. I told him my great displeasure
against him and the reasons of it, to his great trouble yet
satisfaction, for my care over him, and how every thing I said was for
the good of the fellow, and he will take time to examine the fellow
about all, and to desire my pleasure concerning him, which I told him
was either that he should became a better servant or that we would not
have him under my roof to be a trouble. He tells me in a few days he
will come to me again and we shall agree what to do therein. I home and
told my wife all, and am troubled to see that my servants and others
should be the greatest trouble I have in the world, more than for
myself. We then to set up our bell with a smith very well, and then I
late at the office. So home to supper and to bed.

4th (Lord's day). Up and to church, my house being miserably overflooded
with rayne last night, which makes me almost mad. At home to dinner with
my wife, and so to talk, and to church again, and so home, and all the
evening most pleasantly passed the time in good discourse of our fortune
and family till supper, and so to bed, in some pain below, through cold
got.

5th. Up with pain, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to the Temple, and
then I to my brother's, and up and down on business, and so to the New
Exchange, and there met Creed, and he and I walked two or three hours,
talking of many businesses, especially about Tangier, and my Lord
Tiviot's bringing in of high accounts, and yet if they were higher are
like to pass without exception, and then of my Lord Sandwich sending a
messenger to know whether the King intends to come to Newmarket, as is
talked, that he may be ready to entertain him at Hinchingbroke. Thence
home and dined, and my wife all day putting up her hangings in her
closett, which she do very prettily herself with her own hand, to my
great content. So I to the office till night, about several businesses,
and then went and sat an hour or two with Sir W. Pen, talking very
largely of Sir J. Minnes's simplicity and unsteadiness, and of Sir W.
Batten's suspicious dealings, wherein I was open, and he sufficiently,
so that I do not care for his telling of tales, for he said as much,
but whether that were so or no I said nothing but what is my certain
knowledge and belief concerning him. Thence home to bed in great pain.

6th. Slept pretty well, and my wife waked to ring the bell to call up
our mayds to the washing about 4 o'clock, and I was and she angry that
our bell did not wake them sooner, but I will get a bigger bell. So we
to sleep again till 8 o'clock, and then I up in some ease to the office,
where we had a full board, where we examined Cocke's second account,
when Mr. Turner had drawn a bill directly to be paid the balance
thereof, as Mr. Cocke demanded, and Sir J. Minnes did boldly assert the
truth of it, and that he had examined it, when there is no such thing,
but many vouchers, upon examination, missing, and we saw reason to
strike off several of his demands, and to bring down his 5 per cent.
commission to 3 per cent. So we shall save the King some money, which
both the Comptroller and his clerke had absolutely given away. There
was also two occasions more of difference at the table; the one being
to make out a bill to Captain Smith for his salary abroad as
commander-in-chief in the Streights. Sir J. Minnes did demand an
increase of salary for his being Vice-Admiral in the Downes, he having
received but 40s. without an increase, when Sir J. Lawson, in the same
voyage, had L3, and others have also had increase, only he, because
he was an officer of the board, was worse used than any body else, and
particularly told Sir W. Batten that he was the opposer formerly of his
having an increase, which I did wonder to hear him so boldly lay it to
him. So we hushed up the dispute, and offered, if he would, to examine
precedents, and report them, if there was any thing to his advantage
to be found, to the Duke. The next was, Mr. Chr. Pett and Deane were
summoned to give an account of some knees

     ["Naturally grown timber or bars of iron bent to a right angle or to
     fit the surfaces and to secure bodies firmly together as hanging
     knees secure the deck beams to the sides."--Smyth's Sailor's Word-
     Book.  There are several kinds of knees.]

which Pett reported bad, that were to be served in by Sir W. Warren,
we having contracted that none should be served but such as were to be
approved of by our officers. So that if they were bad they were to be
blamed for receiving them. Thence we fell to talk of Warren's other
goods, which Pett had said were generally bad, and falling to this
contract again, I did say it was the most cautious and as good a
contract as had been made here, and the only [one] that had been in such
terms. Sir J. Minnes told me angrily that Winter's timber, bought for
33s. per load, was as good and in the same terms. I told him that it
was not so, but that he and Sir W. Batten were both abused, and I would
prove it was as dear a bargain as had been made this half year, which
occasioned high words between them and me, but I am able to prove it and
will. That also was so ended, and so to other business. At noon Lewellin
coming to me I took him and Deane, and there met my uncle Thomas, and we
dined together, but was vexed that, it being washing-day, we had no meat
dressed, but sent to the Cook's, and my people had so little witt to
send in our meat from abroad in that Cook's dishes, which were marked
with the name of the Cook upon them, by which, if they observed
anything, they might know it was not my own dinner. After dinner we
broke up, and I by coach, setting down Luellin in Cheapside. So to White
Hall, where at the Committee of Tangier, but, Lord! how I was troubled
to see my Lord Tiviott's accounts of L10,000 paid in that manner, and
wish 1000 times I had not been there. Thence rose with Sir G. Carteret
and to his lodgings, and there discoursed of our frays at the table
to-day, and particularly of that of the contract, and the contract of
masts the other day, declaring my fair dealing, and so needing not any
man's good report of it, or word for it, and that I would make it so
appear to him, if he desired it, which he did, and I will do it. Thence
home by water in great pain, and at my office a while, and thence a
little to Sir W. Pen, and so home to bed, and finding myself beginning
to be troubled with wind as I used to be, and in pain in making water, I
took a couple of pills that I had by me of Mr. Hollyard's.

7th. They wrought in the morning, and I did keep my bed, and my pain
continued on me mightily that I kept within all day in great pain, and
could break no wind nor have any stool after my physic had done working.
So in the evening I took coach and to Mr. Holliard's, but he was not at
home, and so home again, and whether the coach did me good or no I know
not.... So to bed and lay in good ease all night, and.... pretty well to
the morning.....

     [Pepys's prescription for the colic:

     "Balsom of Sulphur, 3 or 4 drops in a spoonfull of Syrrup of Colts
     foote, not eating or drinking two hours before or after.

     "The making of this Balsom:

     "2/3ds of fine Oyle, and 1/3d of fine Brimstone, sett 13 or 14
     houres upon yt fire, simpring till a thicke Stufte lyes at ye
     Bottome, and ye Balsom at ye topp.  Take this off &c.

     "Sir Rob. Parkhurst for ye Collique."--M. B.]

8th. So, keeping myself warm, to the office, and at noon home to dinner,
my pain coming again by breaking no wind nor having any stool. So to Mr.
Holliard, and by his direction, he assuring me that it is nothing of the
stone, but only my constitution being costive, and that, and cold from
without, breeding and keeping the wind, I took some powder that he did
give me in white wine, and sat late up, till past eleven at night, with
my wife in my chamber till it had done working, which was so weakly that
I could hardly tell whether it did work or no. My mayds being at this
time in great dirt towards getting of all my house clean, and weary and
having a great deal of work to do therein to-morrow and next day, were
gone to bed before my wife and I, who also do lie in our room more like
beasts than Christians, but that is only in order to having of the house
shortly in a cleaner, or rather very clean condition. Some ease I had so
long as this did keep my body loose, and I slept well.

9th. And did keep my bed most of this morning, my body I find being
still bound and little wind, and so my pain returned again, though not
so bad, but keeping my body with warm clothes very hot I made shift to
endure it, and at noon sent word to Mr. Hollyard of my condition, that
I could neither have a natural stool nor break wind, and by that means
still in pain and frequent offering to make water. So he sent me two
bottles of drink and some syrup, one bottle to take now and the other
to-morrow morning. So in the evening, after Commissioner Pett, who came
to visit me, and was going to Chatham, but methinks do talk to me in
quite another manner, doubtfully and shyly, and like a stranger, to what
he did heretofore. After I saw he was gone I did drink one of them, but
it was a most loathsome draught, and did keep myself warm after it, and
had that afternoon still a stool or two, but in no plenty, nor any wind
almost carried away, and so to bed. In no great pain, but do not think
myself likely to be well till I have a freedom of stool and wind. Most
of this day and afternoon my wife and I did spend together in setting
things now up and in order in her closet, which indeed is, and will be,
when I can get her some more things to put in it, a very pleasant place,
and is at present very pretty, and such as she, I hope, will find great
content in. So to bed.

10th. Up, and not in any good ease yet, but had pain in making water,
and some course. I see I must take besides keeping myself warm to make
myself break wind and go freely to stool before I can be well, neither
of which I can do yet, though I have drank the other bottle of Mr.
Hollyard's against my stomach this morning. I did, however, make shift
to go to the office, where we sat, and there Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
Batten did advise me to take some juniper water, and Sir W. Batten sent
to his Lady for some for me, strong water made of juniper. Whether that
or anything else of my draught this morning did it I cannot tell, but
I had a couple of stools forced after it.... but whether I shall grow
better upon it I cannot tell. Dined at home at noon, my wife and house
in the dirtiest pickle that ever she and it was in almost, but in order,
I hope, this night to be very clean. To the office all the afternoon
upon victualling business, and late at it, so after I wrote by the post
to my father, I home. This evening Mr. Hollyard sends me an electuary
to take (a walnut quantity of it) going to bed, which I did. 'Tis true I
slept well, and rose in a little ease in the morning.

11th (Lord's day). And was mightily pleased to see my house clean and in
good condition, but something coming into my wife's head, and mine, to
be done more about bringing the green bed into our chamber, which is
handsomer than the red one, though not of the colour of our hangings, my
wife forebore to make herself clean to-day, but continued in a sluttish
condition till to-morrow. I after the old passe, all the day within
doors,.... the effect of my electuary last night, and the greatest of my
pain I find to come by my straining.... For all this I eat with a very
good stomach, and as much as I use to do, and so I did this noon, and
staid at home discoursing and doing things in my chamber, altering
chairs in my chamber, and set them above in the red room, they being
Turkey work, and so put their green covers upon those that were above,
not so handsome. At night fell to reading in the Church History of
Fuller's, and particularly Cranmer's letter to Queen Elizabeth, which
pleases me mightily for his zeal, obedience, and boldness in a cause of
religion. After supper to bed as I use to be, in pain.....

12th. Up (though slept well) and made some water in the morning [as] I
used to do, and a little pain returned to me, and some fears, but being
forced to go to the Duke at St. James's, I took coach and in my way
called upon Mr. Hollyard and had his advice to take a glyster. At St.
James's we attended the Duke all of us. And there, after my discourse,
Mr. Coventry of his own accord begun to tell the Duke how he found that
discourse abroad did run to his prejudice about the fees that he took,
and how he sold places and other things; wherein he desired to appeal to
his Highness, whether he did any thing more than what his predecessors
did, and appealed to us all. So Sir G. Carteret did answer that some
fees were heretofore taken, but what he knows not; only that selling
of places never was nor ought to be countenanced. So Mr. Coventry very
hotly answered to Sir G. Carteret, and appealed to himself whether he
was not one of the first that put him upon looking after this taking of
fees, and that he told him that Mr. Smith should say that he made L5000
the first year, and he believed he made L7000. This Sir G. Carteret
denied, and said, that if he did say so he told a lie, for he could not,
nor did know, that ever he did make that profit of his place; but that
he believes he might say L2500 the first year. Mr. Coventry instanced in
another thing, particularly wherein Sir G. Carteret did advise with
him about the selling of the Auditor's place of the stores, when in the
beginning there was an intention of creating such an office. This he
confessed, but with some lessening of the tale Mr. Coventry told, it
being only for a respect to my Lord Fitz-Harding. In fine, Mr. Coventry
did put into the Duke's hand a list of above 250 places that he did give
without receiving one farthing, so much as his ordinary fees for them,
upon his life and oath; and that since the Duke's establishment of fees
he had never received one token more of any man; and that in his whole
life he never conditioned or discoursed of any consideration from any
commanders since he came to the Navy. And afterwards, my Lord Barkeley
merrily discoursing that he wished his profit greater than it was,
and that he did believe that he had got L50,000 since he came in, Mr.
Coventry did openly declare that his Lordship, or any of us, should have
not only all he had got, but all that he had in the world (and yet he
did not come a beggar into the Navy, nor would yet be thought to speak
in any contempt of his Royall Highness's bounty), and should have a
year to consider of it too, for L25,000. The Duke's answer was, that he
wished we all had made more profit than he had of our places, and that
we had all of us got as much as one man below stayres in the Court,
which he presently named, and it was Sir George Lane! This being ended,
and the list left in the Duke's hand, we parted, and I with Sir G.
Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W. Batten by coach to the Exchange, and
there a while, and so home, and whether it be the jogging, or by having
my mind more employed (which I believe is a great matter) I know not,
but.... I begin to be suddenly well, at least better than I was. So
home and to dinner, and thence by coach to the Old Exchange, and there
cheapened some laces for my wife, and then to Mr.-----the great laceman
in Cheapside, and bought one cost me L4. more by 20s. than I intended,
but when I came to see them I was resolved to buy one worth wearing with
credit, and so to the New Exchange, and there put it to making, and so
to my Lord's lodgings and left my wife, and so I to the Committee of
Tangier, and then late home with my wife again by coach, beginning to
be very well, and yet when I came home.... the little straining which I
thought was no strain at all at the present did by and by bring me some
pain for a good while. Anon, about 8 o'clock, my wife did give me a
clyster which Mr. Hollyard directed, viz., a pint of strong ale, 4 oz.
of sugar, and 2 oz. of butter. It lay while I lay upon the bed above an
hour, if not two, and then thinking it quite lost I rose, and by and
by it began with my walking to work, and gave me three or four most
excellent stools and carried away wind, put me in excellent ease, and
taking my usual walnut quantity of electuary at my going into bed I had
about two stools in the night.....

13th. And so rose in the morning in perfect good ease.... continued
all the morning well, and in the afternoon had a natural easily and dry
stoole, the first I have had these five days or six, for which God be
praised, and so am likely to continue well, observing for the time to
come when any of this pain comes again

(1) To begin to keep myself as warm as I can.

(2) Strain as little as ever I can backwards, remembering that my pain
will come by and by, though in the very straining I do not feel it.

(3) Either by physic forward or by clyster backward or both ways to get
an easy and plentiful going to stool and breaking of wind.

(4) To begin to suspect my health immediately when I begin to become
costive and bound, and by all means to keep my body loose, and that to
obtain presently after I find myself going the contrary.

This morning at the office, and at noon with Creed to the Exchange,
where much business, but, Lord! how my heart, though I know not reason
for it, began to doubt myself, after I saw Stint, Field's one-eyed
solicitor, though I know not any thing that they are doing, or that they
endeavour any thing further against us in the business till the terme.
Home, and Creed with me to dinner, and after dinner John Cole, my
old friend, came to see and speak with me about a friend. I find him
ingenious, but more and more discern his city pedantry; but however, I
will endeavour to have his company now and then, for that he knows much
of the temper of the City, and is able to acquaint therein as much
as most young men, being of large acquaintance, and himself, I think,
somewhat unsatisfied with the present state of things at Court and in
the Church. Then to the office, and there busy till late, and so home to
my wife, with some ease and pleasure that I hope to be able to follow
my business again, which by God's leave I am resolved to return to
with more and more eagerness. I find at Court, that either the King is
doubtfull of some disturbance, or else would seem so (and I have reason
to hope it is no worse), by his commanding all commanders of castles,
&c., to repair to their charges; and mustering the Guards the other day
himself, where he found reason to dislike their condition to my Lord
Gerard, finding so many absent men, or dead pays.

     [This is probably an allusion to the practice of not reporting the
     deaths of soldiers, that the officers might continue to draw their
     pay.--B.]

My Lady Castlemaine, I hear, is in as great favour as ever, and the King
supped with her the very first night he came from Bath: and last night
and the night before supped with her; when there being a chine of beef
to roast, and the tide rising into their kitchen that it could not be
roasted there, and the cook telling her of it, she answered, "Zounds!
she must set the house on fire but it should be roasted!" So it was
carried to Mrs. Sarah's husband's, and there it was roasted. So home to
supper and to bed, being mightily pleased with all my house and my red
chamber, where my wife and I intend constantly to lie, and the having
of our dressing room and mayds close by us without any interfering or
trouble.

14th. Up and to my office, where all the morning, and part of it Sir
J. Minnes spent, as he do every thing else, like a fool, reading
the Anatomy of the body to me, but so sillily as to the making of
me understand any thing that I was weary of him, and so I toward the
'Change and met with Mr. Grant, and he and I to the Coffee-house, where
I understand by him that Sir W. Petty and his vessel are coming, and
the King intends to go to Portsmouth to meet it. Thence home and
after dinner my wife and I, by Mr. Rawlinson's conduct, to the Jewish
Synagogue: where the men and boys in their vayles, and the women behind
a lattice out of sight; and some things stand up, which I believe is
their Law, in a press to which all coming in do bow; and at the putting
on their vayles do say something, to which others that hear him do cry
Amen, and the party do kiss his vayle. Their service all in a singing
way, and in Hebrew. And anon their Laws that they take out of the press
are carried by several men, four or five several burthens in all, and
they do relieve one another; and whether it is that every one desires to
have the carrying of it, I cannot tell, thus they carried it round about
the room while such a service is singing. And in the end they had a
prayer for the King, which they pronounced his name in Portugall; but
the prayer, like the rest, in Hebrew. But, Lord! to see the disorder,
laughing, sporting, and no attention, but confusion in all their
service, more like brutes than people knowing the true God, would make
a man forswear ever seeing them more and indeed I never did see so much,
or could have imagined there had been any religion in the whole world so
absurdly performed as this. Away thence with my mind strongly disturbed
with them, by coach and set down my wife in Westminster Hall, and I to
White Hall, and there the Tangier Committee met, but the Duke and the
Africa Committee meeting in our room, Sir G. Carteret; Sir W. Compton,
Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Rider, Cuttance and myself met in another room,
with chairs set in form but no table, and there we had very fine
discourses of the business of the fitness to keep Sally, and also of the
terms of our King's paying the Portugees that deserted their house at
Tangier, which did much please me, and so to fetch my wife, and so
to the New Exchange about her things, and called at Thomas Pepys the
turner's and bought something there, an so home to supper and to bed,
after I had been a good while with Sir W. Pen, railing and speaking
freely our minds against Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, but no more
than the folly of one and the knavery of the other do deserve.

15th. Up, I bless God being now in pretty good condition, but cannot
come to make natural stools yet..... So up and to the office, where
we sat all the morning, and at noon dined at home, my head full of
business, and after stepping abroad to buy a thing or two, compasses and
snuffers for my wife, I returned to my office and there mighty busy till
it was late, and so home well contented with the business that I had
done this afternoon, and so to supper and to bed.

16th. Up and to my office, where all the morning doing business, and
at noon home to dinner, and then up to remove my chest and clothes up
stairs to my new wardrobe, that I may have all my things above where I
lie, and so by coach abroad with my wife, leaving her at my Lord's till
I went to the Tangier Committee, where very good discourse concerning
the Articles of peace to be continued with Guyland, and thence took up
my wife, and with her to her tailor's, and then to the Exchange and to
several places, and so home and to my office, where doing some business,
and then home to supper and to bed.

17th. Up and to my office, and there we sat a very full board all the
morning upon some accounts of Mr. Gauden's. Here happened something
concerning my Will which Sir W. Batten would fain charge upon him, and
I heard him mutter something against him of complaint for his often
receiving people's money to Sir G. Carteret, which displeased me much,
but I will be even with him. Thence to the Dolphin Tavern, and there
Mr. Gauden did give us a great dinner. Here we had some discourse of the
Queen's being very sick, if not dead, the Duke and Duchess of York being
sent for betimes this morning to come to White Hall to her. So to my
office and there late doing business, and so home to supper, my house
being got mighty clean to my great content from top to toe, and so to
bed, myself beginning to be in good condition of health also, but only
my laying out so much money upon clothes for myself and wife and her
closet troubles me.

18th (Lord's day). Up, and troubled at a distaste my wife took at a
small thing that Jane did, and to see that she should be so vexed that I
took part with Jane, wherein I had reason; but by and by well again, and
so my wife in her best gown and new poynt that I bought her the other
day, to church with me, where she has not been these many weeks, and
her mayde Jane with her. I was troubled to see Pembleton there, but I
thought it prudence to take notice myself first of it and show my wife
him, and so by little and little considering that it mattered not much
his being there I grew less concerned and so mattered it not much, and
the less when, anon, my wife showed me his wife, a pretty little woman,
and well dressed, with a good jewel at her breast. The parson, Mr.
Mills, I perceive, did not know whether to pray for the Queen or no,
and so said nothing about her; which makes me fear she is dead. But
enquiring of Sir J. Minnes, he told me that he heard she was better last
night. So home to dinner, and Tom came and dined with me, and so, anon,
to church again, and there a simple coxcomb preached worse than the
Scot, and no Pembleton nor his wife there, which pleased me not a
little, and then home and spent most of the evening at Sir W. Pen's in
complaisance, seeing him though he deserves no respect from me. This
evening came my uncle Wight to speak with me about my uncle Thomas's
business, and Mr. Moore came, 4 or 5 days out of the country and not
come to see me before, though I desired by two or three messengers that
he would come to me as soon as he came to town. Which do trouble me to
think he should so soon forget my kindness to him, which I am afraid he
do. After walking a good while in the garden with these, I went up again
to Sir W. Pen, and took my wife home, and after supper to prayers, and
read very seriously my vowes, which I am fearful of forgetting by my
late great expenses, but I hope in God I do not, and so to bed.

19th. Waked with a very high wind, and said to my wife, "I pray God
I hear not of the death of any great person, this wind is so high!"
fearing that the Queen might be dead. So up; and going by coach with
Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to St. James's, they tell me that Sir
W. Compton, who it is true had been a little sickly for a week or
fortnight, but was very well upon Friday at night last at the Tangier
Committee with us, was dead--died yesterday: at which I was most
exceedingly surprised, he being, and so all the world saying that he
was, one of the worthyest men and best officers of State now in England;
and so in my conscience he was: of the best temper, valour, abilities
of mind, integrity, birth, fine person, and diligence of any one man he
hath left behind him in the three kingdoms; and yet not forty years old,
or if so, that is all.

     [Sir William Compton (1625-1663) was knighted at Oxford, December
     12th, 1643.  He was called by Cromwell "the sober young man and the
     godly cavalier."  After the Restoration he was M.P. for Cambridge
     (1661), and appointed Master of the Ordnance.  He died in Drury
     Lane, suddenly, as stated in the text, and was buried at Compton
     Wynyates, Warwickshire.]

I find the sober men of the Court troubled for him; and yet not so as to
hinder or lessen their mirth, talking, laughing, and eating, drinking,
and doing every thing else, just as if there was no such thing, which is
as good an instance for me hereafter to judge of death, both as to the
unavoidableness, suddenness, and little effect of it upon the spirits of
others, let a man be never so high, or rich, or good; but that all die
alike, no more matter being made of the death of one than another,
and that even to die well, the praise of it is not considerable in the
world, compared to the many in the world that know not nor make anything
of it, nor perhaps to them (unless to one that like this poor gentleman,
who is one of a thousand, there nobody speaking ill of him) that will
speak ill of a man. Coming to St. James's, I hear that the Queen did
sleep five hours pretty well to-night, and that she waked and gargled
her mouth, and to sleep again; but that her pulse beats fast, beating
twenty to the King's or my Lady Suffolk's eleven; but not so strong as
it was. It seems she was so ill as to be shaved and pidgeons put to her
feet, and to have the extreme unction given her by the priests, who were
so long about it that the doctors were angry. The King, they all say;
is most fondly disconsolate for her, and weeps by her, which makes her
weep;

     ["The queen was given over by her physicians,..., and the
     good nature of the king was much affected with the situation in
     which he saw!  a princess whom, though he did not love her, yet he
     greatly esteemed.  She loved him tenderly, and thinking that it was
     the last time she should ever speak to him, she told him 'That the
     concern he showed for her death was enough to make her quit life
     with regret; but that not possessing charms sufficient to merit his
     tenderness, she had at least the consolation in dying to give place
     to a consort who might be more worthy, of it and to whom heaven,
     perhaps, might grant a blessing that had been refused to her.'  At
     these words she bathed his hands with some tears which he thought
     would be her last; he mingled his own with hers, and without
     supposing she would take him at his word, he conjured her to live
     for his sake."--Grammont Memoirs, chap.  vii.]

which one this day told me he reckons a good sign, for that it carries
away some rheume from the head. This morning Captain Allen tells me how
the famous Ned Mullins, by a slight fall, broke his leg at the ancle,
which festered; and he had his leg cut off on Saturday, but so ill done,
notwithstanding all the great chyrurgeons about the town at the doing
of it, that they fear he will not live with it, which is very strange,
besides the torment he was put to with it. After being a little with
the Duke, and being invited to dinner to my Lord Barkeley's, and so, not
knowing how to spend our time till noon, Sir W. Batten and I took coach,
and to the Coffee-house in Cornhill;

     [This may be the Coffee House in Exchange Alley, which had for a
     sign, Morat the Great, or The Great Turk, where coffee was sold in
     berry, in powder, and pounded in a mortar.  There is a token of the
     house, see "Boyne's Tokens," ed.  Williamson, vol.  i., p.  592.]

where much talk about the Turk's proceedings, and that the plague is got
to Amsterdam, brought by a ship from Argier; and it is also carried to
Hambrough. The Duke says the King purposes to forbid any of their
ships coming into the river. The Duke also told us of several Christian
commanders (French) gone over to the Turks to serve them; and upon
inquiry I find that the King of France do by this aspire to the Empire,
and so to get the Crown of Spayne also upon the death of the King, which
is very probable, it seems. Back to St. James's, and there dined with
my Lord Barkeley and his lady, where Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Batten,
and myself, with two gentlemen more; my Lady, and one of the ladies of
honour to the Duchesse (no handsome woman, but a most excellent hand).
A fine French dinner, and so we after dinner broke up and to Creed's new
lodgings in Axe-yard, which I like very well and so with him to White
Hall and walked up and down in the galleries with good discourse, and
anon Mr. Coventry and Povy, sad for the loss of one of our number we sat
down as a Committee for Tangier and did some business and so broke up,
and I down with Mr. Coventry and in his chamber discoursing of business
of the office and Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten's carriage, when he
most ingeniously tells me how they have carried themselves to him in
forbearing to speak the other day to the Duke what they know they have
so largely at other times said to him, and I told him what I am put to
about the bargain for masts. I perceive he thinks of it all and will
remember it. Thence took up my wife at Mrs. Harper's where she and Jane
were, and so called at the New Exchange for some things for her, and
then at Tom's went up and saw his house now it is finished, and indeed
it is very handsome, but he not within and so home and to my office; and
then to supper and to bed.

20th. Up and to the office, where we sat; and at noon Sir G. Carteret,
Sir J. Minnes, and I to dinner to my Lord Mayor's, being invited, where
was the Farmers of the Customes, my Lord Chancellor's three sons, and
other great and much company, and a very great noble dinner, as this
Mayor--[Sir John Robinson.]--is good for nothing else. No extraordinary
discourse of any thing, every man being intent upon his dinner, and
myself willing to have drunk some wine to have warmed my belly, but I
did for my oath's sake willingly refrain it, but am so well pleased
and satisfied afterwards thereby, for it do keep me always in so good a
frame of mind that I hope I shall not ever leave this practice. Thence
home, and took my wife by coach to White Hall, and she set down at
my Lord's lodgings, I to a Committee of Tangier, and thence with her
homeward, calling at several places by the way. Among others at Paul's
Churchyard, and while I was in Kirton's shop, a fellow came to offer
kindness or force to my wife in the coach, but she refusing, he went
away, after the coachman had struck him, and he the coachman. So I being
called, went thither, and the fellow coming out again of a shop, I did
give him a good cuff or two on the chops, and seeing him not oppose me,
I did give him another; at last found him drunk, of which I was glad,
and so left him, and home, and so to my office awhile, and so home
to supper and to bed. This evening, at my Lord's lodgings, Mrs. Sarah
talking with my wife and I how the Queen do, and how the King tends
her being so ill. She tells us that the Queen's sickness is the spotted
fever; that she was as full of the spots as a leopard which is very
strange that it should be no more known; but perhaps it is not so. And
that the King do seem to take it much to heart, for that he hath wept
before her; but, for all that; that he hath not missed one night since
she was sick, of supping with my Lady Castlemaine; which I believe is
true, for she [Sarah] says that her husband hath dressed the suppers
every night; and I confess I saw him myself coming through the street
dressing of a great supper to-night, which Sarah says is also for the
King and her; which is a very strange thing.

21st. Up, and by and by comes my brother Tom to me, though late (which
do vex me to the blood that I could never get him to come time enough
to me, though I have spoke a hundred times; but he is very sluggish, and
too negligent ever to do well at his trade I doubt), and having lately
considered with my wife very much of the inconvenience of my going in
no better plight, we did resolve of putting me into a better garb, and,
among other things, to have a good velvet cloake; that is, of cloth
lined with velvet and other things modish, and a perruque, and so I
sent him and her out to buy me velvet, and I to the Exchange, and so to
Trinity House, and there dined with Sir W. Batten, having some business
to speak with him, and Sir W. Rider. Thence, having my belly full, away
on foot to my brother's, all along Thames Streete, and my belly being
full of small beer, I did all alone, for health's sake, drink half
a pint of Rhenish wine at the Still-yard, mixed with beer. From my
brother's with my wife to the Exchange, to buy things for her and
myself, I being in a humour of laying out money, but not prodigally, but
only in clothes, which I every day see that I suffer for want of, I
so home, and after a little at my office, home to supper and to bed.
Memorandum: This morning one Mr. Commander, a scrivener, came to me from
Mr. Moore with a deed of which. Mr. Moore had told me, that my Lord
had made use of my name, and that I was desired by my Lord to sign
it. Remembering this very well, though understanding little of the
particulars, I read it over, and found it concern Sir Robt. Bernard and
Duckinford, their interest in the manor of Brampton. So I did sign it,
declaring to Mr. Commander that I am only concerned in having my name
at my Lord Sandwich's desire used therein, and so I sealed it up after I
had signed and sealed the deed, and desired him to give it so sealed to
Mr. Moore. I did also call at the Wardrobe this afternoon to have told
Mr. Moore of it, but he was not within, but knowing Mr. Commander to
have the esteem of a good and honest man with my Lord Crew, I did not
doubt to intrust him with the deed after I had signed it. This evening
after I came home I begun to enter my wife in arithmetique, in order
to her studying of the globes, and she takes it very well, and, I hope,
with great pleasure, I shall bring her to understand many fine things.

22nd. Up to the office, where we sat till noon and then I home to
dinner, and after dinner with my wife to her study and there read some
more arithmetique, which she takes with great ease and pleasure. This
morning, hearing that the Queen grows worse again, I sent to stop the
making of my velvet cloake, till I see whether she lives or dies. So a
little abroad about several businesses, and then home and to my office
till night, and then home to supper, teach my wife, and so to bed.

23rd. Up, and this morning comes Mr. Clerke, and tells me that the
Injunction against Trice is dismissed again, which troubles me much. So
I am to look after it in the afternoon. There comes also by appointment
my uncle Thomas, to receive the first payment of his daughter's money.
But showing of me the original of the deed by which his daughter gives
her right to her legacy to him, and the copy of it attested by the
Scrivener, for me to keep by me, I did find some difference, and
thereupon did look more into it, and at last did find the whole thing
a forgery; yet he maintained it again and again, upon oath, that it had
been signed and sealed by my cozen Mary ever since before her marriage.
So I told him to his teeth he did like a knave, and so he did, and went
with him to the Scrivener at Bedlam, and there found how it came
to pass, viz., that he had lost, or pretends to have lost, the true
original, and that so he was forced to take this course; but a knave,
at least a man that values not what he swears to, I perceive he is. But
however I am now better able to see myself fully secured before I part
with the money, for I find that his son Charles has right to this legacy
till the first L100 of his daughter's portion be paid, he being bond for
it. So I put him upon getting both his sons to be bound for my security,
and so left him and so home, and then abroad to my brother's, but found
him abroad at the young couple that was married yesterday, and he one of
the Br[ide's] men, a kinswoman (Brumfield) of the Joyces married to an
upholster. Thence walked to the King's Head at Charing Cross and there
dined, and hear that the Queen slept pretty well last night, but her
fever continues upon her still. It seems she hath never a Portuguese
doctor here. Thence by appointment to the Six Clerks' office to meet Mr.
Clerke, which I did and there waited all the afternoon for Wilkinson
my attorney, but he came not, and so vexed and weary we parted, and I
endeavoured but in vain to have found Dr. Williams, of whom I shall have
use in Trice's business, but I could not find him. So weary walked home;
in my way bought a large kitchen knife and half dozen oyster knives.
Thence to Mr. Holliard, who tells me that Mullins is dead of his leg cut
off the other day, but most basely done. He tells me that there is no
doubt but that all my slyme do come away in my water, and therefore no
fear of the stone; but that my water being so slymy is a good sign. He
would have me now and then to take a clyster, the same I did the other
day, though I feel no pain, only to keep me loose, and instead of
butter, which he would have to be salt butter, he would have me
sometimes use two or three ounces of honey, at other times two or three
ounces of Linseed oil. Thence to Mr. Rawlinson's and saw some of my new
bottles made, with my crest upon them, filled with wine, about five or
six dozen. So home and to my office a little, and thence home to prepare
myself against T. Trice, and also to draw a bond fit for my uncle and
his sons to enter into before I pay them the money. That done to bed.

24th. Up and to my office, where busy all the morning about Mr. Gauden's
account, and at noon to dinner with him at the Dolphin, where mighty
merry by pleasant stories of Mr. Coventry's and Sir J. Minnes's, which
I have put down some of in my book of tales. Just as I was going out my
uncle Thomas came to the with a draught of a bond for him and his sons
to sign to me about the payment of the L20 legacy, which I agreed to,
but he would fain have had from me the copy of the deed, which he had
forged and did bring me yesterday, but I would not give him it. Says
[he] I perceive then you will keep it to defame me with, and desired
me not to speak of it, for he did it innocently. Now I confess I do not
find any great hurt in the thing, but only to keep from me a sight of
the true original deed, wherein perhaps there was something else that
may touch this business of the legacy which he would keep from me, or
it may be, it is really lost as he says it is. But then he need not have
used such a slight, but confess it without danger. Thence by coach with
Mr. Coventry to the Temple, and thence I to the Six Clerks' office, and
discoursed with my Attorney and Solicitor, and he and I to Mr. Turner,
who puts me in great fear that I shall not get retayned again against
Tom Trice; which troubles me. Thence, it being night, homewards, and
called at Wotton's and tried some shoes, but he had none to fit me. He
tells me that by the Duke of York's persuasion Harris is come again to
Sir W. Davenant upon his terms that he demanded, which will make him
very high and proud. Thence to another shop, and there bought me a pair
of shoes, and so walked home and to my office, and dispatch letters by
the post, and so home to supper and to bed, where to my trouble I find
my wife begin to talk of her being alone all day, which is nothing
but her lack of something to do, for while she was busy she never, or
seldom, complained..... The Queen is in a good way of recovery; and Sir
Francis Pridgeon hath got great honour by it, it being all imputed to
his cordiall, which in her dispaire did give her rest and brought her to
some hopes of recovery. It seems that, after the much talk of troubles
and a plot, something is found in the North that a party was to rise,
and some persons that were to command it are found, as I find in a
letter that Mr. Coventry read to-day about it from those parts.

     [This refers to a rising in the West Riding of Yorkshire, which took
     place on October 12th, and was known as the Farneley Wood Plot.  The
     rising was easily put down, and several prisoners were taken.  A
     special commission of oyer and terminer was sent down to York to try
     the prisoners in January, 1663-64, when twenty-one were convicted
     and executed.  (See Whitaker's "Loidis and Elmete," 1816.)]

25th (Lord's day). Up, and my wife and I to church, where it is strange
to see how the use and seeing Pembleton come with his wife thither to
church, I begin now to make too great matter of it, which before was so
terrible to me. Dined at home, my wife and I alone, a good dinner, and
so in the afternoon to church again, where the Scot preached, and I
slept most of the afternoon. So home, and my wife and I together all the
evening discoursing, and then after reading my vowes to myself, and my
wife with her mayds (who are mighty busy to get it dispatched because of
their mistress's promise, that when it is done they shall have leave all
to go see their friends at Westminster, whither my wife will carry them)
preparing for their washing to-morrow, we hastened to supper and to bed.

26th. Waked about one o'clock in the morning.... My wife being waked
rung her bell, and the mayds rose and went to washing, we to sleep again
till 7 o'clock, and then up, and I abroad to look out Dr. Williams,
but being gone out I went to Westminster, and there seeing my Lord
Sandwich's footman knew he was come to town, and so I went in and saw
him, and received a kind salute from him, but hear that my father is
very ill still. Thence to Westminster Hall with Creed, and spent
the morning walking there, where, it being Terme time, I met several
persons, and talked with them, among others Dr. Pierce, who tells
me that the Queen is in a way to be pretty well again, but that her
delirium in her head continues still; that she talks idle, not by fits,
but always, which in some lasts a week after so high a fever, in some
more, and in some for ever; that this morning she talked mightily
that she was brought to bed, and that she wondered that she should be
delivered without pain and without spueing or being sicke, and that she
was troubled that her boy was but an ugly boy. But the King being by,
said, "No, it is a very pretty boy."--"Nay," says she, "if it be like
you it is a fine boy indeed, and I would be very well pleased with it."
The other day she talked mightily of Sir H. Wood's lady's great belly,
and said if she should miscarry he would never get another, and that she
never saw such a man as this Sir H. Wood in her life, and seeing of Dr.
Pridgeon, she said, "Nay, Doctor, you need not scratch your head, there
is hair little enough already in the place." But methinks it was not
handsome for the weaknesses of Princes to be talked of thus. Thence
Creed and I to the King's Head ordinary, where much and very good
company, among others one very talking man, but a scholler, that would
needs put in his discourse and philosophy upon every occasion, and
though he did well enough, yet his readiness to speak spoilt all. Here
they say that the Turkes go on apace, and that my Lord Castlehaven is
going to raise 10,000 men here for to go against him; that the King of
France do offer to assist the Empire upon condition that he may be their
Generalissimo, and the Dolphin chosen King of the Romans: and it is said
that the King of France do occasion this difference among the Christian
Princes of the Empire, which gives the Turke such advantages. They say
also that the King of Spayne is making all imaginable force against
Portugall again. Thence Creed and I to one or two periwigg shops about
the Temple, having been very much displeased with one that we saw, a
head of greasy and old woman's haire, at Jervas's in the morning; and
there I think I shall fit myself of one very handsomely made. Thence by
coach, my mind being troubled for not meeting with Dr. Williams, to St.
Catharine's to look at a Dutch ship or two for some good handsome maps,
but met none, and so back to Cornhill to Moxon's, but it being dark we
staid not to see any, then to coach again, and presently spying Sir W.
Batten; I 'light and took him in and to the Globe in Fleete Streete,
by appointment, where by and by he and I with our solicitor to Sir F.
Turner about Field's business, and back to the Globe, and thither I sent
for Dr. Williams, and he is willing to swear in my behalf against T.
Trice, viz., that at T. Trice's desire we have met to treat about our
business. Thence (I drinking no wine) after an hour's stay Sir W. Batten
and another, and he drinking, we home by coach, and so to my office and
set down my Journall, and then home to supper and to bed, my washing
being in a good condition over. I did give Dr. Williams 20s. tonight,
but it was after he had answered me well to what I had to ask him about
this business, and it was only what I had long ago in my petty bag book
allotted for him besides the bill of near L4 which I paid him a good
while since by my brother Tom for physique for my wife, without any
consideration to this business that he is to do for me, as God shall
save me. Among the rest, talking of the Emperor at table to-day one
young gentleman, a pretty man, and it seems a Parliament man, did say
that he was a sot;

     [Leopold I, the Holy Roman Emperor, was born June 9th, 1640.  He
     became King of Hungary in 1655, and King of Bohemia in 1658, in
     which year he received the imperial crown.  The Princes of the
     German Empire watched for some time the progress of his struggle
     with the Turks with indifference, but in 1663 they were induced to
     grant aid to Leopold after he had made a personal appeal to them in
     the diet at Ratisbon.]

for he minded nothing of the Government, but was led by the Jesuites.
Several at table took him up, some for saying that he was a sot in being
led by the Jesuites, [who] are the best counsel he can take. Another
commander, a Scott[ish] Collonell, who I believe had several under him,
that he was a man that had thus long kept out the Turke till now,
and did many other great things, and lastly Mr. Progers, one of our
courtiers, who told him that it was not a thing to be said of any
Soveraigne Prince, be his weaknesses what they will, to be called a sot,
which methinks was very prettily said.

27th. Up, and my uncle Thomas and his scrivener bringing me a bond and
affidavit to my mind, I paid him his L20 for his daughter's legacy,
and L5 more for a Quarter's annuity, in the manner expressed in each
acquittance, to which I must be referred on any future occasion, and to
the bond and affidavit. Thence to the office and there sat till noon,
and then home to dinner, and after dinner (it being a foul house to-day
among my maids, making up their clothes) abroad with my Will with me
by coach to Dr, Williams, and with him to the Six Clerks's office, and
there, by advice of his acquaintance, I find that my case, through my
neglect and the neglect of my lawyers, is come to be very bad, so as
that it will be very hard to get my bill retayned again. However, I got
him to sign and swear an affidavit that there was treaties between T.
Trice and me with as much advantage as I could for me, but I will say
that for him he was most exact as ever I saw man in my life, word by
word what it was that he swore to, and though, God forgive me, I could
have been almost naturally willing to have let him ignorantly have sworn
to something that was not of itself very certain, either or no, yet out
of his own conscience and care he altered the words himself so as
to make them very safe for him to swear. This I carrying to my clerk
Wilkinson, and telling him how I heard matters to stand, he, like a
conceited fellow, made nothing of it but advised me to offer Trice's
clerks the cost of the dismission, viz., 46s. 8d., which I did, but they
would not take it without his client. Immediately thereupon we parted,
and met T. Trice coming into the room, and he came to me and served me
with a subpoena for these very costs, so I paid it him, but Lord! to see
his resolution, and indeed discretion, in the wording of his receipt,
he would have it most express to my greatest disadvantage that could be,
yet so as I could not deny to give it him. That being paid, my clerke,
and then his began to ask why we could not think, being friends, of
referring it, or stating it, first ourselves, and then put it to some
good lawyer to judge in it. From one word to more we were resolved to
try, and to that end to step to the Pope's Head Taverne, and there
he and his Clerke and Attorney and I and my Clerke, and sent for Mr.
Smallwood, and by and by comes Mr. Clerke, my Solicitor, and after I had
privately discoursed with my men and seen how doubtfully they talked,
and what future certain charge and trouble it would be, with a doubtful
victory, I resolved to condescend very low, and after some talke all
together Trice and I retired, and he came to L150 the lowest, and I bid
him L80. So broke off and then went to our company, and they putting us
to a second private discourse, at last I was contented to give him L100,
he to spend 40s. of it among this good company that was with us. So we
went to our company, both seeming well pleased that we were come to an
end, and indeed I am in the respects above said, though it be a great
sum for us to part with. I am to pay him by giving him leave to buy
about L40 worth of Piggott's land and to strike off so much of Piggott's
debt, and the other to give him bond to pay him in 12 months after
without interest, only giving him a power to buy more land of Piggott
and paying him that way as he did for the other, which I am well enough
contented with, or at least to take the land at that price and give him
the money. This last I did not tell him, but I shall order it so. Having
agreed upon to-morrow come se'nnight for the spending of the 40s. at Mr.
Rawlinson's, we parted, and I set T. Trice down in Paul's Churchyard
and I by coach home and to my office, and there set down this day's
passages, and so home to supper and to bed. Mr. Coventry tells me to-day
that the Queen had a very good night last night; but yet it is strange
that still she raves and talks of little more than of her having of
children, and fancys now that she hath three children, and that the
girle is very like the King. And this morning about five o'clock waked
(the physician feeling her pulse, thinking to be better able to judge,
she being still and asleep, waked her) and the first word she said was,
"How do the children?"

28th. Up and at my office all the morning, and at noon Mr. Creed came to
me and dined with me, and after dinner Murford came to me and he and I
discoursed wholly upon his breach of contract with us. After that Mr.
Creed and I abroad, I doing several errands, and with him at last to the
great coffee-house, and there after some common discourse we parted and
I home, paying what I owed at the Mitre in my way, and at home Sympson
the joyner coming he set up my press for my cloaks and other small
things, and so to my office a little, and to supper, and to bed. This
morning Mr. Blackburne came to me, and telling me what complaints Will
made of the usage he had from my wife and other discouragements, and,
I seeing him, instead of advising, rather favouring his kinsman, I told
him freely my mind, but friendlily, and so we have concluded to have him
have a lodging elsewhere, and that I will spare him L15 of his salary,
and if I do not need to keep another L20.

29th. Up, it being my Lord Mayor's day, Sir Anthony Bateman. This
morning was brought home my new velvet cloake, that is, lined with
velvet, a good cloth the outside, the first that ever I had in my life,
and I pray God it may not be too soon now that I begin to wear it. I had
it this day brought, thinking to have worn it to dinner, but I thought
it would be better to go without it because of the crowde, and so I did
not wear it. We met a little at the office, and then home again and got
me ready to go forth, my wife being gone forth by my consent before to
see her father and mother, and taken her cooke mayde and little girle
to Westminster with her for them to see their friends. This morning in
dressing myself and wanting a band,

     [The band succeeded the ruff as the ordinary civil costume.  The
     lawyers, who now retain bands, and the clergy, who have only lately
     left them off, formerly wore ruffs.]

I found all my bands that were newly made clean so ill smoothed that
I crumpled them, and flung them all on the ground, and was angry with
Jane, which made the poor girle mighty sad, so that I were troubled for
it afterwards. At noon I went forth, and by coach to Guild Hall (by the
way calling at Mr. Rawlinson's), and there was admitted, and meeting
with Mr. Proby (Sir R. Ford's son), and Lieutenant-Colonel Baron, a City
commander, we went up and down to see the tables; where under every salt
there was a bill of fare, and at the end of the table the persons
proper for the table. Many were the tables, but none in the Hall but the
Mayor's and the Lords of the Privy Council that had napkins

     [As the practice of eating with forks gradually was introduced from
     Italy into England, napkins were not so generally used, but
     considered more as an ornament than a necessary.

                    "The laudable use of forks,
          Brought into custom here, as they are in Italy,
          To the sparing of napkins."

                         Ben Jonson, The Devil is an Ass, act v., sc.  3.

     The guests probably brought their own knife and fork with them in a
     case.--M.B.]

or knives, which was very strange. We went into the Buttry, and there
stayed and talked, and then into the Hall again: and there wine was
offered and they drunk, I only drinking some hypocras, which do not
break my vowe, it being, to the best of my present judgement, only a
mixed compound drink, and not any wine.

     [A drink, composed usually of red wine, but sometimes of white, with
     the addition of sugar and spices.  Sir Walter Scott ("Quarterly
     Review," vol.  xxxiii.) says, after quoting this passage of Pepys,
     "Assuredly his pieces of bacchanalian casuistry can only be matched
     by that of Fielding's chaplain of Newgate, who preferred punch to
     wine, because the former was a liquor nowhere spoken against in
     Scripture."]

If I am mistaken, God forgive me! but I hope and do think I am not. By
and by met with Creed; and we, with the others, went within the several
Courts, and there saw the tables prepared for the Ladies and Judges and
Bishopps: all great sign of a great dinner to come. By and by about one
o'clock, before the Lord Mayor came, come into the Hall, from the room
where they were first led into, the Lord Chancellor (Archbishopp before
him), with the Lords of the Council, and other Bishopps, and they to
dinner. Anon comes the Lord Mayor, who went up to the lords, and then
to the other tables to bid wellcome; and so all to dinner. I sat near
Proby, Baron, and Creed at the Merchant Strangers' table; where ten good
dishes to a messe, with plenty of wine of all sorts, of which I drunk
none; but it was very unpleasing that we had no napkins nor change of
trenchers, and drunk out of earthen pitchers and wooden dishes.--[The
City plate was probably melted during the Civil War.-M.B.]--It happened
that after the lords had half dined, came the French Embassador, up to
the lords' table, where he was to have sat; but finding the table set,
he would not sit down nor dine with the Lord Mayor, who was not
yet come, nor have a table to himself, which was offered; but in a
discontent went away again. After I had dined, I and Creed rose and
went up and down the house, and up to the lady's room, and there stayed
gazing upon them. But though there were many and fine, both young and
old, yet I could not discern one handsome face there; which was very
strange, nor did I find the lady that young Dawes married so pretty as I
took her for, I having here an opportunity of looking much upon her
very near. I expected musique, but there was none but only trumpets and
drums, which displeased me. The dinner, it seems, is made by the Mayor
and two Sheriffs for the time being, the Lord Mayor paying one half, and
they the other. And the whole, Proby says, is reckoned to come to about
7 or L800 at most. Being wearied with looking upon a company of ugly
women, Creed and I went away, and took coach and through Cheapside, and
there saw the pageants, which were very silly, and thence to the Temple,
where meeting Greatorex, he and we to Hercules Pillars, there to show me
the manner of his going about of draining of fenns, which I desired much
to know, but it did not appear very satisfactory to me, as he discoursed
it, and I doubt he will faile in it. Thence I by coach home, and there
found my wife come home, and by and by came my brother Tom, with whom
I was very angry for not sending me a bill with my things, so as that I
think never to have more work done by him if ever he serves me so again,
and so I told him. The consideration of laying out L32 12s. this very
month in his very work troubles me also, and one thing more, that is to
say, that Will having been at home all the day, I doubt is the occasion
that Jane has spoken to her mistress tonight that she sees she cannot
please us and will look out to provide herself elsewhere, which do
trouble both of us, and we wonder also at her, but yet when the rogue is
gone I do not fear but the wench will do well. To the office a little,
to set down my Journall, and so home late to supper and to bed. The
Queen mends apace, they say; but yet talks idle still.

30th. Lay long in bed with my wife, and then up and a while at my
office, and so to the Change, and so [home] again, and there I found my
wife in a great passion with her mayds. I upstairs to set some things in
order in our chamber and wardrobe, and so to dinner upon a good dish of
stewed beef, then up again about my business. Then by coach with my wife
to the New Exchange, and there bought and paid for several things, and
then back, calling at my periwigg-makers, and there showed my wife
the periwigg made for me, and she likes it very well, and so to my
brother's, and to buy a pair of boddice for her, and so home, and to
my office late, and then home to my wife, purposing to go on to a new
lesson in arithmetique with her. So to supper and to bed. The Queen
mends apace, but her head still light. My mind very heavy thinking of my
great layings out lately, and what they must still be for clothes, but
I hope it is in order to getting of something the more by it, for I
perceive how I have hitherto suffered for lack of going as becomes my
place. After a little discourse with my wife upon arithmetique, to bed.

31st. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
home to dinner, where Creed came and dined with me, and after dinner he
and I upstairs, and I showed him my velvet cloake and other things of
clothes, that I have lately bought, which he likes very well, and I took
his opinion as to some things of clothes, which I purpose to wear, being
resolved to go a little handsomer than I have hitherto. Thence to the
office; where busy till night, and then to prepare my monthly account,
about which I staid till 10 or 11 o'clock at night, and to my great
sorrow find myself L43 worse than I was the last month, which was
then L760, and now it is but L717. But it hath chiefly arisen from my
layings-out in clothes for myself and wife; viz., for her about L12, and
for myself L55, or thereabouts; having made myself a velvet cloake, two
new cloth suits, black, plain both; a new shagg

     [Shag was a stuff similar to plush.  In 1703 a youth who was missing
     is described in an advertisement as wearing "red shag breeches,
     striped with black stripes." (Planche's "Cyclopxdia of Costume ").]

gowne, trimmed with gold buttons and twist, with a new hat, and, silk
tops for my legs, and many other things, being resolved henceforward to
go like myself. And also two perriwiggs, one whereof costs me L3, and
the other 40s.--I have worn neither yet, but will begin next week, God
willing. So that I hope I shall not need now to lay out more money a
great while, I having laid out in clothes for myself and wife, and for
her closett and other things without, these two months, this and the
last, besides household expenses of victuals, &c., above L110. But
I hope I shall with more comfort labour to get more, and with better
successe than when, for want of clothes, I was forced to sneake like a
beggar. Having done this I went home, and after supper to bed, my mind
being eased in knowing my condition, though troubled to think that I
have been forced to spend so much.

Thus I end this month worth L717, or thereabouts, with a good deal of
good goods more than I had, and a great deal of new and good clothes.
My greatest trouble and my wife's is our family, mighty out of order by
this fellow Will's corrupting the mayds by his idle talke and carriage,
which we are going to remove by hastening him out of the house, which
his uncle Blackburne is upon doing, and I am to give him L20 per annum
toward his maintenance. The Queene continues lightheaded, but in hopes
to recover. The plague is much in Amsterdam, and we in fears of it here,
which God defend.

     [Defend is used in the sense of forbid.  It is a Gallicism from the
     French "defendre."]

The Turke goes on mightily in the Emperor's dominions, and the Princes
cannot agree among themselves how to go against him. Myself in pretty
good health now, after being ill this month for a week together, but
cannot yet come to.... well, being so costive, but for this month almost
I have not had a good natural stool, but to this hour am forced to take
physic every night, which brings me neither but one stool, and that in
the morning as soon as I am up, all the rest of the day very costive. My
father has been very ill in the country, but I hope better again now. I
am lately come to a conclusion with Tom Trice to pay him L100, which is
a great deale of money, but I hope it will save a great deale more. But
thus everything lessens, which I have and am like to have, and therefore
I must look about me to get something more than just my salary, or else
I may resolve to live well and die a beggar.




NOVEMBER 1663

November 1st (Lord's day). This morning my brother's man brought me a
new black baize waistecoate, faced with silke, which I put on from this
day, laying by half-shirts for this winter. He brought me also my new
gowne of purple shagg, trimmed with gold, very handsome; he also brought
me as a gift from my brother, a velvet hat, very fine to ride in, and
the fashion, which pleases me very well, to which end, I believe, he
sent it me, for he knows I had lately been angry with him. Up and to
church with my wife, and at noon dined at home alone, a good calves
head boiled and dumplings, an excellent dinner methought it was. Then
to church again, whither Sir W. Pen came, the first time he has been at
church these several months, he having been sicke all the while. Home
and to my office, where I taught my wife some part of subtraction,
and then fell myself to set some papers of my last night's accounts
in order, and so to supper home, and after supper another bout at
arithmetique with my wife, and then to my office again and made an end
of my papers, and so home to prayers, and then to read my vowes, and to
bed.

2d. Up, and by coach to White Hall, and there in the long Matted Gallery
I find Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W. Batten--and by and by
comes the King to walk there with three or four with him; and soon as
he saw us, says he, "Here is the Navy Office," and there walked twenty
turns the length of the gallery, talking, methought, but ordinary talke.
By and by came the Duke, and he walked, and at last they went into the
Duke's lodgings. The King staid so long that we could not discourse with
the Duke, and so we parted. I heard the Duke say that he was going to
wear a perriwigg; and they say the King also will. I never till this
day observed that the King is mighty gray. Thence, meeting with Creed,
walked with him to Westminster Hall, and thence by coach took up Mrs.
Hunt, and carried her towards my house, and we light at the 'Change, and
sent her to my house, Creed and I to the Coffeehouse, and then to the
'Change, and so home, and carried a barrel of oysters with us, and so
to dinner, and after a good dinner left Mrs. Hunt and my wife making
marmalett of quinces, and Creed and I to the perriwigg makers, but it
being dark concluded of nothing, and so Creed went away, and I with Sir
W. Pen, who spied me in the street, in his coach home. There found them
busy still, and I up to my vyall. Anon, the comfiture being well done,
my wife and I took Mrs. Hunt at almost 9 at night by coach and carried
Mrs. Hunt home, and did give her a box of sugar and a haunch of venison
given me by my Lady the other day. We did not 'light, but saw her
within doors, and straight home, where after supper there happening some
discourse where my wife thought she had taken Jane in a lie, she told
me of it mighty triumphantly, but I, not seeing reason to conclude it a
lie, was vexed, and my wife and I to very high words, wherein I up to
my chamber, and she by and by followed me up, and to very bad words from
her to me, calling me perfidious and man of no conscience, whatever I
pretend to, and I know not what, which troubled me mightily, and though
I would allow something to her passion, yet I see again and again that
she spoke but somewhat of what she had in her heart. But I tempered
myself very well, so as that though we went to bed with discontent she
yielded to me and began to be fond, so that being willing myself to
peace, we did before we sleep become very good friends, it being past 12
o'clock, and so with good hearts and joy to rest.

3rd. Up and to the office, where busy all the morning, and at noon to
the Coffee-house, and there heard a long and most passionate discourse
between two doctors of physique, of which one was Dr. Allen, whom I knew
at Cambridge, and a couple of apothecarys; these maintaining chymistry
against them Galenicall physique; and the truth is, one of the
apothecarys whom they charged most, did speak very prettily, that is,
his language and sense good, though perhaps he might not be so knowing
a physician as to offer to contest with them. At last they came to some
cooler terms, and broke up. I home, and there Mr. Moore coming by my
appointment dined with me, and after dinner came Mr. Goldsborough, and
we discoursed about the business of his mother, but could come to no
agreement in it but parted dissatisfied. By and by comes Chapman, the
periwigg-maker, and upon my liking it, without more ado I went up, and
there he cut off my haire, which went a little to my heart at present to
part with it; but, it being over, and my periwigg on, I paid him L3 for
it; and away went he with my owne haire to make up another of, and I
by and by, after I had caused all my mayds to look upon it; and they
conclude it do become me; though Jane was mightily troubled for
my parting of my own haire, and so was Besse, I went abroad to the
Coffeehouse, and coming back went to Sir W. Pen and there sat with him
and Captain Cocke till late at night, Cocke talking of some of the
Roman history very well, he having a good memory. Sir W. Pen observed
mightily, and discoursed much upon my cutting off my haire, as he do of
every thing that concerns me, but it is over, and so I perceive after a
day or two it will be no great matter.

4th. Up and to my office, shewing myself to Sir W. Batten, and Sir J.
Minnes, and no great matter made of my periwigg, as I was afeard there
would be. Among other things there came to me Shales of Portsmouth, by
my order, and I began to discourse with him about the arrears of stores
belonging to the Victualling Office there, and by his discourse I am in
some hopes that if I can get a grant from the King of such a part of all
I discover I may chance to find a way to get something by the by, which
do greatly please me the very thoughts of. Home to dinner, and very
pleasant with my wife, who is this day also herself making of marmalett
of quince, which she now do very well herself. I left her at it and by
coach I to the New Exchange and several places to buy and bring home
things, among others a case I bought of the trunk maker's for my
periwigg, and so home and to my office late, and among other things
wrote a letter to Will's uncle to hasten his removal from me, and so
home to supper and to bed. This morning Captain Cocke did give me a good
account of the Guinny trade. The Queene is in a great way to recovery.
This noon came John Angier to me in a pickle, I was sad to see him,
desiring my good word for him to go a trooper to Tangier, but I
did schoole him and sent him away with good advice, but no present
encouragement. Presently after I had a letter from his poor father
at Cambridge, who is broke, it seems, and desires me to get him a
protection, or a place of employment; but, poor man, I doubt I can helpe
him, but will endeavour it.

5th. Lay long in bed, then up, called by Captain Cocke about business of
a contract of his for some Tarre, and so to the office, and then to
Sir W. Pen and there talked, and he being gone came Sir W. Warren and
discoursed about our business with Field, and at noon by agreement to
the Miter to dinner upon T. Trice's 40s., to be spent upon our late
agreement. Here was a very poor dinner and great company. All our
lawyers on both sides, and several friends of his and some of mine
brought by him, viz., Mr. Moore, uncle Wight, Dr. Williams, and my cozen
Angier, that lives here in town, who t Captain John Shales after
dinner carried me aside and showed me a letter from his poor brother at
Cambridge to me of the same contents with that yesterday to me desiring
help from me. Here I was among a sorry company without any content or
pleasure, and at the last the reckoning coming to above 40s. by 15s., he
would have me pay the 10s. and he would pay the 5s., which was so poor
that I was ashamed of it, and did it only to save contending with
him. There, after agreeing a day for him and I to meet and seal our
agreement, I parted and home, and at the office by agreement came Mr.
Shales, and there he and I discourse till late the business of his
helping me in the discovery of some arrears of provisions and stores
due to the stores at Portsmouth, out of which I may chance to get some
money, and save the King some too, and therefore I shall endeavour to do
the fellow some right in other things here to his advantage between Mr.
Gauden and him. He gone my wife and I to her arithmetique, in which she
pleases me well, and so to the office, there set down my Journall, and
so home to supper and to bed. A little troubled to see how my family is
out of order by Will's being there, and also to hear that Jane do not
please my wife as I expected and would have wished.

6th. This morning waking, my wife was mighty-earnest with me to persuade
me that she should prove with child since last night, which, if it be,
let it come, and welcome. Up to my office, whither Commissioner Pett
came, newly come out of the country, and he and I walked together in
the garden talking of business a great while, and I perceive that by our
countenancing of him he do begin to pluck up his head, and will do good
things I hope in the yard. Thence, he being gone, to my office and there
dispatched many people, and at noon to the 'Change to the coffee-house,
and among other things heard Sir John Cutler say, that of his owne
experience in time of thunder, so many barrels of beer as have a piece
of iron laid upon them will not be soured, and the others will. Thence
to the 'Change, and there discoursed with many people, and I hope
to settle again to my business and revive my report of following of
business, which by my being taken off for a while by sickness and,
laying out of money has slackened for a little while. Home, and there
found Mrs. Hunt, who dined very merry, good woman; with us. After dinner
came in Captain Grove, and he and I alone to talk of many things, and
among many others of the Fishery, in which he gives the such hopes that
being at this time full of projects how to get a little honestly, of
which some of them I trust in God will take, I resolved this afternoon
to go and consult my Lord Sandwich about it, and so, being to carry home
Mrs. Hunt, I took her and my wife by coach and set them at Axe Yard, and
I to my Lord's and thither sent for Creed and discoursed with him about
it, and he and I to White Hall, where Sir G. Carteret and my Lord met me
very fortunately, and wondered first to see me in my perruque, and I am
glad it is over, and then, Sir G. Carteret being gone, I took my Lord
aside, who do give me the best advice he can, and telling me how there
are some projectors, by name Sir Edward Ford, who would have the making
of farthings,

     [Sir Edward Ford, son of Sir William Ford of Harting, born at Up
     Park in 1605.  "After the Restoration he invented a mode of coining
     farthings.  Each piece was to differ minutely from another to
     prevent forgery.  He failed in procuring a patent for these in
     England, but obtained one for Ireland.  He died in Ireland before he
     could carry his design into execution, on September 3rd, 1670"
     ("Dictionary of National Biography ").]

and out of that give so much to the King for the maintenance of the
Fishery; but my Lord do not like that, but would have it go as they
offered the last year, and so upon my desire he promises me when it is
seasonable to bring me into the commission with others, if any of them
take, and I perceive he and Mr. Coventry are resolved to follow it
hard. Thence, after walking a good while in the Long gallery, home to my
Lord's lodging, my Lord telling me how my father did desire him to speak
to me about my giving of my sister something, which do vex me to see
that he should trouble my Lord in it, but however it is a good occasion
for me to tell my Lord my condition, and so I was glad of it. After that
we begun to talk of the Court, and he tells me how Mr. Edward Montagu
begins to show respect to him again after his endeavouring to bespatter
him all was, possible; but he is resolved never to admit him into his
friendship again. He tells me how he and Sir H. Bennet, the Duke of
Buckingham and his Duchesse, was of a committee with somebody else for
the getting of Mrs. Stewart for the King; but that she proves a cunning
slut, and is advised at Somerset House by the Queene-Mother, and by her
mother, and so all the plot is spoiled and the whole committee broke.
Mr. Montagu and the Duke of Buckingham fallen a-pieces, the Duchesse
going to a nunnery; and so Montagu begins to enter friendship with my
Lord, and to attend the Chancellor whom he had deserted. My Lord tells
me that Mr. Montagu, among other things, did endeavour to represent
him to the Chancellor's sons as one that did desert their father in the
business of my Lord of Bristoll; which is most false, being the only man
that hath several times dined with him when no soul hath come to him,
and went with him that very day home when the Earl impeached him in the
Parliament House, and hath refused ever to pay a visit to my Lord
of Bristoll, not so much as in return to a visit of his. So that the
Chancellor and my Lord are well known and trusted one by another. But
yet my Lord blames the Chancellor for desiring to have it put off to the
next Session of Parliament, contrary to my Lord Treasurer's advice, to
whom he swore he would not do it: and, perhaps, my Lord Chancellor, for
aught I see by my Lord's discourse, may suffer by it when the Parliament
comes to sit. My Lord tells me that he observes the Duke of York do
follow and understand business very well, and is mightily improved
thereby. Here Mr. Pagett coming in I left my Lord and him, and thence
I called my wife and her maid Jane and by coach home and to my office,
where late writing some things against tomorrow, and so home to supper
and to bed. This morning Mr. Blackburne came to me to let me know that
he had got a lodging very commodious for his kinsman, and so he is ready
at my pleasure to go when I would bid him, and so I told him that I
would in a day or two send to speak with him and he and I would talk and
advise Will what to do, of which I am very glad.

7th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and Sir W. Pen
and I had a word or two, where by opposing him in not being willing to
excuse a mulct put upon the purser of the James, absent from duty, he
says, by his business and order, he was mighty angry, and went out of
the office like an asse discontented: At which I am never a whit sorry;
I would not have [him] think that I dare not oppose him, where I see
reason and cause for it. Home to dinner, and then by coach abroad about
several businesses to several places, among others to Westminster Hall,
where, seeing Howlett's daughter going out of the other end of the Hall,
I followed her if I would to have offered talk to her and dallied with
her a little, but I could not overtake her. Then calling at Unthank's
for something of my wife's not done, a pretty little gentlewoman, a
lodger there, came out to tell me that it was not yet done, which though
it vexed me yet I took opportunity of taking her by the hand with the
boot, and so found matter to talk a little the longer to her, but I
was ready to laugh at myself to see how my anger would not operate,
my disappointment coming to me by such a messenger. Thence to Doctors'
Commons and there consulted Dr. Turner about some differences we have
with the officers of the East India ships about goods brought by them
without paying freight, which we demand of them. So home to my office,
and there late writing letters, and so home to supper and to bed, having
got a scurvy cold by lying cold in my head the last night. This day
Captain Taylor brought me a piece of plate, a little small state dish,
he expecting that I should get him some allowance for demorage

     ["'Demurrage' is the compensation due to a shipowner from a
     freighter for unduly decaying his vessel in port beyond the time
     specified in the charter-party or bill of lading.  It is in fact an
     extended freight.  A ship, unjustly detained as a prize is entitled
     to 'demurrage.'"--Smyth's Sailor's Word-Book, 1867.]

of his ship "William," kept long at Tangier, which I shall and may
justly do.

8th (Lord's day). Up, and it being late, to church without my wife, and
there I saw Pembleton come into the church and bring his wife with
him, a good comely plain woman, and by and by my wife came after me
all alone, which I was a little vexed at. I found that my coming in
a perriwigg did not prove so strange to the world as I was afear'd it
would, for I thought that all the church would presently have cast
their eyes all upon me, but I found no such thing. Here an ordinary lazy
sermon of Mr. Mill's, and then home to dinner, and there Tom came and
dined with us; and after dinner to talk about a new black cloth suit
that I have a making, and so at church time to church again, where the
Scott preached, and I slept most of the time. Thence home, and I
spent most of the evening upon Fuller's "Church History" and Barckly's
"Argeny," and so after supper to prayers and to bed, a little fearing
my pain coming back again, myself continuing as costive as ever, and my
physic ended, but I had sent a porter to-day for more and it was brought
me before I went to bed, and so with pretty good content to bed.

9th. Up and found myself very well, and so by coach to White Hall and
there met all my fellow officers, and so to the Duke, where, when we
came into his closett, he told us that Mr. Pepys was so altered with his
new perriwigg that he did not know him. So to our discourse, and among
and above other things we were taken up in talking upon Sir J. Lawson's
coming home, he being come to Portsmouth; and Captain Berkely is come to
towne with a letter from the Duana of Algier to the King, wherein they
do demand again the searching of our ships and taking out of strangers,
and their goods; and that what English ships are taken without the
Duke's pass they will detain (though it be flat contrary to the words of
the peace) as prizes, till they do hear from our King, which they advise
him may be speedy. And this they did the very next day after they had
received with great joy the Grand Seignor's confirmation of the Peace
from Constantinople by Captain Berkely; so that there is no command nor
certainty to be had of these people. The King is resolved to send his
will by a fleete of ships; and it is thought best and speediest to send
these very ships that are now come home, five sail of good ships, back
again after cleaning, victualling, and paying them. But it is a pleasant
thing to think how their Basha, Shavan Aga, did tear his hair to see the
soldiers order things thus; for (just like his late predecessor) when
they see the evil of war with England, then for certain they complain to
the Grand Seignor of him, and cut his head off: this he is sure of,
and knows as certain. Thence to Westminster Hall, where I met with Mr.
Pierce, chyrurgeon; and among other things he asked me seriously whether
I knew anything of my Lord's being out of favour with the King; and told
me, that for certain the King do take mighty notice of my Lord's living
obscurely in a corner not like himself, and becoming the honour that
he is come to. I was sorry to hear, and the truth is, from my Lord's
discourse among his people (which I am told) of the uncertainty of
princes' favours, and his melancholy keeping from Court, I am doubtful
of some such thing; but I seemed wholly strange to him in it, but
will make my use of it. He told me also how loose the Court is, nobody
looking after business, but every man his lust and gain; and how
the King is now become besotted upon Mrs. Stewart, that he gets into
corners, and will be with her half an houre together kissing her to the
observation of all the world; and she now stays by herself and expects
it, as my Lady Castlemaine did use to do; to whom the King, he says,
is still kind, so as now and then he goes to have a chat with her as
he believes; but with no such fondness as he used to do. But yet it is
thought that this new wench is so subtle, that she lets him not do any
thing than is safe to her, but yet his doting is so great that, Pierce
tells me, it is verily thought if the Queene had died, he would have
married her. The Duke of Monmouth is to have part of the Cockpitt new
built for lodgings for him, and they say to be made Captain of the
Guards in the room of my Lord Gerard. Having thus talked with him, there
comes into the Hall Creed and Ned Pickering, and after a turne or two
with them, it being noon, I walked with them two to the King's Head
ordinary, and there we dined; little discourse but what was common, only
that the Duke of Yorke is a very, desperate huntsman, but I was ashamed
of Pickering, who could not forbear having up my Lord Sandwich now and
then in the most paltry matters abominable. Thence I took leave of them,
and so having taken up something at my wife's tailor's, I home by coach
and there to my office, whither Shales came and I had much discourse
with him about the business of the victualling, and thence in
the evening to the Coffee-house, and there sat till by and by, by
appointment Will brought me word that his uncle Blackburne was ready to
speak with me. So I went down to him, and he and I to a taverne hard by,
and there I begun to speak to Will friendlily, advising him how to carry
himself now he is going from under my roof, without any reflections upon
the occasion from whence his removal arose. This his uncle seconded, and
after laying down to him his duty to me, and what I expect of him, in
a discourse of about a quarter of an houre or more, we agreed upon his
going this week, towards the latter (end) of the week, and so dismissed
him, and Mr. Blackburne and I fell to talk of many things, wherein I did
speak so freely to him in many things agreeing with his sense that
he was very open to me: first, in that of religion, he makes it great
matter of prudence for the King and Council to suffer liberty of
conscience; and imputes the losse of Hungary to the Turke from the
Emperor's denying them this liberty of their religion. He says that many
pious ministers of the word of God, some thousands of them, do now beg
their bread: and told me how highly the present clergy carry themselves
every where, so as that they are hated and laughed at by everybody;
among other things, for their excommunications, which they send upon the
least occasions almost that can be. And I am convinced in my judgement,
not only from his discourse, but my thoughts in general, that the
present clergy will never heartily go down with the generality of the
commons of England; they have been so used to liberty and freedom, and
they are so acquainted with the pride and debauchery of the present
clergy. He did give me many stories of the affronts which the clergy
receive in all places of England from the gentry and ordinary persons of
the parish. He do tell me what the City thinks of General Monk, as of
a most perfidious man that hath betrayed every body, and the King also;
who, as he thinks, and his party, and so I have heard other good friends
of the King say, it might have been better for the King to have had his
hands a little bound for the present, than be forced to bring such a
crew of poor people about him, and be liable to satisfy the demands of
every one of them. He told me that to his knowledge (being present at
every meeting at the Treaty at the Isle of Wight), that the old King
did confess himself overruled and convinced in his judgement against the
Bishopps, and would have suffered and did agree to exclude the service
out of the churches, nay his own chappell; and that he did always say,
that this he did not by force, for that he would never abate one inch
by any vyolence; but what he did was out of his reason and judgement. He
tells me that the King by name, with all his dignities, is prayed for by
them that they call Fanatiques, as heartily and powerfully as in any of
the other churches that are thought better: and that, let the King think
what he will, it is them that must helpe him in the day of warr. For as
they are the most, so generally they are the most substantial sort of
people, and the soberest; and did desire me to observe it to my Lord
Sandwich, among other things, that of all the old army now you cannot
see a man begging about the street; but what? You shall have this
captain turned a shoemaker; the lieutenant, a baker; this a brewer; that
a haberdasher; this common soldier, a porter; and every man in his apron
and frock, &c., as if they never had done anything else: whereas
the others go with their belts and swords, swearing and cursing, and
stealing; running into people's houses, by force oftentimes, to carry
away something; and this is the difference between the temper of one
and the other; and concludes (and I think with some reason,) that the
spirits of the old parliament soldiers are so quiett and contented with
God's providences, that the King is safer from any evil meant him by
them one thousand times more than from his own discontented Cavalier.
And then to the publique management of business: it is done, as he
observes, so loosely and so carelessly, that the kingdom can never be
happy with it, every man looking after himself, and his owne lust and
luxury; among other things he instanced in the business of money, he do
believe that half of what money the Parliament gives the King is not so
much as gathered. And to the purpose he told me how the Bellamys (who
had some of the Northern counties assigned them for their debt for the
petty warrant victualling) have often complained to him that they cannot
get it collected, for that nobody minds, or, if they do, they won't pay
it in. Whereas (which is a very remarkable thing,) he hath been told
by some of the Treasurers at Warr here of late, to whom the most of
the L120,000 monthly was paid, that for most months the payments were
gathered so duly, that they seldom had so much or more than 40s., or the
like, short in the whole collection; whereas now the very Commissioners
for Assessments and other publique payments are such persons, and those
that they choose in the country so like themselves, that from top to
bottom there is not a man carefull of any thing, or if he be, he is not
solvent; that what between the beggar and the knave, the King is abused
the best part of all his revenue. From thence we began to talk of the
Navy, and particularly of Sir W. Pen, of whose rise to be a general I
had a mind to be informed. He told me he was always a conceited man, and
one that would put the best side outward, but that it was his pretence
of sanctity that brought him into play. Lawson, and Portman, and the
Fifth-monarchy men, among whom he was a great brother, importuned that
he might be general; and it was pleasant to see how Blackburne himself
did act it, how when the Commissioners of the Admiralty would enquire
of the captains and admirals of such and such men, how they would with
a sigh and casting up the eyes say, "Such a man fears the Lord," or, "I
hope such a man hath the Spirit of God," and such things as that. But he
tells me that there was a cruel articling against Pen after one fight,
for cowardice, in putting himself within a coyle of cables, of which he
had much ado to acquit himself: and by great friends did it, not without
remains of guilt, but that his brethren had a mind to pass it by, and
Sir H. Vane did advise him to search his heart, and see whether this
fault or a greater sin was not the occasion of this so great tryall.
And he tells me, that what Pen gives out about Cromwell's sending and
entreating him to go to Jamaica, is very false; he knows the contrary:
besides, the Protector never was a man that needed to send for any man,
specially such a one as he, twice. He tells me that the business of
Jamaica did miscarry absolutely by his pride, and that when he was in
the Tower he would cry like a child. This he says of his own personal
knowledge, and lastly tells me that just upon the turne, when Monk was
come from the North to the City, and did begin to think of bringing in
the King, Pen was then turned Quaker. This he is most certain of. He
tells me that Lawson was never counted any thing but only a seaman,
and a stout man, but a false man, and that now he appears the greatest
hypocrite in the world. And Pen the same. He tells me that it is much
talked of, that the King intends to legitimate the Duke of Monmouth; and
that he has not, nor his friends of his persuasion, have any hopes of
getting their consciences at liberty but by God Almighty's turning of
the King's heart, which they expect, and are resolved to live and die in
quiett hopes of it; but never to repine, or act any thing more than by
prayers towards it. And that not only himself but all of them have, and
are willing at any time to take the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.
Thus far, and upon many more things, we had discoursed when some persons
in a room hard by began to sing in three parts very finely and to play
upon a flagilette so pleasantly that my discourse afterwards was but
troublesome, and I could not attend it, and so, anon, considering of a
sudden the time of night, we found it 11 o'clock, which I thought it
had not been by two hours, but we were close in talk, and so we rose,
he having drunk some wine and I some beer and sugar, and so by a
fair moonshine home and to bed, my wife troubled with tooth ache. Mr.
Blackburne observed further to me, some certain notice that he had of
the present plot so much talked of; that he was told by Mr. Rushworth,
how one Captain Oates, a great discoverer, did employ several to bring
and seduce others into a plot, and that one of his agents met with one
that would not listen to him, nor conceal what he had offered him, but
so detected the trapan. This, he says, is most true. He also, among
other instances how the King is served, did much insist upon the
cowardice and corruption of the King's guards and militia, which to be
sure will fail the King, as they have done already, when there will be
occasion for them.

10th. Up and to the office, where we sat till noon, and then to the
Exchange, where spoke with several and had my head casting about how to
get a penny and I hope I shall, and then hone, and there Mr. Moore by
appointment dined with me, and after dinner all the afternoon till night
drawing a bond and release against to-morrow for T. Trice, and I to come
to a conclusion in which I proceed with great fear and jealousy, knowing
him to be a rogue and one that I fear has at this time got too great
a hank--[hold]--over me by the neglect of my lawyers. But among other
things I am come to an end with Mr. Moore for a L32, a good while lying
in my hand of my Lord Privy Seal's which he for the odd L7 do give me a
bond to secure me against, and so I got L25 clear. Then, he being
gone, to the office and there late setting down yesterday's remarkable
discourses, and so home and to supper, late, and to bed. The Queene, I
hear, is now very well again, and that she hath bespoke herself a new
gowne.

11th. Up and to my office all the morning, and at noon to the
Coffee-house, where with Dr. Allen some good discourse about physique
and chymistry. And among other things, I telling him what Dribble the
German Doctor do offer of an instrument to sink ships; he tells me that
which is more strange, that something made of gold, which they call in
chymistry Aurum fulminans, a grain, I think he said, of it put into a
silver spoon and fired, will give a blow like a musquett, and strike
a hole through the spoon downward, without the least force upward; and
this he can make a cheaper experiment of, he says, with iron prepared.
Thence to the 'Change, and being put off a meeting with T. Trice, he not
coming, I home to dinner, and after dinner by coach with my wife to my
periwigg maker's for my second periwigg, but it is not done, and so,
calling at a place or two, home, and there to my office, and there
taught my wife a new lesson in arithmetique and so sent her home, and I
to several businesses; and so home to supper and to bed, being mightily
troubled with a cold in my stomach and head, with a great pain by
coughing.

12th. Lay long in bed, indeed too long, divers people and the officers
staying for me. My cozen Thomas Pepys the executor being below, and I
went to him and stated reckonings about our debt, for his payments of
money to my uncle Thomas heretofore by the Captain's orders. I did not
pay him but will soon do it if I can. To the office and there all the
morning, where Sir W. Pen, like a coxcomb, was so ready to cross me in a
motion I made unawares for the entering a man at Chatham into the works,
wherein I was vexed to see his spleene, but glad to understand it, and
that it was in no greater a matter, I being not at all concerned here.
To the 'Change and did several businesses there and so home with Mr.
Moore to dinner, my wife having dined, with Mr. Hollyard with her
to-day, he being come to advise her about her hollow sore place. After
dinner Mr. Moore and I discoursing of my Lord's negligence in attendance
at Court, and the discourse the world makes of it, with the too great
reason that I believe there is for it; I resolved and took coach to his
lodgings, thinking to speak with my Lord about it without more ado.
Here I met Mr. Howe, and he and I largely about it, and he very soberly
acquainted me how things are with my Lord, that my Lord do not do
anything like himself, but follows his folly, and spends his time either
at cards at Court with the ladies, when he is there at all, or else
at Chelsy with the slut to his great disgrace, and indeed I do see and
believe that my Lord do apprehend that he do grow less too at Court.
Anon my Lord do come in, and I begun to fall in discourse with him, but
my heart did misgive me that my Lord would not take it well, and then
found him not in a humour to talk, and so after a few ordinary words, my
Lord not talking in the manner as he uses to do; I took leave, and spent
some time with W. Howe again, and told him how I could not do what I had
so great a mind and resolution to do, but that I thought it would be as
well to do it in writing, which he approves of, and so I took leave of
him, and by coach home, my mind being full of it, and in pain concerning
it. So to my office busy very late, the nights running on faster than
one thinks, and so to supper and to bed.

13th. Up and to my office, busy all the morning with Commissioner
Pett; at noon I to the Exchange, and meeting Shales, he and I to the
Coffee-house and there talked of our victualling matters, which I fear
will come to little. However I will go on and carry it as far as I can.
So home to dinner where I expected Commissioner Pett, and had a good
dinner, but he came not. After dinner came my perriwigg-maker, and
brings me a second periwigg, made of my own haire, which comes to 21s.
6d. more than the worth of my own haire, so that they both come to L4
1s. 6d., which he sayth will serve me two years, but I fear it. He being
gone, I to my office, and put on my new shagg purple gowne, with gold
buttons and loop lace, I being a little fearful of taking cold and of
pain coming upon me. Here I staid making an end of a troublesome letter,
but to my advantage, against Sir W. Batten, giving Sir G. Carteret an
account of our late great contract with Sir W. Warren for masts, wherein
I am sure I did the King L600 service. That done home to my wife to take
a clyster, which I did, and it wrought very well and brought a great
deal of wind, which I perceive is all that do trouble me. After that,
about 9 or 10 o'clock, to supper in my wife's chamber, and then about 12
to bed.

14th. Up and to the office, where we sat, and after we had almost
done, Sir W. Batten desired to have the room cleared, and there he did
acquaint the board how he was obliged to answer to something lately said
which did reflect upon the Comptroller and him, and to that purpose
told how the bargain for Winter's timber did not prove so bad as I had
reported to the board it would. After he had done I cleared the matter
that I did not mention the business as a thing designed by me against
them, but was led to it by Sir J. Minnes, and that I said nothing but
what I was told by Mayers the surveyor as much as by Deane upon whom
they laid all the fault, which I must confess did and do still trouble
me, for they report him to be a fellow not fit to be employed, when in
my conscience he deserves better than any officer in the yard. I thought
it not convenient to vindicate him much now, but time will serve when I
will do it, and I am bound to do it. I offered to proceed to examine
and prove what I said if they please, but Mr. Coventry most discreetly
advised not, it being to no purpose, and that he did believe that what
I said did not by my manner of speaking it proceed from any design of
reproaching them, and so it ended. But my great trouble is for poor
Deane. At noon home and dined with my wife, and after dinner Will told
me if I pleased he was ready to remove his things, and so before my
wife I did give him good counsel, and that his going should not abate
my kindnesse for him, if he carried himself well, and so bid "God bless
him," and left him to remove his things, the poor lad weeping, but I am
apt to think matters will be the better both for him and us. So to the
office and there late busy. In the evening Mr. Moore came to tell me
that he had no opportunity of speaking his mind to my Lord yesterday,
and so I am resolved to write to him very suddenly. So after my business
done I home, I having staid till 12 o'clock at night almost, making an
end of a letter to Sir G. Carteret about the late contract for masts,
wherein I have done myself right, and no wrong to Sir W. Batten. This
night I think is the first that I have lain without ever a man in my
house besides myself, since I came to keep any. Will being this night
gone to his lodging, and by the way I hear to-day that my boy Waynman
has behaved himself so with Mr. Davis that they have got him put into
a Barbadoes ship to be sent away, and though he sends to me to get a
release for him I will not out of love to the boy, for I doubt to keep
him here were to bring him to the gallows.

15th (Lord's day). Lay very long in bed with my wife and then up and to
my office there to copy fair my letter to Sir G. Carteret, which I did,
and by and by most opportunely a footman of his came to me about other
business, and so I sent it him by his own servant. I wish good luck with
it. At noon home to dinner, my wife not being up, she lying to expect
Mr. Holyard the surgeon. So I dined by myself, and in the afternoon to
my office again, and there drew up a letter to my Lord, stating to him
what the world talks concerning him, and leaving it to him and myself to
be thought of by him as he pleases, but I have done but my duty in it.
I wait Mr. Moore's coming for his advice about sending it. So home
to supper to my wife, myself finding myself by cold got last night
beginning to have some pain, which grieves me much in my mind to see
to what a weakness I am come. This day being our Queene's birthday, the
guns of the Tower went all off; and in the evening the Lord Mayor sent
from church to church to order the constables to cause bonfires to be
made in every streete, which methinks is a poor thing to be forced to
be commanded. After a good supper with my wife, and hearing of the mayds
read in the Bible, we to prayers, and to bed.

16th. Up, and being ready then abroad by coach to White Hall, and there
with the Duke, where Mr. Coventry did a second time go to vindicate
himself against reports and prove by many testimonies that he brought,
that he did nothing but what had been done by the Lord Admiral's
secretaries heretofore, though he do not approve of it, nor since he
had any rule from the Duke hath he exceeded what he is there directed to
take, and the thing I think is very clear that they always did take and
that now he do take less than ever they did heretofore. Thence away, and
Sir G. Carteret did call me to him and discourse with me about my letter
yesterday, and did seem to take it unkindly that I should doubt of his
satisfaction in the bargain of masts, and did promise me that hereafter
whatever he do hear to my prejudice he would tell me before he would
believe it, and that this was only Sir W. Batten's report in this
business, which he says he did ever approve of, in which I know he lies.
Thence to my Lord's lodgings thinking to find Mr. Moore, in order to the
sending away my letter of reproof to my Lord, but I do not find him,
but contrary do find my Lord come to Court, which I am glad to hear and
should be more glad to hear that he do follow his business that I may
not have occasion to venture upon his good nature by such a provocation
as my letter will be to him. So by coach home, to the Exchange, where
I talked about several businesses with several people, and so home to
dinner with my wife, and then in the afternoon to my office, and there
late, and in the evening Mr. Hollyard came, and he and I about our great
work to look upon my wife's malady, which he did, and it seems her
great conflux of humours, heretofore that did use to swell there, did
in breaking leave a hollow which has since gone in further and further;
till now it is near three inches deep, but as God will have it do not
run into the bodyward, but keeps to the outside of the skin, and so he
must be forced to cut it open all along, and which my heart I doubt will
not serve for me to see done, and yet she will not have any body else
to see it done, no, not her own mayds, and so I must do it, poor wretch,
for her. To-morrow night he is to do it. He being gone, I to my office
again a little while, and so home to supper and to bed.

17th. Up, and while I am dressing myself, Mr. Deane of Woolwich came
to me, and I did tell him what had happened to him last Saturday in the
office, but did encourage him to make no matter of it, for that I did
not fear but he would in a little time be master of his enemies as much
as they think to master him, and so he did tell me many instances of the
abominable dealings of Mr. Pett of Woolwich towards him. So we broke
up, and I to the office, where we sat all the forenoon doing several
businesses, and at noon I to the 'Change where Mr. Moore came to me, and
by and by Tom Trice and my uncle Wight, and so we out to a taverne (the
New Exchange taverne over against the 'Change where I never was before,
and I found my old playfellow Ben Stanley master of it), and thence to a
scrivener to draw up a bond, and to another tavern (the King's Head) we
went, and calling on my cozen Angier at the India House there we eat a
bit of pork from a cookes together, and after dinner did seal the bond,
and I did take up the old bond of my uncle's to my aunt, and here T.
Trice before them do own all matters in difference between us is clear
as to this business, and that he will in six days give me it under the
hand of his attorney that there is no judgment against the bond that
may give me any future trouble, and also a copy of their letters of his
Administration to Godfrey, as much of it as concerns me to have. All
this being done towards night we broke up, and so I home and with Mr.
Moore to my office, and there I read to him the letter I have wrote
to send to my Lord to give him an account how the world, both city and
court, do talk of him and his living as he do there in such a poor and
bad house so much to his disgrace. Which Mr. Moore do conclude so well
drawn: that he would not have me by any means to neglect sending it,
assuring me in the best of his judgment that it cannot but endear me to
my Lord instead of what I fear of getting his offence, and did offer
to take the same words and send them as from, him with his hand to him,
which I am not unwilling should come (if they are at all fit to go) from
any body but myself, and so, he being gone, I did take a copy of it
to keep by me in shorthand, and sealed them up to send to-morrow by my
Will. So home, Mr. Hollyard being come to my wife, and there she being
in bed, he and I alone to look again upon her .... and there he do find
that, though it would not be much pain, yet she is so fearful, and the
thing will be somewhat painful in the tending, which I shall not be able
to look after, but must require a nurse and people about her; so that
upon second thoughts he believes that a fomentation will do as well,
and though it will be troublesome yet no pain, and what her mayd will be
able to do without knowing directly what it is for, but only that it may
be for the piles. For though it be nothing but what is fiery honest, yet
my wife is loth to give occasion of discourse concerning it. By this
my mind and my wife's is much eased, for I confess I should have been
troubled to have had my wife cut before my face, I could not have borne
to have seen it. I had great discourse with him about my disease. He
tells me again that I must eat in a morning some loosening gruel, and at
night roasted apples, that I must drink now and then ale with my wine,
and eat bread and butter and honey, and rye bread if I can endure it,
it being loosening. I must also take once a week a clyster of his last
prescription, only honey now and then instead of butter, which things I
am now resolved to apply myself to. He being gone I to my office again
to a little business, and then home to supper and to bed, being in, a
little pain by drinking of cold small beer to-day and being in a cold
room at the Taverne I believe.

18th. Up, and after being ready, and done a little business at the
office, I and Mr. Hater by water to Redriffe, and so walked to Deptford,
where I have not been a very great, while, and there paid off the
Milford in very good order, and all respect showed me in the office as
much as there used to be to any of the rest or the whole board. That
done at noon I took Captain Terne, and there coming in by chance Captain
Berkeley, him also to dinner with me to the Globe. Captain Berkeley, who
was lately come from Algier, did give us a good account of the place,
and how the Basha there do live like a prisoner, being at the mercy
of the soldiers and officers, so that there is nothing but a great
confusion there. After dinner came Sir W. Batten, and I left him to pay
off another ship, and I walked home again reading of a little book
of new poems of Cowley's, given me by his brother. Abraham do lie, it
seems, very sicke, still, but like to recover. At my office till late,
and then came Mr. Hollyard so full of discourse and Latin that I think
he hath got a cupp, but I do not know; but full of talke he is in
defence of Calvin and Luther. He begun this night the fomentation to
my wife, and I hope it will do well with her. He gone, I to the office
again a little, and so to bed. This morning I sent Will with my great
letter of reproof to my Lord Sandwich, who did give it into his owne
hand. I pray God give a blessing to it, but confess I am afeard what
the consequence may be to me of good or bad, which is according to the
ingenuity that he do receive it with. However, I am satisfied that it
will do him good, and that he needs it:

     MY LORD,

     I do verily hope that neither the manner nor matter of this advice
     will be condemned by your Lordship, when for my defence in the first
     I shall alledge my double attempt, since your return from
     Hinchinbroke, of doing it personally, in both of which your
     Lordship's occasions, no doubtfulnesse of mine, prevented me, and
     that being now fearful of a sudden summons to Portsmouth, for the
     discharge of some ships there, I judge it very unbecoming the duty
     which every bit of bread I eat tells me I owe to your Lordship to
     expose the safety of your honour to the uncertainty of my return.
     For the matter, my Lord, it is such as could I in any measure think
     safe to conceal from, or likely to be discovered to you by any other
     hand, I should not have dared so far to owne what from my heart I
     believe is false, as to make myself but the relater of other's
     discourse; but, sir, your Lordship's honour being such as I ought to
     value it to be, and finding both in city and court that discourses
     pass to your prejudice, too generally for mine or any man's
     controllings but your Lordship's, I shall, my Lord, without the
     least greatening or lessening the matter, do my duty in laying it
     shortly before you.

     People of all conditions, my Lord, raise matter of wonder from your
     Lordship's so little appearance at Court: some concluding thence
     their disfavour thereby, to which purpose I have had questions asked
     me, and endeavouring to put off such insinuations by asserting the
     contrary, they have replied, that your Lordship's living so beneath
     your quality, out of the way, and declining of Court attendance,
     hath been more than once discoursed about the King.  Others, my
     Lord, when the chief ministers of State, and those most active of
     the Council have been reckoned up, wherein your Lordship never used
     to want an eminent place, have said, touching your Lordship, that
     now your turn was served, and the King had given you a good estate,
     you left him to stand or fall as he would, and, particularly in that
     of the Navy, have enlarged upon your letting fall all service there.

     Another sort, and those the most, insist upon the bad report of the
     house wherein your Lordship, now observed in perfect health again,
     continues to sojourne, and by name have charged one of the daughters
     for a common courtizan, alledging both places and persons where and
     with whom she hath been too well known, and how much her wantonnesse
     occasions, though unjustly, scandal to your Lordship, and that as
     well to gratifying of some enemies as to the wounding of more
     friends I am not able to tell.

     Lastly, my Lord, I find a general coldness in all persons towards
     your Lordship, such as, from my first dependance on you, I never yet
     knew, wherein I shall not offer to interpose any thoughts or advice
     of mine, well knowing your Lordship needs not any.  But with a most
     faithful assurance that no person nor papers under Heaven is privy
     to what I here write, besides myself and this, which I shall be
     careful to have put into your owne hands, I rest confident of your
     Lordship's just construction of my dutifull intents herein, and in
     all humility take leave, may it please your Lordship,

     Your Lordship's most obedient Servant, S. P.

The foregoing letter was sealed up, and enclosed in this that follows

     MY LORD,

     If this finds your Lordship either not alone, or not at leisure, I
     beg the suspending your opening of the enclosed till you shall have
     both, the matter very well bearing such a delay, and in all humility
     remain, may it please your Lordship,

     Your Lordship's most obedient Servant, S. P.

     November 17, 1663.

     My servant hath my directions to put this into your Lordship's owne
     hand, but not to stay for any answer.

19th. Up, and to the office, where (Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten
being gone this morning to Portsmouth) the rest of us met, and rode at
noon. So I to the 'Change, where little business, and so home to dinner,
and being at dinner Mr. Creed in and dined with us, and after dinner Mr.
Gentleman, my Jane's father, to see us and her. And after a little stay
with them, I was sent for by Sir G. Carteret by agreement, and so
left them, and to him and with him by coach to my Lord Treasurer, to
discourse with him about Mr. Gauden's having of money, and to offer to
him whether it would not be necessary, Mr. Gauden's credit being so low
as it is, to take security of him if he demands any great sum, such
as L20,000, which now ought to be paid him upon his next year's
declaration. Which is a sad thing, that being reduced to this by us, we
should be the first to doubt his credit; but so it is. However, it will
be managed with great tenderness to him. My Lord Treasurer we found in
his bed-chamber, being laid up of the goute. I find him a very ready
man, and certainly a brave servant to the King: he spoke so quick and
sensibly of the King's charge. Nothing displeased me in him but his long
nails, which he lets grow upon a pretty thick white short hand, that it
troubled me to see them. Thence with Sir G. Carteret by coach, and he
set me down at the New Exchange. In our way he told me there is no such
thing likely yet as a Dutch war, neither they nor we being in condition
for it, though it will come certainly to that in some time, our
interests lying the same way, that is to say, in trade. But not yet.
Thence to the Temple, and there visited my cozen Roger Pepys and his
brother Dr. John, a couple, methinks, of very ordinary men, and thence
to speak [with] Mr. Moore, and met him by the way, who tells me, to
my great content, that he believes my letter to my Lord Sandwich hath
wrought well upon him, and that he will look after himself and his
business upon it, for he begins already to do so. But I dare not
conclude anything till I see him, which shall be to-morrow morning, that
I may be out of my pain to know how he takes it of me. He and I to the
Coffee-house, and there drank and talked a little, and so I home, and
after a little at my office home to supper and to bed, not knowing how
to avoid hopes from Mr. Moore's words to-night, and yet I am fearful of
the worst.

20th. Up, and as soon as I could to my Lord Sandwich's lodgings, but
he was gone out before, and so I am defeated of my expectation of being
eased one way or other in the business of my Lord. But I went up to Mr.
Howe, who I saw this day the first time in a periwigg, which becomes
him very well, and discoursed with him. He tells me that my Lord is of
a sudden much changed, and he do believe that he do take my letter well.
However, we do both bless God that it hath so good an effect upon him.
Thence I home again, calling at the Wardrobe, where I found my Lord, but
so busy with Mr. Townsend making up accounts there that I was unwilling
to trouble him, and so went away. By and by to the Exchange, and there
met by agreement Mr. Howe, and took him with a barrel of oysters home to
dinner, where we were very merry, and indeed I observe him to be a very
hopeful young man, but only a little conceited. After dinner I took him
and my wife, and setting her in Covent Garden at her mother's, he and I
to my Lord's, and thence I with Mr. Moore to White Hall, there the King
and Council being close, and I thinking it an improper place to meet
my Lord first upon the business; I took coach, and calling my wife went
home, setting Mr. Moore down by the way, and having been late at the
office alone looking over some plates of the Northern seas, the White
seas, and Archangell river, I went home, and, after supper, to bed.
My wife tells me that she and her brother have had a great falling out
to-night, he taking upon him to challenge great obligation upon her, and
taxing her for not being so as she ought to be to her friends, and that
she can do more with me than she pretends, and I know not what, but God
be thanked she cannot. A great talke there is today of a crush between
some of the Fanatiques up in arms, and the King's men in the North; but
whether true I know not yet.

21st. At the office all the morning and at noon I receive a letter from
Mr. Creed, with a token, viz., a very noble parti-coloured Indian gowne
for my wife. The letter is oddly writ, over-prizing his present, and
little owning any past service of mine, but that this was his genuine
respects, and I know not what: I confess I had expectations of a better
account from him of my service about his accounts, and so give his boy
12d., and sent it back again, and after having been at the pay of a
ship this afternoon at the Treasury, I went by coach to Ludgate, and, by
pricing several there, I guess this gowne may be worth about L12 or L15.
But, however, I expect at least L50 of him. So in the evening I wrote
him a letter telling him clearly my mind, a copy of which I keep and
of his letter and so I resolve to have no more such correspondence as
I used to have but will have satisfaction of him as I do expect. So to
write my letters, and after all done I went home to supper and to bed,
my mind being pretty well at ease from my letter to Creed, and more for
my receipt this afternoon of L17 at the Treasury, for the L17 paid a
year since to the carver for his work at my house, which I did intend to
have paid myself, but, finding others to do it, I thought it not amisse
to get it too, but I am afeard that we may hear of it to our greater
prejudices hereafter.

22nd (Lord's day). Up pretty early, and having last night bespoke a
coach, which failed me this morning, I walked as far as the Temple, and
there took coach, and to my Lord's lodgings, whom I found ready to go
to chappell; but I coming, he begun, with a very serious countenance,
to tell me that he had received my late letter, wherein first he took
notice of my care of him and his honour, and did give me thanks for that
part of it where I say that from my heart I believe the contrary of what
I do there relate to be the discourse of others; but since I intended
it not a reproach, but matter of information, and for him to make a
judgment of it for his practice, it was necessary for me to tell him the
persons of whom I have gathered the several particulars which I there
insist on. I would have made excuses in it; but, seeing him so earnest
in it, I found myself forced to it, and so did tell him Mr. Pierce;
the chyrurgeon, in that of his Lordship's living being discoursed of at
Court; a mayd servant that-I kept, that lived at Chelsy school; and also
Mr. Pickering, about the report touching the young woman; and also Mr.
Hunt, in Axe Yard, near whom she lodged. I told him the whole city
do discourse concerning his neglect of business; and so I many times
asserting my dutifull intention in all this, and he owning his accepting
of it as such. That that troubled me most in particular is, that he
did there assert the civility of the people of the house, and the young
gentlewoman, for whose reproach he was sorry. His saying that he was
resolved how to live, and that though he was taking a house, meaning to
live in another manner, yet it was not to please any people, or to stop
report, but to please himself, though this I do believe he might say
that he might not seem to me to be so much wrought upon by what I have
writ; and lastly, and most of all, when I spoke of the tenderness that
I have used in declaring this to him, there being nobody privy to it,
he told me that I must give him leave to except one. I told him that
possibly somebody might know of some thoughts of mine, I having borrowed
some intelligence in this matter from them, but nobody could say they
knew of the thing itself what I writ. This, I confess, however, do
trouble me, for that he seemed to speak it as a quick retort, and it
must sure be Will. Howe, who did not see anything of what I writ, though
I told him indeed that I would write; but in this, I think, there is no
great hurt. I find him, though he cannot but owne his opinion of my
good intentions, and so, he did again and again profess it, that he
is troubled in his mind at it; and I confess, I think I may have done
myself an injury for his good, which, were it to do again, and that
I believed he would take it no better, I think I should sit quietly
without taking any notice of it, for I doubt there is no medium between
his taking it very well or very ill. I could not forbear weeping before
him at the latter end, which, since, I am ashamed of, though I cannot
see what he can take it to proceed from but my tenderness and good
will to him. After this discourse was ended, he began to talk very,
cheerfully of other things, and I walked with him to White Hall, and we
discoursed of the pictures in the gallery, which, it may be, he might do
out of policy, that the boy might not see any, strangeness in him; but I
rather think that his mind was somewhat eased, and hope that he will be
to me as he was before. But, however, I doubt not when he sees that I
follow my business, and become an honour to him, and not to be like to
need him, or to be a burden to him, and rather able to serve him than to
need him, and if he do continue to follow business, and so come to
his right witts again, I do not doubt but he will then consider my
faithfulnesse to him, and esteem me as he ought. At chappell I had
room in the Privy Seale pew with other gentlemen, and there heard Dr.
Killigrew, preach, but my mind was so, I know not whether troubled, or
only full of thoughts of what had passed between my Lord and me that I
could not mind it, nor can at this hour remember three words. The anthem
was good after sermon, being the fifty-first psalme, made for five
voices by one of Captain Cooke's boys, a pretty boy. And they say there
are four or five of them that can do as much. And here I first perceived
that the King is a little musicall, and kept good time with his hand
all along the anthem. Up into the gallery after sermon and there I met
Creed. We saluted one another and spoke but not one word of what had
passed yesterday between us, but told me he was forced to such a place
to dinner and so we parted. Here I met Mr. Povy, who tells me how
Tangier had like to have been betrayed, and that one of the King's
officers is come, to whom 8,000 pieces of eight were offered for his
part. Hence I to the King's Head ordinary, and there dined, good and
much company, and a good dinner: most of their discourse was about
hunting, in a dialect I understand very little. Thence by coach to our
own church, and there my mind being yet unsettled I could mind nothing,
and after sermon home and there told my wife what had passed, and thence
to my office, where doing business only to keep my mind employed till
late; and so home to supper, to prayers, and to bed.

23rd: Up and to Alderman Backwell's, where Sir W. Rider, by appointment,
met us to consult about the insuring of our hempe ship from Archangell,
in which we are all much concerned, by my Lord Treasurer's command. That
being put in a way I went to Mr. Beacham, one of our jury, to confer
with him about our business with Field at our trial to-morrow, and
thence to St. Paul's Churchyarde, and there bespoke "Rushworth's
Collections," and "Scobell's Acts of the Long Parliament,"' &c., which
I will make the King pay for as to the office; and so I do not break my
vow at all. Back to the Coffee-house, and then to the 'Change, where Sir
W. Rider and I did bid 15 per cent., and nobody will take it under 20
per cent., and the lowest was 15 per cent. premium, and 15 more to be
abated in case of losse, which we did not think fit without order to
give, and so we parted, and I home to a speedy, though too good a dinner
to eat alone, viz., a good goose and a rare piece of roast beef. Thence
to the Temple, but being there too soon and meeting Mr. Moore I took him
up and to my Lord Treasurer's, and thence to Sir Ph. Warwick's, where
I found him and did desire his advice, who left me to do what I thought
fit in this business of the insurance, and so back again to the Temple
all the way telling Mr. Moore what had passed between my Lord and me
yesterday, and indeed my fears do grow that my Lord will not reform as
I hoped he would nor have the ingenuity to take my advice as he ought
kindly. But however I am satisfied that the one person whom he said he
would take leave to except is not Mr. Moore, and so W. Howe I am sure
could tell him nothing of my letter that ever he saw it. Here Mr. Moore
and I parted, and I up to the Speaker's chamber, and there met Mr.
Coventry by appointment to discourse about Field's business, and thence
we parting I homewards and called at the Coffeehouse, and there by
great accident hear that a letter is come that our ship is safe come
to Newcastle. With this news I went like an asse presently to Alderman
Backewell and, told him of it, and he and I went to the African House
in Broad Street to have spoke with Sir W. Rider to tell him of it, but
missed him. Now what an opportunity had I to have concealed this and
seemed to have made an insurance and got L100 with the least trouble
and danger in the whole world. This troubles me to think I should be
so oversoon. So back again with Alderman Backewell talking of the new
money, which he says will never be counterfeited, he believes; but it is
deadly inconvenient for telling, it is so thick, and the edges are made
to turn up. I found him as full of business, and, to speak the truth,
he is a very painfull man, and ever was, and now-a-days is well paid
for it. So home and to my office, doing business late in order to the
getting a little money, and so home to supper and to bed.

24th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
to the 'Change, where everybody joyed me in our hemp ship's coming safe,
and it seems one man, Middleburgh, did give 20 per cent. in gold last
night, three or four minutes before the newes came of her being safe.
Thence with Mr. Deane home and dined, and after dinner and a good deal
of discourse of the business of Woolwich Yard, we opened his draught of
a ship which he has made for me, and indeed it is a most excellent one
and that that I hope will be of good use to me as soon as I get a little
time, and much indebted I am to the poor man. Toward night I by coach to
Whitehall to the Tangier committee, and there spoke with my Lord and he
seems mighty kind to me, but I will try him to-morrow by a visit to see
whether he holds it or no. Then home by coach again and to my office,
where late with Captain Miners about the East India business. So home
to supper and to bed, being troubled to find myself so bound as I am,
notwithstanding all the physic that I take. This day our tryall was with
Field, and I hear that they have given him L29 damage more, which is a
strange thing, but yet not so much as formerly, nor as I was afeard of.

25th. Up and to Sir G. Carteret's house, and with him by coach to
Whitehall. He uses me mighty well to my great joy, and in our discourse
took occasion to tell me that as I did desire of him the other day so he
desires of me the same favour that we may tell one another at any time
any thing that passes among us at the office or elsewhere wherein we are
either dissatisfied one with another, and that I should find him in
all things as kind and ready to serve me as my own brother. This
methinks-was very sudden and extraordinary and do please me mightily,
and I am resolved by no means ever to lose him again if I can. He
told me that he did still observe my care for the King's service in my
office. He set me down in Fleet Street and thence I by another coach to
my Lord Sandwich's, and there I did present him Mr. Barlow's "Terella,"
with which he was very much pleased, and he did show me great kindnesse,
and by other discourse I have reason to think that he is not at all, as
I feared he would be, discontented against me more than the trouble of
the thing will work upon him. I left him in good humour, and I to White
Hall, to the Duke of York and Mr. Coventry, and there advised about
insuring the hempe ship at 12 per cent., notwithstanding her being come
to Newcastle, and I do hope that in all my three places which are now
my hopes and supports I may not now fear any thing, but with care, which
through the Lord's blessing I will never more neglect, I don't doubt but
to keep myself up with them all. For in the Duke, and Mr. Coventry,
my Lord Sandwich and Sir G. Carteret I place my greatest hopes, and it
pleased me yesterday that Mr. Coventry in the coach (he carrying me to
the Exchange at noon from the office) did, speaking of Sir W. Batten,
say that though there was a difference between them, yet he would
embrace any good motion of Sir W. Batten to the King's advantage as well
as of Mr. Pepys' or any friend he had. And when I talked that I would go
about doing something of the Controller's work when I had time, and that
I thought the Controller would not take it ill, he wittily replied that
there was nothing in the world so hateful as a dog in the manger. Back
by coach to the Exchange, there spoke with Sir W. Rider about insuring,
and spoke with several other persons about business, and shall become
pretty well known quickly. Thence home to dinner with my poor wife, and
with great joy to my office, and there all the afternoon about business,
and among others Mr. Bland came to me and had good discourse, and he has
chose me a referee for him in a business, and anon in the evening comes
Sir W. Warren, and he and I had admirable discourse. He advised me in
things I desired about, bummary,--[bottomry]--and other ways of putting
out money as in parts of ships, how dangerous they are, and lastly fell
to talk of the Dutch management of the Navy, and I think will helpe me
to some accounts of things of the Dutch Admiralty, which I am mighty
desirous to know. He seemed to have been mighty privy with my Lord
Albemarle in things before this great turn, and to the King's dallying
with him and others for some years before, but I doubt all was not very
true. However, his discourse is very useful in general, though he would
seem a little more than ordinary in this. Late at night home to supper
and to bed, my mind in good ease all but my health, of which I am not a
little doubtful.

26th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
I to the 'Change, and there met with Mr. Cutler the merchant, who would
needs have me home to his house by the Dutch Church, and there in an old
but good house, with his wife and mother, a couple of plain old women,
I dined a good plain dinner, and his discourse after dinner with me upon
matters of the navy victualling very good and worth my hearing, and so
home to my office in the afternoon with my mind full of business, and
there at it late, and so home to supper to my poor wife, and to bed,
myself being in a little pain..... by a stroke.... in pulling up my
breeches yesterday over eagerly, but I will lay nothing to it till I see
whether it will cease of itself or no. The plague, it seems, grows more
and more at Amsterdam; and we are going upon making of all ships coming
from thence and Hambrough, or any other infected places, to perform
their Quarantine (for thirty days as Sir Rd. Browne expressed it in the
order of the Council, contrary to the import of the word, though in the
general acceptation it signifies now the thing, not the time spent in
doing it) in Holehaven, a thing never done by us before.

27th. Up and to my office, where busy with great delight all the
morning, and at noon to the 'Change, and so home to dinner with my poor
wife, and with great content to my office again, and there hard at work
upon stating the account of the freights due to the King from the East
India Company till late at night, and so home to supper and to bed. My
wife mightily pleased with my late discourse of getting a trip over to
Calais, or some other port of France, the next summer, in one of the
yachts, and I believe I shall do it, and it makes good sport that my
mayde Jane dares not go, and Besse is wild to go, and is mad for joy,
but yet will be willing to stay if Jane hath a mind, which is the best
temper in this and all other things that ever I knew in my life.

28th. Up and at the office sat all the morning, and at noon by Mr.
Coventry's coach to the 'Change, and after a little while there where I
met with Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon, who tells me for good newes that
my Lord Sandwich is resolved to go no more to Chelsy, and told me he
believed that I had been giving my Lord some counsel, which I neither
denied nor affirmed, but seemed glad with him that he went thither no
more, and so I home to dinner, and thence abroad to Paul's Church Yard,
and there looked upon the second part of Hudibras, which I buy not, but
borrow to read, to see if it be as good as the first, which the world
cry so mightily up, though it hath not a good liking in me, though I had
tried by twice or three times reading to bring myself to think it witty.
Back again home and to my office, and there late doing business and
so home to supper and to bed. I have been told two or three times, but
to-day for certain I am told how in Holland publickly they have pictured
our King with reproach. One way is with his pockets turned the wrong
side outward, hanging out empty; another with two courtiers picking of
his pockets; and a third, leading of two ladies, while others abuse him;
which amounts to great contempt.

29th (Lord's day). This morning I put on my best black cloth suit,
trimmed with scarlett ribbon, very neat, with my cloake lined with
velvett, and a new beaver, which altogether is very noble, with my black
silk knit canons I bought a month ago. I to church alone, my wife not
going, and there I found my Lady Batten in a velvet gown, which vexed
me that she should be in it before my wife, or that I am able to put
her into one, but what cannot be, cannot be. However, when I came home I
told my wife of it, and to see my weaknesse, I could on the sudden have
found my heart to have offered her one, but second thoughts put it by,
and indeed it would undo me to think of doing as Sir W. Batten and his
Lady do, who has a good estate besides his office. A good dinner we had
of boeuf a la mode, but not roasted so well as my wife used to do it. So
after dinner I to the French Church, but that being too far begun I came
back to St. Dunstan's by six and heard a good sermon, and so home and
to my office all, the evening making up my accounts of this month, and
blessed be God I have got up my crumb again to L770, the most that ever
I had yet, and good clothes a great many besides, which is a great mercy
of God to me. So home to supper and to bed.

30th. Was called up by a messenger from Sir W. Pen to go with him by
coach to White Hall. So I got up and went with him, and by the way he
began to observe to me some unkind dealing of mine to him a weeke or two
since at the table, like a coxcomb, when I answered him pretty freely
that I would not think myself to owe any man the service to do this or
that because they would have it so (it was about taking of a mulct
upon a purser for not keeping guard at Chatham when I was there), so
he talked and I talked and let fall the discourse without giving or
receiving any great satisfaction, and so to other discourse, but I shall
know him still for a false knave. At White Hall we met the Duke in the
Matted Gallery, and there he discoursed with us; and by and by my Lord
Sandwich came and stood by, and talked; but it being St. Andrew's, and a
collar-day, he went to the Chappell, and we parted. From him and Sir W.
Pen and I back again and 'light at the 'Change, and to the Coffee-house,
where I heard the best story of a cheate intended by a Master of a ship,
who had borrowed twice his money upon the bottomary, and as much more
insured upon his ship and goods as they were worth, and then would have
cast her away upon the coast of France, and there left her, refusing any
pilott which was offered him; and so the Governor of the place took her
and sent her over hither to find an owner, and so the ship is come safe,
and goods and all; they all worth L500, and he had one way or other
taken L3000. The cause is to be tried to-morrow at Guildhall, where
I intend to be. Thence home to dinner, and then with my wife to her
arithmetique. In the evening came W. Howe to see me, who tells me that
my Lord hath been angry three or four days with him, would not speak to
him; at last did, and charged him with having spoken to me about what he
had observed concerning his Lordship, which W. Howe denying stoutly, he
was well at ease; and continues very quiett, and is removing from
Chelsy as fast as he can, but, methinks, both by my Lord's looks upon
me to-day, or it may be it is only my doubtfulness, and by W. Howe's
discourse, my Lord is not very well pleased, nor, it may be, will be a
good while, which vexes me; but I hope all will over in time, or else I
am but ill rewarded for my good service. Anon he and I to the Temple
and there parted, and I to my cozen Roger Pepys, whom I met going to his
chamber; he was in haste, and to go out of town tomorrow. He tells me of
a letter from my father which he will keep to read to me at his coming
to town again. I perceive it is about my father's jealousys concerning
my wife's doing ill offices with me against him only from the
differences they had when she was there, which he very unwisely
continues to have and troubles himself and friends about to speak to me
in, as my Lord Sandwich, Mr. Moore, and my cozen Roger, which vexes me,
but I must impute it to his age and care for my mother and Pall and
so let it go. After little discourse with him I took coach and home,
calling upon my bookseller's for two books, Rushworth's and Scobell's
Collections. I shall make the King pay for them. The first I spent some
time at the office to read and it is an excellent book. So home and
spent the evening with my wife in arithmetique, and so to supper and to
bed. I end this month with my mind in good condition for any thing else,
but my unhappy adventuring to disoblige my Lord by doing him service in
representing to him the discourse of the world concerning him and his
affairs.




DECEMBER 1663

December 1st. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At
noon I home to dinner with my poor wife, with whom now-a-days I enjoy
great pleasure in her company and learning of Arithmetique. After dinner
I to Guild Hall to hear a tryall at King's Bench, before Lord Chief
Justice Hide, about the insurance of a ship, the same I mention in my
yesterday's journall, where everything was proved how money was so taken
up upon bottomary and insurance, and the ship left by the master and
seamen upon rocks, where, when the sea fell at the ebb, she must perish.
The master was offered helpe, and he did give the pilotts 20 sols to
drink to bid them go about their business, saying that the rocks were
old, but his ship was new, and that she was repaired for L6 and less
all the damage that she received, and is now brought by one, sent for
on purpose by the insurers, into the Thames, with her cargo, vessels
of tallow daubed over with butter, instead of all butter, the whole not
worth above L500, ship and all, and they had took up, as appeared, above
L2,400. He had given his men money to content them; and yet, for
all this, he did bring some of them to swear that it was very stormy
weather, and [they] did all they could to save her, and that she was
seven feete deep water in hold, and were fain to cut her main and
foremast, that the master was the last man that went out, and they were
fain to force [him] out when she was ready to sink; and her rudder broke
off, and she was drawn into the harbour after they were gone, as wrecke
all broken, and goods lost: that she could not be carried out again
without new building, and many other things so contrary as is not
imaginable more. There was all the great counsel in the kingdom in the
cause; but after one witnesse or two for the plaintiff, it was cried
down as a most notorious cheate; and so the jury, without going out,
found it for the plaintiff. But it was pleasant to see what mad sort of
testimonys the seamen did give, and could not be got to speak in order:
and then their terms such as the judge could not understand; and to hear
how sillily the Counsel and judge would speak as to the terms necessary
in the matter, would make one laugh: and above all, a Frenchman that
was forced to speak in French, and took an English oathe he did not
understand, and had an interpreter sworn to tell us what he said,
which was the best testimony of all. So home well satisfied with this
afternoon's work, purposing to spend an afternoon or two every term so,
and so to my office a while and then home to supper, arithmetique
with my wife, and to bed. I heard other causes, and saw the course of
pleading by being at this trial, and heard and learnt two things: one
is that every man has a right of passage in, but not a title to, any
highway. The next, that the judge would not suffer Mr. Crow, who hath
fined for Alderman, to be called so, but only Mister, and did eight or
nine times fret at it, and stop every man that called him so.

2nd. My wife troubled all last night with the toothache and this
morning. I up and to my office, where busy, and so home to dinner with
my wife, who is better of her tooth than she was, and in the afternoon
by agreement called on by Mr. Bland, and with him to the Ship a
neighbour tavern and there met his antagonist Mr. Custos and his referee
Mr. Clarke a merchant also, and begun the dispute about the freight of a
ship hired by Mr. Bland to carry provisions to Tangier, and the freight
is now demanded, whereas he says that the goods were some spoiled, some
not delivered, and upon the whole demands L1300 of the other, and their
minds are both so high, their demands so distant, and their words
so many and hot against one another that I fear we shall bring it to
nothing. But however I am glad to see myself so capable of understanding
the business as I find I do, and shall endeavour to do Mr. Bland all the
just service I can therein. Here we were in a bad room, which vexed me
most, but we meet at another house next. So at noon I home and to
my office till 9 o'clock, and so home to my wife to keep her company,
arithmetique, then to supper, and to bed, she being well of her tooth
again.

3rd. Up and to the office, where all the forenoon, and then (by Mr.
Coventry's coach) to the 'Change, and so home to dinner, very pleasant
with my poor wife. Somebody from Portsmouth, I know not who, has this
day sent me a Runlett of Tent. So to my office all the afternoon, where
much business till late at night, and so home to my wife, and then to
supper and to bed. This day Sir G. Carteret did tell us at the table,
that the Navy (excepting what is due to the Yards upon the quarter now
going on, and what few bills he hath not heard of) is quite out of debt;
which is extraordinary good newes, and upon the 'Change to hear how our
creditt goes as good as any merchant's upon the 'Change is a joyfull
thing to consider, which God continue! I am sure the King will have the
benefit of it, as well as we some peace and creditt.

4th. Up pretty betimes, that is about 7 o'clock, it being now dark then,
and so got me ready, with my clothes, breeches and warm stockings, and
by water with Henry Russell, cold and wet and windy to Woolwich, to a
hempe ship there, and staid looking upon it and giving direction as to
the getting it ashore, and so back again very cold, and at home without
going on shore anywhere about 12 o'clock, being fearful of taking cold,
and so dined at home and shifted myself, and so all the afternoon at my
office till night, and then home to keep my poor wife company, and so to
supper and to bed.

5th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and then with
the whole board, viz., Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and myself along
with Captain Allen home to dinner, where he lives hard by in Mark Lane,
where we had a very good plain dinner and good welcome, in a pretty
little house but so smoky that it was troublesome to us all till they
put out the fire, and made one of charcoale. I was much pleased with
this dinner for the many excellent stories told by Mr. Coventry, which I
have put down in my book of tales and so shall not mention them here. We
staid till night, and then Mr. Coventry away, and by and by I home to
my office till 9 or 10 at night, and so home to supper and to bed after
some talke and Arithmetique with my poor wife, with whom now-a-days I
live with great content, out of all trouble of mind by jealousy (for
which God forgive me), or any other distraction more than my fear of my
Lord Sandwich's displeasure.

6th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed, and then up and to church alone,
which is the greatest trouble that I have by not having a man or, boy to
wait on me, and so home to dinner, my wife, it being a cold day, and it
begun to snow (the first snow we have seen this year) kept her bed till
after dinner, and I below by myself looking over my arithmetique books
and timber rule. So my wife rose anon, and she and I all the afternoon
at arithmetique, and she is come to do Addition, Subtraction, and
Multiplicacion very well, and so I purpose not to trouble her yet with
Division, but to begin with the Globes to her now. At night came Captain
Grove to discourse with me about Field's business and of other matters,
and so, he being gone, I to my office, and spent an houre or two reading
Rushworth, and so to supper home, and to prayers and bed, finding
myself by cold to have some pain begin with me, which God defend should
increase.

7th. Up betimes, and, it being a frosty morning, walked on foot to White
Hall, but not without some fear of my pain coming. At White Hall I hear
and find that there was the last night the greatest tide that ever was
remembered in England to have been in this river: all White Hall having
been drowned, of which there was great discourse. Anon we all met, and
up with the Duke and did our business, and by and by my Lord of Sandwich
came in, but whether it be my doubt or no I cannot tell, but I do not
find that he made any sign of kindnesse or respect to me, which troubles
me more than any thing in the world. After done there Sir W. Batten and
Captain Allen and I by coach to the Temple, where I 'light, they going
home, and indeed it being my trouble of mind to try whether I could meet
with my Lord Sandwich and try him to see how he will receive me. I took
coach and back again to Whitehall, but there could not find him. But
here I met Dr. Clerke, and did tell him my story of my health; how my
pain comes to me now-a-days. He did write something for me which I
shall take when there is occasion. I then fell to other discourse of
Dr. Knapp, who tells me he is the King's physician, and is become a
solicitor for places for people, and I am mightily troubled with him. He
tells me he is the most impudent fellow in the world, that gives himself
out to be the King's physician, but it is not so, but is cast out of the
Court. From thence I may learn what impudence there is in the world,
and how a man may be deceived in persons: Anon the King and Duke and
Duchesse came to dinner in the Vane-roome, where I never saw them
before; but it seems since the tables are done, he dines there all
together. The Queene is pretty well, and goes out of her chamber to her
little chappell in the house. The King of France, they say, is hiring of
sixty sail of ships of the Dutch, but it is not said for what design. By
and by, not hoping to see my Lord, I went to the King's Head ordinary,
where a good dinner but no discourse almost, and after dinner by coach,
home, and found my wife this cold day not yet out of bed, and after a
little good talk with her to my office, and there spent my time till
late. Sir W. Warren two or three hours with me talking of trade, and
other very good discourse, which did please me very, well, and so, after
reading in Rushworth, home to supper and to bed.

8th. Lay long in bed, and then up and to the office, where we sat all
the morning, and among other things my Lord Barkely called in question
his clerk Mr. Davy for something which Sir W. Batten and I did tell him
yesterday, but I endeavoured to make the least of it, and so all was
put up. At noon to the 'Change, and among other businesses did discourse
with Captain Taylor, and I think I shall safely get L20 by his ship's
freight at present, besides what it may be I may get hereafter. So home
to dinner, and thence by coach to White Hall, where a great while walked
with my Lord Tiviott, whom I find a most carefull, thoughtfull, and
cunning man, as I also ever took him to be. He is this day bringing in
an account where he makes the King debtor to him L10,000 already on the
garrison of Tangier account; but yet demands not ready money to pay
it, but offers such ways of paying it out of the sale of old decayed
provisions as will enrich him finely. Anon came my Lord Sandwich, and
then we fell to our business at the Committee about my Lord Tiviott's
accounts, wherein I took occasion to speak now and then, so as my Lord
Sandwich did well seem to like of it, and after we were up did bid me
good night in a tone that, methinks, he is not so displeased with me as
I did doubt he is; however, I will take a course to know whether he be
or no. The Committee done, I took coach and home to my office, and there
late, and so to supper at home, and to bed, being doubtful of my pain
through the very cold weather which we have, but I will take all the
care I can to prevent it.

9th. Lay very long in bed for fear of my pain, and then rose and went to
stool (after my wife's way, who by all means would have me sit long and
upright) very well, and being ready to the office. From thence I was
called by and by to my wife, she not being well. So to her, and found
her in great pain...... So by and by to my office again, and then abroad
to look out a cradle to burn charcoal in at my office, and I found one
to my mind in Newgate Market, and so meeting Hoby's man in the street,
I spoke to him to serve it in to the office for the King. So home to
dinner, and after talk with my wife, she in bed and pain all day, I to
my office most of the evening, and then home to my wife. This day Mrs.
Russell did give my wife a very fine St. George, in alabaster, which
will set out my wife's closett mightily. This evening at the office,
after I had wrote my day's passages, there came to me my cozen Angier
of Cambridge, poor man, making his moan, and obtained of me that I would
send his son to sea as a Reformado, which I will take care to do. But to
see how apt every man is to forget friendship in time of adversity. How
glad was I when he was gone, for fear he should ask me to be bond for
him, or to borrow money of me.

10th. Up, pretty well, the weather being become pretty warm again,
and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and I confess having
received so lately a token from Mrs. Russell, I did find myself
concerned for our not buying some tallow of her (which she bought on
purpose yesterday most unadvisedly to her great losse upon confidence of
putting it off to us). So hard it is for a man not to be warped against
his duty and master's interest that receives any bribe or present,
though not as a bribe, from any body else. But she must be contented,
and I to do her a good turn when I can without wrong to the King's
service. Then home to dinner (and did drink a glass of wine and beer,
the more for joy that this is the shortest day in the year,--[Old
Style]--which is a pleasant consideration) with my wife. She in bed but
pretty well, and having a messenger from my brother, that he is not well
nor stirs out of doors, I went forth to see him, and found him below,
he has not been well, but is not ill. I found him taking order for the
distribution of Mrs. Ramsey's coals, a thing my father for many years
did, and now he after him, which I was glad to see, as also to hear that
Mr. Wheatly begins to look after him. I hope it is about his daughter.
Thence to St. Paul's Church Yard, to my bookseller's, and having gained
this day in the office by my stationer's bill to the King about 40s. or
L3, I did here sit two or three hours calling for twenty books to lay
this money out upon, and found myself at a great losse where to choose,
and do see how my nature would gladly return to laying out money in
this trade. I could not tell whether to lay out my money for books of
pleasure, as plays, which my nature was most earnest in; but at last,
after seeing Chaucer, Dugdale's History of Paul's, Stows London, Gesner,
History of Trent, besides Shakespeare, Jonson, and Beaumont's plays,
I at last chose Dr. Fuller's Worthys, the Cabbala or Collections of
Letters of State, and a little book, Delices de Hollande, with another
little book or two, all of good use or serious pleasure: and Hudibras,
both parts, the book now in greatest fashion for drollery, though I
cannot, I confess, see enough where the wit lies. My mind being thus
settled, I went by linke home, and so to my office, and to read in
Rushworth; and so home to supper and to bed. Calling at Wotton's, my
shoemaker's, today, he tells me that Sir H. Wright is dying; and that
Harris is come to the Duke's house again; and of a rare play to be acted
this week of Sir William Davenant's: the story of Henry the Eighth with
all his wives.

11th. Up and abroad toward the Wardrobe, and going out Mr. Clerke met me
to tell me that Field has a writ against me in this last business of
L30 10s., and that he believes he will get an execution against me this
morning, and though he told me it could not be well before noon, and
that he would stop it at the Sheriff's, yet it is hard to believe with
what fear I did walk and how I did doubt at every man I saw and do start
at the hearing of one man cough behind my neck. I to, the Wardrobe and
there missed Mr. Moore. So to Mr. Holden's and evened all reckonings
there for hats, and then walked to Paul's Churchyard and after a little
at my bookseller's and bought at a shop Cardinall Mazarin's Will in
French. I to the Coffeehouse and there among others had good discourse
with an Iron Merchant, who tells me the great evil of discouraging our
natural manufacture of England in that commodity by suffering the Swede
to bring in three times more than ever they did and our owne Ironworks
be lost, as almost half of them, he says, are already. Then I went and
sat by Mr. Harrington, and some East country merchants, and talking of
the country about Quinsborough, and thereabouts, he told us himself that
for fish, none there, the poorest body, will buy a dead fish, but must
be alive, unless it be in winter; and then they told us the manner of
putting their nets into the water. Through holes made in the thick ice,
they will spread a net of half a mile long; and he hath known a hundred
and thirty and a hundred and seventy barrels of fish taken at one
draught. And then the people come with sledges upon the ice, with snow
at the bottome, and lay the fish in and cover them with snow, and so
carry them to market. And he hath seen when the said fish have been
frozen in the sledge, so as that he hath taken a fish and broke
a-pieces, so hard it hath been; and yet the same fishes taken out of the
snow, and brought into a hot room, will be alive and leap up and down.
Swallows are often brought up in their nets out of the mudd from under
water, hanging together to some twigg or other, dead in ropes, and
brought to the fire will come to life. Fowl killed in December.
(Alderman Barker said) he did buy, and putting into the box under his
sledge, did forget to take them out to eate till Aprill next, and they
then were found there, and were through the frost as sweet and fresh and
eat as well as at first killed. Young beares are there; their flesh sold
in market as ordinarily as beef here, and is excellent sweet meat. They
tell us that beares there do never hurt any body, but fly away from you,
unless you pursue and set upon them; but wolves do much mischief. Mr.
Harrington told us how they do to get so much honey as they send abroad.
They make hollow a great fir-tree, leaving only a small slitt down
straight in one place, and this they close up again, only leave a little
hole, and there the bees go in and fill the bodys of those trees as full
of wax and honey as they can hold; and the inhabitants at times go and
open the slit, and take what they please without killing the bees, and
so let them live there still and make more. Fir trees are always planted
close together, because of keeping one another from the violence of the
windes; and when a fell is made, they leave here and there a grown tree
to preserve the young ones coming up. The great entertainment and sport
of the Duke of Corland, and the princes thereabouts, is hunting; which
is not with dogs as we, but he appoints such a day, and summons all the
country-people as to a campagnia; and by several companies gives every
one their circuit, and they agree upon a place where the toyle is to be
set; and so making fires every company as they go, they drive all the
wild beasts, whether bears, wolves, foxes, swine, and stags, and roes,
into the toyle; and there the great men have their stands in such and
such places, and shoot at what they have a mind to, and that is their
hunting. They are not very populous there, by reason that people marry
women seldom till they are towards or above thirty; and men thirty or
forty years old, or more oftentimes. Against a publique hunting the Duke
sends that no wolves be killed by the people; and whatever harm they do,
the Duke makes it good to the person that suffers it: as Mr. Harrington
instanced in a house where he lodged, where a wolfe broke into a
hog-stye, and bit three or four great pieces off the back of the hog,
before the house could come to helpe it (it calling, and that did give
notice to the people of the house); and the man of the house told him
that there were three or four wolves thereabouts that did them great
hurt; but it was no matter, for the Duke was to make it good to him,
otherwise he would kill them. Hence home and upstairs, my wife keeping
her bed, and had a very good dinner, and after dinner to my office, and
there till late busy. Among other things Captain Taylor came to me about
his bill for freight, and besides that I found him contented that I have
the L30 I got, he do offer me to give me L6 to take the getting of the
bill paid upon me, which I am ready to do, but I am loath to have it
said that I ever did it. However, I will do him the service to get it
paid if I can and stand to his courtesy what he will give me. Late to
supper home, and to my great joy I have by my wife's good advice almost
brought myself by going often and leisurely to the stool that I am come
almost to have my natural course of stool as well as ever, which I pray
God continue to me.

12th. Up and to the office where all the morning, and among other things
got Sir G. Carteret to put his letters to Captain Taylor's bill by which
I am in hopes to get L5, which joys my heart. We had this morning a
great dispute between Mr. Gauden, Victualler of the Navy, and Sir J.
Lawson, and the rest of the Commanders going against Argier, about their
fish and keeping of Lent; which Mr. Gauden so much insists upon to have
it observed, as being the only thing that makes up the loss of his dear
bargain all the rest of the year. At noon went home and there I found
that one Abrahall, who strikes in for the serving of the King with Ship
chandlery ware, has sent my wife a Japan gowne, which pleases her very
well and me also, it coming very opportune, but I know not how to carry
myself to him, I being already obliged so far to Mrs. Russell, so that I
am in both their pays. To the Exchange, where I had sent Luellin word
I would come to him, and thence brought him home to dinner with me. He
tells me that W. Symon's wife is dead, for which I am sorry, she being
a good woman, and tells me an odde story of her saying before her death,
being in good sense, that there stood her uncle Scobell. Then he began
to tell me that Mr. Deering had been with him to desire him to speak to
me that if I would get him off with these goods upon his hands, he would
give me 50 pieces, and further that if I would stand his friend to helpe
him to the benefit of his patent as the King's merchant, he could spare
me L200 per annum out of his profits. I was glad to hear both of these,
but answered him no further than that as I would not by any thing be
bribed to be unjust in my dealings,

     [Edward Dering was granted, August, 1660, "the office of King's
     merchant in the East, for buying and providing necessaries for
     apparelling the Navy" ("Calendar," Domestic, 1660-61, p.  212).
     There is evidence among the State Papers of some dissatisfaction
     with the timber, &c., which he supplied to the Navy, and at this
     time he appears to have had some stores left on his hands.]

so I was not so squeamish as not to take people's acknowledgment where
I had the good fortune by my pains to do them good and just offices, and
so I would not come to be at any agreement with him, but I would
labour to do him this service and to expect his consideration thereof
afterwards as he thought fit. So I expect to hear more of it. I did make
very much of Luellin in hopes to have some good by this business, and in
the evening received some money from Mr. Moore, and so went and settled
accounts in my books between him and me, and I do hope at Christmas not
only to find myself as rich or more than ever I was yet, but also my
accounts in less compass, fewer reckonings either of debts or moneys
due to me, than ever I have been for some years, and indeed do so, the
goodness of God bringing me from better to a better expectation and
hopes of doing well. This day I heard my Lord Barkeley tell Sir G.
Carteret that he hath letters from France that the King hath unduked
twelve Dukes, only to show his power and to crush his nobility, who he
said he did see had heretofore laboured to cross him. And this my Lord
Barkeley did mightily magnify, as a sign of a brave and vigorous mind,
that what he saw fit to be done he dares do. At night, after business
done at my office, home to supper and to bed. I have forgot to set down
a very remarkable passage that, Lewellen being gone, and I going into
the office, and it begun to be dark, I found nobody there, my clerks
being at the burial of a child of W. Griffin's, and so I spent a little
time till they came, walking in the garden, and in the mean time, while
I was walking Mrs. Pen's pretty maid came by my side, and went into the
office, but finding nobody there I went in to her, being glad of the
occasion. She told me as she was going out again that there was nobody
there, and that she came for a sheet of paper. So I told her I would
supply her, and left her in the office and went into my office and
opened my garden door, thinking to have got her in, and there to have
caressed her, and seeming looking for paper, I told her this way was as
near a way for her, but she told me she had left the door open and so
did not come to me. So I carried her some paper and kissed her, leading
her by the hand to the garden door and there let her go. But, Lord! to
see how much I was put out of order by this surprisal, and how much I
could have subjected my mind to have treated and been found with this
wench, and how afterwards I was troubled to think what if she should
tell this and whether I had spoke or done any thing that might be unfit
for her to tell. But I think there was nothing more passed than just
what I here write.

13th (Lord's day). Up and made me ready for Church, but my wife and I
had a difference about her old folly that she would fasten lies upon her
mayds, and now upon Jane, which I did not see enough to confirm me in
it, and so would not consent to her. To church, where after sermon
home, and to my office, before dinner, reading my vowes, and so home to
dinner, where Tom came to me and he and I dined together, my wife not
rising all day, and after dinner I made even accounts with him, and
spent all the afternoon in my chamber talking of many things with him,
and about Wheately's daughter for a wife for him, and then about the
Joyces and their father Fenner, how they are sometimes all honey one
with another and then all turd, and a strange rude life there is among
them. In the evening, he gone, I to my office to read Rushworth upon
the charge and answer of the Duke of Buckingham, which is very fine, and
then to do a little business against to-morrow, and so home to supper to
my wife, and then to bed.

14th. Up by candlelight, which I do not use to do, though it be very
late, that is to say almost 8 o'clock, and out by coach to White Hall,
where we all met and to the Duke, where I heard a large discourse
between one that goes over an agent from the King to Legorne and
thereabouts, to remove the inconveniences his ships are put to by denial
of pratique; which is a thing that is now-a-days made use of only as a
cheat, for a man may buy a bill of health for a piece of eight, and my
enemy may agree with the Intendent of the Sante for ten pieces of eight
or so; that he shall not give me a bill of health, and so spoil me in my
design, whatever it be. This the King will not endure, and so resolves
either to have it removed, or to keep all ships from coming in, or going
out there, so long as his ships are stayed for want hereof. Then, my
Lord Sandwich being there, we all went into the Duke's closet and did
our business. But among other things, Lord! what an account did Sir J.
Minnes and Sir W. Batten make of the pulling down and burning of the
head of the Charles, where Cromwell was placed with people under his
horse, and Peter, as the Duke called him, is praying to him; and Sir J.
Minnes would needs infer the temper of the people from their joy at the
doing of this and their building a gibbet for the hanging of his head
up, when God knows, it is even the flinging away of L100 out of the
King's purse, to the building of another, which it seems must be a
Neptune. Thence I through White Hall only to see what was doing, but
meeting none that I knew I went through the garden to my Lord Sandwich's
lodging, where I found my Lord got before me (which I did not intend
or expect) and was there trying some musique, which he intends for an
anthem of three parts, I know not whether for the King's chapel or no,
but he seems mighty intent upon it. But it did trouble me to hear him
swear before God and other oathes, as he did now and then without any
occasion, which methinks did so ill become him, and I hope will be a
caution for me, it being so ill a thing in him. The musique being done,
without showing me any good or ill countenance, he did give me his hat
and so adieu, and went down to his coach without saying anything to me.
He being gone I and Mr. Howe talked a good while. He tells me that my
Lord, it is true, for a while after my letter, was displeased, and did
shew many slightings of me when he had occasion of mentioning me to his
Lordship, but that now my Lord is in good temper and he do believe will
shew me as much respect as ever, and would have me not to refrain to
come to him. This news I confess did much trouble me, but when I did
hear how he is come to himself, and hath wholly left Chelsy, and the
slut, and that I see he do follow his business, and becomes in better
repute than before, I am rejoiced to see it, though it do cost me some
disfavour for a time, for if not his good nature and ingenuity, yet I
believe his memory will not bear it always in his mind. But it is my
comfort that this is the thing that after so many years good service
that has made him my enemy. Thence to the King's Head ordinary, and
there dined among a company of fine gentlemen; some of them discoursed
of the King of France's greatness, and how he is come to make the
Princes of the Blood to take place of all foreign Embassadors, which it
seems is granted by them of Venice and other States, and expected from
my Lord. Hollis, our King's Embassador there; and that either upon that
score or something else he hath not had his entry yet in Paris, but hath
received several affronts, and among others his harnesse cut, and his
gentlemen of his horse killed, which will breed bad blood if true. They
say also that the King of France hath hired threescore ships of Holland,
and forty of the Swede, but nobody knows what to do; but some great
designs he hath on foot against the next year. Thence by coach home
and to my office, where I spent all the evening till night with Captain
Taylor discoursing about keeping of masts, and when he was gone, with
Sir W. Warren, who did give me excellent discourse about the same thing,
which I have committed to paper, and then fell to other talk of his
being at Chatham lately and there discoursing of his masts. Commissioner
Pett did let fall several scurvy words concerning my pretending to know
masts as well as any body, which I know proceeds ever since I told him I
could measure a piece of timber as well as anybody employed by the King.
But, however, I shall remember him for a black sheep again a good while,
with all his fair words to me, and perhaps may let him know that my
ignorance does the King as much good as all his knowledge, which would
do more it is true if it were well used. Then we fell to talk of Sir
J. Minnes's and Sir W. Batten's burning of Oliver's head, while he was
there; which was done with so much insulting and folly as I never heard
of, and had the Trayned Band of Rochester to come to the solemnity,
which when all comes to all, Commissioner Pett says it never was made
for him; but it troubles me the King should suffer L100 losse in his
purse, to make a new one after it was forgot whose it was, or any words
spoke of it. He being gone I mightily pleased with his discourse, by
which I always learn something, I to read a little in Rushworth, and so
home to supper to my wife, it having been washing day, and so to bed, my
mind I confess a little troubled for my Lord Sandwich's displeasure.
But God will give me patience to bear since it rises from so good an
occasion.

15th. Before I was up, my brother's man came to tell me that my cozen,
Edward Pepys, was dead, died at Mrs. Turner's, for which my wife and
I are very sorry, and the more for that his wife was the only handsome
woman of our name. So up and to the office, where the greatest business
was Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten against me for Sir W. Warren's
contract for masts, to which I may go to my memorandum book to see what
past, but came off with conquest, and my Lord Barkely and Mr. Coventry
well convinced that we are well used. So home to dinner, and thither
came to me Mr. Mount and Mr. Luellin, I think almost foxed, and there
dined with me and very merry as I could be, my mind being troubled to
see things so ordered at the Board, though with no disparagement to me
at all. At dinner comes a messenger from the Counter with an execution
against me for the L30 10s., given the last verdict to Field. The man's
name is Thomas, of the Poultry Counter. I sent Griffin with him to the
Dolphin, where Sir W. Batten was at dinner, and he being satisfied
that I should pay the money, I did cause the money to be paid him, and
Griffin to tell it out to him in the office. He offered to go along with
me to Sir R. Ford, but I thought it not necessary, but let him go with
it, he also telling me that there is never any receipt for it given,
but I have good witness of the payment of it. They being gone, Luellin
having again told me by myself that Deering is content to give me L50 if
I can sell his deals for him to the King, not that I did ever offer to
take it, or bid Luellin bargain for me with him, but did tacitly seem to
be willing to do him what service I could in it, and expect his
thanks, what he thought good. Thence to White Hall by coach, by the way
overtaking Mr. Moore, and took him into the coach to me, and there he
could tell me nothing of my Lord, how he stands as to his thoughts or
respect to me, but concludes that though at present he may be angry yet
he will come to be pleased again with me no doubt, and says that he do
mind his business well, and keeps at Court. So to White Hall, and there
by order found some of the Commissioners of Tangier met, and my Lord
Sandwich among the rest, to whom I bowed, but he shewed me very little
if any countenance at all, which troubles me mightily. Having soon done
there, I took up Mr. Moore again and set him down at Pauls, by the way
he proposed to me of a way of profit which perhaps may shortly be
made by money by fines upon houses at the Wardrobe, but how I did not
understand but left it to another discourse. So homeward, calling upon
Mr. Fen, by Sir G. Carteret's desire, and did there shew him the bill of
Captain Taylor's whereby I hope to get something justly. Home and to
my office, and there very late with Sir W. Warren upon very serious
discourse, telling him how matters passed to-day, and in the close he
and I did fall to talk very openly of the business of this office, and
(if I was not a little too open to tell him my interest, which is my
fault) he did give me most admirable advice, and such as do speak him a
most able and worthy man, and understanding seven times more than ever
I thought to be in him. He did particularly run over every one of the
officers and commanders, and shewed me how I had reason to mistrust
every one of them, either for their falsenesse or their over-great
power, being too high to fasten a real friendship in, and did give me
a common but a most excellent saying to observe in all my life. He did
give it in rhyme, but the sense was this, that a man should treat every
friend in his discourse and opening his mind to him as of one that may
hereafter be his foe. He did also advise me how I should take occasion
to make known to the world my case, and the pains that I take in my
business, and above all to be sure to get a thorough knowledge in my
employment, and to that add all the interest at Court that I can, which
I hope I shall do. He staid talking with me till almost 12 at night,
and so good night, being sorry to part with him, and more sorry that he
should have as far as Wapping to walk to-night. So I to my Journall and
so home, to supper and to bed.

16th. Up, and with my head and heart full of my business, I to my
office, and there all the morning, where among other things to my great
content Captain Taylor brought me L40, the greater part of which I shall
gain to myself after much care and pains out of his bill of freight,
as I have at large set down in my book of Memorandums. At noon to the
'Change and there met with Mr. Wood by design, and got out of him to
my advantage a condition which I shall make good use of against Sir W.
Batten (vide my book of Memorandums touching the contract of masts of
Sir W. Warren about which I have had so much trouble). So home to dinner
and then to the Star Tavern hard by to our arbitration of Mr. Bland's
business, and at it a great while, but I found no order like to be kept
in our inquiry, and Mr. Clerke, the other arbitrator, one so far from
being fit (though able as to his trade of a merchant) to inquire and
to take pains in searching out the truth on both sides, that we parted
without doing anything, nor do I believe we shall at all ever attain
to anything in it. Then home and till 12 at night making up my accounts
with great account of this day's receipt of Captain Taylor's money and
some money reimbursed me which I have laid out on Field's business. So
home with my mind in pretty good quiet, and to Supper and to bed.

17th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning. At noon home
to my poor wife and dined, and then by coach abroad to Mrs. Turner's
where I have not been for many a day, and there I found her and her
sister Dike very sad for the death of their brother. After a little
common expression of sorrow, Mrs. Turner told me that the trouble she
would put me to was, to consult about getting an achievement prepared,
scutcheons were done already, to set over the door. So I did go out to
Mr. Smith's, where my brother tells me the scutcheons are made, but he
not being within, I went to the Temple, and there spent my time in a
Bookseller's shop, reading in a book of some Embassages into Moscovia,
&c., where was very good reading, and then to Mrs. Turner's, and thither
came Smith to me, with whom I did agree for L4 to make a handsome one,
ell square within the frame. After he was gone I sat an houre talking of
the suddennesse of his death within 7 days, and how by little and little
death came upon him, neither he nor they thinking it would come to that.
He died after a day's raveing, through lightness in his head for want of
sleep. His lady did not know of his sickness, nor do they hear yet
how she takes it. Hence home, taking some books by the way in Paul's
Churchyard by coach to my office, where late doing business, and so home
to supper and to bed.

18th. Up, and after being ready and done several businesses with people,
I took water (taking a dram of the bottle at the waterside) with a
gaily, the first that ever I had yet, and down to Woolwich, calling at
Ham Creeke, where I met Mr. Deane, and had a great deal of talke with
him about business, and so to the Ropeyarde and Docke, discoursing
several things, and so back again and did the like at Deptford, and I
find that it is absolutely necessary for me to do thus once a weeke at
least all the yeare round, which will do me great good, and so home with
great ease and content, especially out of the content which I met with
in a book I bought yesterday, being a discourse of the state of Rome
under the present Pope, Alexander the 7th, it being a very excellent
piece. After eating something at home, then to my office, where till
night about business to dispatch. Among other people came Mr. Primate,
the leather seller, in Fleete Streete, to see me, he says, coming this
way; and he tells me that he is upon a proposal to the King, whereby,
by a law already in being, he will supply the King, without wrong to
any man, or charge to the people in general, so much as it is now, above
L200,000 per annum, and God knows what, and that the King do like
the proposal, and hath directed that the Duke of Monmouth, with their
consent, be made privy, and go along with him and his fellow proposer in
the business, God knows what it is; for I neither can guess nor believe
there is any such thing in his head. At night made an end of the
discourse I read this morning, and so home to supper and to bed.

19th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and I laboured
hard at Deering's business of his deals more than I would if I did not
think to get something, though I do really believe that I did what is
to the King's advantage in it, and yet, God knows, the expectation of
profit will have its force and make a man the more earnest. Dined at
home, and then with Mr. Bland to another meeting upon his arbitration,
and seeing we were likely to do no good I even put them upon it, and
they chose Sir W. Rider alone to end the matter, and so I am rid of it.
Thence by coach to my shoemaker's and paid all there, and gave something
to the boys' box against Christmas. To Mrs. Turner's, whom I find busy
with Sir W. Turner, about advising upon going down to Norfolke with the
corps, and I find him in talke a sober, considering man. So home to
my office late, and then home to supper and to bed. My head full of
business, but pretty good content.

20th (Lord's day). Up and alone to church, where a common sermon of Mr.
Mills, and so home to dinner in our parler, my wife being clean, and
the first time we have dined here a great while together, and in the
afternoon went to church with me also, and there begun to take her place
above Mrs. Pen, which heretofore out of a humour she was wont to
give her as an affront to my Lady Batten. After a dull sermon of the
Scotchman, home, and there I found my brother Tom and my two cozens
Scotts, he and she, the first time they were ever here. And by and by
in comes my uncle. Wight and Mr. Norbury, and they sat with us a while
drinking, of wine, of which I did give them plenty. But the two would
not stay supper, but the other two did. And we were as merry as I could
be with people that I do wish well to, but know not what discourse
either to give them or find from them. We showed them our house from top
to bottom, and had a good Turkey roasted for our supper, and store of
wine, and after supper sent them home on foot, and so we to prayers and
to bed.

21st. Up betimes, my wife having a mind to have gone abroad with me, but
I had not because of troubling me, and so left her, though against my
will, to go and see her father and mother by herself, and I straight to
my Lord Sandwich's, and there I had a pretty kind salute from my Lord,
and went on to the Duke's, where my fellow officers by and by came, and
so in with him to his closet, and did our business, and so broke up, and
I with Sir W. Batten by coach to Salisbury Court, and there spoke with
Clerk our Solicitor about Field's business, and so parted, and I to Mrs.
Turner's, and there saw the achievement pretty well set up, and it
is well done. Thence I on foot to Charing Crosse to the ordinary, and
there, dined, meeting Mr. Gauden and Creed. Here variety of talk but
to no great purpose. After dinner won a wager of a payre of gloves of
a crowne of Mr. Gauden upon some words in his contract for victualling.
There parted in the street with them, and I to my Lord's, but he not
being within, took coach, and, being directed by sight of bills upon the
walls, I did go to Shoe Lane to see a cocke-fighting at a new pit there,
a sport I was never at in my life; but, Lord! to see the strange variety
of people, from Parliament-man (by name Wildes, that was Deputy Governor
of the Tower when Robinson was Lord Mayor) to the poorest 'prentices,
bakers, brewers, butchers, draymen, and what not; and all these fellows
one with another in swearing, cursing, and betting. I soon had enough
of it, and yet I would not but have seen it once, it being strange to
observe the nature of these poor creatures, how they will fight till
they drop down dead upon the table, and strike after they are ready
to give up the ghost, not offering to run away when they are weary or
wounded past doing further, whereas where a dunghill brood comes he
will, after a sharp stroke that pricks him, run off the stage, and
then they wring off his neck without more ado, whereas the other they
preserve, though their eyes be both out, for breed only of a true cock
of the game. Sometimes a cock that has had ten to one against him will
by chance give an unlucky blow, will strike the other starke dead in a
moment, that he never stirs more; but the common rule is, that though a
cock neither runs nor dies, yet if any man will bet L10 to a crowne, and
nobody take the bet, the game is given over, and not sooner. One thing
more it is strange to see how people of this poor rank, that look as
if they had not bread to put in their mouths, shall bet three or four
pounds at one bet, and lose it, and yet bet as much the next battle (so
they call every match of two cocks), so that one of them will lose L10
or L20 at a meeting. Thence, having enough of it, by coach to my Lord
Sandwich's, where I find him within with Captain Cooke and his boys,
Dr. Childe, Mr. Madge, and Mallard, playing and singing over my Lord's
anthem which he hath made to sing in the King's Chappell: my Lord
saluted me kindly and took me into the withdrawing-room, to hear it at
a distance, and indeed it sounds very finely, and is a good thing, I
believe, to be made by him, and they all commend it. And after that was
done Captain Cooke and his two boys did sing some Italian songs, which
I must in a word say I think was fully the best musique that I ever yet
heard in all my life, and it was to me a very great pleasure to hear
them. After all musique ended, my Lord going to White Hall, I went along
with him, and made a desire for to have his coach to go along with my
cozen Edward Pepys's hearse through the City on Wednesday next, which
he granted me presently, though he cannot yet come to speak to me in the
familiar stile that he did use to do, nor can I expect it. But I was the
willinger of this occasion to see whether he would deny me or no, which
he would I believe had he been at open defyance against me. Being not a
little pleased with all this, though I yet see my Lord is not right yet,
I thanked his Lordship and parted with him in White Hall. I back to my
Lord's, and there took up W. Howe in a coach, and carried him as far as
the Half Moone, and there set him down. By the way, talking of my Lord,
who is come another and a better man than he was lately, and God be
praised for it, and he says that I shall find my Lord as he used to be
to me, of which I have good hopes, but I shall beware of him, I mean W.
Howe, how I trust him, for I perceive he is not so discreet as I took
him for, for he has told Captain Ferrers (as Mr. Moore tells me) of my
letter to my Lord, which troubles me, for fear my Lord should think that
I might have told him. So called with my coach at my wife's brother's
lodging, but she was gone newly in a coach homewards, and so I drove
hard and overtook her at Temple Bar, and there paid off mine, and went
home with her in her coach. She tells me how there is a sad house among
her friends. Her brother's wife proves very unquiet, and so her mother
is, gone back to be with her husband and leave the young couple to
themselves, and great trouble, and I fear great want, will be among
them, I pray keep me from being troubled with them. At home to put on my
gowne and to my office, and there set down this day's Journall, and by
and by comes Mrs. Owen, Captain Allen's daughter, and causes me to stay
while the papers relating to her husband's place, bought of his father,
be copied out because of her going by this morning's tide home to
Chatham. Which vexes me, but there is no help for it. I home to supper
while a young [man] that she brought with her did copy out the things,
and then I to the office again and dispatched her, and so home to bed.

22nd. Up and there comes my she cozen Angier, of Cambridge, to me to
speak about her son. But though I love them, and have reason so to do,
yet, Lord! to consider how cold I am to speak to her, for fear of giving
her too much hopes of expecting either money or anything else from me
besides my care of her son. I let her go without drinking, though that
was against my will, being forced to hasten to the office, where we sat
all the morning, and at noon I to Sir R. Ford's, where Sir R. Browne (a
dull but it seems upon action a hot man), and he and I met upon setting
a price upon the freight of a barge sent to France to the Duchess of
Orleans. And here by discourse I find them greatly crying out against
the choice of Sir J. Cutler to be Treasurer for Paul's upon condition
that he give L1500 towards it, and it seems he did give it upon
condition that he might be Treasurer for the work, which they say will
be worth three times as much money, and talk as if his being chosen to
the office will make people backward to give, but I think him as likely
a man as either of them, or better. The business being done we parted,
Sir R. Ford never inviting me to dine with him at all, and I was not
sorry for it. Home and dined. I had a letter from W. Howe that my Lord
hath ordered his coach and six horses for me to-morrow, which pleases
me mightily to think that my Lord should do so much, hoping thereby that
his anger is a little over. After dinner abroad with my wife by coach
to Westminster, and set her at Mrs. Hunt's while I about my business,
having in our way met with Captain Ferrers luckily to speak to him about
my coach, who was going in all haste thither, and I perceive the King
and Duke and all the Court was going to the Duke's playhouse to see
"Henry VIII." acted, which is said to be an admirable play. But, Lord!
to see how near I was to have broken my oathe, or run the hazard of 20s.
losse, so much my nature was hot to have gone thither; but I did not go,
but having spoke with W. Howe and known how my Lord did do this kindly
as I would have it, I did go to Westminster Hall, and there met Hawley,
and walked a great while with him. Among other discourse encouraging him
to pursue his love to Mrs. Lane, while God knows I had a roguish meaning
in it. Thence calling my wife home by coach, calling at several places,
and to my office, where late, and so home to supper and to bed. This day
I hear for certain that my Lady Castlemaine is turned Papist, which
the Queene for all do not much like, thinking that she do it not for
conscience sake. I heard to-day of a great fray lately between Sir H.
Finch's coachman, who struck with his whip a coachman of the King's
to the losse of one of his eyes; at which the people of the Exchange
seeming to laugh and make sport with some words of contempt to him, my
Lord Chamberlin did come from the King to shut up the 'Change, and by
the help of a justice, did it; but upon petition to the King it was
opened again.

23rd. Up betimes and my wife; and being in as mourning a dress as we
could, at present, without cost, put ourselves into, we by Sir W. Pen's
coach to Mrs. Turner's, at Salisbury Court, where I find my Lord's coach
and six horses. We staid till almost eleven o'clock, and much company
came, and anon, the corps being put into the hearse, and the scutcheons
set upon it, we all took coach, and I and my wife and Auditor Beale in
my Lord Sandwich's coach, and went next to Mrs. Turner's mourning coach,
and so through all the City and Shoreditch, I believe about twenty
coaches, and four or five with six and four horses. Being come thither,
I made up to the mourners, and bidding them a good journey, I took leave
and back again, and setting my wife into a hackney out of Bishopsgate
Street, I sent her home, and I to the 'Change and Auditor Beale about
his business. Did much business at the 'Change, and so home to dinner,
and then to my office, and there late doing business also to my great
content to see God bless me in my place and opening honest ways, I hope
to get a little money to lay up and yet to live handsomely. So to supper
and to bed. My wife having strange fits of the toothache, some times on
this, and by and by on that side of her tooth, which is not common.

24th. Up betimes; and though it was a most foggy morning, and cold, yet
with a gally down to Eriffe, several times being at a loss whither we
went. There I mustered two ships of the King's, lent by him to the Guiny
Company, which are manned better than ours at far less wages. Thence on
board two of the King's, one of them the "Leopard," Captain Beech, who
I find an able and serious man. He received me civilly, and his wife was
there, a very well bred and knowing woman, born at Antwerp, but speaks
as good English as myself, and an ingenious woman. Here was also Sir
G. Carteret's son, who I find a pretty, but very talking man, but good
humour. Thence back again, entertaining myself upon my sliding rule with
great content, and called at Woolwich, where Mr. Chr. Pett having an
opportunity of being alone did tell me his mind about several things he
thought I was offended with him in, and told me of my kindness to his
assistant. I did give him such an answer as I thought was fit and left
him well satisfied, he offering to do me all the service, either by
draughts or modells that I should desire. Thence straight home, being
very cold, but yet well, I thank God, and at home found my wife making
mince pies, and by and by comes in Captain Ferrers to see us, and, among
other talke, tells us of the goodness of the new play of "Henry VIII.,"
which makes me think [it] long till my time is out; but I hope before I
go I shall set myself such a stint as I may not forget myself as I have
hitherto done till I was forced for these months last past wholly to
forbid myself the seeing of one. He gone I to my office and there late
writing and reading, and so home to bed.

25th (Christmas day). Lay long talking pleasantly with my wife, but
among other things she begun, I know not whether by design or chance, to
enquire what she should do if I should by any accident die, to which I
did give her some slight answer; but shall make good use of it to bring
myself to some settlement for her sake, by making a will as soon as I
can. Up and to church, where Mr. Mills made an ordinary sermon, and so
home and dined with great pleasure with my wife, and all the afternoon
first looking out at window and seeing the boys playing at many several
sports in our back yard by Sir W. Pen's, which reminded me of my own
former times, and then I began to read to my wife upon the globes with
great pleasure and to good purpose, for it will be pleasant to her and
to me to have her understand these things. In the evening at the
office, where I staid late reading Rushworth, which is a most excellent
collection of the beginning of the late quarrels in this kingdom, and so
home to supper and to bed, with good content of mind.

26th. Up and walked forth first to the Minerys to Brown's, and there
with great pleasure saw and bespoke several instruments, and so to
Cornhill to Mr. Cades, and there went up into his warehouse to look
for a map or two, and there finding great plenty of good pictures, God
forgive me! how my mind run upon them, and bought a little one for my
wife's closett presently, and concluded presently of buying L10 worth,
upon condition he would give me the buying of them. Now it is true I did
still within me resolve to make the King one way or other pay for them,
though I saved it to him another way, yet I find myself too forward to
fix upon the expense, and came away with a resolution of buying them,
but do hope that I shall not upon second thoughts do it without a way
made out before I buy them to myself how to do [it] without charge to my
main stock. Thence to the Coffee-house, and sat long in good discourse
with some gentlemen concerning the Roman Empire. So home and found Mr.
Hollyard there, and he stayed and dined with us, we having a pheasant
to dinner. He gone, I all the afternoon with my wife to cards, and, God
forgive me! to see how the very discourse of plays, which I shall be at
liberty to see after New Year's Day next, do set my mind upon them, but
I must be forced to stint myself very strictly before I begin, or else I
fear I shall spoil all. In the evening came my aunt Wight's kinswoman to
see how my wife do, with a compliment from my aunt, which I take kindly
as it is unusual for her to do it, but I do perceive my uncle is very
kind to me of late. So to my office writing letters, and then to read
and make an end of Rushworth, which I did, and do say that it is a book
the most worth reading for a man of my condition or any man that hopes
to come to any publique condition in the world that I do know. So home
to supper and to bed.

27th. Up and to church alone and so home to dinner with my wife very
pleasant and pleased with one another's company, and in our general
enjoyment one of another, better we think than most other couples do. So
after dinner to the French church, but came too late, and so back to our
owne church, where I slept all the sermon the Scott preaching, and so
home, and in the evening Sir J. Minnes and I met at Sir W. Pen's about
ordering some business of the Navy, and so I home to supper, discourse,
prayers, and bed.

28th. Up and by coach to my Lord's lodgings, but he was gone abroad, so
I lost my pains, but, however, walking through White Hall I heard the
King was gone to play at Tennis, so I down to the new Tennis Court; and
saw him and Sir Arthur Slingsby play against my Lord of Suffolke and my
Lord Chesterfield. The King beat three, and lost two sets, they all, and
he particularly playing well, I thought. Thence went and spoke with the
Duke of Albemarle about his wound at Newhall, but I find him a heavy
dull man, methinks, by his answers to me. Thence to the King's Head
ordinary and there dined, and found Creed there, but we met and dined
and parted without any thing more than "How do you?" After dinner
straight on foot to Mr. Hollyard's, and there paid him L3 in full for
his physic and work to my wife.... but whether it is cured for ever or
no I cannot tell, but he says it will never come to anything, though it
may be it may ooze now and then a little. So home and found my wife gone
out with Will (whom she sent for as she do now a days upon occasion) to
have a tooth drawn, she having it seems been in great pain all day, and
at night came home with it drawn, and pretty well. This evening I had a
stove brought me to the office to try, but it being an old one it smokes
as much as if there was nothing but a hearth as I had before, but it may
be great new ones do not, and therefore I must enquire further. So at
night home to supper and to bed. The Duchesse of York is fallen sicke of
the meazles.

29th. Up and to the office, where all the morning sitting, at noon to
the 'change, and there I found and brought home Mr. Pierse the surgeon
to dinner. Where I found also Mr. Luellin and Mount, and merry at
dinner, but their discourse so free.... that I was weary of them. But
after dinner Luellin took me up to my chamber to give me L50 for the
service I did him, though not so great as he expected and I intended.
But I told him that I would not sell my liberty to any man. If he would
give me any thing by another's hand I would endeavour to deserve it,
but I will never give him himself thanks for it, not acknowledging the
receiving of any, which he told me was reasonable. I did also tell him
that neither this nor any thing should make me to do any thing that
should not be for the King's service besides. So we parted and left them
three at home with my wife going to cards, and I to my office and there
staid late. Sir W. Pen came like a cunning rogue to sit and talk with me
about office business and freely about the Comptroller's business of the
office, to which I did give him free answers and let him make the best
of them. But I know him to be a knave, and do say nothing that I fear
to have said again. Anon came Sir W. Warren, and after talking of his
business of the masts and helping me to understand some foul dealing in
the business of Woods we fell to other talk, and particularly to speak
of some means how to part this great familiarity between Sir W. Batten
and Sir J. Minnes, and it is easy to do by any good friend of Sir J.
Minnes to whom it will be a good service, and he thinks that Sir
J. Denham will be a proper man for it, and so do I. So after other
discourse we parted, and I home and to bed.

30th. Up betimes and by coach to my Lord Sandwich, who I met going out,
and he did aske me how his cozen, my wife; did, the first time he hath
done so since his being offended, and, in my conscience, he would be
glad to be free with me again, but he knows not how to begin. So he went
out, and I through the garden to Mr. Coventry, where I saw Mr. Ch. Pett
bringing him a modell, and indeed it is a pretty one, for a New Year's
gift; but I think the work not better done than mine. With him by coach
to London, with good and friendly discourse of business and against Sir
W. Batten and his foul dealings. So leaving him at the Guiny House I to
the Coffee House, whither came Mr. Grant and Sir W. Petty, with whom
I talked, and so did many, almost all the house there, about his new
vessel, wherein he did give me such satisfaction in every point that I
am almost confident she will prove an admirable invention. So home to
dinner, and after being upon the 'Change awhile I dined with my wife,
who took physique to-day, and so to my office, and there all the
afternoon till late at night about office business, and so to supper and
to bed.

31st. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and among
other things Sir W. Warren came about some contract, and there did at
the open table, Sir W. Batten not being there; openly defy him, and
insisted how Sir W. Batten did endeavour to oppose him in everything
that he offered. Sir W. Pen took him up for it, like a counterfeit
rogue, though I know he was as much pleased to hear him talk so as any
man there. But upon his speaking no more was said but to the business.
At noon we broke up and I to the 'Change awhile, and so home again to
dinner, my head aching mightily with being overcharged with business. We
had to dinner, my wife and I, a fine turkey and a mince pie, and dined
in state, poor wretch, she and I, and have thus kept our Christmas
together all alone almost, having not once been out, but to-morrow my
vowes are all out as to plays and wine, but I hope I shall not be long
before I come to new ones, so much good, and God's blessing, I find to
have attended them. Thence to the office and did several businesses and
answered several people, but my head aching and it being my great night
of accounts, I went forth, took coach, and to my brother's, but he was
not within, and so I back again and sat an hour or two at the Coffee
[house], hearing some simple discourse about Quakers being charmed by a
string about their wrists, and so home, and after a little while at
my office, I home and supped, and so had a good fire in my chamber
and there sat till 4 o'clock in the morning making up my accounts and
writing this last Journall of the year. And first I bless God I do,
after a large expense, even this month, by reason of Christmas, and some
payments to my father, and other things extraordinary, find that I
am worth in money, besides all my household stuff, or any thing of
Brampton, above L800, whereof in my Lord Sandwich's hand, L700, and the
rest in my hand. So that there is not above L5 of all my estate in money
at this minute out of my hands and my Lord's. For which the good God be
pleased to give me a thankful heart and a mind careful to preserve this
and increase it. I do live at my lodgings in the Navy Office, my family
being, besides my wife and I, Jane Gentleman, Besse, our excellent,
good-natured cookmayde, and Susan, a little girle, having neither man
nor boy, nor like to have again a good while, living now in most perfect
content and quiett, and very frugally also; my health pretty good,
but only that I have been much troubled with a costiveness which I am
labouring to get away, and have hopes of doing it. At the office I am
well, though envied to the devil by Sir William Batten, who hates me to
death, but cannot hurt me. The rest either love me, or at least do not
show otherwise, though I know Sir W. Pen to be a false knave touching
me, though he seems fair. My father and mother well in the country; and
at this time the young ladies of Hinchingbroke with them, their house
having the small-pox in it. The Queene after a long and sore sicknesse
is become well again; and the King minds his mistresse a little too
much, if it pleased God! but I hope all things will go well, and in the
Navy particularly, wherein I shall do my duty whatever comes of it. The
great talke is the designs of the King of France, whether against the
Pope or King of Spayne nobody knows; but a great and a most promising
Prince he is, and all the Princes of Europe have their eye upon him. My
wife's brother come to great unhappiness by the ill-disposition, my wife
says, of his wife, and her poverty, which she now professes, after all
her husband's pretence of a great fortune, but I see none of them, at
least they come not to trouble me. At present I am concerned for my
cozen Angier, of Cambridge, lately broke in his trade, and this day am
sending his son John, a very rogue, to sea. My brother Tom I know not
what to think of, for I cannot hear whether he minds his business or
not; and my brother John at Cambridge, with as little hopes of
doing good there, for when he was here he did give me great cause of
dissatisfaction with his manner of life. Pall with my father, and God
knows what she do there, or what will become of her, for I have not
anything yet to spare her, and she grows now old, and must be disposed
of one way or other. The Duchesse of York, at this time, sicke of the
meazles, but is growing well again. The Turke very far entered into
Germany, and all that part of the world at a losse what to expect from
his proceedings. Myself, blessed be God! in a good way, and design and
resolution of sticking to my business to get a little money with doing
the best service I can to the King also; which God continue! So ends the
old year.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS FOR PEPY'S DIARY 1963 COMPLETE:

     A woman sober, and no high-flyer, as he calls it
     Academy was dissolved by order of the Pope
     After oysters, at first course, a hash of rabbits, a lamb
     After some pleasant talk, my wife, Ashwell, and I to bed
     After awhile I caressed her and parted seeming friends
     Again that she spoke but somewhat of what she had in her heart
     And there, did what I would with her
     And so to sleep till the morning, but was bit cruelly
     And so to bed and there entertained her with great content
     And so to bed, my father lying with me in Ashwell's bed
     Apprehend about one hundred Quakers
     At last we pretty good friends
     Before I sent my boy out with them, I beat him for a lie
     Being cleansed of lice this day by my wife
     Better we think than most other couples do
     Book itself, and both it and them not worth a turd
     But a woful rude rabble there was, and such noises
     Compliment from my aunt, which I take kindly as it is unusual
     Conceited, but that's no matter to me
     Content as to be at our own home, after being abroad awhile
     Dare not oppose it alone for making an enemy and do no good
     Did so watch to see my wife put on drawers, which (she did)
     Did go to Shoe Lane to see a cocke-fighting at a new pit there
     Did find none of them within, which I was glad of
     Dined at home alone, a good calves head boiled and dumplings
     Dinner was great, and most neatly dressed
     Dog attending us, which made us all merry again
     Dr. Calamy is this day sent to Newgate for preaching
     Duodecimal arithmetique
     Eat a mouthful of pye at home to stay my stomach
     Employed by the fencers to play prizes at
     Enquiring into the selling of places do trouble a great many
     Every man looking after himself, and his owne lust and luxury
     Every small thing is enough now-a-days to bring a difference
     Excommunications, which they send upon the least occasions
     Expectation of profit will have its force
     Familiarity with her other servants is it that spoils them all
     Fear it may do him no good, but me hurt
     Fearful that I might not go far enough with my hat off
     Feverish, and hath sent for Mr. Pierce to let him blood
     Found guilty, and likely will be hanged (for stealing spoons)
     Found him a fool, as he ever was, or worse
     Galileo's air thermometer, made before 1597
     Give her a Lobster and do so touse her and feel her all over
     God knows that I do not find honesty enough in my own mind
     Goes with his guards with him publiquely, and his trumpets
     Goes down the wind in honour as well as every thing else
     Great plot which was lately discovered in Ireland
     Had a good supper of an oxe's cheek
     Half a pint of Rhenish wine at the Still-yard, mixed with beer
     Hanged with a silken halter
     He is too wise to be made a friend of
     He hoped he should live to see her "ugly and willing"
     He having made good promises, though I fear his performance
     His readiness to speak spoilt all
     How highly the Presbyters do talk in the coffeehouses still
     I calling her beggar, and she me pricklouse, which vexed me
     I and she never were so heartily angry in our lives as to-day
     I do not find other people so willing to do business as myself
     I slept most of the sermon
     I was very angry, and resolve to beat him to-morrow
     Ill humour to be so against that which all the world cries up
     In some churches there was hardly ten people in the whole church
     Insurrection of the Catholiques there
     It must be the old ones that must do any good
     Jealous, though God knows I have no great reason
     John has got a wife, and for that he intends to part with him
     Justice of proceeding not to condemn a man unheard
     Keep at interest, which is a good, quiett, and easy profit
     King was gone to play at Tennis
     Lady Castlemaine hath all the King's Christmas presents
     Lay long in bed talking and pleasing myself with my wife
     Lay very long with my wife in bed talking with great pleasure
     Lay chiding, and then pleased with my wife in bed
     Liability of a husband to pay for goods supplied his wife
     Many thousands in a little time go out of England
     Matters in Ireland are full of discontent
     Money, which sweetens all things
     Most flat dead sermon, both for matter and manner of delivery
     Much discourse, but little to be learned
     My maid Susan ill, or would be thought so
     My wife has got too great head to be brought down soon
     My wife and her maid Ashwell had between them spilled the pot....
     No more matter being made of the death of one than another
     No sense nor grammar, yet in as good words that ever I saw
     Nor will yield that the Papists have any ground given them
     Nor would become obliged too much to any
     Nothing in the world done with true integrity
     Nothing of any truth and sincerity, but mere envy and design
     Nothing is to be got without offending God and the King
     Once a week or so I know a gentleman must go....
     Opening his mind to him as of one that may hereafter be his foe
     Out of an itch to look upon the sluts there
     Pain of the stone, and makes bloody water with great pain
     Parliament do agree to throw down Popery
     Pen was then turned Quaker
     Persuade me that she should prove with child since last night
     Plague is much in Amsterdam, and we in fears of it here
     Pride and debauchery of the present clergy
     Pride himself too much in it
     Quakers being charmed by a string about their wrists
     Rabbit not half roasted, which made me angry with my wife
     Railed bitterly ever and anon against John Calvin
     Reading my Latin grammar, which I perceive I have great need
     Reckon nothing money but when it is in the bank
     Resolve to live well and die a beggar
     Sad for want of my wife, whom I love with all my heart
     Saw his people go up and down louseing themselves
     Scholler, that would needs put in his discourse (every occasion)
     Scholler, but, it may be, thinks himself to be too much so
     See how time and example may alter a man
     See whether my wife did wear drawers to-day as she used to do
     Sent me last night, as a bribe, a barrel of sturgeon
     Servant of the King's pleasures too, as well as business
     She was so ill as to be shaved and pidgeons put to her feet
     She is conceited that she do well already
     She used the word devil, which vexed me
     She begins not at all to take pleasure in me or study to please
     So home, and mighty friends with my wife again
     So much is it against my nature to owe anything to any body
     So home to supper and bed with my father
     So home, and after supper did wash my feet, and so to bed
     So neat and kind one to another
     Softly up to see whether any of the beds were out of order or no
     Sorry for doing it now, because of obliging me to do the like
     Sporting in my fancy with the Queen
     Statute against selling of offices
     Talk very highly of liberty of conscience
     Taught my wife some part of subtraction
     That I might say I saw no money in the paper
     That he is not able to live almost with her
     The plague is got to Amsterdam, brought by a ship from Argier
     The goldsmith, he being one of the jury to-morrow
     The house was full of citizens, and so the less pleasant
     Thence by coach, with a mad coachman, that drove like mad
     There is no passing but by coach in the streets, and hardly that
     There is no man almost in the City cares a turd for him
     Therefore ought not to expect more justice from her
     These young Lords are not fit to do any service abroad
     They were so false spelt that I was ashamed of them
     They say now a common mistress to the King
     Things being dear and little attendance to be had we went away
     Though it be but little, yet I do get ground every month
     Through the Fleete Ally to see a couple of pretty [strumpets]
     To bed with discontent she yielded to me and began to be fond
     Towzing her and doing what I would, but the last thing of all
     Upon a small temptation I could be false to her
     Vexed at my wife's neglect in leaving of her scarf
     Waked this morning between four and five by my blackbird
     We having no luck in maids now-a-days
     Who is over head and eares in getting her house up
     Whose voice I am not to be reconciled
     Wife and the dancing-master alone above, not dancing but talking
     Wine, new and old, with labells pasted upon each bottle
     With much ado in an hour getting a coach home
     Would not make my coming troublesome to any
     Yet it was her fault not to see that I did take them





End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1663, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1663 ***

***** This file should be named 4145.txt or 4145.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/4/4145/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
