The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Psychology of Salesmanship, by William
Walker Atkinson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Psychology of Salesmanship


Author: William Walker Atkinson



Release Date: November 29, 2012  [eBook #41510]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PSYCHOLOGY OF SALESMANSHIP***


E-text prepared by sp1nd, C.M., and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (http://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      http://archive.org/details/psychologyofsale00atkirich


Transcriber's note:

      The author's use of three asterisks (* * *) to serve as
      ellipses has been preserved as printed in the original
      publication.





THE PSYCHOLOGY OF SALESMANSHIP

by

WILLIAM WALKER ATKINSON







L.N. Fowler & Company
7, Imperial Arcade, Ludgate Circus
London, E.C., England

1912
The Elizabeth Towne Co.
Holyoke, Mass.

Copyright 1912
By
Elizabeth Towne




THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
SALESMANSHIP




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                        PAGE

     I. Psychology in Business      9

    II. The Mind of the Salesman      28

   III. The Mind of the Salesman (continued)      47

    IV. The Mind of the Buyer      70

     V. The Mind of the Buyer (continued)      91

    VI. The Pre-Approach      114

   VII. The Psychology of Purchase      137

  VIII. The Approach      167

    IX. The Demonstration      193

     X. The Closing      222




CHAPTER I

PSYCHOLOGY IN BUSINESS


Until the last few years the mere mention of the word "psychology" in
connection with business was apt to be greeted with a shrug of the
shoulders, a significant raising of the eyebrows--and a change of the
subject. Psychology was a subject that savored of the class room, or
else was thought to be somehow concerned with the soul, or possibly
related to the abnormal phenomena generally classified as "psychic." The
average business man was apt to impatiently resent the introduction into
business of class room topics, or speculation regarding the soul, or of
theories and tales regarding clairvoyance, telepathy, or general
"spookiness"--for these were the things included in his concept of
"psychology."

But a change has come to the man in business. He has heard much of late
years regarding psychology in business affairs, and has read something
on the subject. He understands now that psychology means "the science of
the mind" and is not necessarily the same as metaphysics or "psychism."
He has had brought home to him the fact that psychology plays a most
important part in business, and that it is quite worth his while to
acquaint himself with its fundamental principles. In fact, if he has
thought sufficiently on the subject, he will have seen that the entire
process of selling goods, personally, or by means of advertising or
display, is essentially a mental process depending upon the state of
mind induced in the purchaser, and that these states of mind are induced
solely by reason of certain established principles of psychology.
Whether the salesman, or advertiser, realizes this or not, he is
employing psychological principles in attracting the attention, arousing
the interest, creating the desire, and moving the will of the purchaser
of his goods.

The best authorities on salesmanship and advertising now recognize this
fact and emphasize it in their writings. George French, in his "_Art
and Science of Advertising_" says regarding psychology in advertising:
"So we can dismiss the weird word, and simply acknowledge that we can
sell things to a man more readily if we know the man. We can't
personally know every man to whom we wish to sell goods. We must
therefore consider if there are not certain ways of thinking and of
acting which are common to all men, or to a large proportion of men. If
we can discover the laws governing the action of men's minds we will
know how to appeal to those men. We know how to appeal to Smith, because
we know Smith. We know what will please Brown, because we know Brown. We
know how to get our way with Jones, because we know Jones. What the
advertiser must know is how to get at Smith, Brown, and Jones without
knowing any of them. While every man has his personal peculiarities, and
while every mind has its peculiar method of dealing with the facts of
life, every man and every mind is controlled, in a large sense and to a
great extent, by predilections and mind-workings which were established
before he lived, and are operated in a manner separate from his
personality. Our minds are more automatic, more mechanical, than we are
willing to admit. That which we loosely call mind is largely the
automatic expression of tendencies controlled by physical conditions
wholly apart from conscious intellectual or moral motives or qualities.
What those physical conditions are, and how the knowledge of what they
are may be utilized by advertisers, forms the body of that new knowledge
some like to call psychology, so far as it concerns advertising." Mr.
French has well expressed the idea of the important part played in
business by psychology. What he says is, of course, as applicable to
personal salesmanship as to salesmanship through advertisements--the
same principles are present and operative in both cases.

In order to bring to the mind of the reader the full idea of the
operation of psychological principles in the sale of goods, we shall
mention a few particular instances in which these principles have played
a part. Each reader will be able to recollect many similar instances,
once his attention is called to the matter.

Prof. Halleck, a well known authority on psychology says: "Business men
say that the ability to gain the attention is often the secret of
success in life. Enormous salaries are paid to persons who can write
advertisements certain to catch the eye. A publisher said that he had
sold only five thousand copies of an excellent work, merely because it
had failed to catch the attention of many, and that twenty-five thousand
copies could have been disposed of in the same time, if agents had
forced them upon the notice of people. Druggists say that any kind of
patent medicine can be sold, if it is so advertised as to strike the
attention in a forcible manner. Business life has largely resolved
itself into a battle to secure the attention of people."

The same excellent authority says, regarding the effect of associated
ideas: "An eminent philosopher has said that man is completely at the
mercy of the association of his ideas. Every new object is seen in the
light of its associated ideas. * * * The principle of the association of
ideas is sufficient to account for the change in fashions. A woman in a
southern city had a bonnet that she particularly admired, until she one
day saw three negresses wearing precisely the same pattern. She never
appeared again in that bonnet. When a style of dress becomes 'common,'
and is worn by the lower classes, it is discarded by the fashionable
people. Fashions that are absolutely repulsive will often be adopted if
they are introduced by popular or noted people. * * * A knowledge of the
power of the association of ideas is of the utmost importance in
business. One man has his store so planned that all its associations are
pleasing, from the manner of the clerks to the fixtures and drapery.
Another store brings up unpleasant associations. * * * When negligee
hats first made their appearance, a shrewd hatter sent for a
well-dressed and popular collegian and offered him his choice of the
best hats in the store, if he would wear a negligee hat for three days.
He objected to making such an exhibition of himself, until he was
flattered by the hatter's wager that the hats could, in this way, be
made the fashion for the entire town. When the collegian first put in
his appearance on the campus with the hat, he was guyed for his oddity.
Late in the afternoon, some of his friends concluded that the hat
looked so well that they would invest. On the following day large
numbers reached the same conclusion. For some time after this the hatter
found difficulty in keeping a sufficient supply in stock. Had an
unpopular or poorly dressed man appeared first on the campus with that
hat, the result would have been the reverse. The hat would have been the
same, but the association of ideas would have differed. Some of the
ladies of fashion in a large European city selected on their own
responsibility, without consulting the milliners, a cheap spring Manilla
hat, which was very handsome. The milliners found themselves with a
high-priced stock for which there was no demand. They held a council,
bought a large number of the cheap hats, and put them on the heads of
all the female street sweepers and scavengers in the town. When the
ladies of fashion went out the next day, they were amazed to see the
very dregs of the city arrayed in headgear like their own. It was not
very long before the result was what might have been expected."

In a previous work of the present writer, the following illustrations
of the effect of psychological suggestion in advertising were used:

The use of the "direct command" as the "ad. men" call it, is very
common. People are positively told to do certain things in these
advertisements. They are told to "take home a cake of Hinky-dink's Soap
tonight; your wife needs it!" And they do it. Or they see a mammoth hand
pointing down at them from a sign, and almost hear the corresponding
mammoth voice as it says (in painted words): "Say you! Smoke Honey-Dope
Cigars; they're the best ever!!!" And, if you manage to reject the
command the first time, you will probably yield at the repeated
suggestion of the same thing being hurled at you at every corner and
high fence, and "Honey-Dope" will be your favorite brand until some
other suggestion catches you. Suggestion by authority and repetition,
remember; that's what does the business for you! They call this the
"Direct Command" in the advertising schools. Then there are some other
subtle forms of suggestion in advertising. You see staring from every
bit of space, on billboard and in newspapers and magazines: "Uwanta
Cracker," or something of that sort--and you usually wind up by
acquiescing. And then you are constantly told that "Babies howl for
Grandma Hankin's Infantile Soother," and then when you hear some baby
howling you think of what you have been told they are howling for, and
then you run and buy a bottle of "Grandma Hankin's." Then you are told
that some cigar is "Generously Liberal" in size and quality; or that
some kind of Cocoa is "Grateful and Refreshing"; or that some brand of
soap is "99.999% Pure"; etc., etc. Only last night I saw a new
one--"Somebody's Whisky is Smooth," and every imbiber in the car was
smacking his lips and thinking about the "smooth" feeling in his mouth
and throat. It _was_ smooth--the idea, not the stuff, I mean. And some
other whiskey man shows a picture of a glass, a bottle, some ice and a
syphon of seltzer, with simply these words: "Oldboy's Highball--That's
all!" All of these things are suggestions, and some of them are very
powerful ones, too, when constantly impressed upon the mind by
repetition. * * * I have known dealers in Spring goods to force the
season by filling their windows with their advance stock. I have seen
hat dealers start up the straw hat season by putting on a straw
themselves, their clerks ditto, and then a few friends. The sprinkling
of "straws" gave a suggestion to the street, and the straw hat season
was opened.

Dr. Herbert A. Parkyn, an authority on Suggestion, draws the following
picture from life of a retail merchant who is suffering from the effect
of adverse psychological influences resulting from his pessimistic
mental attitude. The present writer can vouch for the accuracy of Dr.
Parkyn's picture, for he knows the original of the sketch. Dr. Parkyn
says of the storekeeper:

"He is the proprietor of a store in a neighboring city; but such a
store--it almost gives me the blues to go into it! His windows are
dressed year in and year out with the same old signs, and there is
nothing to give the store the cheerful appearance so essential to an
up-to-date business establishment. But the atmosphere of the place is
only in keeping with the proprietor. When he started in business thirty
years ago he employed eight clerks, but his business has fallen off till
he does all the work himself and is scarcely able now to pay rent,
although competitors around him are increasing their business steadily
every year. In the course of a fifteen minute's conversation, the first
time I met him, he told me all his troubles, which were many. According
to his story, everyone had been trying to get the better of him ever
since he started in business; his competitors resorted to unfair
business methods; his landlord was endeavoring to drive him out by
raising his rent; he could not get an honest clerk in his store; an old
man had not an equal chance with a young man; he could not understand
why people he had catered to so faithfully should be so ungrateful or so
fickle as to give their patronage to every upstart who went into
business in the same line as his; he supposed that he could work along,
as he was doing, from morning till night without a holiday till he was
driven to the poorhouse or died, and although he had been in the same
stand for fifteen years there was not a single person he could call on
if in need of a friend, etc. Although I have had occasion to visit him
many times during business hours, I have never heard him address a
cheerful or encouraging remark to a customer. On the other hand he
waited on them, not only with an air of indifference, but apparently as
if he were doing them a favor by allowing them to trade at his store,
while others who dropped in to ask permission to use his telephone or to
enquire about residents in the neighborhood were soon given to
understand by his manner and answers that he considered them a nuisance
and hoped they had not mistaken his store for an information bureau. I
have purposely led him into other channels of conversation, with the
same result; everything was going to the dogs--the city, the country,
etc. No matter what was talked about, his remarks were saturated with
pessimism. He was ready to blame everything and everyone for his
condition, and when I ventured to suggest that much of his trouble was
due to his attitude he was ready to show me to the door. * * * If he
would but cast his bread upon the waters for a few weeks by bestowing a
smile here and a smile there, or a cheerful encouraging word to this
customer and that customer, he would certainly feel better for the
giving, and they would return to him a thousand fold. If he would only
assume that he is prosperous and proceed to give his store an air of
prosperity, how much more attractive he could make his place look and
how much more inviting it would be for customers! If he would assume
that every person that entered his store was his guest, whether he made
a purchase or not, people would feel like returning to his store when
they wanted anything in his line. I could suggest a hundred ways in
which this man could employ suggestion and auto-suggestion to increase
his business, to draw friends to him, instead of driving them away, and
to make the world and himself better and happier while he lives in it."

But, you may ask, what has all this to do with psychology in
salesmanship--what has the matter of advertising, store display,
personal manner, etc., to do with salesmanship? Just this much, that all
these things are based on the same fundamental principles as is
salesmanship, and that these fundamental principles are those of
psychology. All that has been said refers to psychology--all is the
effect of psychology pure and simple. All depends upon the mental
attitude, the suggestions offered, the mental states induced, the motive
to the will--all these outward things are merely the effects of inner
mental states.

J.W. Kennedy, in "Judicious Advertising" says: "Advertising is just
salesmanship on paper; a mere money-making means of selling goods
rapidly. That 'mysterious something' is just printed persuasion and its
other name is 'selling conviction.' Conviction can be imparted at will
by those few writers who have closely studied the thought processes by
which conviction is induced. The mission of every ad. is to convert
readers into buyers." Geo. Dyers, in the same journal says: "Advertising
takes into account the sub-conscious impressions, the varying phases of
suggestion and association as received through the eye, the psychology
of the direct command,--all worth earnest consideration, and seriously
to be reckoned with, however we may balk at the terms." Seth Brown in
"Salesmanship" says: "To make advertising which will sell goods requires
development of the human part of the writer. He must realize the
different forces which command Attention, Interest, Desire and
Conviction. The buyer wants your goods because they will produce for him
some definite effect or result. It is this result that the ad. man must
keep in mind."

"But," you may also say, "after all this 'psychology' seems to be
nothing else than what we have always known as 'human nature'--there is
nothing new about this." Exactly so! Psychology is the inner science of
human nature. Human nature depends entirely upon psychological
processes--it is bound up with the activities of the mind. The study of
human nature is the study of the minds of people. But whereas the study
of human nature, as usually conducted, is a haphazard, hit-or-miss sort
of undertaking, the study of the mind, according to the established
principles of psychology, is of the nature of the study of science, and
is pursued according to scientific methods.

Particularly in its phase of Salesmanship does the study of human nature
along the lines of psychology become a science. From the first to the
last Salesmanship is a psychological subject. Every step in the process
of a sale is a mental process. The mental attitude and mental expression
of the salesman; the mental attitude and mental impression of the
customer; the process of arousing the attention, awakening curiosity or
interest, creating desire, satisfying the reason, and moving the
will--all these are purely mental processes, and the study of them
becomes a branch of the study of psychology. The display of goods on the
counters, shelves, or windows of a store, or in the hands of the
salesman on the road, must be based upon psychological principles. The
argument of the salesman must not only be logical but must be so
arranged and worded as to arouse certain feelings or faculties within
the mind of the prospective buyer--this is psychology. And finally, the
closing of the sale, in which the object is to arouse the will of the
buyer into final favorable action--this also is psychology. From the
entrance of the salesman to the final closing of the sale, each and
every step is a psychological process. A sale is the action and reaction
of mind upon mind, according to well established psychological
principles and rules. Salesmanship is essentially a psychological
science as all must admit who will give to the subject a logical
consideration. To those who object to the term "psychology" because of
its newness and unfamiliar sound, we do not care to urge the term. Let
such cling to their old term of "human nature," remembering however that
"human nature" is essentially mental. A dead man, a man asleep or in a
trance, or an idiot, manifests no "human nature" in the sense the word
is generally used. A man must be alive, wide awake, and in possession of
his senses, before he is able to manifest "human nature," and before his
"human nature" may be appealed to according to the well known
principles. "Human nature" cannot be divorced from psychology, try as we
may.

We do not for a moment wish to imply that Salesmanship is entirely
dependent upon a knowledge of psychology. There are other factors
concerned. For instance, the salesman must possess a practical knowledge
of his goods; of the seasons; of the trend of fashion in relation to his
line; of the adaptability of certain goods for certain sections. But,
waiving for the moment the point that even these are concerned with the
mind of people at the last, and admitting that they may be considered as
independent of psychology, all of these points will avail nothing if the
salesman violates the psychological principles of the sale. Give such a
man the best goods, of the best house, with a thorough knowledge of the
requirements of the trade and the goods themselves, and send him forth
to sell those goods. The result will be that his sales will fall below
the mark of a man far less well equipped in other respects but who
understands the psychology of salesmanship, either intuitively or else
by conscious acquirement.

Inasmuch as the essence of Salesmanship is the employment of the proper
psychological principles, does it not seem imperative that the salesman
should know something of the Mind of Man--the instrument upon which he
must play in plying his vocation? Should not the salesman possess the
same kind of knowledge of his instrument as does the musician, the
mechanic, the artisan, the artist? What would be thought of one who
would expect to become an expert swordsman without a knowledge of the
principles of fencing, or of one who would expect to become a boxer
without mastering the established principle of boxing? The instruments
of the salesman are his own mind and the mind of his customers. He
should acquaint himself thoroughly with both.




CHAPTER II

THE MIND OF THE SALESMAN


In the Psychology of Salesmanship there are two important elements, viz:
(1) The Mind of the Salesman; and (2) the Mind of the Buyer. The
proposition, or the goods to be sold, constitute the connecting link
between the two Minds, or the common point upon which the two Minds must
unite, blend, and come to agreement. The Sale itself is the result of
the fusion and agreement of the two Minds--the product of the action and
reaction between them. Let us now proceed to a consideration of the two
important elements, the Two Minds involved in the process of
Salesmanship.

Beginning our consideration of the Mind of the Salesman, let us realize
that upon his mind depends his character and personality. His character
is composed of his individual mental qualities or attributes. His
personality is his customary outward expression of his character. Both
character and personality may be altered, changed and improved. And
there is in each person a central _something_ which he calls "I," which
is able to order and manifest these changes in his character and
personality. While it may be argued plausibly that a man is merely a
composite of his characteristics and nothing more, nevertheless there is
always in each the consciousness that in his real "I" there is a
something which is above and behind characteristics, and which may
regulate the latter. Without attempting to lead the reader into the maze
of metaphysics, or the pitfalls of philosophy, we wish to impress upon
him the fact that his mental being has for its innermost centre of
consciousness this mysterious "I," the nature of which no one has ever
been able to determine, but which when fully realized imparts to one a
strength and force undreamed of before.

And it is well worth while for everyone seeking self-development and
self-improvement to awaken to a clear realization of this "I" within
him, to which every faculty, every quality, every characteristic is an
instrument of expression and manifestation. The real "you" is not the
characteristics or features of personality, which change from time to
time, but a permanent, changeless, centre and background of the changes
of personality--a something that endures through all changes, and which
you simply know as "I." In the volume of this series, entitled "_The New
Psychology_," in the chapter entitled "The Ego, or Self" we have spoken
of this in detail. Further mention would be out of place in the present
volume, but we may be pardoned for quoting the following from the said
chapter, for we feel that a realization of this "I" is most important to
each person who wishes to master his own mind, and to create his own
personality. Here follows the quotation:

"The consciousness of the 'I' is above personality--it is something
inseparable from individuality. * * * The consciousness of the 'I' is an
actual experience, just as much as is the consciousness of the page
before you. * * * The whole subject of The New Psychology is bound up
with this recognition of the 'I'--it revolves around this 'I' as a
wheel around its centre. We regard the mental faculties, powers, organs,
qualities, and modes of expression, as merely instruments, tools, or
channels of expression of this wonderful Something--the Self, the pure
Ego--the 'I.' And this is the message of The New Psychology--that You,
the 'I,' have at your command a wonderful array of mental instruments,
tools, machinery, which if properly used will create for you any kind of
personality you may desire. You are the Master Workman who may make of
yourself what you will. But before you can appreciate this truth--before
you can make it your own--before you can apply it--you must enter into a
recognition and realization of this wonderful 'I' that you are, to which
body and senses, yea, even the mind itself, are but channels of
expression. You are something more than body, or senses, or mind--you
are that wonderful Something, master of all these things, but of which
you can say but one thing: 'I AM.'"

But remember, always, that this realization of the Ego does not mean
egotism, or self-conceit, or comparison of your character or
personality with that of others. It is Egoism not Egotism--and Egoism
means simply the realization of this "Master-Consciousness" to which all
other mental faculties are subordinate. If you want some other name for
it, you may consider this "I" as the "Will of the will," for it is the
very essence of _will-power_--it is, so to speak, the Will conscious of
itself. By means of the realization, you will find it far easier to
cultivate the mental qualities in which you are deficient, and to
restrain undesirable characteristics. The spirit of the idea may be
gained by a careful understanding of the following from the pen of
Charles F. Lummis: "I'm all right. I am bigger than anything that can
happen to me. All these things are outside my door, _and I've got the
key_!"

The mental qualities most requisite to the Salesman may be stated as
follows:

1. _Self Respect._ It is important to the Salesman that he cultivate the
faculty of Self Respect. By this we do not mean egotism, conceit,
superciliousness, imperiousness, hauteur, snobbishness, etc., all of
which are detrimental qualities. Self Respect, on the contrary imparts
the sense of true manhood or womanhood, self-reliance, dignity, courage
and independence. It is the spirit of Black Hawk, the Indian chieftain,
who, lifting his head said to Jackson: "I am a Man!" It is entirely
opposed to the crawling, cringing "worm of the dust," mental attitude of
Uriah Heep, who was continually asserting how humble--how very
humble--he was. Learn to look the world in the eyes without flinching.
Throw off the fear of the crowd, and the impression that you are
unworthy. Learn to believe in yourself, and to respect yourself. Let
your motto be "I Can; I Will; I Dare; I Do!"

Self Respect is a sure antidote for the feeling of fear, shrinking,
sense of inferiority, and other negative feelings which sometimes
oppress the Salesman when he is about to enter into the presence of some
"big man." Remember that the man's personality is merely a mask, and
that behind it is merely an "I" like your own--no more, no less.
Remember that behind the "John Smith" part of you there exists the same
kind of "I" that exists behind the "High Mucky-muck" part of him.
Remember that you are Man approaching Man--not a worm approaching a
god. Remember that just as Kipling says: "The Colonel's lady and Judy
O'Grady _are sisters under their skin_," so are you and the big man twin
"I's" beneath the covering of personality, position, and outward
appearance. By cultivating the realization of the "I," of which we have
told you, you will acquire a new sense of Self Respect which will render
you immune from the feeling of bashfulness, inferiority and fear in the
presence of others. Unless a man respects himself, he cannot expect
others to respect him. He should build up his true individuality and
respect it, being careful, always, not to get "side-tracked" by egotism,
vanity and similar follies of personality. It is not your personality
which is entitled to respect, but your _individuality_, which is
something far different. The personality belongs to the outer man, the
individuality to the inner.

One's physical carriage and attitude tends to react upon his own mental
attitude as well as also impressing those in whose presence he is. There
is always an action and reaction between mind and body. Just as mental
states take form in physical actions, so do physical actions react upon
the mind and influence mental states. Frown continually and you will
feel cross; smile and you will feel cheerful. Carry yourself like a man,
and you will feel like a man. Carl H. Pierce says regarding the proper
carriage of a salesman: "Remember that you are asking no favors; that
you have nothing to apologize for, and that you have every reason in the
world to hold your head up high. And it is wonderful what this holding
of the head will do in the way of increasing sales. We have seen
salesmen get entrance to the offices of Broadway buyers simply through
the holding of the head straight up from the shoulders. The rule to
follow is: Have your ear lobes directly over your shoulders, so that a
plumb line hung from the ears describes the line of your body. Be sure
not to carry the head either to the right or left but vertical. Many men
make the mistake, especially when waiting for a prospect to finish some
important piece of business, of leaning the head either to the right or
left. This indicates weakness. A study of men discloses the fact that
the strong men never tilt the head. Their heads sit perfectly straight
on strong necks. Their shoulders, held easily yet firmly in correct
position, are inspiring in their strength indicating poise. Every line
of the body, in other words, denotes the thought of the bearer."

So cultivate not only the inner sense of Self Respect, but also the
outward indications of that mental state. Thus do you secure the benefit
of the action and reaction between body and mind.

II. _Poise._ The salesman should cultivate Poise, which manifests in
balance, tranquility and ease. Poise is that mental quality which
maintains a natural balance between the various faculties, feelings,
emotions and tendencies. It is the assertion of the "I" as the Master
and controller of the mental states, feelings, and action. Poise enables
one to correctly _balance_ himself, mentally, instead of allowing his
feelings or emotions to run away with him. Poise enables one to remain
the Master of Himself, instead of "slopping over" on the one hand, or of
"losing his nerve" on the other. Poise enables one to "keep himself well
in hand." The man who has Poise indeed has Power, for he is never
thrown off his balance, and consequently always remains master of the
situation. Did you ever hear of, or see, the Gyroscope? Well, it is a
peculiar little mechanical contrivance consisting of a whirling wheel
within a frame work, the peculiarity consisting of the arrangement and
action of the wheel which by its motion always maintains its balance and
equilibrium. No matter how the little apparatus is turned, it always
maintains its equilibrium. It is likely to play an important part in
aerial navigation and mono-rail systems of transportation, in the
future.

Well, here is the point--_be a Mental Gyroscope_. Cultivate the mental
quality which acts automatically in the direction of keeping your
balance and centre of mental gravity. This does not mean that you should
be a prig, or a solemn-faced smug bore, with an assumption of
supernatural dignity. On the contrary, always be natural in manner and
action. The point is to always maintain your balance, and mental
control, instead of allowing your feelings or emotions to run away with
you. Poise means Mastery--lack of it means Slavery. As Edward Carpenter
says: "How rare indeed to meet a _man_! How common rather to discover a
creature hounded on by tyrant thoughts (or cares, or desires), cowering,
wincing under the lash--or perchance priding himself to run merrily in
obedience to a driver that rattles the reins and persuades himself that
he is free." Poise is the Mental Gyroscope--keep it in good working
order.

III. _Cheerfulness._ The "bright, cheerful and happy" mental attitude,
and the outward manifestation of the same, is a magnet of success to the
salesman. The "grouch" is the negative pole of personality, and does
more to repel people than almost any other quality. So much in demand is
the cheerful demeanor and mental state, that people often give undue
preference to those possessing it, and pass over a "grouchy" individual
of merit in favor of the man of less merit but who possesses the
"sunshine" in his personality. The "man with the southern exposure" is
in demand. There is enough in the world to depress people without having
gloom thrust upon them by persons calling to sell goods. Well has the
poet said:

   "Laugh, and the world laughs with you;
      Weep, and you weep alone.
    For this sad old earth is in need of mirth;
      It has troubles enough of its own."

The world prefers "Happy Jim" to "Gloomy Gus," and will bestow its
favors upon the first while turning a cold shoulder to the second. The
Human Wet Blanket is not a welcome guest, while the individual who
manages to "let a little sunshine in" upon all occasions is always
welcome. The optimistic and cheerful spirit creates for itself an
atmosphere which, perhaps unconsciously, diffuses itself in all places
visited by the individual. Cheerfulness is contagious, and is a most
valuable asset. We have known individuals whose sunny exteriors caused a
relief in the tension on the part of those whom they visited. We have
heard it said of such people: "I am always glad to see that fellow--he
brightens me up." This does not mean that one should endeavor to become
a professional wit, a clown, or a comedian--that is not the point. The
idea underlying this mental state and attribute of personality is
_Cheerfulness_, and a disposition to look on the bright side of things,
and to manifest that mental state as the sun does its rays. Learn to
radiate Cheerfulness. It is not so much a matter of saying things, as it
is a matter of thinking them. A man's inner thoughts are reflected in
his outward personality.

So cultivate the inner _Cheerfulness_ before you can hope to manifest
its outer characteristics. There is nothing so pitiful, or which falls
so flat, as a counterfeit Cheerfulness--it is worse than the minstrel
jokes of the last decade. To be cheerful one does not have to be a
"funny man." The atmosphere of true Cheerfulness can proceed only from
within. The higher-class Japanese instruct their children to maintain a
cheerful demeanor and a smiling face no matter what happens, even though
the heart is breaking. They consider this the obligation of their caste,
and regard it as most unworthy of the person, as well as insulting to
others, to manifest any other demeanor or expression. Their theory,
which forms a part of their wonderful code called "Bushido," is that it
is an impertinence to obtrude one's grief, sorrow, misfortunes, or
"grouch," upon others. They reserve for their own inner circle their
sorrows and pains, and always present a cheerful and bright appearance
to others. The Salesman would do well to remember the "Bushido,"--he
needs it in his business. Avoid the "grouch" mental state as you would a
pestilence. Don't be a "knocker"--for "knocks," like chickens, come home
to roost, bringing their chicks with them.

IV. _Politeness._ Courtesy is a valuable asset to a Salesman. Not only
this, but it is a trait characteristic of _gentlemen_ in all walks of
life, and is a duty toward oneself as well as toward others. By
politeness and courtesy we do not mean the formal, artificial outward
acts and remarks which are but the counterfeit of the real thing, but,
instead, that respectful demeanor toward others which is the mark of
innate refinement and good-breeding. Courtesy and politeness do not
necessarily consist of formal rules of etiquette, but of an inner
sympathy and understanding of others which manifests in a courteous
demeanor toward them. Everyone likes to be treated with appreciation
and understanding and is willing to repay the same in like form. One
does not need to be a raw "jollier" in order to be polite.
Politeness--true politeness--comes from within, and it is almost
impossible to imitate it successfully. Its spirit may be expressed by
the idea of trying to see the good in everyone and then acting toward
the person as if his good were in plain evidence. Give to those with
whom you come in contact the manner, attention and respect to which they
would be entitled if they were actually manifesting the highest good
within them.

One of the best retail salesmen we ever knew attributed his success to
his ability to "get on the customer's side of the counter," that is, to
try to see the matter from the customer's viewpoint. This led to a
sympathetic understanding which was most valuable. If the Salesman can
manage to put himself in the place of the customer, he may see things
with a new light, and thus gain an understanding of the customer which
will enable him, the Salesman, to manifest a true politeness toward his
customers. But politeness and courtesy does not mean a groveling,
cringing attitude of mind or demeanor. True politeness and courtesy must
have as its background and support, Self Respect.

Allied to politeness is the quality called Tact, which is defined as the
"peculiar skill or adroitness in doing or saying exactly that which is
required by, or is suited to, the circumstances; nice perception or
discernment." A little consideration will show that Tact must depend
upon an understanding of the viewpoint and mental attitude of the other
person, so that if one has the key to the one he may open the door of
the other. An understanding of the other person's position, and an
application of the true spirit of politeness, will go a long way toward
establishing the quality of tactfulness. Tact is a queer combination of
Worldly Wisdom and the Golden Rule--a mixture of the ability to seek
into the other person's mind, and the ability to speak unto others as
you would that others speak unto you, under the same circumstances. The
trait called Adaptability, or the faculty of adjusting oneself to
conditions, and to the personality of others, also belongs to this
category. Adaptability depends upon the ability to see the other
person's position. As a writer says: "Those individuals who are out of
harmony with their surroundings disappear to make room for those who are
in harmony with them." When the keynote of the understanding of the
minds of others is found, the whole subject of true politeness, tact and
adaptability is understood and may be applied in practice.

V. _Human Nature._ Closely allied to the subject of the preceding
paragraphs, is that of Human Nature. A knowledge of Human Nature is very
important to the Salesman. In order to understand the workings of the
minds of others, one must not only understand the general psychological
principles involved, but also the special manifestations of those
principles. Nature tends to form classes and species, and the majority
of people may be grouped into special classes depending upon their
temperaments. An intelligent study of The New Psychology and the general
subject of Human Nature in works on Physiognomy, etc., will do much to
start one well upon the road to an understanding of Human Nature. But,
after all, the best knowledge comes only when the general principles are
tested and applied under observation in general experience.

In this particular work we have much to say upon certain features of
Human Nature--in fact, as we have said, Human Nature is but Psychology.
The following advice, from the pen of Prof. Fowler, the well known
authority on Phrenology, is recommended to all Salesmen desirous of
acquiring the faculty of understanding Human Nature: "Scan closely all
the actions of men, with a view to ascertain their motives and
mainsprings of action; look with a sharp eye at man, woman, child, all
you meet, as if you would read them through; note particularly the
expression of the eye, as if you would imbibe what it signifies; say to
yourself: What faculty prompted this expression or that action; drink in
the general looks, attitude, natural language, and manifestation of the
man, and yield yourself to the impressions naturally made on you--that
is, study human nature both as a philosophy and as a sentiment, or as
if being impressed thereby."

A forthcoming volume of this series, to be entitled "Human Nature," will
go into this subject in detail.




CHAPTER III

THE MIND OF THE SALESMAN (CONTINUED)


VI. _Hope._ The Salesman should cultivate the Optimistic Outlook upon
Life. He should encourage the earnest expectation of the good things to
come, and move forward to the realization thereof. Much of life success
depends upon the mental attitude of, and the confident expectation of, a
successful outcome. Earnest Desire, Confident Expectation, and Resolute
Action--this is the threefold key of attainment. Thought manifests
itself in action, and we grow in accordance with the mental pattern or
mould we create for ourselves. If you will look around you you will find
that the men who have succeeded, and who are succeeding, are those who
have maintained the hopeful mental attitude--who have always looked
forward to the star of hope even in the moments of the greatest trouble
and temporary reverses. If a man loses his hope permanently he is
defeated. Hope is the incentive which is always drawing man onward and
upward. Hope backed by Will and Determination is almost invincible.
Learn to look on the bright side of things, to believe in your ultimate
success. Learn to look upward and forward--heed the motto, "look aloft!"
Cultivate the "rubber-ball spirit," by which you will be able to bounce
higher up the harder you are thrown down. There is a subtle
psychological law by the operation of which we tend to materialize our
ideals. The "confident expectation" backed by actions will win out in
the end. Hitch your wagon to the Star of Hope.

VII. _Enthusiasm._ Very few people understand the true meaning of the
word "enthusiasm," although they may use it quite frequently in ordinary
conversation. Enthusiasm means far more than energy, activity, interest
and hope--it means the expression of the "soul" in mental and physical
actions. The Greeks used the word as meaning "inspiration; moved by the
gods," from which arose the later meaning of "inspired by a superhuman
or divine power." The modern usage is defined as: "Enkindled and
kindling fervor of the soul; ardent and imaginative zeal or interest;
lively manifestation of joy or zeal;" etc. A person filled with
enthusiasm seems to move and act from the very centre of his being--that
part which we mean when we say "soul." There is a wonderful power in
rightly directed enthusiasm, which serves not only to arouse within one
his full powers, but also tends to impress others in the direction of
mental contagion. Mental states are contagious, and enthusiasm is one of
the most active of mental states. Enthusiasm comes nearer to being
"soul-power" than any other outward expression of mental states. It is
allied to the soul-stirring impulse of music, poetry, and the drama. We
can _feel_ it in the words of a writer, speaker, orator, preacher,
singer or poet. Enthusiasm may be analyzed as Inspired Interest. As
Walter D. Moody says: "It will be found that all men possessed of
personal magnetism are very much in earnest. Their intense earnestness
is magnetic." The best authorities agree that Enthusiasm is the active
principle of what has been called Personal Magnetism.

An old writer has well said: "All of us emit a sphere, aura, or halo,
impregnated with the very essence of ourselves, sensitives know it, so
do our dogs and other pets; so does a hungry lion or tiger; aye, even
flies, snakes and insects, as we know to our cost. Some of us are
magnetic--others not. Some of us are warm, attractive, love-inspiring
and friendship-making, while others are cold, intellectual, thoughtful,
reasoning, but not magnetic. Let a learned man of the latter type
address an audience and it will soon tire of his intellectual discourse,
and will manifest symptoms of drowsiness. He talks at them, but not into
them--he makes them think, not feel, which is most tiresome to the
majority of persons, and few speakers succeed who attempt to merely make
people think--they want to be made to feel. People will pay liberally to
be made to feel or laugh, while they will begrudge a dime for
instruction or talk that will make them think. Pitted against a learned
man of the type mentioned above, let there be a half-educated, but very
loving, ripe and mellow man, with but nine-tenths of the logic and
erudition of the first man, yet such a man carries along his crowd with
perfect ease, and everybody is wide-awake, treasuring up every good
thing that falls from his lips. The reasons are palpable and plain. It
is heart against head; soul against logic; and soul is bound to win
every time." And as Newman says: "Deductions have no power of
persuasion. The heart is commonly reached, not through the reason, but
through the imagination, by means of direct impressions, by the
testimony of facts and events, by history, by description. Persons
influence us, looks subdue us, deeds inflame us." Enthusiasm imparts
that peculiar quality that we call "_life_," which constitutes such an
important part in the personality of a salesman. Remember we have
analyzed enthusiasm as _inspired earnestness_--think over this analysis,
and grasp its inner meaning. The very word "ENTHUSIASM" is
inspiring--visualize it and let it incite you to its expression when you
feel "dead." The very thought of it is a stimulant!

VIII. _Determination._ The Salesman needs the quality of dogged
determination, persistence, and "stick-to-itiveness." This bulldog
quality must be developed. The "I Can and I Will" spirit must be
cultivated. Determination is composed of several constituent faculties.
First comes Combativeness or the quality of "tackling" obstacles. This
is a marked quality in all strong characters. It manifests as courage,
boldness, resistance, opposition, and disposition to combat opposition
rather than to yield to it.

Allied to this faculty is another which bears the very inadequate name
of Destructiveness, which expresses itself in the direction of breaking
down barriers, pushing aside obstacles, making headway; pushing to the
front; holding one's own; etc. It is the quality of the man who makes
his own paths and builds up his own trade. It is the "pioneer" faculty
of the mind which clears away the ground, lays foundations and builds
the first log-cabin.

Then comes Continuity, the faculty which is well-defined as
"stick-to-itiveness," which enables one to stick to his task until it is
finished. This faculty gives stability and staying qualities, and
enables a man to _finish_ well. The lack of this quality often
neutralizes the work of other good faculties, causing the person to
"let go" too soon, and to thus lose the fruits of his labors.

Finally, comes the faculty of Firmness, which gives to one the quality
of tenacity, perseverance, fixity, decision and stability, accompanied
by a certain "stubborn tendency" which holds the other faculties
together. A certain amount of this quality of "jackass courage" is
needed in the mental make up of a Salesman. If a person is 'set' to a
certain extent it enables him to maintain his position without the
constant wear and tear upon his will that is met with by those lacking
it. This faculty prevents one from being "sidetracked," and enables him
to "put his hand to the plow and look not backward." It holds the chisel
of the will up against the metal of circumstances until the work is
accomplished. It enables one to be like the rock against which
harmlessly beat the waves of opposition and competition. It enables one
to see his object, and then to march straight to it.

IX. _Secretiveness._ We mention this quality, not because it is one
which plays such an important part in the world of Salesmanship, but
because the tendency of the average Salesman is to talk too freely
regarding matters which should be kept to himself. This failing on the
part of the Salesman is due to the free expression which his work
necessitates. He should remember, however, that many a good plan has
miscarried by reason of the tendency of the Salesman to "blab," or to
"give away" his hopes, plans and expectations. The Salesman should think
thrice before speaking regarding any matter of office or personal
policy, plans, methods, or other things which he would not like his
competitors to know. It is a safe rule, laid down by a very successful
business man, that one should "Never speak of anything that he is not
desirous of his principal competitor hearing--for hear it he will if one
speaks of it." The world is full of the "little birds" who delight in
carrying tales--the "walls have ears" with microphone, wireless
telegraphic attachments. Be a diplomat in matters of the kind to which
we have referred. A little thought should convince that if you
_yourself_ do not respect your own secrets, you can not expect others
to do so.

X. _Acquisitiveness._ This faculty manifests as the desire for acquiring
things; gaining; possessing; reaching out for; etc. It is often
condemned by people, because of the unpleasant traits manifested by
those in whom it is abnormally developed, as the miser, the "hog," and
the "stingy" person. But it is not well to hastily condemn this faculty,
for without it we would become desireless, spendthrift, wasteful,
without resources, and poor. The man who would succeed in any line of
business must cultivate Acquisitiveness, if he is deficient in it. He
must learn to want and earnestly desire the good things of life, and to
reach out for them. He must desire to accumulate something for himself,
for by so doing he will work so that he will make a valuable
accumulating channel for his employers. Acquisitiveness is one of the
animating principles of the business world, evade it though we may try
to. It is hypocritical to deny this. The facts are too plain to be
brushed aside or denied. As the writer has said in another work: "People
are all after money--every blessed mother's son and daughter of
them--in one way or another." What is the use of denying it. Some day we
may have better economic conditions--I pray to God that we may--but
until that time all of us must chase the nimble dollar to the best of
our ability. For unless a man does this thing, then shall he not eat;
nor be clothed; nor have shelter; nor books; nor music; nor anything
else that makes life worth living for one who thinks and feels. It seems
to me the proper balance is preserved in the following statement: "While
you're getting, get all you can--_but give the other fellow a chance_."

XI. _Approbativeness._ This is the quality which manifests in a desire
for praise, flatter, approval, fame, etc. The average Salesman does not
need to develop this faculty--his temperament is very apt to make him
have it too highly developed. It is all very well to feel a certain
pleasure from the approval of others of work well done. But it is a
decided weakness for one to be so sensitive to the opinions of others
that they suffer from their disapproval, or from the lack of praise. He
who is dependent upon the praise of the crowd, or the approval of the
mob is a fool, deserving of pity. The crowd is fickle and tomorrow may
turn on those whom they are praising to-day. Moreover there is always
much secret envy and jealousy mixed with the praise of others.

Did you ever notice how eagerly people relate the slip-up or stumble of
those whom they have been praising? Be not deceived by the plaudits of
the crowd. Nor should you allow yourself to be deterred from a right
course because of fear of blame. Learn to rely on what you, yourself,
know to be right. "Be sure you're right, then go ahead." Learn to stand
upon your own feet, and do not lean upon others. Shake the crowd off
your heels--mind your own business and let others do likewise. And look
the world squarely in the eye while you are talking to it, too. It will
understand you, if you do not truckle to it. But never cringe to
it--else it will rend you to pieces. "They say; what do they say; let
them say!" "Do not worry about it--your friends will not care, and your
enemies will criticise anyway; so what's the use?" Say to yourself: "I
am the Captain of my Soul." And remember Burton's glorious words of
freedom and courage:

   "Do what thy manhood bids thee do, from none but self expect applause;
    He noblest lives and noblest dies who makes and keeps his self-made
        laws.
    All other Life is living Death, a world where none but Phantoms dwell.
    A breath, a wind, a sound, a voice, a tinkling of the Camel's bell."

The difference between Egoism and Egotism consists largely of the
difference between Self-Respect and Approbativeness. Develop the first,
and restrain the second--if you wish to become an Individual. And the
successful Salesman is always an Individual--standing out from and above
the crowd of the "mere persons" or "order-takers." Be a Man, and not a
human looking glass reflecting the ideas, opinions, and wishes of all
those around you. Be creative, not imitative. Flattery is the food for
apes, not for men.

_Personal Expression._ While one's personal expression in the direction
of clothing, walk, voice, etc., can scarcely be called mental
qualities, yet they must be considered as _expressions_ of mental
qualities--outward manifestations of inward states. So true is this that
people naturally judge one's character by these outward expressions.
And, moreover, there is a subtle reaction of one's outward
manifestations upon one's mental states. One's walk, carriage and
demeanor influence one's mental attitude, as we may prove by changing
these outward manifestations and noting our changed feelings. As someone
has said: "The consciousness of being well dressed imparts a certain
serenity and peace which even religion sometimes fails to give us."

And, as for physical attitudes, etc., hear what several eminent
psychologists tell us. Prof. Halleck says: "By inducing an expression we
can often cause its allied emotion." Prof. James says: "Whistling to
keep up courage is no mere figure of speech. On the other hand, sit all
day in a moping posture, sigh, and reply to everything with a dismal
voice, and your melancholy lingers. There is no more valuable precept in
moral education than this: If we wish to conquer undesirable emotional
tendencies in ourselves we must assiduously, and in the first instance
cold-bloodedly, go through the _outward movements_, of those contrary
dispositions which we wish to cultivate. Smooth the brow, brighten the
eye, contract the dorsal rather than the ventral aspect of the frame,
and speak in a major key, pass the genial compliment and your heart must
indeed be frigid if it does not gradually thaw."

Dr. Woods Hutchinson says: "To what extent muscular contractions
condition emotions, as Prof. James has suggested, may be easily tested
by a quaint and simple little experiment upon a group of the smallest
voluntary muscles of the body, those that move the eyeball. Choose some
time when you are sitting quietly in your room, free from all disturbing
thoughts and influences. Then stand up, and assuming an easy position,
cast the eyes upward, and hold them in that position for thirty seconds.
Instantly and involuntarily you will be conscious of a tendency toward
reverential, devotional, contemplative ideas and thoughts. Then turn the
eyes sideways, glancing directly to the right or to the left, through
half-closed lids. Within thirty seconds images of suspicion, of
uneasiness, or of dislike will rise unbidden to the mind. Turn the eyes
on one side and slightly downward, and suggestions of jealousy or
coquetry will be apt to spring unbidden. Direct your gaze downward
toward the floor, and you are likely to go off into a fit of reverie or
abstraction." Maudsley says: "The specific muscular action is not merely
an exponent of passion, but truly an essential part of it. If we try
while the features are fixed in the expression of one passion to call up
in the mind a different one, we shall find it impossible to do so."

In view of the above statements, we may readily see the importance of
cultivating those outward expressions which are co-related to desirable
mental states or feelings. By so doing we arouse in our minds those
particular states or feelings. And, moreover, we tend to impress others
with the possession on our part of the co-related mental qualities.
One's outward expression is a powerful instrument of suggestion to
others, and people are unconsciously and instinctively affected by it,
to our benefit or detriment. Let us therefore consider, briefly, the
general principles underlying personal expression along the lines
indicated.

_Carriage and Walk._ In the first part of the previous chapter, under
the sub-head of "Self-Respect" we have given you the advice of a good
authority concerning the proper carriage. The key is: Carry yourself in
a manner showing your Self-Respect, Poise, and Consideration of Others.
Another authority gives the following directions for the correct
position in standing: "(1) Heels together; (2) head up, with chin
slightly drawn in rather than protruding; (3) eyes front; (4) shoulders
thrown back but not elevated; (5) chest expanded; (6) abdomen slightly
drawn in, and not allowed to protrude; (7) arms dropped naturally to the
sides, with the little fingers lightly touching the sides of the thigh.
This may make you feel a little stiff and awkward at first, but, if you
persevere, will soon establish itself as second nature with you."

Another authority says: "The easiest way in which to acquire a correct
carriage is to imagine that you are suspended from on high with a line,
the lowest end of the line being fastened to the lower end of your
breast-bone. If you will stand and walk as if you are so suspended, the
result will be that you will acquire an easy, graceful, gliding walk,
and a correct carriage and natural position." Another authority gives
the following advice: "The following method if observed in walking and
standing, will impart a desirable physical poise and will keep you erect
and in a graceful attitude while walking: Stand with your back toward
the wall, with the heels, legs, hips, shoulders and back of head
touching the wall, and with the chin slightly drawn in. Press up against
the wall firmly. You will find yourself in an uncomfortable position,
and one that is unnatural and incorrect. Then, keeping your heels to the
wall, allow your body to swing forward into a natural position, being
careful to keep the body firm in the same 'form,' avoiding relaxation,
swinging yourself forward from the ankle joints alone. When you find
that the correct poised, natural position has been attained, hold it,
and march forward in what will be the natural, normal, well-balanced
walking position. Practice this repeatedly, several times every day,
until you have fully acquired the habit."

_Shaking Hands._ When you grasp another's hand in the act of "shaking
hands," do not do so in a listless, cold-blooded manner--do not extend
to the other man a flabby, clammy, fish-like hand. But take hold of his
hand as if you liked to do it--throw interest into the proceeding. More
than this--throw feeling into it. Throw into the hand-clasp the feeling:
"_I like you, and you like me_." Then, when you draw your hand away, if
possible let your fingers slide over the palm of his hand in a caressing
manner, allowing his first finger to pass between your thumb and
forefinger, close up in the crotch of the thumb. Practice this well,
until you can perform it without thinking of it. You will find merit in
the method. Grasp the other person's hand "as if he were your best
girl's millionaire father-in-law."

_Voice._ The Salesman should cultivate a voice with expression in it.
His voice should convey his belief in what he is saying, and his
interest in the story. You will find it an aid in this direction if you
will learn to visualize your thoughts--that is, to make a mental
picture of the thing you are saying. One can always describe better
that which they see before them. In the degree that you can see your
mental picture, so will be your degree of power in expressing it to
another in words, and so will be the degree of feeling in your tone. The
voice should express the meaning of your thought rather than being
merely the symbol of it. Try to say "Good Morning" as if you meant
it--then say it in the usual way. Do you see the difference? Throw your
thought and feeling into your voice. Forget all about yourself and the
other man and concentrate your thought and feeling into your voice.

Many people make the mistake of "speaking with their muscles instead of
with their nerves." They throw muscular energy into their words, when
they should use nervous energy, or thought-force. The former has but
little effect on the mind of the other, while the second vibrates subtly
and reaches the feelings of those addressed. _Feel_, when you wish to
speak impressively, and your tones will reflect the same, and induce a
similar feeling in others. It is a point worth remembering that one may
"bring down" the voice of an excited person to one's own pitch, if the
latter is firmly held at the customary pitch, in a firm manner. Not only
does this "bring down" the other man's voice, but his feelings will also
follow suit, and besides, you also manage to keep your own temper and
poise. Never raise your voice because another raises his--resist the
tendency, and maintain your poise and power by so doing. This is worth
remembering.

_The Eyes._ Learn to look people in the eyes when you are speaking to
them. Not in a staring manner, but firmly, politely and easily. This may
be acquired with a little practice. Practice on yourself in the mirror
if you prefer. A shifting, restless gaze produces a bad impression,
while a firm, honest gaze will incline people in your favor. You will
find that strong men--men who influence others--almost always have a
firm, strong gaze. It is worth practice, work and time, to acquire this
personal trait.

_Clothes._ A man is very often known by his clothes, or at least judged
by them. The Salesman should pay attention to this point of personal
expression, since it will count much for or against him. The first
point to remember is that _cleanliness_ is the first requisite in
clothing. Keep your clothes clean and well pressed. Particularly keep
your linen clean, for nothing in the way of dress acts so much against a
man as soiled linen. Another important point is to keep the extremities
well clad--that is, the head, feet and hands. A soiled or worn hat; a
soiled or frayed collar; an old, or unpolished pair of shoes; ragged
sleeves or frayed cuffs--these things are more easily noticed and count
more against a man than a shabby suit. Better an old suit well brushed,
with a good hat, shoes and clean cuffs--than the reverse.

One should always wear as good clothes as his means will permit, and
such as will be in keeping with his occupation and position. The rule is
to get as good material as possible, and cut reasonably within the
prevailing style--but avoiding all extremes, or fanciful designs. _A
well-dressed business man should give neither the appearance of
shabbiness nor of being "dressed-up."_ He should present the appearance
of general neatness without attracting any special attention to his
clothing. When a man's clothes specially attract one, that man is not
well dressed, but either poorly dressed or over-dressed. The "happy
mean" between the two extremes is to be sought after. Polonius' advice
to his son is well worth memorizing: "Costly thy habit as thy purse can
buy, but not expressed in fancy; rich, not gaudy; for the apparel oft
proclaims the man."

_Details of Appearance._ Personal cleanliness and neatness are
pre-requisites of the Salesman who wishes to produce a favorable
impression. There is nothing that will so tend to prejudice the average
business man against a new caller as the appearance of neglect of
personal care. The body should be well-bathed; the hair trimmed and
neatly brushed; the face cleanly shaven; the teeth well brushed; the
nails clean; the shoes polished; the necktie and collar clean; the
clothes brushed. Avoid the smell of liquor or tobacco on the breath, and
eschew as fatal the odor of strong perfumery on the clothes or
handkerchief. The yellow stains of the cigarette showing on the fingers,
and the disgusting odor attaching to the cigarette habit, have lost
many a man a favorable bearing. The cigarette is "taboo" to many men who
smoke other forms of tobacco. These things are instinctively recognized
by the buyer as manifestations of the mind of the salesman--a part of
his personality--and very rightly so, for if the mind be kept above them
they do not manifest. All these things go toward forming the impression
which one person always makes upon another at the first meeting, and
which have so much to do with securing a favorable notice during the
Approach of the Salesman.




CHAPTER IV

THE MIND OF THE BUYER


The second important element in a sale is the Mind of the Buyer. In the
mind of the buyer is fought the battle of the sale. Within its
boundaries are manifested the movements which win or lose the day. As a
writer on the subject has said: "The buyer's brain is the board upon
which the game is played. The faculties of the brain are the men. The
salesman moves or guides these faculties as he would chess men or
checkers on a board." In order to understand the ground upon which your
battle must be fought, and the mental elements which you must combat,
persuade, move, push or attract, you must understand the various
faculties of the mind, as well as the mind as a whole. Let us,
therefore, consider the various mental faculties which are employed
actively by a buyer in the mental process of a purchase.

I. _Quality._ In the first place, let us consider that which the
phrenologists call "Quality," by which they express the various degrees
of fineness or coarseness in a man's mental make-up which is usually
indicated by his appearance and physical characteristics. This "quality"
in a man is akin to what we call "class," "breeding," or "blood" in the
higher animals. It is difficult to explain, but is universally
recognized. At one extreme of "quality" we find those individuals who
are fine-grained, refined, high-strung, intense, and inclined to be
susceptible to emotional or sentimental influence, poetry, music, etc.,
and are apt to be more or less impractical and out of harmony with the
material world of men and affairs. At the other extreme we find those
individuals who are coarse-grained, of coarse and unrefined tastes,
animal, gross, unrefined, and generally "swinish." Between these two
extremes we find many degrees in the scale. The outward physical signs
of the person, such as the coarseness or fineness of his skin, hair,
nails, ears and facial features, as well as his general form and
characteristics, will usually give the careful observer the key to the
degree of a man's "quality." It will be well for the Salesman to
acquaint himself with these characteristics, for they throw much light
on the general character of people.

Next in order come what are called the Temperaments, by which term
phrenologists designate the general classes into which individuals fit.
As a rule, however, an individual manifests the elements of several of
the temperaments--that is, they blend in him. The best phrenological
authorities classify the temperaments as follows: (1) The Vital; (2) The
Motive; (3) The Mental; the characteristics of which are described as
follows:

_The Vital Temperament._ This temperament is indicated by a predominance
of the purely physical or "animal" propensities. Those in whom it
predominates are distinguished by a round head, wide space between the
corners of the eyes and the ears, side-head full, broad forehead (not
necessarily high). They are generally fleshy with a "well-fed"
appearance, inclined to be broad shouldered and deep chested and with a
"bull neck"--splendid animals, in fact. Their mental characteristics
are love of eating and drinking, and animal comforts; impulsiveness,
impetuosity, heartiness, quick temper, zeal and ardor, often shrewd and
cunning but without great depth, susceptible to flattery and appeal to
selfish emotions and prejudices, and loving pleasure. They are generally
selfish and grasping toward that which caters to their pleasure and
physical welfare. Try to "get all that is coming to them," and yet at
the same time tend toward conviviality and are desirous of being thought
"good fellows." Are usually excitable, and are easily thrown off their
balance. Those in whom this temperament is deficient manifest physical
characteristics opposite to those above mentioned, and are more or less
anaemic, or bloodless, and show a lack of vitality and physical
well-being. Those in whom this temperament predominates make good
butchers, hotel-keepers, captains, locomotive engineers, traders,
politicians, contractors, etc. They are reached through their feelings
rather than through their intellect.

_The Motive Temperament._ This temperament is indicated by a
predominance of muscular strength, endurance, toughness, and powers of
action. Those in whom it predominates are distinguished by a general
leanness and spareness; strongly marked and prominent features, usually
with a large nose and high cheek bones; large and strong teeth; large
joints and knuckles--the Abraham Lincoln physical characteristics, in
fact. Their mental characteristics are determination, persistence,
combativeness, destructiveness, endurance, thoroughness, management,
executive ability, creative power, stubbornness, powers of resistance,
and often an indomitable spirit. Their emotions are not on the surface,
but when once aroused are strong and persistent. They are slow to wrath,
but are good fighters and will stay to the finish. They are generally
canny and shrewd, instinctively. They are the active and persistent
workers of the world. It is this temperament in one which supplies his
motive power--his ability and taste for work. Those in whom this
temperament is deficient manifest physical characteristics opposite to
those above mentioned, and accordingly are averse to work or exertion of
any kind.

_The Mental Temperament._ This temperament is indicated by a
predominance of nervous force, mental activity, reasoning power,
imagination, and a brain development rather than bodily strength or
physical activity. Those in whom it predominates are distinguished by a
slight build, small bones and muscles, general fineness of structure,
quick motions, signs of nervous energy, sharp features, thin lips, thin,
finely shaped, and often pointed nose, high forehead, and expressive
eyes. Their mental characteristics are activity in reasoning processes,
active imagination, susceptibility to disturbance from uncongenial
environment and distasteful company, love of mental activity and often a
distaste for physical activity, sensitiveness, extremes of feeling and
emotion, eager and enthusiastic, and the general traits popularly
designated as "temperamental." Those in whom this temperament is
deficient manifest characteristics opposite to those above mentioned,
and are averse to mental activity.

_Blended Temperaments._ Nearly every individual possesses the three
temperaments blended in various proportions and combinations. In some,
one temperament predominates largely and gives us the distinctive
characteristics of that class. But in others, often two temperaments
will predominate, leaving the third scarcely manifest. In others, the
three are so well blended and balanced that the individual is known as
"well balanced" temperamentally--this being considered the ideal
condition.

Prof. Fowler, one of the old authorities in phrenology, says of the
blended temperaments: "Excessive Motive with deficient Mental gives
power and sluggishness, so that the talents lie dormant. Excessive Vital
gives physical power and enjoyment, but too little of the mental and
moral, along with coarseness and animality. Excessive Mental confers too
much mind for body, too much sentimentalism and exquisiteness, along
with greenhouse precocity. Whereas their equal balance gives an abundant
supply of vital energy, physical stamina, and mental power and
susceptibility. They may be compared to the several parts of a steamboat
and its appurtenances. The Vital is the steampower; the Motive, the hulk
or frame-work; the Mental, the freight and passengers. The Vital
predominating, generates more animal energy than can well be worked off,
and causes restlessness, excessive passion, and a pressure which
endangers outbursts and overt actions; predominant Motive gives too much
frame or hulk; moves slowly, and with weak Mental is too light freighted
to secure the great ends of life; predominant Mental overloads, and
endangers sinking; but all equally balanced and powerful, carry great
loads rapidly and well, and accomplish wonders. Such persons unite cool
judgment with intense and well governed feelings; great force of
character and intellect with perfect consistency; scholarship with sound
common sense; far seeing sagacity with brilliancy; and have the highest
order of both physiology and mentality."

The Salesman should thoroughly acquaint himself with the characteristics
of each of the three temperaments, and should also learn to analyze them
when found blended and in combination. An understanding of a man's
temperament will often give one the key to his general character and
disposition, which will be of the greatest advantage to the Salesman.
Many students of human nature devote their entire attention to a study
of the several faculties of the mind, ignoring the force and effect of
the temperaments. We consider this to be a mistake, for a thorough
knowledge of the temperaments gives one a general key to character, and,
as a fact, it is generally found that given a certain temperament or
combination of the same, a good phrenologist will be able to indicate
just what faculties are apt to be found in the ascendency in such a
character. And as the average Salesman cannot spare the time to become
an expert phrenologist, it will be seen that a correct knowledge of the
temperaments gives him his best working knowledge of the subject of
character reading.

Let us now consider the various groups of mental faculties which are
manifested by the buyer in his business, and which should be understood
by the Salesman in order that he may successfully meet the impulses
arising therefrom in the mind of the buyer. Our consideration of these
groups of faculties must necessarily be brief, but we shall include the
essential features.

_The Social Faculties._ This group of faculties includes _Amativeness_
or Sexuality; _Conjugality_ or Marital Inclination; _Parental Love_ or
Love of Offspring; _Friendship_ or Love of Companionship;
_Inhabitiveness_ or Love of Home. Phrenology teaches that this group of
organs occupies the lower back portion of the head, giving the
appearance of bulging behind the ears. _Amativeness_ or Sexuality when
highly developed causes one to be at the mercy of the attraction of the
opposite sex. While normally developed it plays a worthy part in life,
its excessive development manifests in licentiousness, and when
deficient manifests in an aversion to the opposite sex or a coldness and
reserve. Persons in whom this faculty is in excess will neglect business
for sex attraction, and will allow themselves to be "sidetracked" by
reason thereof. In selling a man of this kind, keep him away from this
particular subject, or he will not give you his attention. _Conjugality_
or Marital Inclination when highly developed causes one to be largely
influenced by one's companion in marriage. A man of this kind will be
largely governed by his wife's wishes, tastes and desires, consequently
if his wife "says so" the battle is won. Some men, however, while having
Amativeness largely developed, have but small Conjugality, and if one
love is not found satisfactory, another is substituted--an "affinity"
takes the wife's place. _Parental Love_ or Love of Offspring when highly
developed causes one to idolize his children and to be capable of
influence through them. Such men are prone to relate anecdotes regarding
their children and to bore listeners with recitals of infantile
brightness and precocity. They generally have photographs of their
children about their desks. An appeal to the interests of the children
always reaches the attention and interest of these people. _Friendship_,
or Love of Companionship, when highly developed causes one to seek
society, form attachments of friendship, enjoy social pleasures, do
favors for those whom they like, enjoy entertaining and being
entertained. Such a man will be more apt to base his business dealings
upon likes and acquaintance rather than upon reason or judgment, and are
comparatively easily persuaded by those whom they like. An appearance of
sociability generally attracts them to those manifesting it. The
quality of "good fellowship" appeals to this class. _Inhabitiveness_ or
Love of Home when highly developed causes one to become _attached to
places_, localities and associations. Such a man will be full of
patriotism, local pride and prejudice and provincialism. He will resent
any apparent "slur" upon his locality, and will appreciate any favorable
comment on his home place and locality. These people are like cats who
are attached to places rather than to people. Their township is usually
their idea of "my country."

_The Selfish Faculties._ This group of faculties includes
_Vitativeness_, or Love of Life; _Combativeness_, or Love of Opposing;
_Destructiveness_, or Love of Breaking Through; _Alimentiveness_, or
Love of Appetite; _Bibativeness_, or Love of Drink; _Acquisitiveness_,
or Love of Gain; _Secretiveness_, or Cunning; _Cautiousness_, or
Prudence; _Approbativeness_, or Love of Praise; _Self Esteem_, or Self
Reliance. Phrenology teaches that this group of organs occupy the sides
of the back part of the head. _Vitativeness_, or Love of Life, when
highly developed causes one to manifest a determination to live, and a
great fear of death. Anything promising increased health or long life
will greatly attract these people, and anything arousing a fear of ill
health or death will influence them greatly. These people are excellent
customers for health appliances, books on health, etc. _Combativeness_,
or Love of Opposing, when highly developed causes one to desire a
"scrap" or an argument or debate. These people can best be handled by
seemingly allowing them to win in argument, and then leading them to
suggest the thing that the Salesman has had in his mind all the time.
These people may be led, or coaxed, but never driven. With them it is
always a case of "sugar catches more flies than vinegar," or of the hot
sun causing the man to drop the cloak which the fierce north wind was
unable to blow away from him. A man of this kind will be so pleased at
beating another in an argument on a minor point, that he will forget the
main point and will be in a humor to be persuaded. Always avoid a direct
argument or dispute with these people on important points--they will let
their pride of combat obscure their judgment. But they will be ready to
bestow favors on those whom they believe they have worsted in argument.
_Destructiveness_, or Love of Breaking Through, when highly developed
causes one to take great pleasure in doing things in new ways; in
breaking precedents and defying authority, and in breaking down
obstacles. If you can arouse this spirit in such a man, by showing him
how he may do these things with your goods, he will fall in line. A man
of this kind may be interested at once in any proposition whereby he may
be enabled to do something in a novel way here--to defy opposition or
established custom--or to break down opposing obstacles. The keynote of
this faculty is: "Make Way." _Alimentiveness_, or Love of Appetite, when
highly developed causes one to incline toward gluttony and gormandizing,
and to place undue importance upon the pleasures of the table. A man of
this kind "lives to eat" instead of "eating to live," and may be reached
through his weakest point--his stomach. To such a man a good dinner is
more convincing than a logical argument. _Bibativeness_, or Love of
Drink, when highly developed causes one to manifest an inordinate taste
for liquids of all kinds. In some cases, where alcoholic drinks are
avoided by such people, they will run to excess in the direction of
"soft drinks" such as ginger ale, soda water, etc. It does not follow
that these people are fond of the effects of alcohol, the craving
seemingly being for liquids in some form. Such people, if their
appetites are not controlled, will let their taste for drinks run away
with their judgment and reason.

_Acquisitiveness_, or Love of Gain, when highly developed causes one to
be very grasping, avaricious, and often miserly. But, when not so highly
developed, it causes one to manifest a keen trading instinct, and is a
necessary factor in the mental make-up of the successful merchant. Those
in whom it is highly developed will be interested in any proposition
which seems to them to promise gain or saving. In selling such a man,
the effort should be to keep the one point of _profit or saving_ always
in evidence. In some cases this faculty, too highly developed and not
counterbalanced by other faculties, will make a man "penny wise and
pound-foolish," and will focus his mental gaze so closely on the nickel
held close to his eye that he will not see the dollar a little further
off. The "money talk" is the only one that will appeal to these people.

_Secretiveness_, or Cunning, when highly developed causes one to incline
toward double-dealing, duplicity, trickery and deception. It is the
"foxy" faculty, which, while useful to a certain degree, becomes
undesirable when carried to excess. In dealing with a man of this kind,
be on guard so far as accepting his statements at full value is
concerned. Accept his statements "with a grain of salt." Those who wish
to "fight the devil with his own fire" can reach these people by
allowing them to think that they are overreaching or getting the best of
the Salesman. The Salesman who is apparently defeated by these people,
is very apt to have discounted their methods in advance, and has mapped
out his line of retreat in advance so that the defeat is really a
victory. These people often will sacrifice a real advantage concerning a
big thing for the sake of tricking one out of a small advantage. To
trick another causes them to feel a glow of righteous well-being and
self-satisfaction, and makes them forget the main point in the deal. A
small victory thus won acts on them like the good dinner to the
Alimentive man, or flattery to the Approbative person. A faculty
developed to excess is always a weak point which can be used by others
who understand it.

_Cautiousness_, or Prudence, while an admirable quality when normally
developed, becomes, when highly developed, an undesirable quality. When
highly developed it causes one to be over-anxious, fearful, afraid to
act, liable to panic, etc. These people must be cultivated carefully,
and led to acquire confidence and trust. One should be very careful in
dealing with these people not to cause suspicion or alarm. They should
be treated with the utmost fairness, and given full explanations of
matters of which they are in doubt. As a rule they are very slow in
giving confidence, but when they once place confidence in a person they
are very apt to stick to him. Their very fearfulness acts to prevent
their making changes when confidence is once secured. These people
cannot be "rushed," as a rule--they require time in order to gain
confidence. They are, however, subject to an occasional "rush" by reason
of their panicky disposition, if they can be made to fear that if they
do not act some competitor will be given the chance, or that prices will
advance if they do not order at once. These people must be handled
carefully, and the Salesman who masters their nature will be well repaid
for his trouble and pains.

_Approbativeness_, or Love of Praise, when highly developed causes one
to be susceptible to flattery, desirous of praise, fond of "showing off"
and displaying himself, vain, sensitive to criticism, and generally
egotistical and often pompous. This quality when highly developed is a
weakness and gives to an adversary a powerful lever to work. The
Salesman, while secretly detesting this quality in a buyer, nevertheless
finds it a very easy channel of approach and weapon of success, when he
once understands its characteristics. These people can be reached by an
apparent "falling in" with their opinion of themselves, and a
manifestation of the proper respect in manner and words. These are the
people to whom the "soft soap" is applied liberally, and who are carried
away by an apparent appreciation of their own excellence. They will be
willing to bestow all sorts of favors upon those who are sufficiently
able to "understand" them, and to perceive the existence of those
superlative qualities which the cruel, cold, unfeeling world has
ignored. These are the people for whom the word "jolly" was invented,
and who are ready to absorb the available world-supply of that article.

_Self Esteem_, or Self Reliance, is a very different quality from that
just described, although many people seem unable to make the
distinction. Self Esteem when highly developed causes one to appreciate
one's powers and qualities, while not blinding oneself to one's faults.
It gives a sense of self-help, self-respect, self-reliance, dignity,
complacency, and independence. Carried to an extreme it manifests as
hauteur, superciliousness, imperiousness and tyranny. It is a
characteristic of the majority of successful men who have made their own
way by their own efforts. These people insist upon having their own way,
and using their own minds--they resent apparent influence or
suggestions, and often deliberately turn down a proposition simply
because they think that an effort is being made to force them into it.
The best way to deal with these people is to frankly acknowledge their
right to think for themselves, both in your manner, tone and
actions--and to present the proposition to them in an impersonal way,
apparently leaving the whole matter to their own good judgment. A
logical appeal appeals to them providing you do not make the mistake of
pitting yourself against them as an opponent in argument. You may play
the part of the lawyer to them, but remember always they want to play
the part of judge, and not that of the opposing counsel. If a matter be
subtly suggested to them in such a way as to make them think that they
have thought it themselves, they will favor it. Always give them a
chance to think out the point themselves--they like it. One need not
cringe to or flatter these people. All that is necessary is to maintain
your own self-respect, but at the same time let them walk a little ahead
of you, or stand just a little bit higher--that is all they need to make
them feel comfortable. They much prefer being a little higher or ahead
of a strong man than a weakling--it is more complimentary to them. They
appreciate the one who forces them to use their heaviest guns--but who
finally allows them to claim the victory.




CHAPTER V

THE MIND OF THE BUYER (CONTINUED)


_The Faculties of Application._ This group consists of two qualities:
that of _Firmness_, or Decision; and that of _Continuity_, or Patience.
These faculties, together with Self-Esteem, are located at the
upper-back, or back-upper, part of the head.

_Firmness_, or Decision, when highly developed causes one to manifest
stability, tenacity, fixedness of purpose, often reaching the point of
obstinacy, mulishness and stubbornness. These people cannot be driven,
or forced into anything. They are "mighty set" in their ways, and when
they once take a position are very apt to stick to it "right or wrong."
They are apt to fight to the last ditch for what they consider
principle, and will hold on to the end in what they believe to be right.
To attempt to drive them by force is to dash one's head against a stone
wall. The only way to handle these people is to endeavor to get them
interested in your side of the case before they have "set" their minds
and made up their opinion. If they have already been prejudiced against
your case, the only way is to give up the fight from the front, and
endeavor to present the matter from a different viewpoint, or angle, so
that new points will be presented which take the matter out of the old
category. These people will never give in unless they can say: "Oh, that
of course alters the matter entirely;" or "Oh, well, that places it in a
new light;" or "That is an entirely different proposition," etc. Leave
them victors of the positions upon which they are "set," and endeavor to
enlist their interest upon some new aspects, points, or principles--you
have at least an even chance of winning on the new point, whereas you
have none whatever on the old one. If, however, you can fit your case to
some of their established prejudices, for or against, you have won your
battle, for their quality of stability will then be employed in your
favor instead of against it. You will have to fit your case to their
moulds--cut your garment according to their pattern. A stubborn and
balky horse or mule can often be started in motion by turning its
attention to a new thing--such as putting a piece of twisted paper in
its ear, adjusting its harness in a new way, etc. The same principle
will work on stubborn men, "set" in their ways. Get their mind off the
point in question, and they will be rational. Let them have their own
way about their own points--and then plan a flank or rear attack on
them. You cannot batter down their stone-wall--you must either soar over
it, tunnel under it, or else go around it.

_Continuity_, or Patience, when highly developed causes one to "stick
to" a thing once undertaken; to manifest patience and perseverance, and
to give up the mind to one thing to the exclusion of others. It is
difficult to interest these people in new things--they instinctively
distrust the _new_ idea or thing, and cling to the old. These people are
very conservative and dislike change. They can be dealt with best by
avoiding shocking them with entirely _new_ things, and by carefully
attaching the newer idea or thing to the old so that it seems a part of
the latter. New things under old names do not disturb these people as
much as old things under new names--it is the form and name, rather than
the substance with them. Old wine in new bottles they abhor--but new
wine in old bottles they will stand. Arguments based on "old
established" things, or "good old-time" things, appeal to them. Things
must be "respectable," "well-established," "standing the test of years,"
"no new-fangled notion," etc., to appeal to them. Beware of trying new
and startling changes on them--they will be prejudiced against you at
once. Fall in with their ideals, and they will be excellent friends and
steady customers. The words "conservative" and "established" sound well
to their ears. On the contrary, people in whom this faculty is deficient
will incline toward new things because they are new. This faculty,
either in excess or when deficient, strongly affects the judgment, and
must be taken into consideration by the Salesman.

_The Religio-Moral Faculties._ This group of faculties includes
_Conscientiousness_, or Moral Principle; _Hope_, or Optimism;
_Spirituality_, or other-worldliness; _Veneration_, or Reverence; and
_Benevolence_, or Human Kindness. The organs manifesting these
qualities are located in the front-top of the head.

_Conscientiousness_, or Moral Principle, when highly developed gives one
a high sense of right, justice, truth, virtue, and duty. In dealing with
these people be particularly careful to make no misstatements,
misrepresentations, and exaggerations, but to adhere closely to the
facts of the case. Avoid also any appearance of trickiness or sharp
practice, stories of shrewd bargains, etc. These people become staunch,
firm friends if dealt with as they deserve, but become prejudiced
against people and houses whom they suspect of unfair dealings, or in
whom they lose confidence. Their keynote is "right's right"--and you
should adhere to it in all dealings with them. They are "the salt of the
earth," and it is a pity that there are not more of them. It is true
that sometimes this faculty seems to become perverted into phariseeism
and hypocrisy--but, then, every good thing has its counterfeit, and the
thing to do is to distinguish between the true and the false, here as
elsewhere.

_Hope_, or Optimism, when highly developed causes one to look on the
bright side of things, expect favorable outcomes, look confidently
forward, and expect much from the future. Its perversion manifests in
visionary dreams and castle-building. These people are amenable to
appeals to future success, bright prospects, cheerful outlook, and new
undertakings which seem promising. They become enthusiastic when
propositions are properly presented to them, and prefer to deal with
Salesmen of similar mental characteristics. These people are natural
"bulls" in business--beware of posing as a "bear" when dealing with
them. They relish a good cheering, cheerful talk more than anything
else. They are good people to deal with, particularly if the quality in
question is balanced by caution and trained by experience.

_Spirituality_, or Other-worldliness, when highly developed tends to
cause one to live on mental heights above the things of ordinary
material existence; to trust to the "inner light;" to incline toward
mysticism; and to experience a religious consciousness above the
ordinary. When manifested in a lesser degree it is evidenced by the
ordinary "religious" feeling. Perverted, it manifests as superstition,
credulity and "psychism." The people in whom this faculty is active seem
to feel that business is a degrading necessity, and they are never
thoroughly at home in it, unless the goods handled happen to be along
the lines of their general inclination, as for instance, religious
books, etc. Consequently, their business traits and tastes arise from
the other faculties, rather than from this particular one. However, they
are easily prejudiced against one whom they imagine does not agree with
them in their beliefs and convictions, and are apt to be swayed rather
more by feeling, emotion and sentiment than by cool judgment and pure
reason. They are usually strong in their likes and dislikes, and are
susceptible to appeals to their imagination.

_Veneration_, or Reverence, when highly developed causes one to manifest
reverence and extreme respect to authority of all kinds. These people
are usually good church members and law abiding citizens. In business,
the faculty is apt to cause them to place great stress upon authority
and example. If some large merchant has ordered certain goods, they
will be impressed by his example. They regard testimonials and
recommendations highly. In dealing with them one must avoid speaking
lightly of any thing or person esteemed by them, for they will be quick
to resent it. They are usually decidedly conventional, and aim to meet
the full requirements of "respectability" and social customs.

_Benevolence_, or Human Kindness, when highly developed causes one to
manifest sympathy, kindness, generosity, and philanthropy. These people
are altruistic and always ready to do another a good turn. They are
moved by their feelings rather than by their reason and judgment, and
will often base their business transactions rather more upon
friendliness and personal feeling than upon cold business judgment and
policy. They are generous where their sympathies and feelings are
interested, and are too often taken advantage of by selfish people who
play on their unselfish natures. Too often are they considered "easy,"
and are imposed on accordingly. The personal equation of the Salesman
plays an important part in dealing with these people.

From these several groups of faculties arise many combinations of
character in people. While it is true that there is almost infinite
variety among people, nevertheless, it is true that there are a few
general classes into which the majority of buyers may be fitted or
grouped for convenience. Let us now consider some of the more common
classes, and see how the faculties, in combination, manifest themselves.

_The Argumentive Buyer._ This man finds his greatest pleasure in
arguing, combating and disputing with the Salesman--argument for the
sake of argument, not for the sake of truth or advantage. This trait
arises from developed Combativeness and Destructiveness. Do not take
these people too seriously. Let them enjoy a victory over you on minor
points, and then after yielding gracefully coax them along the main
lines of the selling talk. At the best, they are arguing over terms,
definitions, forms, etc. and not over _facts_. Let them make their own
definitions, terms and forms--and then take their order for the goods
which you have fitted into their side of the argument. If, however, the
argument is based upon true reasoning and with a legitimate intent,
then reason with him calmly and respectfully.

_The Conceited Buyer._ This fellow is full of Approbativeness. We have
told you about him elsewhere. Meet him on his own plane, and give him
the particular bait indicated for his species--he will rise to it.
Appearing to defer to him, you may work in your arguments and selling
talk without opposition. Prefacing your explanation with "As you know by
your own experience;" or "as your own good judgment has decided;" etc.,
you may tell your story without much opposition. You must always let him
feel that you realize that you are in the presence of a great man.

_The "Stone Wall" Buyer._ This man has Self Esteem and Firmness largely
developed. We have told you about him under those two headings. You must
fly over, tunnel under, or walk around his stone wall of reserve and
stubbornness. Let him keep his wall intact--he likes it, and it would be
a shame to deprive him of it. A little careful search will generally
show that he has left his flanks, or his rear unguarded. He will not let
you in the front door--so go around to the kitchen door, or the
side-door of the sitting room--they are not so well guarded.

_The Irritable Buyer._ This is an unpleasant combination of
Approbativeness and Combativeness, in connection with poor digestion and
disordered nerves. Do not quarrel with him, and let his manner slide
over you like water off a duck's back. Stick to your selling talk, and
above everything keep cool, confident, and speak in even tones. This
course will tend to bring him down. If you show that you are not afraid
of him, and cannot be made angry--if your tones are firm yet under
control and not loud--he will gradually come down to meet you. If you
lose your own temper, you may as well walk out. Simply ignore his
"grouch"--deny it out of existence, as our New Thought friends would
say.

_The "Rough Shod" Buyer._ This man has large Destructiveness, and Self
Esteem, and wants to run things himself. He will try to ride rough shod
over you. Keep cool, even-tempered, self-possessed, and firm yet
respectful. Do not let him "rattle" you. It is often more of a "bluff"
than anything else. Keep on "sawing wood;" and do not be scared off.
These people are often but "lath-and-plaster" instead of the iron and
steel they appear to be at first sight. Keep firm and calm, is the
keynote in dealing with them.

_The Cautious Buyer._ This man generally has Cautiousness and Continuity
well developed, and Hope deficient. He is conservative and fearful.
Avoid frightening him with ideas of "new" things or "experiments." If
you are selling new things or ideas, manage to blend them in with things
with which he is familiar--associate the new and unfamiliar with the old
and familiar. And be conservative and careful in your talk, do not give
him the idea that you are a radical or a "new fangled idea" man. To him,
be an "old fashioned person."

_The Cunning Buyer._ This fellow has large Secretiveness or Cunning--he
belongs to the fox tribe. He likes to scheme out things for himself, so
if you will content yourself with giving him broad hints, accompanied by
expressive glances, regarding what can be done with your goods, he will
be apt to scheme out something in that direction, and thinking he has
done it all himself, he will be pleased and interested. Let him know
that you appreciate his shrewdness, particularly if he shows that his
Approbativeness is well developed. But, if not, better let him think
that he is deceiving you regarding his true nature. The majority of
cunning people, however, take pride in it, and relish a little grim
appreciation of their quality.

_The Dignified Buyer._ This man has large Self Esteem, and probably also
large Approbativeness. In either case, let him play the part for which
Nature has cast him, and you play yours. Your part is in recognizing and
respecting his dignity, by your manner and tone. Whether the dignity be
real or assumed, a recognition of and falling in with it is appreciated
and relished. Imagine that you are in the presence of your revered
great-grandfather, or the bishop, and the rest will be easy. We once
knew of a jovial, but indiscreet, salesman who lost a large sale to a
buyer of this kind, by poking him in the ribs and calling him "old
chap." The buyer barely escaped an attack of apoplexy--the Salesman
entirely escaped a sale.

_The "Mean" Buyer._ This man is moved by Acquisitiveness. He is
suspicious of you from the start, for he feels that you intend to get
some money from him. Don't blame him--he's built that way. Instead, get
his mind off the subject and on to another, by plunging in at once with
the statement that you have something upon which _he can make money_, or
something that _will save him money_. Emphasize these points, and you
will have aroused his curiosity. Then proceed along the same
lines--something to make money for him, or something to save money for
him--these are the only two arguments he can assimilate.

_The Intelligent Buyer._ These people depend almost entirely upon reason
and judgment. They are scarce. When you meet one of them, drop all
attempts to play upon weak points, prejudices or feelings, and confine
yourself strictly to logical and rational statements, presentation of
your proposition, and argument thereon. Do not attempt sophistry,
argument from false premises, or other fallacies. He will detect them at
once, and will feel indignant. Talk straight from the shoulder, and
confine yourself to facts, figures, principles, and logic.

So far we have dealt with the voluntary or outer mind of the buyer. Let
us now consider his involuntary or inner mind. There are many other
terms used by psychologists to designate these two phases of mind--the
important fact is that there are _two_ phases or planes of mind which
are operative in a sale. Let us see how they work, rather than what they
are, or what they are called.

Discarding, for the time being, the current psychological theories and
terminology, let us take a plain look at the facts of the case. A little
consideration will show us that there are two parts to a man's mind--or
two phases of activity. In the first place, there is a part of one's
mind which acts as does the mind of the higher animal, the savage, the
child. That is, it acts upon impulse and without restraint of the will.
Its attention is easily attracted, but held with difficulty unless the
interest and curiosity is awakened. It is curious, fond of novelty,
inquisitive, impulsive, easily persuaded in certain directions,
susceptible to impressions, amenable to suggestion, imitative, subject
to panic, apt to "follow my leader," emotional, depending upon feeling
rather than upon reason, subject to persuasion and coaxing, and acting
almost automatically in response to awakened desire. Let us think of
this part of the mind as the inheritance of the race from the past--the
instinctive mind--the elemental mind of the race before Intellect
mounted its throne. This part of the mind is possessed by every
individual of the race. No matter how highly developed the individual
may be, he has this part of the mind. No matter how much he may be in
control of it, it is always there as a background and basis of his other
kind of mind. The difference in the self-control of individuals depends
almost altogether upon the other part of the mind, which we shall now
consider--the Voluntary Mind, in which the Intellect and Will are the
predominant elements. The phase which we have just considered may be
called the Involuntary Mind, in which Desire and Feeling are the
predominant elements.

The Voluntary Mind has come to man in the course of evolution. It is not
nearly so highly developed in the majority of people, as one might at
first suppose. The majority of the race have the Involuntary Mind
predominant, and are swayed more by feeling and desire than by intellect
and will. Those in whom the Voluntary Mind is highly developed place the
intellect over the feelings--the will over the desires. They submit
their feelings to the inspection and approval of their intellect, and
hold their desires in check by their will. We are in the habit of
thinking of will as a something which acts--but in the majority of
instances it is found to be employed in checking action of the
desires--in holding back rather than in pushing forward. One of the
chief duties of the developed will is that of inhibition, or restraint.
And inhibition depends upon the decision of the judgment or intellect.
The animal, savage, or child has but little power of this kind--the
average individual has more than the child or savage but less than the
developed individual--the developed individual has better self-control,
and subordinates his emotional desires and feelings to his judgment and
will, by inhibition or restraint. Every individual has both of these
phases of mind--the Involuntary and Voluntary--the latter, however,
being manifested in an infinite variety of degrees of development and
power. Back of every Involuntary Mind is to be found the protecting
Voluntary Mind--and likewise, back of every Voluntary Mind, no matter
how strong it may be, there is ever the Involuntary Mind chafing under
restraint and striving to escape its master's eye and express itself in
its own way. And the master often relaxes its attention, or gets tired
of its strenuous task, and then the hidden nature "plays while the cat's
away."

Perhaps the Salesman may be able to remember this classification of the
two phases of the mind, by picturing them as _two partners_ engaged in
business. The Salesman is trying to secure the trade of the firm. The
one brother is an easy-going fellow, possessing curiosity and childish
interest, capable of being "jollied," persuaded and coaxed, and
apparently acting always from his momentary desires and feelings,
desirous of appearing well in the eyes of others, and anxious to make a
good impression, finding it easier to say "Yes," than "No"--easier to
fall in with the wishes of others than to oppose them, being vain and
complaisant. This partner's name is "Easyboy." The other partner is an
entirely different sort of fellow. He is cold and calculating,
manifesting very little feeling or emotion, submitting everything to his
reason and judgment, not moved by prejudices for or against, driving a
close bargain and resenting attempts to coax or drive him. His name is
"Hardfellow."

In the firm of "Easyboy and Hardfellow," the work is divided. "Easyboy"
has much to do about the place, attending to many things for which his
temperament specially fits him. "Hardfellow," however, does the buying,
for experience has taught him that "Easyboy" is not fitted for the task,
being too much under the sway of his feelings and being too easily
influenced. "Easyboy" never could say "No," anyway--but "Hardfellow"
finds it almost as hard to say "yes." So "Hardfellow" does the buying,
but "Easyboy" always "hangs 'round" when a salesman is talking, for he
is naturally inquisitive, and, being jealous, rather resents
"Hardfellow's" authority in the matter. Sometimes he breaks in, and
"Hardfellow" lets him have his say, and at times indulges him in minor
purchases, for being a partner he must accord him some consideration in
spite of the arrangement regarding duties. A strange thing is that
"Easyboy" is possessed of the notion that he would make an ideal buyer,
far better than "Hardfellow" in fact, and he loses no opportunity of
manifesting his supposed quality, notwithstanding the fact that he
usually makes a bungle of it.

For "Hardfellow" is often so busy that he cannot give his full attention
to the business of buying; then again he becomes tired and at such times
his judgment is not so good, and he is apt to be influenced by "Easyboy"
at such times; and, again, he becomes interested in one feature of the
purchase and overlooks the others--at such times "Easyboy" "gets in his
fine work," and takes a hand in the buying. The Salesmen who visit the
firm are fully aware of this condition of affairs, and plan things so as
to have "Easyboy" on hand and able to play his part. They can do
anything with him, and the more he is in evidence the better are their
chances. If he had his way he would buy corner lots in the moon, or
gold-bricks minus the plating. He likes to say "Yes" when coaxed,
jollied or led. But the Salesmen having a straight business proposition
of merit get along well with "Hardfellow," for he is reachable on such
lines when logically presented and explained in a business way. Even
such Salesmen, however, find "Easyboy" a valuable ally, for he often
gets them a hearing when "Hardfellow" is busy or otherwise not disposed
to listen. And so, they all find it an important question to get
"Easyboy" on the scene at "Hardfellow's" elbow. Some claim to have
discovered a method whereby they can "sidetrack" "Hardfellow" and get
"Easyboy" to do the buying. And rumor even has it that there have been
unscrupulous individuals who have happened around when "Hardfellow" was
taking his _siesta_ after a full dinner, and who then played upon
"Easyboy's" weakness in a shameful manner. The firm deny these rumors,
but there is an old gold brick holding back a door at the back part of
the store; and a big bundle of worthless shares in a nicely printed
gold-mine and a deed for a quarter-section of the blue sky, in the
safe--so there may have been something in the tale, after all.

Every mind is an "Easyboy and Hardfellow" firm. Both partners are in
evidence. In some cases "Easyboy" has far more sway and influence than
his more capable partner; in others they have equal authority; in a
third, "Hardfellow" asserts his right and ability, and "Easyboy" has to
take a back seat under protest. But the same principle is true of them
all. And this fact is taken into consideration by men of the world who
understand the true state of affairs. If anyone doubts this statement of
psychological facts, let him analyze himself, and look back over his own
experience. He will find that "Easyboy" has played him many a sad trick
in the past, and the "Hardfellow" has been "off his job" more than once.
Then let him begin to analyze others with whom he comes in contact--he
will see the same state of affairs existing there. And yet there is no
mystery about the matter--it is all in accordance with known
psychological laws. Some writers on the subject of Salesmanship rather
solemnly assure us that the "Easyboy" part of the mind is a "higher
mind"--but it is not. It belongs to the _instinctive_ stage of mental
development, rather than to the _rational_. It is an inheritance from
the past--that past in which men were moved entirely by feeling and
emotion, before reason came to its present stage of development. If it
is "higher" why is it a fact that the lower races and individuals
manifest it to a greater extent than the higher ones? This part of the
mind gives vitality and energy to one, but unless it be controlled by
Intellect and Will it is apt to prove a curse.




CHAPTER VI

THE PRE-APPROACH


Nearly all teachers of or writers upon Salesmanship lay much stress upon
what is called "The Pre-Approach," by which term is indicated the
preliminaries leading up to the Approach or Interview with the Buyer.

What we have said under the head of "The Mind of the Salesman" is really
a part of the Pre-Approach, for it is in the nature of the preparation
of the mind of the salesman for the interview with the buyer. But there
is more than this to the Pre-Approach. The Pre-Approach is the mapping
out of the campaign--"organizing victory" it has been called. It is the
accumulation of ammunition for the fight, and the laying out of the
strategy. Macbain says: "The Pre-Approach is the groundwork upon which
the salesman builds. It comprises all the information obtainable by him
that will be of importance in making his approach in selling the
customer. * * * A sale, in fact, resembles chimney-building, in which it
takes more time for preliminary scaffold-making than it does to build
the permanent structure once the scaffold is made."

In the first place, an important part of the Pre-Approach is a correct
and complete knowledge of your goods. Too many men rush to the Approach
without knowing what they have to sell. It is not enough to know brands
and prices--one should _know_ his goods from top to bottom, inside and
outside, from the raw material to the finished article. He should feel
perfectly at home with his goods, so that he may have full information
regarding them on tap, and thus have his mind free for the strategy of
the sale. A little close, earnest intelligent study of one's line of
goods will not only supply one with an efficient weapon, but will also
impart to him a sense of certainty and confidence that he cannot have
otherwise. What would be thought of a teacher of natural history who did
not understand animals? And yet many salesmen are equally as ignorant
about their subject.

The salesman should understand his goods so thoroughly that he could
write a treatise on them, or demonstrate them before an audience of
experts or of persons entirely in ignorance of them--the latter being
probably the hardest task. He should be able to explain their particular
virtues and characteristics to a man old in the same line, or to explain
them simply and plainly to one who had never seen them or who was
ignorant of their uses. We know of one salesman who was asked by his
little boy to explain a cash register to him, and who complied with the
request. He told us that he learned more about his cash register in the
process of that explanation than he had acquired in even the process of
the technical demonstration in the "salesman's school" at the factory.
It is not always policy for the salesman to air his knowledge of his
goods to his customer--such a course would generally bore the
latter--but he should know all about his goods, nevertheless. The man
who knows his goods in this way plants his feet on the solid rock and
cannot be swept away, while the man who builds on the shifting sand of
"half-knowledge" is always in danger.

But the more popular branch of the Pre-Approach is the knowledge of the
customer. Get as many points regarding the characteristics, habits,
likes and dislikes of the customer as possible. Find out as much as you
can about his trade, and manner of conducting his business, as well as
his business history. Macbain says: "There is really no information
about a prospective customer that can be said to be valueless. On the
other hand, a knowledge of one or two of the characteristics of the man
to be approached may be considered sufficient, the ready intuition of
the salesman being relied upon for the rest. It is assumed, of course,
that a salesman will be able to call his man by name, pronouncing the
name correctly upon the very first interview. This is the prime
requisite, and the remaining knowledge should be grouped about this in
the order of its importance."

The data regarding your prospective customer is obtainable in many ways.
Much of it you may obtain from your house if they have had previous
dealings with him. Other salesmen will also add to the data, but one
must be on the lookout here and not allow himself to be prejudiced
against the customer, or frightened by adverse reports regarding his
manner and characteristics coming from other salesmen. Pierce says: "It
would seem that the good characteristics of the prospect are desirable
to learn. But it is a conviction that by denying to one's self the
unfavorable things said about your prospect, you will not accentuate the
very qualities you hope to obviate. One attempt at a sale is recalled
where the prospect was said to be 'the meanest man on earth.' Almost
terrified by the description, the salesman went at the prospect the
wrong way; displeased him; lost the sale."

Hotel clerks--or better still, hotel proprietors--are often very well
informed regarding merchants in their town, and often valuable
information may be obtained in this way, although the judgment and
experience of the hotel people must be appraised before basing one's own
opinion regarding the customer. Other customers may also be
diplomatically pressed into service in obtaining information regarding
their competitors, although allowance must always be made for the
personal bias in such cases. It is a good idea for the salesman to make
a record of these advance reports, so as to have them on file where he
may refer to them when needed. Some salesmen have a card index devoted
to this purpose, which they have found very useful.

Another, and a very important point about the Pre-Approach is that of
developing the proper Mental Attitude in yourself. You must get
_yourself_ right first, before you can get anything else right. Pierce
says regarding this: "Someone has said that the greatest bane to selling
goods is fear. As a matter of fact, the only thing you are afraid of is
that you won't make the sale,--get the check. But, if you waive this
point, and say, 'Now, I don't care whether I get this sale or not. I do
know this: I am honest, my goods are honest, and if this man does not
want them there are plenty of men who do,' you will find the fear
melting like the mist before sunshine. Fear cannot live in the presence
of your smile, your confidence, your knowledge of the business and your
industry."

In this connection, re-read what we have said to you regarding the "I"
and "Self-Respect" in the chapter entitled "The Mind of the Salesman."
This chapter was written to cover just such cases as the one in
question. If you can realize the "I" within you, your fear will
disappear quickly. Remember, "there's nothing to fear but Fear."

Many successful salesmen state that they overcame their early fear and
timidity by filling themselves with auto-suggestions that they were
calling on the customer for the purpose of doing him a good turn--that
it was a good thing for the customer that the salesman was calling on
him, although he did not know it--and that he, the salesman must let
nothing stand in the way of doing that good turn to the customer, etc.
As ridiculous as this may appear to some, it will be found to work well
in many cases. And it is based upon truth, too, for if the goods are
right, and the prices are likewise, the salesman is doing the customer a
good turn.

And right here, let us impress upon you the necessity of working
yourself up to the point of _believing thoroughly in your own
proposition_. You must get yourself into the state of mind in which, if
you were in the customer's place, you would surely want to take
advantage of it. You must convert yourself before you can expect to
convert the customer. We know an ad. man who tells us that he never
feels satisfied with an ad. that he is writing until he can make himself
believe that he wants to buy the article himself. And he is right. And
the salesman will do well to take a leaf from his book. Enthusiasm and
belief are contagious. If you believe thoroughly in a thing, you run a
much better chance of making others believe in it also, than if you feel
otherwise. You must learn to _sell to yourself_ first, then you may sell
to the customer.

W.C. Holman, in "Salesmanship," says: "One cannot make others believe
what he himself believes, unless he himself is an earnest believer.
Dwight L. Moody swayed enormous audiences by the simple power of his own
wonderful earnestness. No one could listen to Moody without saying:
'This man believes absolutely every word he is speaking. If he feels
what he says so tremendously, there must be something in it.' If every
salesman realized how largely the attitude of the 'prospect' depended
upon the salesman's own mental attitude, he would be as careful to get
into the right frame of mind when he started out to approach a prospect
as he would be to carry a sample case. It is a simple matter for him to
do this. All that is necessary is for him to 'take account of stock'
just before he starts out--to enumerate to himself all the strong,
convincing points in his proposition--to consider the good high
qualities of the goods he is selling--run over in his mind the splendid
characteristics of his house--think of the great number of customers who
have bought his product--and of the supremely satisfying reasons why
other customers should buy his goods. In other words, before a salesman
starts to sell other men, he should sell himself. He should make this
sale to himself at the beginning of every day's work."

The student should acquaint himself thoroughly with the creative force
of Suggestion and Auto-Suggestion in Character Building, and in
producing and maintaining the proper Mental Attitude. The volume of
this series entitled "_Suggestion and Auto-Suggestion_" gives both the
theory, principles and methods of applying Auto-Suggestion in the
directions named. One need no longer be a slave of his Mental Attitude.
On the contrary he may create and preserve the Mental Attitude he deems
advisable and necessary at any time.

Mr. W.C. Holman, one of the best of the inspirational writers on
Salesmanship, gives the following interesting instance of the use of
Auto-Suggestion by a salesman. He says: "One of the best salesmen the
writer ever knew got up what he called his catechism. He used to put
himself through it every morning before starting out. Oftentimes he
repeated it aloud if he had the opportunity. The questions he would
repeat in a quiet tone, but the answers he would pronounce with all the
earnestness of which he was capable. His catechism ran somewhat as
follows:

"Am I working for a good house? YES!

"Has my house the reputation and prestige of being one of the best in
its line? YES!

"Have we made hundreds of thousands of sales like the sales I am going
to make to-day? YES!

"Have we an enormous body of satisfied users? YES!

"Am I selling the best goods of the kind made anywhere in the world?
YES!

"Is the price I am asking a fair one? YES!

"Do the men I am going to call on need the article I am selling? YES!

"Do they realize that now? NO!

"Is that the very reason I am going to call on them--because at present
they don't want my goods, and haven't yet bought them? YES!

"Am I justified in asking a prospect's time and attention to present my
proposition? BY ALL THE POWERS, YES!

"Am I going to get into the office of every man that I call on, if there
is any earthly way to do it? YES!

"Am I going to sell every man I call on to-day? YOU BET I AM!"

Referring to the above "catechism" of Mr. Holman, we would say that if a
man would work himself up to the point of asking and answering these
questions in earnest, and would carry the spirit thereof through the
day, he would render himself almost invincible. A spirit like that is
the spirit of the Light Brigade, of Napoleon, of the Berserker Norseman
who made a way for himself. Such a man would make opportunities, instead
of begging for them. Such a man would be inspired. This is
Auto-Suggestion raised to the Nth Power. Try it--you need it in your
business!

The second phase of the Pre-Approach is that of obtaining an interview
with the prospective customer, generally known as "the prospect." In
many instances the salesman is able to secure the interview by simply
walking into the presence of the prospect, the latter being in full view
in his store or office and no intermediary being present to intercept
the approach. In such cases the second phase of the Pre-Approach is
passed over, and the actual Approach is entered into at once. But in
other cases, particularly in the large office buildings of the principal
cities, the prospect is found to be in his private office, and the
salesman's advance is halted by a clerk, or even an office boy, and
there are certain preliminaries to be gone through with before an
interview may be obtained. In many cases, "big" men (or those who wish
to be considered "big") surround themselves with so much formality and
red-tape that it is quite a feat to run the gauntlet of the guardians of
the inner temple, and much tact, diplomacy, presence of mind, and often
strategy is required of the Salesman in order that he may "get at his
man."

Macbain, in his work entitled "Selling," says of this stage: "Between
the pre-approach and the actual approach sometimes lies a trying time
for the salesman. It is no uncommon thing for a prospective customer to
keep a salesman waiting, either outside the office door and out of
sight, or inside and in the presence of the prospective buyer. This is
known as 'breaking the salesman's nerve.' It is often done with the idea
of deliberately making the salesman nervous and consequently unable to
make such an approach as otherwise would be possible. Perhaps one of the
most common forms of this is seen when the prospective customer appears
to be very busily interested in something at his desk and allows the
salesman to stand an indefinite length of time and then turns suddenly
upon him. This is especially disconcerting to the young man, but the
experienced salesman recognizes it as an indication that either the man
is very busy and actually hates to take his mind off his work, or that
he is afraid of being talked into something that he will later regret.
The salesman consequently shapes his introduction accordingly and will
in no wise be disconcerted by this attempt as it will enable him to
study carefully the outward characteristics of the man whom he is about
to approach."

In many cases this waiting is forced on the salesman by a prospect who
also knows something of the laws of psychology--for such knowledge is
not confined to the salesman by any means, the buyer having posted
himself in many cases. In the game of checkers or draughts quite an
important advantage accrues to the player securing what is technically
known as "the move," which, however, is a very different thing from the
"first play." There is in the psychology of the sale, or of the
interview between two people of equal strength, a something which
corresponds very closely with "the move" in checkers. This something
gives a decided advantage to the person securing it, and it is worth
striving for. This something is subtle and almost indescribable,
although apparent to every one who has dealings with his fellow men. It
seems to be a matter of mental balance and poise. The salesman, if he be
well balanced and poised, is "positive" to the buyer, the latter being
in a listening, and therefore passive, attitude. So far the salesman has
"the move," which however he may later lose if the prospect plays
scientifically. Well, to get back to the "waiting" stage, the prospect
by disturbing the salesman's poise, and "breaking his nerve" by keeping
him waiting on the anxious bench in a state of suspense, often manages
to get "the move" on him, unless he understands the psychology of the
process and accordingly avoids it. Suspense is the most nerve-breaking
mental state on the psychological list, as all realize who have
experienced it. Beware of losing "the move."

An important factor in getting past the stockade of the outer office is
the consciousness of Self Respect and the realization of the "I" of
which we have spoken. This mental attitude impresses itself upon those
who guard the outer works, and serves to clear the way. As Pierce says:
"Remember, you are asking no favors; that you have nothing to apologize
for, and that you have every reason in the world for holding your head
high. And it is wonderful what this holding up of the head will do in
the way of increasing sales. We have seen salesmen get entrance to the
offices of Broadway buyers simply through the holding of the head
straight up from the shoulders." But it is the Mental Attitude back of
the physical expression that is the spirit of the thing--don't forget
this.

The Mental Attitude and the physical expression thereof instinctively
influence the conduct of other people toward one. We may see the same
thing illustrated in the attitude and action of the street boy toward
dogs. Let some poor cur trot along with drooping ears, timid expression,
meek eyes, and tail between his legs, and the urchin will be apt to kick
him or throw a rock at his retreating form. Note the difference when the
self-respecting dog, with spirit in him, trots past, looking the boy
fearlessly in the eye and showing his sense of self-respect and power to
back it up in every movement. That dog is treated accordingly. There are
certain people whose manner is such that they do not need to ask respect
and consideration--it is given them as a matter of right and privilege.
People stand aside to give them room, and move up in street cars that
they may have a seat. And it does not necessarily follow that the person
to whom this respect is shown is a worthy individual or a person of fine
qualities--he may be a confidence man or a swindler. But whatever he is,
or may be, he has certain outward mannerisms and characteristics which
enable him to "put up a good front" and which carry him through. At the
back of it all will be found certain mental states which produce the
genuine outward characteristics and manner in the case of genuine
instances of persons possessing authority and high position, the
confidence man merely presenting a passable counterfeit, being a good
actor.

It is often necessary for the salesman to send in a card to the inner
office. It is well for him to have some cards, well engraved in the
most approved manner, bearing simply his name: "Mr. John Jay Jones,"
with his business appearing thereon. If he is travelling from a large
city, and is selling in smaller towns, he may have "New York,"
"Chicago," "Philadelphia," "Boston," etc., as the case may be in the
corner of his card. If the name of his business appears on the card the
prospect often goes over the matter of a possible sale, mentally,
without the salesman being present to present his case, and then may
decline to grant an interview. The name, without the business, often
arouses interest or curiosity and thus, instead of hindering, really
aids in securing the interview.

Regarding the discussion of the business with anyone other than the
prospect himself, the authorities differ. As a matter of fact it would
seem to depend largely upon the particular circumstances of each case,
the nature of the articles to be sold, and the character and position of
the subordinate in question.

One set of authorities hold that it is very poor policy to tell your
business to a subordinate, and that it is far better to tell him
courteously but firmly that your business is of such a nature that you
can discuss it only with the prospect in person. Otherwise, it is held
that the subordinate will tell you that the matter in question has
already been considered by his principal, and that he is fully informed
regarding the proposition, and has given orders that he is not to be
disturbed further regarding it.

The other set of authorities hold that in many cases the subordinate may
be pressed into service, by treating him with great respect, and an
apparent belief in his judgment and authority, winning his good-will and
getting him interested in your proposition, and endeavoring to have him
"speak about it" to his superior during the day. It is claimed that a
subsequent call, the day following, will often prove successful, as the
subordinate will have paved the way for an interview and have actually
done some work for you in the way of influence and selling talk. It is
held that some salesmen have made permanent "friends in camp" of these
subordinates who have been approached in this way.

It would seem, however, as we have said, to depend much upon the
particular circumstances of the case. In some cases the subordinate is
merely a "hold-off," or "breakwater;" while in others he is a
confidential employee whose opinion has weight with the prospect, and
whose good-will and aid are well worth securing. In any event, however,
it is well to gain the respect and good-will of those in the "outer
court," for they can often do much in the way of helping or injuring
your chances. We have known cases in which subordinates "queered" a
salesman who had offended them; and we have known other cases in which
the subordinate being pleased by the salesman "put him next." It is
always better to make a friend rather than an enemy--from the office-boy
upward--on general principles. Many a fine warrior has been tripped up
by a small pebble. Strong men have died from the bite of a mosquito.

The following advice from J.F. Gillen, the Chicago manager of the
Burroughs Adding Machine Company, is very much to the point. Mr. Gillen,
in the magazine "Salesmanship," says: "A salesman who has not proved
his mettle--and who, unfortunately, is not sure of himself--is likely
to be overcome by a sense of his own insignificance on entering the
private domain of the great man, rich man, or influential man, from whom
he hopes to get an order. The very hum and rush of business in this
boss's office are very awe-inspiring. The fact that there exists an
iron-clad rule, designed to protect the boss against intrusion,
forbidding the admittance of an uninvited salesman--and the fact that
the army of employees are bound by this rule to oppose the entrance of
any such visitor--combine to make an untried salesman morally certain of
his powerlessness; to make him feel that he has no justifiable reason
for presenting himself at all. Indeed he has none, if the awe which he
feels for red-tape, rules, dignitaries, has made him lose sight of the
attractions of his own proposition; has swallowed up his confidence in
what he has to offer and his ability to enthuse the prospect in regard
to it. * * * If you believe that your proposition will prove interesting
to the prospect and that he will profit by doing business with you, you
have a right to feel that the rule barring salesmen from his presence
was not intended to bar _you_. Convince yourself of this and the stern
negative of the information clerk will not abash you. You will find
yourself endowed with a courage and resourcefulness to cope with a slick
secretary who gives glibly evasive replies when you try to find out
whether Mr. Prospect is now in his office, whether he cannot see you at
once, and what reason exists for supposing you could possibly tell your
business to any subordinate in place of him. Once you are thus morally
sure of your ground, the hardest part of the battle is won. * * * _You
can see the prospect and get speech with him, no matter what obstacles
intervene, if your nerve holds out and you use your brains._"

Remember this, always: The Psychology of Salesmanship applies not only
to work with the prospect, but also to work with those who bar the way
to him. Subordinates have minds, faculties, feelings and strong and weak
points of mentality--they have their psychology just as their employer
has his. It will pay you to make a careful study of their
psychology--it has its rules, laws and principles. This is a point often
overlooked by little salesmen, but fully recognized by the "big" ones.
The short cut to the mind of many a prospect is directly through the
mind of the man in the outer office.




CHAPTER VII

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF PURCHASE


There are several stages or phases manifested by the buyer in the mental
process which results in a purchase. While it is difficult to state a
hard and fast rule regarding the same, because of the variety of
temperament, tendencies and mental habits possessed in several degrees
by different individuals, still there are certain principles of feeling
and thought manifested alike by each and every individual buyer, and a
certain logical sequence is followed by all men in each and every
original purchase. It follows, of course, that these principles, and
this sequence, will be found to be operative in each and every original
purchase, whether that purchase be the result of an advertisement,
display of goods, recommendation, or the efforts of a salesman. The
principle is the same in each and every case, and the sequence of the
mental states is the same in each and every instance. Let us now
consider these several mental states in their usual sequence.

The several mental states manifested by every buyer in an original
purchase are given below in the order of sequence in which they are
usually manifested:--

     I. Involuntary Attention.
    II. First Impression.
   III. Curiosity.
    IV. Associated Interest.
     V. Consideration.
    VI. Imagination.
   VII. Inclination.
  VIII. Deliberation.
    IX. Decision.
     X. Action.

We use the term "_original_ purchase" in this connection in order to
distinguish the original purchase from a repeated order or subsequent
purchase of the same article, in which latter instance the mental
process is far more simple and which consists merely in recognizing the
inclination, or habit, and ordering the goods, without repeating the
original complex mental operation. Let us now proceed to a consideration
of the several mental stages of the original purchase, in logical
sequence:--

I. _Involuntary Attention._ This mental state is the elementary phase of
attention. Attention is not a faculty of the mind, but is instead the
focusing of the consciousness upon one object to the temporary exclusion
of all other objects. It is a turning of the mind on an object. The
object of attention may be either external, such as a person or thing;
or internal, such as a feeling, thought, memory, or idea. Attention may
be either voluntary, that is, directed consciously by the will; or
involuntary, that is, directed unconsciously and instinctively and
apparently independently of the will. Voluntary attention is an acquired
and developed power and is the attribute of the thinker, student and
intellectual individual in all walks of life. Involuntary attention, on
the contrary, is but little more than a reflex action, or a nervous
response to some stimulus. As Halleck says: "Many persons scarcely get
beyond the reflex stage. Any chance stimulus will take their attention
away from their studies or their business." Sir William Hamilton made a
still finer distinction, which is, however, generally overlooked by
writers on the subject, but which is scientifically correct and which we
shall follow in this book. He holds that there are three degrees or
kinds of attention: (1) the reflex or involuntary, which is instinctive
in nature; (2) that determined by desire or feeling, which partakes of
both the involuntary and voluntary nature, and which although partly
instinctive may be resisted by the will under the influence of the
judgment; and (3) that determined by deliberate volition in response to
reason, as in study, scientific games, rational deliberation, etc.

The first mental step of the purchase undoubtedly consists of
involuntary or reflex attention, such as is aroused by a sudden sound,
sight, or other sensation. The degree of this involuntary attention
depends upon the intensity, suddenness, novelty, or movement of the
object to which it responds. All persons respond to the stimuli arousing
this form of attention, but in different degrees depending upon the
preoccupation or concentration of the individual at the time. The
striking or novel appearance of an advertisement; the window-display of
goods; the appearance of the salesman--all these things instinctively
arouse the involuntary attention, and the buyer "turns his mind on"
them. But this turning the mind on belongs to Hamilton's first
class--that of the instinctive response to the sight or sound, and not
that aroused by desire or deliberate thought. It is the most elemental
form of attention or mental effort, and to the salesman means simply:
"Well, I _see_ you!" Sometimes the prospect is so preoccupied or
concentrated on other things that he barely "sees" the salesman until an
added stimulus is given by a direct remark.

II. _First Impression._ This mental state is the hasty generalization
resulting from the first impression of the object of attention--the
advertisement, suggestion, display of goods, or the Salesman--depending
in the last case upon the general appearance, action, manner, etc., as
interpreted in the light of experience or association. In other words,
the prospect forms a hasty general idea of the thing or person, either
favorable or unfavorable, almost instinctively and unconsciously. The
thing or person is associated or classed with others resembling it in
the experience and memory of the prospect, and the result is either a
good, bad or indifferent impression resulting from the suggestion of
association. For this reason the ad. man and the window dresser endeavor
to awaken favorable and pleasing associated memories and suggestions,
and "puts his best foot foremost." The Salesman endeavors to do the
same, and seeks to "put up a good front" in his Approach, in order to
secure this valuable favorable first impression. People are influenced
more than they will admit by these "first impressions," or suggestions,
of appearance, manner, etc., and the man who understands psychology
places great importance upon them. A favorable first impression smooths
the way for the successful awakening of the later mental states. An
unfavorable first impression, while it may be removed and remedied
later, nevertheless is a handicap which the Salesman should avoid.

(_Note_: The mental process of the purchase now passes from the stage of
_involuntary attention_, to that of attention inspired by desire and
feeling which partakes of _both the voluntary and involuntary elements_.
The first two stages of this form of attention are known as Curiosity
and Associated Interest, respectively. In some cases Curiosity precedes,
in others Associated Interest takes the lead, as we shall see. In other
cases the manifestation of the two is almost simultaneous.)

III. _Curiosity._ This mental state is really a form of Interest, but is
more elemental than Associated Interest, being merely the interest of
novelty. It is the strongest item of interest in the primitive races, in
children, and in many adults of elemental development and habits of
thought. Curiosity is the form of Interest which is almost instinctive,
and which impels one to turn the attention to strange and novel things.
All animals possess it to a marked degree, as trappers have found out to
their profit. Monkeys possess it to an inordinate degree, and the less
developed individuals of the human race also manifest it to a high
degree. It is connected in some way with the primitive conditions of
living things, and is probably a heritage from earlier and less secure
conditions of living, where inquisitiveness regarding new, novel and
strange sights and sounds was a virtue and the only means of acquiring
experience and education. At any rate, there is certainly in human
nature a decided instinctive tendency to explore the unknown and
strange--the attraction of the mysterious; the lure of the secret
things; the tantalizing call of the puzzle; the fascination of the
riddle.

The Salesman who can introduce something in his opening talk that will
arouse Curiosity in the prospect has done much to arouse his attention
and interest. The street-corner fakir, and the "barker" for the
amusement-park show, understand this principle in human nature, and
appeal largely to it. They will blindfold a boy or girl, or will make
strange motions or sounds, in order to arouse the curiosity of the crowd
and to cause them to gather around--all this before the actual appeal to
interest is made. In some buyers Curiosity precedes Associated
Interest--the interest in the unknown and novel precedes the practical
interest. In others the Associated Interest--the practical interest
inspired by experience and association--precedes Curiosity, the latter
manifesting simply as inquisitiveness regarding the details of the
object which has aroused Associated Interest. In other cases, Curiosity
and Associated Interest are so blended and shaded into each other that
they act almost as one and simultaneously. On the whole, though,
Curiosity is more elemental and crude than Associated Interest, and may
readily be distinguished in the majority of cases.

IV. _Associated Interest._ This mental state is a higher form of
interest than Curiosity. It is a practical interest in things relating
to one's interests in life, his weal or woe, loves or hates, instead of
being the mere interest in novelty of Curiosity. It is an acquired
trait, while Curiosity is practically an instinctive trait. Acquired
Interest develops with character, occupation, and education, while
Curiosity manifests strongly in the very beginnings of character, and
before education. Acquired Interest is manifested more strongly in the
man of affairs, education and experience, while Curiosity has its
fullest flower in the monkey, savage, young child and uncultured adult.
Recognizing the relation between the two, it may be said that Curiosity
is the root, and Associated Interest the flower.

Associated Interest depends largely upon the principle of Association or
Apperception, the latter being defined as "that mental process by which
the perceptions or ideas are brought into relation to our previous ideas
and feelings, and thus are given a new clearness, meaning and
application." Apperception is the mental process by which objects and
ideas presented to us are perceived and thought of by us in the light of
our past experience, temperament, tastes, likes and dislikes,
occupation, interest, prejudices, etc., instead of as they actually are.
We see everything through the colored glasses of our own personality and
character. Halleck says of Apperception: "A woman may apperceive a
passing bird as an ornament to her bonnet; a fruit grower, as an insect
killer; a poet, as a songster; an artist, as a fine bit of coloring and
form. The housewife may apperceive old rags as something to be thrown
away; a ragpicker, as something to be gathered up. A carpenter, a
botanist, an ornithologist, a hunter, and a geologist walking through a
forest would not see the same things." The familiar tale of the
text-books illustrates this principle. It relates that a boy climbed up
a tree in a forest and watched the passers-by, and listened to their
conversation. The first man said: "What a fine stick of timber that tree
would make." The boy answered: "Good morning, Mr. Carpenter." The second
man said: "That is fine bark." The boy answered: "Good morning, Mr.
Tanner." The third man said: "I'll bet there's squirrels in that tree."
The boy answered: "Good morning, Mr. Hunter." Each and every one of the
men saw the tree in the light of his personal Apperception or Associated
Interest.

Psychologists designate by the term "the apperceptive mass" the
accumulated previous experiences, prejudices, temperament, inclination
and desires which serve to modify the new perception or idea. The
"apperceptive mass" is really the "character" or "human nature" of the
individual. It necessarily differs in each individual, by reason of the
great variety of experiences, temperament, education, etc., among
individuals. Upon a man's "apperceptive mass," or character, depends the
nature and degree of his interest, and the objects which serve to
inspire and excite it.

It follows then that in order to arouse, induce and hold this Associated
Interest of the prospect, the Salesman must present things, ideas or
suggestions which will appeal directly to the imagination and feelings
of the man before him, and which are associated with his desires,
thoughts and habits. If we may be pardoned for the circular definition
we would say that one's Associated Interest is aroused only by
interesting things; and that the interesting things are those things
which concern his interests. A man's interests always interest him--and
his interests are usually those things which concern his advantage,
success, personal well-being--in short his pocketbook, social position,
hobbies, tastes, and satisfaction of his desires. Therefore the
Salesman who can throw the mental spot-light on these interesting
things, may secure and hold one's Associated Interest. Hence the
psychology of the repeated statement: "I can save you money;" "I can
increase your sales;" "I can reduce your expenses;" "I have something
very choice;" or "I can give you a special advantage," etc.

It may as well be conceded that business interest is selfish interest,
and not altruistic. In order to interest a man in a business proposition
he must be shown how it will benefit him in some way. He is not running
a philanthropic institution, or a Salesman's Relief Fund, nor is he in
business for his health--he is there to make money, and in order to
interest him you must show him something to his advantage. And the first
appeal of Associated Interest is to his feeling of Self Interest. It
must be in the nature of the mention of "rats!" to a terrier, or
"candy!" to a child. It must awaken pleasant associations in his mind,
and pleasing images in his memory. If this effect is produced, he can be
speedily moved to the succeeding phases of Imagination and Inclination.
As Halleck says: "All feeling tends to excite desire. * * * A
representative image of the thing desired is the necessary antecedent to
desire. If the child had never seen or heard of _peaches_ he would have
no desire for them." And, following this same figure, we may say that if
the child has a taste for peaches he will be _interested_ in the idea of
peaches. And so when you say "peaches!" to him you have his Associated
Interest, which will result in a mental image of the fruit followed by a
_desire_ to possess it, and he will listen to your talk regarding the
subject of "peaches."

The following are the general psychological rules regarding Associated
Interests:

I. Associated Interest attaches only to interesting things--that is to
things associated with one's general desires and ideas.

II. Associated Interest will decline in force and effect unless some new
attributes or features are presented--it requires variety in
presentation of its object.

Macbain says: "One of the old time salesmen who used to sell the trade
in the Middle West, beginning some thirty years ago, and following that
vocation for several decades, used as his motto, 'I am here to do you
good.' He did not make his statement general, either, in telling his
customers how he could do it. He got right down to the vital affairs
which touched his customers. He demonstrated it to them, and this
personal demonstration is the kind that makes the sales."

Remember, always, that the phase of Associated Interest in a purchase is
not the same as the phase of Demonstration and Proof. It is the "warming
up" process, preceding the actual selling talk. It is the stage of
"thawing out" the prospect and melting the icy covering of prejudice,
caution and reluctance which encases him. Warm up your prospect by
_general statements_ of Associated Interest, and blow the coals by
positive, brief, pointed confident statements of the good things you
have in store for him. And, finally, remember that the sole purpose of
your efforts at this state is to arouse in him the mental state of
INTERESTED EXPECTANT ATTENTION! Keep blowing away at this spark until
you obtain the blaze of Imagination and the heat of Desire.

V. _Consideration._ This mental state is defined as: "An examination,
inquiry, or investigation into anything." It is the stage following
Curiosity and Associated Interest, and tends toward an inquiry into the
thing which has excited these feelings. Consideration, of course, must
be preceded and accompanied by Interest. It calls for the phase of
Attention excited by feeling, but a degree of voluntary attention is
also manifested therewith. It is the "I think I will look into this
matter" stage of the mental process of purchase. It is usually evidenced
by a disposition to ask questions regarding the proposition, and to "see
what there is to it, anyway." In Salesmanship, this stage of
Consideration marks the passing from the stage of Approach on the
Salesman's part, to that of the Demonstration. It marks the passage from
Passive Interest to Active Interest--from the stage of being "merely
interested" in a thing, to that of "interested investigation." Here is
where the real selling work of the salesman begins. Here is where he
begins to describe his proposition in detail, laying stress upon its
desirable points. In the case of an advertisement, or a window display,
the mental operation goes on in the buyer's mind in the same way, but
without the assistance of the salesman. The "selling talk" of the
advertisement must be stated or suggested by its text. If the
Consideration is favorable and reveals sufficiently strong attractive
qualities in the proposition or article, the mind of the buyer passes on
to the next stage of the process which is known as:

VI. _Imagination._ This mental state is defined as: "The exercise of
that power or faculty of the mind by which it conceives and forms ideal
pictures of things communicated to it by the organs of sense." In the
mental process of a purchase, the faculty of imagination takes up the
idea of the object in which the Associated Interest has been aroused,
and which has been made the subject of Consideration, and endeavors to
picture the object in use and being employed in different ways, or as in
possession of the buyer. One must use his imagination in order to
realize what good a thing will be to him; how he may use it; how it
will look; how it will sell; how it will serve its purpose; how it will
"work out" or "make good" when purchased. A woman gazing at a hat will
use her imagination to picture how she will look in it. The man looking
at the book will use his imagination in picturing its uses and the
pleasure to be derived therefrom. The business man will use his
imagination to picture the probable sale of the goods, their display,
their adaptability to his trade, etc. Another will picture himself
enjoying the gains from his purchase. Imagination plays an important
part in the psychology of the sale. It is the direct inciter of desire
and inclination. The successful salesman realizes this, and feeds the
flame of the imagination with the oil of Suggestion. In fact, Suggestion
receives its power through the Imagination. The Imagination is the
channel through which Suggestion reaches the mind. Salesmen and ad.
writers strive to arouse the imagination of their prospective customers
by clever word-painting. The Imagination is the "direct wire" to Desire.
From Imagination it is a short step to the next mental stage which is
called:

VII. _Inclination._ This mental state is defined as: "A leaning or bent
of the mind or will; desire; propensity." It is the "want to" feeling.
It is the mental state of which Desire is an advanced stage. Inclination
has many degrees. From a faint inclination or bent in a certain
direction, it rises in the scale until it becomes an imperious demand,
brooking no obstacle or hindrance. Many terms are employed to designate
the various stages of Inclination, as for instance: Desire, wish, want,
need, inclination, leaning, bent, predilection, propensity, penchant,
liking, love, fondness, relish, longing, hankering, aspiration,
ambition, appetite, hunger, passion, craving, lust, etc.

Desire is a strange mental quality, and one very difficult to define
strictly. It is linked with feeling on one side, and with will on the
other. Feeling rises to desire, and desire rises to the phase of will
and endeavors to express itself in action. Halleck says of Desire: "_It
has for its object something which will bring pleasure or get rid of
pain, immediate or remote, for the individual or for some one in whom
he is interested. Aversion, or a striving to get away from something, is
merely the negative aspect of desire._" Inclination in its various
stages is aroused through the appeals to the feelings through the
imagination. The feelings related to the several faculties are excited
into action by a direct appeal to them through the imagination, and
inclination or desired results. Appeal to Acquisitiveness will result in
a feeling which will rise to inclination and desire for gain. Appeal to
Approbativeness will act likewise in its own field. And so on through
the list, each well-developed faculty being excited to feeling by the
appropriate appeal through the imagination, and thus giving rise to
Inclination which in turn strives to express itself in action through
the will.

In short, every man is a bundle of general desires, the nature and
extent of which are indicated by his several faculties, and which result
from heredity, environment, training, experience, etc. These desires may
be excited toward a definite object by the proper emotional appeal
through the imagination, and by suggestion. Desire _must_ be created or
aroused before action can be had, or the will manifest in action. For,
at the last, we do things only because we "want to," directly or
indirectly. Therefore, the important aim of the Salesman is to make his
prospect "want to." And in order to make him "want to" he must make him
see that his proposition is calculated to "bring pleasure, or get rid of
pain, immediate or remote, for the individual or for someone else in
whom he is interested." In business, the words "profit and loss" may be
substituted for "pleasure and pain," although really, they are but forms
of the latter. But even when the prospect is brought to the stage of
strong inclination or desire, he does not always move to gratify the
same. Why is this? What other mental process interferes? Let us see as
we pass on to the next stage of the purchase, known as:

VIII. _Deliberation._ This mental state is defined as: "The act of
deliberating and weighing facts and arguments in the mind, calmly and
carefully." Here is manifested the action of thought and reason--the
mental process of weighing and balancing facts, feelings, and
inclinations. For it is not only _facts_ and _proofs_ which are weighed
in the mental balance, but also feelings, desires, and fears. Pure
logical reasoning inclines to strict logical processes based upon
irrefragible facts, it is true--but there is but little pure logical
reasoning. The majority of people are governed more by their feelings
and inclinations--their loves and their fears--than by logic. It has
been said: "People seek not _reasons_, but _excuses for following their
feelings_." The real deliberation, in the majority of cases, is the
weighing of probable advantages and disadvantages--of various likes and
dislikes--of hopes and fears.

It is said that our minds are controlled by _motives_--and the strongest
motive wins. We often find that when we think we desire a thing
ardently, we then find that we also like something else better, or
perhaps fear something else more than we desire the first thing. In such
case, the strongest or most pressing feeling wins the day. The faculties
here exert their different influences. Caution opposes Acquisitiveness.
Acquisitiveness opposes Conscientiousness. Fear opposes Firmness. And
so on. The deliberation is not only the weighing of facts, but also the
weighing of feelings.

The process of Deliberation--the weighing of desires--the play and
counterplay of motives--is well illustrated by a scene in a classical
French comedy. "Jeppe," one of the characters, has been given money by
his wife to buy her a cake of soap. He prefers to buy a drink with the
coin, for his inclinations tend in that direction. But he knows that his
wife will beat him if he so squanders the money. He deliberates over the
pleasure to be derived from the drink, and the pain which would arise
from the beating. "My stomach says drink--my back says soap," says
Jeppe. He deliberates further. Then: "My stomach says Yes! My back says
No!" cries the poor wight. The conflict between back and stomach rages
still more fiercely. Then comes the deciding point: "Is not my stomach
more to me than my back? Sure, it is! I say _Yes_!" cries Jeppe. And
away to the tavern he marches. It has been remarked that if the active
suggestion of the distant sight of his wife armed with the cudgel, had
been added to the situation, Jeppe would have bought the soap. Or, if
the tavern had not been so handy, the result might have been different.
Sometimes a mental straw tips the scale. The above illustration contains
the entire philosophy of the action of the mind in the process of
Deliberation. The salesman will do well to remember it.

Halleck thus well states the immediate and remote factors in choice:
"The immediate factors are * * * (1) a preceding process of desire; (2)
the presence in consciousness of more than one represented object or
end, to offer an alternative course of action; (3) deliberation
concerning the respective merits of these objects; (4) the voluntary
fiat of decision, which seems to embody most the very essence of will.
The remote factors are extremely difficult to select. The sum total of
the man is felt more in choice than anywhere else. * * * Before a second
person could approximate the outcome, he would have to know certain
remote factors, the principal being: (1) heredity; (2) environment; (3)
education; (4) individual peculiarities." This eminent authority might
well have added an additional element--a most important one--as
follows: (5) SUGGESTION.

The Salesman watching carefully the shifting scale of Deliberation,
injects a telling argument or suggestion into the scale, which gives
weight to his side at a critical stage. He does this in many ways. He
may neutralize an objection by a counter-fact. He adds another proof or
fact here--a little more desire and feeling there, until he brings down
the scale to a decision. It must be remembered that this Deliberation is
_not regarding_ the desirability of the proposition--the prospect has
admitted his desire, either directly or indirectly, and is now engaged
in trying to justify his desire by reason and expediency. He is seeking
for reasons or "excuses" to back up his desire, or perhaps, is
endeavoring to strike a balance of his conflicting desires and feelings.
His mental debate is not over the question of desiring the goods, but
over the expediency and probable result of buying them. It is the "to
buy or not to buy" stage. This is a delicate part of the process of the
purchase, and many prospects act like "see-saws" during the process. The
clever Salesman must be ready with the right argument at the right
place. To him this is the Argumentive Stage. Finally, if the Salesman's
efforts are successful, the balance drops, and the process passes to the
next stage, known as--

IX. _Decision._ This mental stage is defined as: "The mental act of
deciding, determining, or settling any point, question, difference, or
contest." It is the act of the _will_, settling the dispute between the
warring faculties, feelings, ideas, desires and fears. It is will acting
upon reason, or (alas! too often, upon mere feeling). Without entering
into a metaphysical discussion, let us remind you that the practical
psychology of the day holds that "the strongest motive _at the moment_
wins the choice." This strongest motive may be of reason or of feeling;
conscious or unconscious; but _strongest_ at that moment it must be, or
it would not win. And this strongest motive is strongest merely because
of our character or "nature" as manifested at that particular moment, in
that particular environment, under the particular circumstances, and
subject to the particular suggestions. The choice depends more upon
association than we generally realize, and association is awakened by
suggestion. As Halleck says: "It is not the business of the psychologist
to state what power the association of ideas ought to have. It is for
him to ascertain what power it does have." And as Ziehen says: "We
cannot think as we will, but we must think just as those associations
which happen to be present prescribe." This being the case, the Salesman
must realize that the Decision is based always upon (1) the mental
states of the man at that moment; plus (2) the added motives supplied by
the Salesman. It is "up to" the Salesman to supply those motives,
whether they be facts, proofs, appeals to reason, or excitement of
feeling. Hope, fear, like, dislike--these are the potent motives in most
cases. In business, these things are known as "profit or loss." All the
faculties of the mind supply motives which aroused may be thrown into
the balance affecting decision. This is what argument, demonstration and
appeal seek to do--supply motives.

(_Note_:--It might naturally be supposed that when the final stage of
Decision has been reached, the mental process of purchase is at an end.
But, not so. Will has three phases: Desire, Decision, and Action. We
have passed through the first two, but Action still is unperformed. A
familiar example is that of the man in bed in the morning. He ponders
over the question of rising, and finally decides to get up. But action
does not necessarily result. The trigger of Action has not been pulled,
and the spring released. So thus we have another mental state, known
as:--)

X. _Action._ This mental state is defined as: "Volition carried into
effect." Mill says: "Now what is an action? Not one, but a series of two
things: the state of mind called a volition, followed by an effect. The
volition or intention to produce the effect is one thing; the effect
produced in consequence of the intention is another thing; the two
together constitute the action." Halleck says: "For a completed act of
will, there must be action along the line of the decision. Many a
decision has not aroused the motor centers to action, nor quickened the
attention, for any length of time. There are persons who can frame a
dozen decisions in the course of a morning, and never carry out one of
them. Sitting in a comfortable chair, it may take one but a very short
time to form a decision that will require months of hard work. * * *
Some persons can never seem to understand that resolving to do a thing
is not the same as doing it. * * * There may be desire, deliberation,
and decision; but if these do not result in action along the indicated
line, the process of will is practically incomplete." Many a person
decides to do a thing but lacks the something necessary to release the
motive impulses. They tend to procrastinate, and delay the final act.
These people are sources of great care and work to the Salesman. Some
men can get their prospects to the deciding point, but fail to get them
to act. Others seem specially adapted to "closing" these cases. It
requires a peculiar knack to "close"--the effort is entirely
psychological. We shall consider it in a subsequent chapter under the
head of "Closing." To be a good "closer" is the ambition of every
Salesman, for it is the best paid branch of his profession. It depends
largely upon the scientific application of suggestion. To lead a
prospect to Action, is to pull the trigger of his will. To this end all
the previous work has been directed. Its psychology is subtle. What
makes you finally get out of bed in the morning, after having "decided
to" several times without resulting action? To understand this, is to
understand the process of the final Action in the mind of the buyer. Is
it not worth learning?

In the succeeding chapters we shall consider the several stages of the
"Salesman's Progress" toward a sale--the Approach, the Demonstration,
and the Closing. In these stages of the Salesman, we shall see the
action and reaction upon the Mind of the Buyer, along the lines of the
Psychology of the Purchase. In the Sale-Purchase the minds of the
Salesman and the Buyer meet. The result is the Signed Order. The
psychological process of the Sale is akin to the progress of a game of
chess or checkers. And neither is the result of chance--well defined
principles underlie each, and established methods are laid down for the
student.




CHAPTER VIII

THE APPROACH


Old salesmen hold that in the psychology of the sale there is no more
important stage or phase than the introductory stage--the stage of the
Approach. Pierce says: "Experienced salesmen will tell you that the
first five minutes in front of a prospect is worth more than all the
remainder in the matter of getting the check. Why? Because it is then
that the prospect is forming his impressions of you. Usually he is
obliged to form this quick size-up of the man he meets, in order to
conserve his time for important duties. Therefore it is your duty to
have this first impression the best within your power. And the best way
to develop this is to be genuine." But it must never be lost sight of
that the First Impression is solely for the purpose of obtaining an
entrance for the fine edge of your wedge of salesmanship, which you
must then proceed to drive home to its logical conclusion,--the Order.
An impression for impression's sake is a fallacy. Remember the old story
of the Salesman who wrote in that he was not making sales, but that he
was "making a good impression on my customers." The firm wired back to
him: "Go out and make some more impressions--on a snow bank." Do not
lose sight of the real object of your work, in obtaining the preliminary
results.

The National Cash Register Company instructs its salesmen regarding the
First Impression, as follows: "Remember, the first five minutes of
speaking to a man is likely to make or break you as far as that sale is
concerned. If you are in any way antagonistic or offensive to him, you
have hurt your chances badly from the start. If you have failed to
definitely please or attract him, you have not done enough. It isn't
sufficient to be merely a negative quantity. You should make a positive
favorable impression, and not by cajolery nor attempted wit nor
cleverness. The only right way to gain a man's liking is to deserve it.
The majority of men do not often know just what the characteristics of
a man are which makes him pleasing or displeasing to them; but they
_feel_ pleased or displeased, attracted or repulsed, or indifferent, and
the feeling is definite and pronounced, even though they cannot
understand just what makes it. A storekeeper in the smallest way of
business in a little country village is just as susceptible of being
pleased or offended as any merchant prince. It should never be forgotten
that whatever his position may be, 'a man's a man for a' that.'"

It is not so much what a man _says_ when he approaches the prospect, as
the way he acts. It is his manner, rather than his speech. And back of
his manner is his Mental Attitude. Without going into subtle
psychological theorizing, we may say that it may be accepted as a
working hypotheses that a man radiates his Mental State, and that those
he approaches feel these radiations. It may be the suggestion of manner,
or it may be something more subtle--no use discussing theories here, we
haven't the time--the fact is that it acts as radiations would act. This
being recognized it will be seen that the man's Mental Attitude in the
Approach must be right. In the previous chapters we have had much to say
to you regarding the factors which go to create the Mental Attitude. Now
is the time to manifest what you have learned and practice--for you are
making the Approach.

Carry in mind Holman's catechism, of which we have told you. Maintain
your Self-Respect, and remember that you are a MAN. Pierce says of this:
"One reason for this is that self-respect is necessary in your work. And
self-respect cannot obtain where there is lack of confidence either in
your own ability or in your line of goods. Assuming that you take only
such a line as you yourself can enthusiastically endorse, it must be
remembered that your goods place you absolutely on a par with the
merchant. Hence, you talk to him shoulder to shoulder, as it were. You
are not as a slave to a master! as a hireling to a lord; as a worm to a
mountain; although this is the usual attitude untrained salesmen
consciously or unconsciously assume. They are timid. They feel they
might know their goods better. They feel, perhaps, that the prospect
knows their goods or their competitors' goods better than they do
themselves. Fear is written all over their faces as the approach is
made. Nine-tenths of the fear is due to ignorance of the goods. The
other tenth is lack of experience."

Regarding this matter of Fear, we would say that the experience of the
majority of men who have lived active and strenuous lives, meeting with
all sorts of people under all sorts of circumstances, is that the cause
of Fear of people and things exists chiefly in the imagination. It is
the fear of anticipation rather than the fear of actual conditions. It
is like the fear felt upon approaching a dentist's office--worse than
the actual experience of the chair. Suspense and fearful expectation are
two of the great sources of human weakness. Experience shows us that the
majority of things we fear never happen; that those which do happen are
never so bad as we had feared. Moreover, experience teaches us that when
a real difficulty confronts us, we usually are given the strength and
courage to meet and bear it, or to overcome it--while in our moments of
fearful anticipation these helpful factors are not apparent. Sufficient
for the moment are the evils thereof--it is not the troubles of the
moment which bear us down, but the burdens of future moments which we
have added to our load. The rule is to meet each question or obstacle as
it arises, and not to add fear of trouble beyond to the work of the
moment. Do not cross your bridge till you come to it. The majority of
feared things melt away when you come up to them--they partake of the
nature of the mirage. It is the ghosts of things which never materialize
which cause us the greatest fear. Banish Fearthought from your Mental
Attitude when you make the Approach.

But, a word of warning here: Do not become "fresh" or impudent because
you feel Self Reliant and Fearless. While realizing that _you_ are a
Man, do not forget that the prospect is also one. Impudence is a mark of
weakness rather than of strength--strong men are above this petty thing.
Be polite and courteous. The true gentleman is both self-respecting and
polite. And, after all is said and done, the best Approach that a
Salesman can make is that of a GENTLEMAN. This will win in the long run,
and the consciousness of having so acted will tend to strengthen the
Salesman and preserve his self-respect. Remember not only to manifest
the self-respect of a gentleman--but also to observe the obligations of
politeness and courtesy which are incumbent upon a gentleman. _Noblesse
oblige_--"nobility imposes obligations."

If you want a maxim of action and manner, take this one: "Act as a
gentleman should." If you want a touchstone upon which to test manner
and action, take this: "Is this the act of a gentleman?" If you will
follow this advice you will acquire a manner which will be far superior
to one based upon artificial rules or principles--a natural
manner--because the manner of a gentleman is the expression of true and
pure courtesy, and will be respected as such by all, whether they,
themselves, observe it or not. We have seen many instances in which the
maintenance of the true gentlemanly spirit under strong provocation has
completely disarmed boorishness, and won friendship and regard from
those apparently opposing it at the time.

The first psychological element of a Sale is that of the First
Impression upon the buyer. And the impression must be of a favorable
kind. There must be nothing to create a bad impression for this will
distract the attention from the purpose of the Approach to the
particular object awakening the unpleasant impression. The first point
preliminary to gaining attention, is to know the name of the man you are
approaching; and if possible just where he is. Nothing is more
demoralizing to the Salesman, and more likely to break up the
psychological influence of the Approach, than a lack of knowledge of the
name and identity of the man you wish to see. The miscarriage of an
Approach occasioned by mistaking the person should be avoided. If you do
not know your man, or where he is in the office, it will be well to
inquire of the others present, politely of course, where "Mr. X's" desk
is. If you happen to ask this question of "Mr. X" himself, you can
easily adjust yourself to the occasion. The _fiasco_ of approaching "Mr.
A" and greeting him as "Mr. X" is apt to be confusing and weakening, and
tends to bring the element of ridicule into the interview, unless the
Salesman has the tact and wit to pass it off. If possible, avoid asking
for "the proprietor," or inquiring of a man, "are you the proprietor?"
If you do not know the proprietor's name, ask it of some one.

The National Cash Register people say to their salesmen: "It is
manifestly improper to describe a definite form of words and require
salesmen to use them in all cases when they approach business men at the
first interview. What would be proper to say to one man under given
circumstances might be unsuitable to say to another under different
circumstances. Much must be left to the discretion of the salesman. At
the same time there are certain leading statements to be made, and
certain ways of making them which experience has shown to be well
adapted to the end in view. * * * It is not necessary that this
introductory talk should be long. Often a short talk is more convincing.
We do not advise salesmen to introduce themselves by sending in a card,
but prefer that they should depend wholly on what they are able to say
to secure a hearing. We strongly disapprove of obscure introductions and
all tricks, and believe that a man who has something worth saying, and
is not ashamed of his business, can make known his errand in a bold,
straightforward manner. A salesman should adapt himself to his man, but
at the same time he should have a fixed idea of what he has to say. He
should be dignified and earnest. * * * As soon as you do succeed in
reaching the proprietor, and have said to him, 'Good morning! Is this
Mr. Johnson?' then say directly and plainly, 'I represent the National
Cash Register Company.' This immediately puts you on a square footing,
and if he has anything to say against your business it will draw his
fire immediately. If he has nothing to say, proceed to business at once,
but don't under any circumstances say, 'I called to sell you a
register,' or 'I called to tell you about our registers,' but put it
rather in this way, '_I want to interest you in our methods for taking
care of transactions with customers in your store_.' The difference
between the two ways of saying it is that one begins with _your end_ of
the business--the thing that interests _you_; while the other begins at
_his_ end of it--the thing presumably interesting to him."

We specially direct the student's attention to the above paragraph. It
contains in a nutshell the whole philosophy of the introductory talk of
the Approach. It is the essence of the experience and knowledge of the
thousands of salesmen of the great selling organization of the large
concern named, and is right to the point, and what is still more
important, it is scientifically correct, and based upon true
psychological principles.

The Salesman in making the Approach should not act as if he were in a
hurry, nor should he dawdle. He should go about it in a business-like
manner showing his realization of the value of time, and yet acting as
if he had the time necessary for the transaction of that particular
piece of business, just as he would if the buyer had called on him
instead of vice versa. Don't swagger or strut, or act as if you were the
proprietor. Act the part of the real business man who is at ease and yet
is attending to business. Do not try to "rush" the customer in the
Approach--you are calling on him and must appear to defer to him in the
matter of opening the conversation, in a respectful and yet
self-respecting manner. The better poised and balanced you are in
manner, the more he will respect you, no matter how he may act. It is
much easier for a buyer to turn down an ill-bred boorish caller than one
who shows the signs of being a gentleman. In fact the boorish caller
invites the turn-down--he suggests it by his manner; while the gentleman
suggests respectful treatment. The line of least resistance in
suggestion is the one most natural for people to follow.

Some salesmen try to grasp the hand of the customer at the beginning.
This is all right if the customer be a jovial "hale fellow, well met"
kind of a man, but if he be reserved and dignified he will be apt to
resent your pushing this attention upon him. The thing to do is to make
him feel like shaking hands--this is an important point, which counts if
gained. You can generally tell from his manner and expression whether to
extend your hand. You must trust to your intuitions in "sizing up" your
man. What has been said regarding the mind of the buyer will help you,
and what data you have collected will also be of use, but at the last
you must depend upon your own intuition to a considerable extent.
Experience develops this intuitive faculty. Some salesmen thrust their
cards into the hands of a prospect when they introduce themselves. This
is poor psychology, for it serves to attract the prospect's attention to
the card and away from the salesman. Introduce yourself verbally, simply
and distinctly, and then get down to business.

If you see a man is busy with someone else, or with something in
particular--wait for him. Don't break into his occupation, until he
looks up and gives you the psychological signal to proceed. Never
interrupt another salesman who may be talking to the prospect. This is
not only a point in fair play and business courtesy, but is very good
business policy in addition. When you begin your introductory talk, get
right to the point, and don't beat around the bush as so many do. Get
down to business--get over the agony of suspense--take the plunge.
Remember always, that to the prospect your little story is not as stale
or stereotyped as it may be to you--so put earnestness into it, and tell
it just as if you were relating it for the first time to someone who
had requested it from you. Maintain _your_ interest, if you would arouse
that of the prospect.

Never commit the folly of asking a prospect: "Are you busy?" or, "I fear
you are busy, sir?" This is a very bad suggestion for the prospect, and
makes it easy for him to say "Yes!" You mould bullets for him to fire at
you. If he really _is_ too busy to give you the proper attention, you
may do well to tell him so, and then get out--but never suggest anything
of this kind to him if you expect to proceed. It is akin to the doleful
"You don't want to buy any matches, sir, do you?" of the forlorn vendors
of small articles who float into offices at times. Never make it easy
for a prospect to turn you down--or out. If he is going to do these
things, make him work hard to do it. This might seem like needless
advice, but many young salesmen commit this particular fault. Avoid the
apologetic attitude and manner--you have nothing to apologize for. You
are using up _your_ time as much as the prospect's time--let it go at
that. Never apologize for anything but a fault or mistake. Your call is
not a fault or a mistake--unless you make it so by assuming it to be
such. Some men would like to apologize for being alive, but they never
make salesmen. Be careful what adverse suggestions you may put into the
prospect's mind by this apologizing and "explaining" business. What's
the use of this nonsense anyway--it never sold any goods, and never
will. It is merely a sign of weakness and lack of nerve. Better stop it.

The trouble with these apologetic and explanatory fellows is that they
do not thoroughly believe in the merit of their propositions. If they
really believed as they should--if they had "sold themselves"--they
would realize that the prospect needs their goods, and, that although he
might not know it now, he is being done a favor by having his attention
called to them. A Salesman has no need to apologize to a customer,
unless he has need to apologize to himself--and if he is not right on
the latter score he had better change his line and get something to sell
that he is not ashamed of, or get out of the business altogether. No man
ever feels ashamed of anything in which he thoroughly believes and
appreciates.

The following advice from the National Cash Register people, is like
everything else they say, very good: "Do not attempt to talk to a man
who is not listening, who is writing a letter or occupying himself in
any other way while you are talking. That's useless, and is a loss of
self-respect and of his respect. If he cannot give you his attention,
say to him: 'I see that you are busy. If you can give me your attention
for a few minutes I shall be pleased; but I don't want to interrupt you,
if you cannot spare the time, and I will call again.' Try to understand
and feel thoroughly the distinction between confidence and familiarity.
Never fail in respect either to yourself or to the man with whom you are
talking. Never be familiar with him. Never put your hand on his shoulder
or on his arm, nor take hold of his coat. Such things are repugnant to a
gentleman--and you should assume that he is one. Never pound the desk or
shake your finger at a prospect. Don't shout at him as if sound would
take the place of sense. Don't advance at him and talk so excitedly
under his nose that he will back away from you for fear of being run
over, as if you were a trolley-car. I have seen a sales agent back a
prospect half way across a room in this way. Don't compel a man to
listen to you by loud or fast talking. Don't make him feel that he can't
get a word in edgewise and has to listen until you are out of breath.
This is not the sort of compulsion to make customers. But make him
believe that you have something to say and will say it quickly. Put
yourself in his place from the very start. Make him feel, not that you
are trying to force _your_ business upon him, but that you want to
discuss how _his_ business may be benefited by you."

One of the best salesmen this particular company ever had has passed
down to the selling corps of that concern the following axiom: "If you
do but one thing, in approaching a prospect, say, '_It will save you
money_,' seven times, and you have made a good Approach." And so say we.
Concrete facts, stated in terse terms, are the essence of the opening
talk and the life of the Approach.

What we have said so far has reference to the stage of First Impression,
which followed the preliminary stage of Involuntary Attention which was
caused by your presence. The purpose of the favorable First Impression
is to make the way easy for the real process of selling which is to
follow. The principle of First Impression rests upon the associated
experience of the buyer, and its effect arises from suggestion. The
hasty, general idea or impression of the Salesman's personality, which
we call the First Impression, is almost unconscious on the part of the
prospect, and is due largely to the suggestion of association. That is,
the prospect has met other people manifesting certain characteristics,
and has fallen into the habit of hasty generalization, or classification
of people in accordance with certain traits of appearance, manner, etc.
This is the operation of the psychological principle of the Association
of Ideas, and may be influenced by what is known as the Suggestion of
Association. The following quotation from the volume of this series
entitled "Suggestion and Auto-Suggestion," will make clearer this
principle:

"This form of Suggestion is one of the most common phases. It is found
on all sides, and at all times. The mental law of association makes it
very easy for us to associate certain things with certain other things,
and we will find that when one of the things is recalled it will bring
with it its associated impression. * * * We are apt to associate a
well-dressed man, of commanding carriage, travelling in an expensive
automobile, with the idea of wealth and influence. And, accordingly,
when some adventurer of the 'J. Rufus Wallingford' type travels our way,
clad in sumptuous apparel, with the air of an Astorbilt, and a $10,000
(hired) automobile, we hasten to place our money and valuables in his
keeping, and esteem ourselves honored by having been accorded the
privilege."

The Suggestion of Authority also plays its part in the First Impression,
and in all the stages of sale in fact. This form of suggestion is
described in the book just mentioned, as follows: "Let some person
posing as an authority, or occupying a position of command, calmly state
a fallacy with an air of wisdom and conviction, without any 'ifs' or
'buts,' and many otherwise careful people will accept the suggestion
without question; and, unless they are afterward forced to analyze it
by the light of reason they will let this seed find lodgement in their
minds, to blossom and bear fruit thereafter. The explanation is that in
such cases the person suspends the critical attention which is usually
interposed by the attentive will, and allows the idea to enter his
mental castle unchallenged, and to influence other ideas in the future.
It is like a man assuming a lordly air and marching past the watchman at
the gate of the mental fortress, where the ordinary visitor is
challenged and severely scrutinized; his credentials examined; and the
mark of approval placed upon him before he may enter. * * * The
acceptance of such suggestions is akin to a person bolting a particle of
food, instead of masticating it. As a rule we bolt many a bit of mental
provender, owing to its stamp of real or pretended authority. And many
persons understanding this phase of suggestion take advantage of it, and
'use it in their business' accordingly. The confidence-man, as well as
the shrewd politician and the seller of neatly printed gold-mines,
imposes himself upon the public by means of an air of authority, or by
what is known in the parlance of the busy streets as 'putting up a good
front.' Some men are all 'front,' and have nothing behind their
authoritative air--but that authoritative air provides them with a
living."

The suggestion of associated manner, appearance and air--the "good
front," in fact--is the principal element in the favorable First
Impression. The balance is a mixture of tact, diplomacy, common sense,
and intuition. But remember this always: the _best_ "front" is the
_real_ one--the one which is the reflection of the right Mental Attitude
and Character--the "front" of the Gentleman. If you lack this, the
nearer you can act it out, the better for yourself. But no imitation is
as good as the genuine article. The true Gentleman is the scientific
mixture of strength and courtesy--the manifestation of "the iron hand in
the velvet glove." So much for the First Impression.

The mental stages of Curiosity and Associated Interest on the part of
the buyer are also to be induced by the Salesman in the Approach. We
have described these phases in the chapter entitled "The Psychology of
the Purchase," this particular part of which should be re-read at this
point. A few additional words on these points, however, will not be out
of place here.

Regarding the phase of Curiosity, we would say that it will be well if
you can manage the opening talk to the prospect so as to "keep him
guessing a little," while still holding his Associated Interest.
Curiosity whets a man's interest just as Worcestershire sauce whets his
appetite. The key to the arousing of Curiosity is the idea of "something
new;" a new idea; a new pattern, a new device, etc. The mind of the
average man likes "something new"--even the old fogy likes something new
in his old favorites, new bottles for his good old wine. The idea of
newness and novelty tends to arouse a man's inquisitiveness and
imagination. And if you can start these faculties working you have done
well, for Associated Interest is closely allied thereto. When you get a
prospect to the stage of asking questions, either verbally or mentally,
you have the game well started.

Never make the mistake of asking the man if he "wants to _buy_
so-and-so." Of course he doesn't at that stage, particularly if you ask
him in that way. It is too easy for him to say No! It is almost as bad
as that stock illustration of adverse suggestion: "You don't want to buy
any so-and-so, do you mister?" which brings a ready "No!" from the
average person. Nor do you want to say: "I have called to see if I
cannot sell you so-and-so, to-day, Mr. X." Or, "Can I sell you some
so-and-so, this morning, Mr. Z?" This form of arousing interest is based
on erroneous psychological principles. Of course, the prospect doesn't
want to buy or be sold at this stage of the game--the sale is the
finishing stage. This plan is like cutting a log of wood with the
butt-end of the axe--you are presenting the wrong end of the
proposition. You can never arouse Curiosity or Associated Interest in
this way. Forget the words "You buy" and "I sell" for the moment--in
fact the less you use them at any stage the better it will be, for they
are too unpleasantly suggestive of the opening of pocket-books to be
agreeable to the prospect. There are excellent substitutes for these
terms--terms which suggest profit, advantage, saving and pleasure to the
mind of the buyer, rather than ideas of expenditure and "giving up."
Try to suggest the incoming stream of money to your buyer--not the
outgoing one. The reason is obvious, if you understand the laws of
suggestion and psychology.

In short, let your appeal at this stage be entirely to the Self
Interest, Pleasure, and Curiosity of the prospect. Try to get him warmed
up, and his imagination working. If you can do this he will forget his
other objects of attention, and will lay aside his armor of suggestive
defence and his shield of instinctive resistance to one whom he thinks
"wants to _sell_ something" and open his pocket-book. This is the stage
in which you must get in the sharp end of your psychological wedge. Here
is where you need the keen edge of your axe--the butt-end may be
reserved for the Decision and Closing.

As far as possible, do not ask questions to which the prospect can
answer "No!" at this stage. Fence him off on this point, and dodge every
sign of a forthcoming negative. But if he does get out a "No!" or
two--do not hear him. Let his "No!" slip off like water from a duck's
back--refuse to admit it to your consciousness--deny it
mentally--refuse the evidence of your ears. This is no time for
"Noes"--go right ahead, unconscious of the words. Keep on appealing to
his Interest, in the phases of Curiosity and Associated Interest. Your
aim here is to get the prospect to the stage of Consideration. This
stage is indicated by his asking a question showing a desire to know the
particulars of your proposition. The question may show but a shade of
interest, but it marks a move in the game. It is the prospect's
answering move to your opening. It is an important psychological moment
in the game. The next move is yours!

And that move is on the plane of the Demonstration--for the stage of the
approach has now been passed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before passing on to the consideration of the stage of Demonstration, we
desire to call your attention to the following excellent advice
regarding the matter of rebuffs which are so often met with in the stage
of Approach. It is from the pen of W.C. Holman, and appeared in his
magazine "Salesmanship." Mr. Holman says: "A crack-a-jack salesman will
receive a rebuff as gracefully and easily and with as little damage to
himself as a professional baseball player will take in a red-hot liner
that a batter drives at him, and go right on playing the game as if
nothing had happened. An amateur salesman will want to quit playing, or
call the attention of the umpire to the malicious intent of the batter.
A blow that would knock the ordinary man off his pins will do nothing
more than to give a professional boxer a chance to show his agility and
win applause. If you drop a plank on a cork in the water with a
tremendous splash the cork will bob up as serenely as if nothing had
happened, and lie quietly once more on the unruffled surface of the
water. And so a clever salesman, when a smashing blow is aimed at him by
a surly prospect, will merely sidestep gracefully and continue calmly
with the prosecution of his purpose. * * * Self-control disarms all ill
natured attacks."




CHAPTER IX

THE DEMONSTRATION


In the last chapter we left the Salesman at that stage of the Approach
where the prospect manifests enough interest to ask a question or make
an interrogative objection. This is an important psychological point or
stage in the game, and here the Approach merges into the Demonstration
on the part of the Salesman; and the stage of passive attention on the
part of the prospect merges into that of active attention, discussion
and Consideration. The moment that the prospect ceases to be a passive
listener, and displays enough active interest to ask a question or make
an interrogative objection, the great game of the sale is on in earnest.
The Demonstration has begun.

This stage of the sale closely resembles a game of chess or checkers.
The approach and preliminary talk of the Salesman is the first move in
the game; the answer, question or objection of the prospect is the
second move--then the real game or discussion is on. It is now "up to"
the Salesman to make his second move, which is a reply move to that of
the prospect. And this particular move is a highly important one in the
great game of the sale. Like an important early move in checkers or
chess the success or failure of the whole game may depend on it, so it
is well to have this move mapped out as a part of your preliminary
study.

Macbain truthfully says of the first remark of the prospect: "The
customer is not going to commit himself in response to the first remark.
He always holds considerable in reserve. An objection--either expressed
or implied--can always be counted on. It may vary from a general 'busy'
statement, or 'no interest in what is about to be submitted,' or it may
be a specific statement--even heated, in fact--that the one approached
has 'no time for the salesman or his house.'"

But, just as in chess or checkers there are certain "replies" indicated
for every one of the first few opening moves, all of which are fully
stated and explained in text books on these games, so in the great game
of Salesmanship there are certain replies indicated for these
preliminary moves on the part of the prospect. The large selling
concerns have schools of instruction, personal or correspondence, in
which the Salesman is furnished with the appropriate and logical answers
to the objections and questions usually advanced by the prospect. It
will be found that there are really but few moves of this kind in the
game of the average prospects--they tend to say the same things under
the same circumstances, and there is always an appropriate answer. The
salesman will acquire many of these answers by experience, conversation
with older salesmen, or by instruction from his sales-manager or the
house. Each line has its own stock of objections, and its own stock of
replies thereto.

There are two general classes of replies to objections, which apply to
nearly every kind of proposition. The first is that of deftly catching
the objection on your mental fencing-foil, allowing it to glance off,
and at the same time getting a thrust on your opponent. President
Patterson of the National Cash Register Company is credited with
special cleverness in this kind of reply, and his salesmen are said to
be instructed to listen carefully to the prospect's objection and then
to turn it back on him by a remark based on the principle of: "Why,
that's the very reason why you should," etc. In other words the
objection should be twisted into an argument in favor of the
proposition. In the hands of a master this form of reply is very
effective, and often brings results by reason of its daring and
unexpectedness. But it is not every one who has the skill to use it to
advantage.

The second class of reply is based upon what is called indirect
Resistance, which, by the way, is often the strongest form of
_resistance_, and accomplishes its intended effect while avoiding the
opposition and antagonism of Direct Resistance. Some writers on the
subject have called this "Non-Resistance," obviously a misnomer for it
is a form of resistance although subtly disguised. It is analogous to
the tree that bends in order to avoid breaking under the blasts of the
storm; of the flexible steel which bends to the pressure, instead of
breaking as would iron; but both of which spring back into place
immediately. It is generally very poor policy to directly oppose the
prospect upon minor points--the main point is what you are after. And
the main point is the order--the rest is immaterial and unimportant. Let
us contrast Direct-Resistance and Indirect-Resistance, and see the
points of each.

In Direct Resistance the minor objections of the prospect are met with
the answer: "You are wrong there, Mr. X;" or, "You are entirely
mistaken;" or, "You take the wrong view;" or, as we heard in one
instance: "Your objection is ridiculous." The Direct Resistance is
necessary in a few contingencies, or upon rare occasions, but it should
be sparingly and cautiously used. It is a desperate remedy indicated
only for desperate diseases. The Indirect Resistance expresses itself in
answers of: "That is possibly _true_ in some cases, _but_," etc.; or,
"There is _much_ truth in what you say, Mr. X, _but_," etc.; or, "As a
general proposition that is probably correct, _but_," etc.; or, "I quite
agree with you, Mr. X. that (etc.) but in this particular case I think
an exception should be made," etc. The value of this form of resistance
lies in the fact that it costs you nothing to allow the prospect to
retain his own ideas and entertain his own prejudices, provided they do
not interfere with the logic of your general argument, nor affect your
main point, the order.

You are not a missionary or a pedagogue--you are just a Salesman and
your business is to _take orders_. Let the old fellow keep his foolish
ideas and intolerant prejudices, providing you can steer him straight to
the ordering point. The active principle in Indirect Resistance is to
get rid of his general objections in the easiest and shortest way, by
allowing him to retain them, and concentrating your and his attention
and interest upon the particular points of your proposition--the
positive and material points of your particular case. Avoid disputes on
non-essentials, generalities, and immaterial points. You are not
striving for first prize in debate--_you're after orders_. Remember the
legal principles of the "pertinent, relevant, and material" points, and
side-track the "immaterial, irrelevant and impertinent" side-issues,
even if you have to tacitly admit them in Indirect Resistance. Here it
is in a nutshell: _Sidetrack and Sidestep the Non-Essentials_.

The Salesman has now reached the point in which the prospect is
manifesting the psychological stage of Consideration--the stage in which
he is willing to "look into" the matter, or rather into the subject or
object of the proposition. This stage must not be confused with that of
Deliberation, in which the prospect weighs the pros and cons of whether
he should purchase. The two stages are quite different. The present
stage--that of Consideration--is merely the phase of examination,
investigation or inquiry into the matter, to see if there is really
anything of real practical interest in it for himself. It is more than
mere Associated Interest, for it has passed into the manifestation of
interested investigation. In many cases the process never gets beyond
this stage, particularly if the Salesman does not understand the
psychology of the process. Many salesmen make the mistake of trying to
make their closing talk at this point--but this is a mistake. The
prospect must understand something about the details of the proposition,
or the qualities and characteristics of the goods, before he uses his
imagination or feels inclination to possess the thing. So here is where
the work of explanation comes in.

The term "Demonstration" has two general means, each of which is
exemplified by stages in the Salesman's work of Demonstration. The first
meaning, and stage, is: "A showing or pointing out; an indication,
manifestation or exhibition." The second meaning, and stage, is: "The
act of proving clearly, by incontrovertible proof and indubitable
evidence, beyond the possibility of doubt or contradiction." The first
stage is that of "showing and pointing out"--the second, that of of
"proof." The first is that of presenting the features of a thing--the
second, that of logical argument and proof. And, therefore, remember
that you are now at the stage of "showing and pointing out," and not
that of "argument and proof."

Regarding the matter of "showing and pointing out" the features and
characteristics of your goods or proposition, you should always remember
that the prospect does not know the details of your proposition or
article of sale as you do--or as you _should_ know. The subject is not
"stale" to him, as it may have become to you if you have not kept up
your enthusiasm. Therefore, while avoiding needless waste of time, do
not make the mistake of rushing this point of the demonstration and thus
neglecting the important features. Better one feature well explained and
emphasized, than a score hurried over in a sloppy manner. It is better
to concentrate upon a few leading and striking points of demonstration,
of material interest to the prospect, and to assume that he does not
know anything about them except as he may show his knowledge by
questions or objections--all this in a courteous manner, of course,
avoiding the "know it all" air. The prospect must have time to allow the
points to sink into his mind--some men are slower than others in this
respect. Watch the prospect's face to see by his expression whether or
not he really understands what you are saying. Better present one point
in a dozen ways, to obtain understanding, than to present a dozen points
in one way and fail to be understood.

In order to demonstrate your goods or proposition at this stage, you
must have fully acquainted yourself with them, and also have arranged
the telling points in a natural and logical order of presentation,
working from the simple up to the complex. Be careful not to suggest
_buying_ at this point, lest your prospect take fright and lose interest
in the demonstration. He is naturally in a defensive mood, for he scents
the appeal to his pocket book in the distance--you must try to take his
mind off this point by arousing his interested attention in the details
of your goods or proposition. Explain the details just as you would if
the prospect had called upon you for the purpose of investigation. In
fact, if you can work yourself up to the proper Mental Attitude you may
effect the psychological change by which the positions may be reversed,
and so that it will instinctively seem to the prospect that he is
calling on you and not you on him. There is an important psychological
point here which you would do well to remember. The man who is called
upon always has "the move" on the caller--if you can reverse this
psychological condition, you have gained a great advantage. An awakened
personal interest in the details of a proposition, on the part of the
prospect, tends to reverse the conditions.

If you would understand what a scientific demonstration of an article or
proposition is like, it would pay you to listen to the demonstration by
a well-trained salesman of the National Cash Register Company. This
company drills its salesmen thoroughly in this part of their work, until
they have every detail fastened in their minds in its proper logical
order. An old salesman of this company should be able to repeat his
formula backwards as well as in the regular order--beginning at the
middle and working either backward or forward, at will. He understands
the "why" and "what for" of every detail of his article and proposition,
and is taught to present them in their logical order. Listening to a
talk of one of their best salesmen is a liberal education in
demonstration.

The essence of this stage of the demonstration is that it should be
given in the spirit of a conversational recital of an interesting story,
or description of an event. Speak in an impersonal way; that is, avoid
suggesting to the prospect that you are trying to sell him the thing.
Let this part of your talk be given from the sheer enthusiasm inspired
in your mind by the merits of your proposition. Let it be a labor of
love--forget all about your hope of sale or profit. Your one aim and
object of life, at that moment, should be that of inspiring the prospect
with the wonderful merits of your proposition, which you yourself
entertain. Yours should be the spirit of the propogandist seeking
converts--imparting information for the good of others, and "for the
cause." Forget the forthcoming collection plate, in the earnestness of
your sermon.

The National Cash Register Company instructs its salesmen as follows
regarding this stage of the demonstration: "When you have gotten a
prospect to a demonstration you have accomplished a most important step.
You can take it for granted that he is to some extent interested in the
subject. Now, by all means make the most of that opportunity. Say what
you have to say to him thoroughly and carefully. Don't rattle off your
demonstration in a hurry, as if you were wound up and had to say so many
words to the minute. Give him a chance to speak, to ask questions or
make objections. He probably has certain ideas in his mind which may be
a decided help or a decided hindrance to your argument. You ought to
learn what they are. Don't imagine because he listens in silence that he
agrees with you, or even understands all you say. Speak deliberately. If
you see from a puzzled or doubtful look on his face that anything is not
quite plain to him, stop and make it plain. Take time enough to explain
each point thoroughly. Whenever you make a statement that is open to
question, be sure to get his assent to it before you proceed. If he will
not assent to it exactly as you make it, modify it until he does. Get
him to assent in some degree to every proposition you make, so that when
you get to the general result he cannot go back and disagree with you.
Don't do this however as if you were trying to corner him, but with a
simple desire to reach a reasonable basis of argument. Cast aside all
attempts at being a clever talker, all idea that there is any trick of
words or manner, any secret artfulness about selling registers, and put
yourself in the plain, unaffected spirit of a man who has simply a
truth to tell, and is bent upon telling it in the plainest, homliest
way. Avoid above all things the fatal mistake of demonstrating to your
prospect with a sense of fear, haste, and uncertainty. Realize fully the
power of the facts behind you, and have the full confidence of your
convictions; coolly and deliberately make each point clear and
conclusive, and lead the prospect by simple steps up to absolute
conviction."

If you have held your prospect's interested attention during this stage
of the Demonstration, you will find that his imagination is beginning to
work in the direction of making mental pictures of how the thing or
proposition would work for him--how the article would look in his
possession. It is a psychological law that interested investigation, or
consideration, tends to awaken the interest of imagination and desire if
the object of the investigation blends with the general trend of the
person's thought and feelings. The very process of investigation
inevitably brings to light new points of interest. And, then, the act of
investigation and discovery, instinctively creates a feeling of
proprietorship in the thing investigated or discovered. It establishes
an association between the object and its investigator.

Halleck says: "* * * We must not forget that any one not shallow and
fickle can soon discover something interesting in most objects * * * the
attention which they are able to give generally ends in finding a pearl
in the most uninteresting looking oyster. * * * The essence of genius is
to present an old thing in new ways." And again: "When we think about a
thing, or keep the mind full of a subject, the activity in certain brain
tracts is probably much increased. As a result of this unconscious
preparation, a full fledged image may suddenly arise in consciousness."
Hoffding says: "The inter-weaving of the elements of the picture in the
imagination takes place in great measure below the threshold of
consciousness, so that the image suddenly emerges in consciousness
complete in its broad outlines, the conscious result of an unconscious
process." Halleck also says: "A representative image of the thing
desired is the necessary antecedent to desire. Not until a
representative idea comes to the mind does desire arise. It has often
been said that where there is no knowledge there can be no desire. A
child sees a new toy and wants it. A man notices some improvements about
his neighbor's house and wishes them. One nation finds out that another
has a war ship of a superior model, and straightway desires something as
good or better. A scholar sees a new cyclopedia or work of reference,
and desire for it arises. A person returns and tells his friends how
delightful a foreign trip is. Their desires for travel increase.
Knowledge gives birth to desire, and desire points out the point to
will." In this paragraph we have quoted eminent authorities, showing the
direct line of psychological progress from interested investigation,
through imagination, to desire and will. One investigates and gains
favorable knowledge regarding a subject; then his imagination operates
to show him the possibility of its successful application to his
personal case; then his desire for the thing is awakened.

The stage of Imagination is reached when the prospect begins to think of
the thing or proposition in connection with himself. He then begins to
picture it in its application to his needs or requirements, or in
relation to his general desires, tastes and feelings. The Salesman, in
order to awaken the Imagination of the prospect, should endeavor to
paint "word pictures" of the thing in its workings, application, value,
and utility. He should endeavor to make the prospect _see_, mentally,
the desirability of the thing to any man--how it will work for good; how
it will benefit one; how great an advantage it will be for one; how much
good it will be in every way for its possessor. Avoid the personal
application, even at this late stage--make the application general, so
as to avoid scaring off the prospect's pocket book. The whole idea and
aim of this stage of the process of sale is to awaken inclination in the
prospect--to make his mouth water for the thing--to make him begin to
feel that he would like to have it, himself. He must be put into the
mental condition of the woman gazing longingly at the hat in the
milliner's window; or of the boy who is peeking through the knot-hole in
the fence of the base-ball park. He must be led into the feeling that
he is on the outside of the fence or window--and the good thing is
inside. He will then begin to feel the inclination or desire to "get on
the inside."

We once heard a tale of two Southern darkies, which illustrates this
point. The two were riding on the same mule's back coming home from
work. The foremost darkey began relating the story of some roast possum
he had feasted upon the preceding night. He pictured the possum as fat
and tender; how they first "briled" him, and then roasted him in the
oven; how juicy and brown he looked; how nice he smelt; how he was
served up "wid coon-gravy poured all over him;" and finally how nice he
tasted when the narrator dug his teeth into him. The darkey in the rear
displayed increasing signs of uneasiness as the tale proceeded and as he
imagined first the sight, then the smell, and then the _taste_ of the
possum. Finally he groaned, and shouted out: "Shet up, yer fool nigger!
Does yer wanter make me fall clean offen dis yer mewel?" This is the
point--you must make your prospect see, smell and taste the good possum
you have, until he is ready to "fall offen de mewel."

Words describing action, taste, feelings, or in fact anything which
relates to sense perceptions, tend to arouse the imagination. If the
Salesman cultivates the art of actually seeing, tasting or feeling the
thing in his own imagination, as he talks, he will tend to re-produce
his mental pictures in the mind of his prospect. Imagination is
contagious--along the lines of suggestion. Descriptions of sensations,
or feelings, tend to awaken a sympathetic response and representation in
the minds of others, along the lines of suggestion. Did you never have
your imagination and desire fired by the description of a thing--didn't
you want to see, feel, or taste it yourself? Did you never _feel_ the
effect of words like: "delicious; fragrant; luscious; sweet; mild;
invigorating; bracing," etc., in an advertisement? How many young people
have been hurried into matrimony by an illustration or word-picture of a
"happy home;" "a little wife to meet you at the door;" "little children
clustering around you," and all the rest of it? A well known instalment
furniture dealer of Chicago is said to be psychologically responsible
for thousands of weddings, by his suggestive pictures of the "happy
home" and his kind statement that "We will Feather your Nest;" and "You
find the Bride, and we will do the rest." The Salesman who can "paint
bright pictures in the mind" of his prospect, will succeed in awakening
the Imagination, and arousing the Inclination and Desire. Newman well
said: "Deductions have no power of persuasion. The heart is commonly
reached, not through the reason, but through the imagination. * * *
Persons influence us, voices melt us, looks subdue us, deeds inflame
us."

And so we pass to the stage of Inclination or Desire, by the road of the
Imagination.

The mental state of Inclination, or Desire, following upon the arousing
of the appropriate faculties through the Imagination which arises in the
stage of Consideration, may be briefly described as the _feeling of_:
"This seems to be a good thing--_I would like to have it_." This
Inclination has been aroused by demonstration and suggestion, and the
prospect begins to experience the feeling that the possession of the
thing will add to his pleasure, comfort, well-being, satisfaction or
profit. You will remember the statement regarding Desire given in a
previous chapter: "_Desire has for its object something which will bring
pleasure or get rid of pain, immediate or remote, for the individual or
for some one in whom he is interested. Aversion, or a striving to get
away from something, is merely the negative aspect of desire._" It is
this feeling that you have aroused in some degree in the mind of the
prospect. You have brought him to the first stages of Inclination, which
naturally brings him to a deliberation as to whether he is justified in
purchasing it, and to the point where he will begin to weigh the
advantages and disadvantages of the purchase--the question of whether he
is willing to "pay the price" for it, which is, after all, the vital
question in nearly all forms of deliberation following Inclination and
Desire. But as the prospect's mind passes to the stage of Deliberation,
you must not lose sight of the question of Desire, for it may be
necessary to re-kindle it in him, or to blow upon its sparks, when he
debates the "to buy or not to buy." The Deliberation is largely a
question of a conflict of motives, and Desire is a powerful motive--so
you must be ready to arouse a new phase of "want to" in the prospect to
counterbalance some other motive which may be turning the scales in the
other direction.

In entering into the stage of Deliberation, or Argument, the discussion
passes from the impersonal plane to the personal. The question no longer
is: "Is not this a good thing?" to that of "Should you not have it for
your own?" This is a distinct change of base, and a different set of
faculties are now employed by the Salesman. He leaves the Descriptive
phase and enters into that of Argument. He enters into that second
meaning or phase of Demonstration which has been defined as: "Proving
clearly." And the question of proof and argument is that of whether the
prospect is not justified in acquiring the thing. The prospect's mind is
already considering the two sides of the question, his Caution combating
his Inclination. He is like "Jeppe" of whom we told you in a previous
chapter. It is now a question of "my back or my stomach," with him. The
Salesman's business now is to demonstrate to him that he can and should
acquire the thing. This is a proceeding in which the Salesman's tact,
resources, knowledge of human nature, persuasive power, and his logic
are needed.

The Salesman has an advantage here which he often overlooks. We refer to
the fact that the very objections of the prospect, and his questions
give a key to his mental operations, which may be followed up by the
Salesman. He knows now what is on the prospect's mind, and what are his
general feelings, views, and inclinations regarding the matter. When he
begins to talk he gives you a glimpse at his motives, prejudices, hopes
and fears. It is quite an art to lead the prospect to ask the questions
or to make the objections to which you have a strong answering argument.
You then are able to turn back upon him his own argument. _It is a
psychological fact that the force of a statement made in answer to an
interrogative objection, is much stronger than would be the same
statement made without the question or objection._

Macbain says: "Lincoln, it is related, early learned in beginning the
study of law, that he did not know what it was to prove a thing. By
means of careful, conscientious study, in which he took up the problems
of Euclid, one by one, he satisfied himself that he then realized
absolutely what it meant to prove a proposition. One of the most eminent
judges of the Iowa judiciary regards every legal problem as a
proposition to be proved by a chain of reasoning. The salesman who
determines with absolute accuracy what it means, first, to prove a
proposition, and second to apply the general principles of demonstration
to an immediate matter in hand, knows just how far to go in making his
demonstration, what to include and what to exclude. He can see in his
mind's eye the chain of evidence that he is fashioning and will make
that fabric of his mind exact, logical and convincing."

(Note:--In order to train the student in logical thinking, development
of the logical faculties, and the art of expressing one's thoughts in a
logical and effective manner, we would suggest that he make inquiry
regarding the volumes of the present series known as "The Art of Logical
Thinking, or The Laws of Reasoning;" "Thought-Culture, or Practical
Mental Training;" and "The Art of Expression." These books are published
by the house issuing the present volume.)

It will be seen that the field of discussion in this stage of
Deliberation covers not only the subject of the value and utility of the
goods or proposition, but also the question of the price, the
advisibility of the purchase at this time, the special advantages
possessed, the over-balancing of assumed disadvantages, and in fact the
whole question of purchase from beginning to end. The one thing to be
held in the mind of the Salesman, however, is "_This will do you good;
this will do you good; this will do you good!_" Keep hammering away at
this one nail, in a hundred ways--hold it up to view from a hundred
viewpoints and angles. It is the gist of the whole argument, at the
last. Don't allow yourself to be sidetracked from this essential
proposition, even if the argument spreads itself over a wide field. The
point is that (1) _the thing is good_; (2) _the prospect needs it_; and
(3) _that you do him a good turn by making him see that he needs it_.
We once knew of a very successful life-insurance salesman who had but
two points to his selling talk. These were: (1) "Life insurance is a
necessity;" and (2) "My company is sound." He brushed aside all other
points as immaterial, and insisted with all his heart and soul upon his
two points. He was not an educated man, nor was he versed in the
technicalities of life-insurance, but he knew his two points from cellar
to garret. He outsold many men with actuarial minds, and extended
knowledge. He followed the "rifle-ball" policy, instead of the "shot
gun" plan. When he struck the target, he made a mark!

It is the Mental Attitude of the Salesman which is the power behind his
argumentive rifle-balls. It is his enthusiasm which warms up the
prospect's imagination and desire. And, back of these, must always be
his belief in his own proposition. The Salesman must "sell himself" over
and over again, as friend Holman has suggested. He must answer every
objection which occurs to himself, as well as those which are thrust
upon him in his work. If the goods are right, there must be an answer
to every objection, just as there is a return-move to every move in
chess--just as there always is "the other side" to everything. He must
find this move, and this "other side" to every objection to which his
proposition is open. And he must "sell himself" over and over again, as
we have said. The National Cash Register people say to their salesmen:
"Selling registers is a straight-forward serious work. You have a plain
statement to make of the facts which you are convinced are true, and
which you are certain it is for the prospect's benefit to know. You
should be as sincere about it as if you were a clergyman preaching the
gospel. If you go at it in this sincere spirit the prospect will feel
the importance of what you say, and it will carry its due weight. It is
a fact which you must fully believe, that the register is a great
benefit to any man who buys it; that it will save any merchant many
times its cost while he is paying for it."

Pierce says: "So in selling--it is absolutely essential to be genuine.
First, last and foremost--be genuine. Practice absolutely what you
preach. Be honest. Never undertake a line of goods that you cannot
enthusiastically endorse. Otherwise you cannot 'sell yourself.' And
selling one's self is by all means necessary. Students have asked us:
'How about being honest when the customer asks you a question that you
know in your heart you cannot answer straight-forwardly?' The answer is:
Drop that line; _the sooner the better_."

It is true that there are men who "wear the livery of heaven in which to
serve the devil," and who practice self-hypnotization upon themselves
until they get to actually believe that they are advocating an honest
proposition in place of the "fake" they are proposing. And many of these
"confidence-men" and "green-goods men" throw themselves so earnestly
into their acting that they persuade their victims by reason of their
earnestness. We remember Bulwer's tale of the French beggar whose tears
wrought havoc upon the hearts of his susceptible victims. "How are you
able to weep at will?" he was asked. "I think of my poor father who is
dead," he answered. Bulwer adds: "The union of sentiment with the
ability of swindling made that Frenchman a most fascinating creature!"
But every genuine thing must have its counterfeit--the existence of the
latter only serves to prove the former. The success of the "J. Rufus
Wallingford's" of real life, are more than equaled by their final
downfall. No man can continue to prostitute his talents and be happy, or
even ultimately successful. The Law of Compensation is in full
operation. No, we're not preaching--just indulging in a little
philosophy, that's all!

Let us now proceed to the stage of the Salesman's Closing, and the
prospect's Decision and Action.




CHAPTER X

THE CLOSING


The "Closing" is a stage of the sale that is an object of dread to the
majority of salesmen. In fact some salesmen content themselves with
leading the prospect to the point bordering on Decision and Action, and
then lose heart, leave the prospect, and later bring around the sales
manager or special "closer" for the concern. They can lead the horse to
the trough, but they cannot make him drink. While it is true that the
stage of Closing is a delicate one, and involving as it does some
practical psychological strategy, nevertheless we are of the opinion
that many salesmen are victims of their own adverse auto-suggestions in
this matter--they make a boogaboo of the thing which is often found to
be but lath and plaster instead of solid iron and granite. Many a
salesman is defeated in his Closing by his own fears rather than by the
prospect. This stage of the sale is one in which the Salesman should
draw on his reserve store of enthusiasm and energy--for he needs it in
order to carry the day. As Holman once wrote: "General Grant said that
in almost every battle, after hours of fighting, there came a critical
moment in which both parties were tired out, and the side that braced up
at that moment and pounded hard would win. This is probably so in
selling. A good salesman knows that critical moment, and pounds."

The main cause of the failure to bring the prospect to a favorable
Decision--the first of the two final stages of the Closing--is that the
Salesman has not done his best work in the preliminary stages of the
Demonstration. He has not demonstrated the proposition properly, or has
not awakened the Imagination and Inclination of the prospect to a
sufficient extent. Many salesmen slight the preliminary process of the
Demonstration in their anxiety to reach the Closing--but this is a great
mistake, for no structure is stronger than its foundation. The Closing
should follow as a logical and legitimate conclusion of the preceding
stages. It should be like the result of a mathematical problem which
has been carefully worked out. Of course it is impossible for any one
Salesman to "sell them all," from the very nature of things--but the
average man could sell a larger percentage of prospects if he would
strengthen himself along the preliminary stages leading up to the
Closing, and to the final steps of the latter.

The gist of the whole matter of the failure of a prospect to make a
favorable Decision is this: He hasn't been convinced! Why? If you can
answer this question, you have the key to the problem. You haven't
reached the man's desire. Why? If you can get him to "want" the thing,
the decision is a mere matter of final settling down to choice. You may
have said to the man, "This is a good thing--you ought to have it," over
and over again--but have you actually made him see that it was a good
thing and that he ought to have it? It is one thing to tell a man these
things, and another to reproduce your own beliefs in his mind.

The changing of the talk from that affecting Deliberation on the part of
the prospect, to that influencing his Decision, is a delicate matter.
There is a "psychological moment" for the change which some men seem to
perceive intuitively, while others have to learn it by hard experience.
It is the critical balancing point between "enough" and "too much" talk.

On the one hand, the Salesman must beware of a premature Closing, and on
the other he must avoid "unselling" a man after he has made the
psychological sale. Some men are inclined toward one of these
faults--and some to the other. The ideal Salesman has found the nice
point of balance between the two.

If the Salesman attempts to make a premature Closing, he will probably
have failed to bring about the full desire and careful Deliberation in
the prospect's mind. As a practical writer on the subject has pointed
out, this course is as faulty as that of a lawyer who would attempt to
begin his closing address to the jury before he had gotten in his
evidence. The trained finger on the pulse should detect the "high-tide
of interest," and close the demonstration at this point, moving surely
and swiftly to the Closing.

On the other hand, if the Salesman persists in talking on, rambling and
wandering, after he has made a particular point, or all of his points,
he runs the risk of losing his prospect's attention and interest, and
with it the newly awakened inclination and desire. James H. Collins, in
a recent article in "The Saturday Evening Post," relates the following
amusing anecdote illustrating this tendency on the part of the Salesman:

"How easily a customer may be talked out of buying is shown by the
experience of a real-estate promoter who sells New York property to
investors in other cities through a staff of salesmen. One of his men
reported that he was unable to close an elderly German in Pittsburg.
'I've explained the whole property,' said the salesman. 'He understands
the possibilities, yet doesn't invest.' Next time the promoter was in
Pittsburg he called on this investor, accompanied by his salesman. The
latter explained the proposition again most exhaustively, and made every
effort to be clear and convincing. * * * From time to time the investor
tried to interrupt, but the salesman swept on, saying: 'Just a moment,
and I'll take that point up with you.' When the story was finished he
recapitulated. When that was finished he began a resume of the
recapitulation preparatory to rushing the man. Here the boss felt that
the investor really wanted to be heard, so he interrupted the salesman:
'Charlie, I guess if Mr. Conrad here doesn't realize the magnificent
opportunities in New York realty after all you've told him, there's no
use telling him any more.' 'Mein gracious!' protested Conrad. 'I do
realize them. What I wanted to say is that I will take these lots.'"

There is a sixth sense, or intuitive faculty developed in many good
salesmen which tends to inform them when they have said enough along any
particular line, or on the whole subject. In the midst of a sentence, or
after the close of a statement, one will notice a subtle and indefinable
change in the manner or expression of the prospect which informs one
that it is time to stop, and "sum up," or briefly recapitulate. And this
"summing up" must be made briefly, and to the point, in an earnest
manner. It should be made in a logical order and sequence, each point
being driven in as with a sledge hammer of conviction. One should lay
especial stress upon any points in which the prospect seemed interested
during the Demonstration. In short he should fall in with the spirit of
the attorney in his closing address, in which he sums up his strong
points, always with an eye on the jury which he has carefully watched
for signs of interest during the progress of the trial. Each juryman's
character is represented by a faculty in the mind of the prospect--each
should be appealed to along its own particular lines.

The perception of the "psychological moment" of closing the selling
talk, is akin to that of the lawyer who leads his jury up to a dramatic
and logical climax--and then stops. Avoid creating an anti-climax. Mr.
Collins in the magazine article mentioned a moment ago says: "The chief
shortcoming of the salesman who has difficulty in closing is, usually,
that he doesn't know when the psychological moment has come to rush his
man. This is a very definite moment in every deal. Veteran salesmen
gauge it in various ways, some by the attention their argument is
receiving, others by some sign in the customer's eyes, and others still
by a sort of sixth sense which seldom leads them wrong. * * * If the
mechanism of a representative sale could be laid bare for study it would
probably approximate the mechanism of the universe in that material
theory by which the philosophers explain the whole thing up to the point
where a slight push was necessary to set it going eternally. The sale of
the man who doesn't close is technically complete except for the push
that lands the order. Sales may be made by patient exposition of facts,
building up the case for the goods. But to close them, very often, a
real push or kick is needed. Logic avails up to the moment when the
customer must be rushed."

The trouble with some prospects is that they have practically made the
Decision--but do not know they have. That is, they have accepted the
premises of the argument; admitted the logic of the succeeding argument
and demonstration; can see no escape from the conclusion--but still they
have not released the spring of formal Decision which settles the matter
with a mental "click." It is the Salesman's business to produce this
mental "click." It is a process akin to "calling the hand" of the
opponent in a certain game other than that of salesmanship. It is the
stage in which the matter is fairly and squarely "put up" to the
prospect. It is a situation demanding nerve on the part of the
Salesman--that is apparent nerve, for it is after all somewhat of a
bluff on his part, for although he wins if the prospect says "Yes," he
does not necessarily lose if the answer be "No!" for the Salesman, like
the lover, should never let one "No" discourage him. "Never take 'No!'
for an answer," says the old song--and it is worth remembering by the
Salesman.

The "click" of Decision is often produced by the Salesman "putting up"
some strong question or statement to the prospect, which, in the popular
term, "brings him to his feet." As for instance the closing illustration
of some of the National Cash Register salesmen, who after having
demonstrated the merits of the cash register by placing in it the "$7.16
of real money," in two-dollar bills, one-dollar bills, silver dollars,
half-dollars, quarters, dimes, nickles and pennies, during the various
points of the demonstration, turns suddenly to the prospect and says to
him: "Mr. Blank, you have been watching every coin and bill I have put
into this cash drawer. Now how much money do you think is in this
drawer?" Mr. Blank naturally doesn't know. Then the Salesman proceeds:
"Well, then, if you have no conception of the amount of money in this
drawer, after watching me put every coin and bill into it, far more
closely than you could possibly watch such transactions in your own
store, you must admit you are guessing every night as to the amount that
should be in your cash drawer in your store." Pausing a moment to let
this strong point sink into the prospect's mind, the Salesman then says,
earnestly and impressively: "_Mr. Blank, don't you think you ought to
have a register of this kind?_" Every proposition contains features
similar to the one noted above, which can be used effectively in
bringing about the "click" of decision.

In some cases the Suggestion of Imitation may be employed at this stage
by showing orders from others, provided they are of importance. Some men
do not like this, but the majority are influenced by the example of
others and the imitative suggestion prevails and brings down the scale
of Decision. In some other cases the Salesman has found it advantageous
to drop into a serious, earnest tone, manifesting a spirit akin to that
of the earnest worker at a revival meeting, and laying his hand on the
prospect's arm, impress upon him the urgent need of his doing this thing
for his own good. With some prospects this plan of placing the hand upon
him in a brotherly spirit, and looking him earnestly in the eye, results
in the final warming up of conviction and decision--probably from the
associated suggestion of previous solemn exhortations and friendly
counsel. But other men resent any such familiarity--one must know human
nature in using this method.

Never attempt to close your sale in the presence of outsiders. Always
defer it until the prospect is alone, and you have his undivided
attention. It is impossible to get into the "heart to heart" rapport in
the presence of other people.

You may sometimes bring about the Decision by asking pointed and
appropriate questions, the answer of which must act to clinch the
matter. But in asking these questions always be careful not to ask a
question which may easily be answered by a "No." Never say: "Won't you
buy?" or "Can't I sell you?" These questions, and others like them give
the suggestion of a negative answer--they make it too easy for the
prospect to say "No." Remember what we have said elsewhere regarding the
suggestions of questions. Remember the horrible example of "You don't
want to buy anything to-day, do you?" And also remember that a question
preceded by an affirmative statement, tends to draw forth an affirmative
answer. As, for instance: "That is a nice day, isn't it;" or, "This is a
beautiful shade of pink, isn't it?;" or, "This is quite an improvement,
isn't it?" In asking the important question, do not show any doubt in
your tone, manner or form of expression. Beware, always, of making a
negative mental track for your prospect to travel over. The mind works
along the lines of least resistance--be sure you make that "line" in the
right direction.

In cases where you have been recommended to call upon a person by a
friend with whom he has discussed the proposition, you may often find
that but little preliminary talk is needed, and you may proceed to the
Closing very shortly after opening the conversation. In these cases, the
prospect often has "closed himself" without your aid--he wants the thing
without urging. When you meet this condition, take things for granted,
and make the sale just as you would if the prospect had called upon you
to make the purchase. And in any and every case, if you see that the
prospect has "closed himself," clinch the matter at once. And you can
readily see when this stage has arrived. After all, the process of
discovering the "psychological moment" of Closing is like the intuitive
discovery of the psychological moment for "popping the question" in
courting. At certain times in courting these psychological moments
arise--then is the time to "close." And the same rule holds good in
Salesmanship. It is largely a matter of feeling, after all.

And, in Salesmanship, as in courting, remember also that "Faint Heart
never won Fair Lady." Fortune favors the brave. When you feel the
psychological urge of the moment--step in! Don't be afraid. Remember the
old couplet:

   "Tender-handed grasp a nettle, and it stings you for your pains.
    Grasp it like a man of mettle, and it soft as down remains."

When it comes to the psychological moment, banish fear from your mind.
Show spirit and be "game." You have got to make the plunge, and take the
risk of "the proposal" some time--why not now? You have done your best,
then go ahead. Stand up and take your chance like a man. But never act
as if there is any chance about it--preserve your mental attitude of
confident expectation, for these mental states are contagious.

If, in spite of everything, the Decision be against you, do not be
discouraged. If you think you can reverse the decision by a little
further persuasion, do so by all means. Many a battle is won, after it
has apparently been lost. Few maidens expect their gallant laddies to
accept the first "No" as conclusive--and the minds of many buyers work
in the same way. There is a certain coyness about maids, _and
prospects_, which seems to call for a little further coaxing. Many
prospects yield only at the final appeal--they are like Byron's heroine
who "saying she would ne'er consent, consented."

But if the "No" is final, take it good-naturedly, and without show of
resentment, and assuming an "I will call again another day" spirit, bid
the prospect good-bye, courteously, and take your departure. Many
subsequent sales have been made in this way--and many have been lost by
a show of ill-nature. The average man likes a game fighter, and respects
a "good loser." Don't give up at anything short of a "knock-out," but,
that given, shake hands with the victor good-naturedly, and then proceed
to lay plans for another interview. Good nature and cheerfulness under
defeat never fail to make friends, and to disarm enemies.

As we have said in a previous chapter, there is sometimes a hitch
between Decision and Action. The spirit of procrastination creeps in,
and the prospect tries to put off the actual order. Try to overcome
this by "taking down" the order at once. Do not allow any wait at this
stage. If no signed order is necessary get the order down in your order
book as quickly as possible. Have your order book handy so that no
awkward wait arises. Avoid these intervals of waiting as far as
possible. Get through with the thing, and get out.

If a signed order is required, approach the request as a matter of
course. Do not assume the air of asking any further favor, or of needing
any argument regarding the signing. Treat it as a matter of course, and
as if the matter had been agreed upon. Do not say "I will have to ask
you to sign," etc., but say simply "sign here, please," placing your
fountain pen at the "suggestive slant," and in his direction, indicating
the line at the same time. Some salesmen even touch the pen to the line,
starting the ink flowing and the suggestion operating with the one
movement. Others proceed, calmly, like this: "Let's see, Mr. Blank, what
is your shipping address (or street number)?" adding, "We can have these
goods here by about such-and-such a date." And while he is saying this
they are filling up the order blank. Then, in the most matter of fact,
business-like manner they lay the order before the prospect, indicating
the line for signature, and saying: "Now, if you will kindly sign here,
please, Mr. Blank." And it is all over.

Always have the order blank, or book, and the fountain pen handy. Avoid
fiddling around after the pen or the book, or both--this is suggestive
in the wrong direction. Some salesmen lay the pen on top of the order
book, and place them easily before the prospect while talking. Others
lay the pen by the side of the book, in the same way. Collins says: "One
of the leading newspapers in the Middle West has a school for the
canvassers who solicit subscriptions. A set of books is sold in
connection with a year's subscription to this paper, and the solicitors
are drilled in old fashioned bookselling tactics, learning their
argument by rote. At the precise point where the signature of the
prospect is to be secured the salesman is taught to take his pencil from
his pocket, drop it on the floor apparently by accident, stoop over and
pick it up as he finishes his argument, and put it into the prospect's
fingers as a matter of course. Six times in ten the signature is written
without more argument." The psychological point employed here is
evidently that of distracting the prospect's mind from his ordinary
objection, and attracting his attention to the recovered pencil. A
similar proceeding is that followed by certain salesmen who carry a
large fountain pen with a rubber band wrapped around the handle. Talking
cheerfully, they drop the pen on the prospect's desk, close to his hand.
The rubber band makes it fall noiselessly, and prevents it from rolling.
The prospect is said usually to involuntarily pick up the pen, and move
it toward the order book which has been deftly placed before him, and,
then, still absorbed in the talk of the Salesman, he signs the order
blank. These methods are given for what they are worth, and in the way
of illustrating a psychological principle. Personally, we do not favor
these methods, and prefer the orthodox fountain pen, courteously handed
the prospect, at the "suggestive slant," with possibly the point
touching the line as an illustration of the "on this line, please,"
which accompanies it.

The principle to be observed in all cases where orders have to be
signed, receipts made out, etc., is to make the process as easy as
possible for the prospect. Let him work along the line of the least
resistance. Avoid giving him the adverse suggestion of "red tape,"
formality, "iron-clad contracts," etc. Act upon the principle of the
young man who when he asked his father for money would say it very
smoothly and _rapidly_ "twenty dollars please," as if it were twenty
cents. Smooth away every item of delay and friction, and adopt the
"rubber tire and ball bearings" mental attitude and mode of procedure.

Regarding the much disputed and vexing question of the interval between
Decision and Action, and the frequent failure of Decision to take form
in Action--which question, by the way, is very important in the Closing
of the Salesman--we ask you to read the following from the pen of Prof.
William James, the eminent psychologist:

"We know what it is to get out of bed on a freezing morning in a room
without a fire, and how the very vital principle within us protests
against the ordeal. Probably most persons have lain on certain mornings
for an hour at a time unable to brace themselves to the resolve. We
think how late we shall be, how the duties of the day will suffer; we
say, 'I _must_ get up, this is ignominious,' etc.; but still the warm
couch feels too delicious, the cold outside too cruel, and resolution
faints away and postpones itself again and again just as it seemed on
the verge of bursting the resistance and passing over into the decisive
act. Now how do we _ever_ get up under such circumstances? If I may
generalize from my own experience, we more often than not get up without
any struggle or decision at all. We suddenly find that we _have_ to get
up. A fortunate lapse of consciousness occurs; we forget both the warmth
and the cold; we fall into some reverie connected with the day's life,
in the course of which the idea flashes across us, 'Hello! I must lie
here no longer'--an idea which at that lucky instant awakens no
contradictory or paralyzing suggestions, and consequently produces
immediately its appropriate motor effects. It was our acute
consciousness of both the warmth and cold during the period of
struggle, which paralyzed our activity then and kept our idea of rising
in the condition of _wish_ and not of _will_. The moment these
inhibitory ideas ceased, the original idea exerted its effects. This
case seems to me to contain in miniature form the data for an entire
psychology of volition."

Prof. James, in another place, gives the following additional hint of
the process of transmuting the Decision into Action: "Let us call the
last idea which in the mind precedes the motor discharge, 'the
motor-cue' * * * There can be no doubt whatever that the cue may be an
image either of the resident or the remote kind."

It will be seen then that the "motor cue" which releases the spring of
Action--the mental trigger which fires the gun of will--may easily be
some remote idea _suggested_ to the mind, as for instance the sight of
the slanted fountain pen and order book. The man wants to, but does not
feel like getting out of bed, and his mind becomes inactive on the
question. If some friend had said to him, "Come, get out old fellow;" or
if he had had his mind suddenly attracted by some outside sound or
sight, he would have sprung out at once. As we have said, elsewhere, the
placing of a piece of twisted paper in the ear of a horse will cause him
to forget his balkiness--it changes his current of thought. Any new
impulse will tend to get a man over his period of "I want to but I
don't" mental hesitancy. We may have given you the psychology of the
thing here--you must work it out in the details of application to suit
your own requirements. Learn to show your prospect something that will
cause him to spring out of bed. Learn to stick the piece of twisted
paper in his ear, to overcome his balkiness. Give him the "motor cue" by
supplying him with a mental image "either of the resident or remote
kind." Like the boy shivering on the brink of the stream, he needs but a
"little shove" to make him take the plunge. Then he will call to others:
"Come on in, the water's fine."

And, now in conclusion: You have the signed order, but you must continue
your Mental Attitude until you fade from the prospect's sight. Do not
gush or become maudlin, as we have seen salesmen do. Maintain your
balance, and thank your customer courteously, but not as the recipient
of alms. Keep up his good impression of and respect for you to the last.
Leave the prospect with this thought radiating from your mind: "I have
done this man a good turn." The prospect will catch these subtle
vibrations, in some way not worth discussing, and he too will feel that
he has done well. Avoid the "Well, I landed this chap, all right, all
right!" mental attitude, which shows so plainly in the manner of some
salesmen after they have booked an order. The prospect will catch those
vibrations also, and will not like it--he will resent it, naturally. In
short, you would do well to follow the homely but scientific advice of
the old salesman who said: "Keep your sugar-coating on to the
last--leave 'em with a pleasant taste in their mouths." Make a good Last
Impression as well as a good First Impression.

But--and remember this also--get away when your work is over. Do not
hang around the office or store of the prospect after the sale is made.
Do not place yourself in a position where some newly discovered
objection will cause you to do your work all over again. You have got
what you came for--now get out! As Macbain says: "When the close is made
the customer should be left in the shortest possible time that may not
be characterized as abrupt. Having 'talked a man into a sale,' the
salesman should be careful not to talk him out. The old adage, 'Stop
praising the goods after the sale is made,' is as true as it is trite."
Collins very aptly says on this point: "The explainer type of salesman
may actually sell goods to a customer and then, by staying and talking,
unsell him without knowing it. * * * One afternoon not long ago, for
instance, a salesman sold eleven thousand dollars' worth of fabrics to a
prominent merchant and, by staying for a friendly chat after the order
had been secured, gave the merchant time to think twice and cancel it.
An excellent rule is that of a salesman who built up a business to a
quarter million in competition with wealthy competitors, doing this by
sheer selling ability. 'Take the first train out of town after you sell
your man,' was his rule. If there was no train for several hours he
excused himself the moment a deal was closed, and disappeared. 'Just as
sure as I stayed around after that order was in my pocket,' he says,
'part of it would be cancelled or modified by the buyer, or some of my
work in selling undone. If it were nothing else the buyer would play on
the fact that I felt good about getting that order, and squeeze
something extra out of me.' When you land your man get out of sight."

And, taking our own advice, kind reader, we, having said our say and
"closed," will now take our departure. We thank you for your kind
attention, and feel that we "have done you a good turn."




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Obvious typographical and printer errors have been corrected without
comment.

In addition to obvious errors, the following corrections have been made:

 1. Page 22: a missing quote mark was added to the end of the sentence
    beginning, "Geo. Dyers, in the same journal says: "Advertising...."

 2. Page 34: extra "the" removed from the phrase, "as Kipling says:
    "The...."

 3. Page 53: a missing quote mark was added to the end of the sentence
    beginning, "People are all after money...."

 4. Page 139: "Voluntary" changed to "Involuntary" in the phrase,
   "Involuntary attention, on the contrary...."

 5. Page 228: "salesman" changed to "salesmen" in the phrase, "Veteran
    salesmen gauge...."

 6. Page 237: "hereby" changed to "here by" in the phrase, "We can have
    these goods here by about such-and-such a date."

Other than the above errors, no attempt has been made to correct common
spelling, punctuation, grammar, etc. The author's usage is preserved as
printed in the original publication. Unconventional spelling which has
been preserved includes, but is not limited to the following:

    advisibility
    argumentive
    irrefragible
    propogandist

Inconsistencies in hyphenation include:

    baseball/ base-ball
    pocketbook/ pocket-book
    sidetrack/ side-track
    straightforward/ straight-forward



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PSYCHOLOGY OF SALESMANSHIP***


******* This file should be named 41510.txt or 41510.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/1/5/1/41510



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
