Project Gutenberg's The Weird Sisters, Volume III (of 3), by Richard Dowling

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Weird Sisters, Volume III (of 3)
       A Romance

Author: Richard Dowling

Release Date: December 4, 2012 [EBook #41554]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WEIRD SISTERS, VOLUME III ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                      THE WEIRD SISTERS.

                         A Romance.

                     BY RICHARD DOWLING,

             AUTHOR OF "THE MYSTERY OF KILLARD."


    In Three Volumes.
    VOL. III.


    LONDON:
    TINSLEY BROTHERS, 8, CATHERINE ST., STRAND.
    1880.

    [_All rights reserved._]

    CHARLES DICKENS AND EVANS,
    GREAT NEW STREET, LONDON.




                  TO
          EDMOND POWER, ESQ.,
            OF SPRINGFIELD,
    Whose kindness to Mine and to Me
          I SHALL NEVER FORGET
              WHILE I AM.




CONTENTS.


    Part II.--The Towers of Silence--_continued_.


     VII.--WAT GREY'S BUSINESS ROMANCE                     1

    VIII.--MAKING HOLIDAY                                 20

      IX.--THE END OF THE HOLIDAY                         39


    Part III.--Husband and Wife.


       I.--THE SECRET OF THE SALE                         58

      II.--"SIR WILLIAM--" "NO; MIDHARST"                 77

     III.--THE PARTING                                    96

      IV.--BETWEEN THE LIGHTS                            116

       V.--"A WOMAN OF NO NAME"                          142

      VI.--PENNILESS                                     159

     VII.--LOSING                                        174

    VIII.--"I AM HE. FIRE."                              190

      IX.--BANKER AND BARONET                            201

       X.--GREY REMEMBERS WHAT HE FORGOT                 215





THE WEIRD SISTERS.




PART II. THE TOWERS OF SILENCE.




CHAPTER VII.

WAT GREY'S BUSINESS ROMANCE.


Grey found his mother in the front parlour of her own house. She was as
bright, intelligent as ever, and put down the _Times_ and took off her
spectacles as he entered.

"Henry," she exclaimed, as he came in, "what is the matter? You are
looking like a ghost."

"It is only that I have seen one, mother," he said wearily, tenderly, as
he kissed her, put his arms round her, and placed her in a chair.

"Seen what?" she demanded, looking up impatiently at her stalwart son.

"A ghost, mother."

"Nonsense, Henry. Of late I see but little of you; and when I do see
you, you are full of mysteries, only fit for sempstresses in penny
parts. You ought not to treat me as if I wanted to be roused into
interest in your affairs by secrets and surprises."

She patted her foot impatiently on the floor, and looked with vivacious
reproach in his face.

He placed his hand gently but impressively on her shoulder, and said,
looking down calmly from his large blue frank eyes into her swift bright
gray eyes:

"I am not, mother, practising any art upon you; I am practising a great
art upon myself."

She now saw something serious was coming or was in his mind; and while
she did not allow her courage to decline, or the resolution of her look
to diminish, she asked simply,

"And what is that art, Henry?"

"That of enduring the company of a villain in the presence of the person
I most respect on earth."

She looked round the room hastily.

"He can't mean this place," she thought, "for we are alone." Raising
impatient eyes to his, she said, "I am listening. Who is this villain?"

"Your son."

"Say that again, my hearing----" She paused and put her hand behind her
ear, and bent forward her wrinkled neck to catch the words.

"In your presence, mother, I am trying to endure the presence of your
villanous son, my villanous self."

"Sit down, Henry," she said very quietly.

He sat down on a chair a little distance in front of her.

She thought, "His father never told me there was a taint of insanity on
his side of the family, and I know there was none on mine. This is
terrible, but I must keep cool. Perhaps it will pass away. We shall have
the best advice. He looks haggard. The wisest thing is to make little of
what he says." Then she said aloud, "Well, Henry, I suppose you are
going to tell me something else?"

"I am going to tell you, mother, all man durst utter. The unspeakable
must remain unsaid."

He leaned his elbow on a small table, and supported his brow with his
thumb and forefinger, shading his eyes with the fingers and the palm of
the hand.

She sat upright on her chair. It was an easy chair, but she disdained
the support of elbows or back. She thought his words, "The unspeakable
must remain unsaid." "My son! my son! what has turned his poor head?"
Aloud she said, "Tell me all you please, Henry."

"It is so cool and sweet and pure here, mother, in this house of yours,
in your presence; I would give all the world if I might live here."

"Then why not come? That great empty house is too much for you, and you
are growing morbid there. Come here at once, and it will be like old
times to you and me."

"I am not so lonely in that house as you might think," he said, with a
ghastly contraction of the lips and a shudder.

"But you see no one now. You have no company, and even at its best and
brightest it was a dismal old barracks. Suppose, Henry, I live with
you?"

He looked up suddenly, fiercely, and cried in a loud voice:

"No, no; you must not think of that. That is the last thing likely to
happen. How could you think of such a thing?"

His head, his head was clearly gone. Fancy his resisting such an offer
from her in such a passionate, ill-tempered way.

"Then come and live with me; the isolation of that house is preying upon
you."

He had dropped his head once more to its old position.

"I am not so much alone there as you might suppose."

"I thought you saw nobody lately."

"But I am often, when at home now, in the company of Bee in her better
days."

What splendid self-torture this was! To dance thus before his mother on
the brink of a precipice she did not see was exhilarating. It was
almost worth committing a crime to enjoy the contrast between the ideas
these words brought up in his mind and his mother's.

"A bad sign," thought the old woman. "A bad sign of reason, when the
mind of a man of his age is always with the past." She said: "I think it
would be much better for you to shut up the Manor and come here. If you
take my advice you would most certainly leave that hateful house. It was
all very well when you were strong and happy to call parts of your house
by horrible names, but when you are ill and weak and nervous you get
superstitious, and full of foolish notions about those very things you
have been playing with."

"Do you know, mother, I would not exchange my Tower of Silence for any
castle in England at this moment; no, not for the fee-simple of
Yorkshire."

The tone, the words, and the awful smile that accompanied them, cowed
the spirit of the woman. "My God!" she thought, "this is worse than
death. His reason is toppling, toppling."

She did not speak, but waited for him to go on.

"But, mother, there is another reason for my not selling the Manor."

"And what is that, Henry?"

"I am thinking of getting married."

"Married! Married!"

"Yes. Am I so old or so feeble that I should not think of marrying
again?" he asked, with a clumsy attempt at a smile as he half uncovered
his pallid face.

"No," she answered slowly.

"Then why are you astonished?"

"I did not say I was astonished."

"No, mother, but you looked astonished; tell me why? Why were you
astonished at the idea of my marrying a second time? Do you know any
_reason_ why I should not?"

This was a fierce pleasure. It was like stirring up a sleeping lion when
there was no chance of escape save through a small door, before reaching
which he might, if he awoke, spring upon you, seize you by the back, and
batter out your brains with one swing against the bars. It was like
mounting a parapet under fire, and standing there thirty seconds, watch
in hand, expecting to be struck, and trying to anticipate where.

"Reason for your not marrying! No, I know nothing to prevent your
marrying."

She did care to excite him in his very critical mental condition by
reference to the little comfort he had derived from his experience of
wedlock.

"Well, mother, it is not only that no cause exists why I should not
marry, but an absolute necessity--a necessity there is no evading,
makes the step inevitable."

He had raised his head from his hand and was looking in her face.

"You have always had good reasons for your acts," she said, humouring
his whim.

"And, moreover, it is imperatively necessary I shall marry one
particular woman, and no other."

"What! in love again already!" exclaimed Mrs. Grey, with a desperate
attempt at archness.

The attempt failed utterly, and her face wore a look of anxiety and
pain. It was now clear her son did not suffer from mere hallucination;
this was a break up of the whole intellect.

The man was so lost to external things he did not notice the change in
his mother's face. He was deliberately rehearsing aloud his plan of
campaign, and counting his forces and chances. He had almost forgotten
he addressed his mother. He knew he might speak out with safety. This
was the first time he had dared to give utterance to his thoughts in the
presence of another. There was intoxication in the fearless recital of
his case, and, with his bodily eyes indifferent to things around him, he
abandoned himself to the delight of speaking his secret thought, and
observing how the uttered words lightened his burden.

"You are curious to know her name?" he asked, in a mechanical tone.

"I should like to hear who it is," she returned.

"It's a very good name. It will bring no discredit on the name of Grey.
Guess."

"Indeed, I cannot."

"Maud Midharst."

"Maud Midharst!" exclaimed the old woman, relaxing the rigidity of her
pose, and falling for support against the back of her chair--"Maud
Midharst!" she repeated, in a tone of dismay. For a moment she had
forgotten she was listening to a man suffering from severe mental
disturbance. Instantly almost she recovered herself, and fixing eyes now
full of tenderness and pity upon her son, resumed her upright attitude,
and continued her former plan of humouring him. "She is very beautiful,
very amiable, and very rich," the woman said.

"She is very beautiful, very amiable, and _very poor_," he said
impressively.

Again Mrs. Grey started. His tones were not those of a man of unsound
mind; and although his face looked pale and worn, and there was a queer
expression in the eyes, the whole conveyed the idea of a man overwrought
rather than radically unsound of head. She was so much thrown off her
guard that she could not refrain from repeating aloud, "Very poor!"

"Yes, very poor," he went on in the same monotonous voice, and with the
same lightless face turned to hers. "And it is because she is very poor
I am going to marry her."

"A regular love romance!" cried the old lady in a sprightly voice. The
tears were in her eyes. Her son, her only son, the idol of her life,
breaking down thus in his strong manhood! Hard sight for a mother! How
hard to sit still, and seem calm, and watch the light of departing
reason flickering in those large blue eyes, which in the happy warm long
ago had looked up to hers as the baby boy lay at her breast.

"A real _business_ romance," he said gravely. "A real business romance."

"It must be a romance indeed if you are marrying her because she is
poor, for I believe you, Henry, are not rich." She thought, "Perhaps it
will be best to take an interest in all this. If I do not he may think I
suspect him of being under delusions, and I daresay that would make him
worse."

"The Daneford Bank is now secure and in a prosperous condition, but I
have nothing beyond its prosperity, so that, compared with the time I
got the Bank, I am a poor man, for I have lost all my private fortune.
Does it not seem strange to you, mother, that I, a poor man, should
aspire to the hand of a baronet's poor daughter?"

"But, Henry, this is a love romance, and in love romances all things are
possible."

"I have explained to you, mother, that it is a _business_, and not a
love romance. But I have not told you half the romance yet."

"I am most anxious to hear it."

"I have never said a word of love to her yet. I do believe a word of
love has never yet been spoken to her, and already there is a rival in
the field, so that now we have every element of success."

"And who is this rival?"

"The new baronet, Sir William Midharst."

"Sir William Midharst! I thought he was in Egypt."

"He has been, but he got back just in time for Sir Alexander's funeral.
He walked to the funeral with me, came back and fell in love with his
cousin Maud."

"How do you know this?"

"Mrs. Grant told me."

"And does Mrs. Grant know you are in love with Miss Midharst?"

"No, nor any one else."

"I, for instance, know."

"Who told you?"

"You."

"Never."

"He forgets already what he told me a few minutes ago. This is terrible.
I shall not be able to stand it much longer. My poor Wat! I wonder what
has turned his brain?" the mother thought. She endeavoured to keep on
her face an expression of vivacious interest.

He spoke again. "I never told you I was in love with Maud Midharst. I
only told you that it is absolutely necessary I should marry her."

"In some things," the mother thought, "he is as clear as ever. Of course
all this talk of his marrying Miss Midharst is the result of some way
poor Bee's death affected him," she reflected. Aloud she said, "But,
Henry, if you do not love her, and if she is poor and you are not rich,
why are you compelled to marry her?"

"If any one knew the answer to that question, mother, that person could
put me in the dock and convict me of embezzlement."

She started to her feet and placed her hand on his shoulder, and cried
in a voice of agony: "My God, my son is mad!"

He rose quietly and put both his hands tenderly on her shoulders, and
whispered hoarsely in her ear: "I am not mad now. I never was more sane
in my life. I _was_ mad when I stole Sir Alexander's savings to the last
penny. It was with his money I saved the Bank."

"Great God, what do I hear!"

"The truth. I am no better than a thief. I have stolen the old man's
savings and the young girl's fortune, and, unless I marry her, I shall
be found out. Did I not tell you I was in the company of a villain when
I came in first? Now you believe me."

"And you lied to me when you told me about that money from the Pacific
coast? Ten thousand times better madness than this!"

"I did."

"You, Henry, my son, lied to me?"

"Yes."

"Understand my question once for all. When you, Henry Grey, told me,
your mother, that the Daneford Bank had been saved by money from the
Pacific coast, did you lie to me?"

"I did."

"Then, sir, leave my presence and my house for ever!"

"Mother!"

"Go, sir, at once!"

"Mother, for God's sake! You do not know all!"

"Go, sir, at once! I do not want to see any more of you--hear any more
of you. You have brought disgrace on our honourable name. You had not
the courage to face ruin, but you had the courage to face crime, and you
had the baseness to lie to me, sir. Go, I tell you, sir, and let me see
you no more. Let me forget there is a man alive who bears your
honourable father's name. Do not let me see you again. Do not let me
hear of you. You will not go, sir? Then I shall leave you. Remember, we
never meet again."

She swept out of the room.

When she had gone he stood a while holding his forehead in his hands,
then shook himself, left the room, and drew the front door after him
with a low laugh, muttering: "And I did not tell her all. I forgot a
part."




CHAPTER VIII.

MAKING HOLIDAY.


When Grey awoke the morning after the interview with his mother, he felt
calmer than usual. He had slept better, and the air of early November
was bright and crisp, and wholesome and invigorating.

He arose, drew back the curtains, and raised the blind. The leaves were
all off the trees, and the bright sharp fretwork of oak sprays glittered
in the morning sun. The grove was silent. All its winged lodgers had
long since taken flight in search of food. The glades and caverns of the
grove no longer sweltered under canopies of impenetrable leaves. Aisles,
which had been vaults of sultry gloom in summer, lay partly open to the
sky. Here and there the eye could pierce the inter-twisted branches and
catch sight of the mounds of red rotting leaves.

The grove no longer desired the screen of leaves to hide it from the
eyes of man, to cover up the monsters of soft rank vegetation that
throve and bloated until they burst with the unclean rottenness of
excess. All things perishable in the vegetable domain were now melting
down into the ground, there to lie until the spring-hunger of the seed
and root moved and drank them in, to thrust them once more whence they
lay into the green-giving air.

In the warm weather these juices, as they move about through the earth,
are caught in the webs of roots and budding seeds, and are pushed
upwards through the crust of earth, and by the sun dyed into a coat of
many colours to keep excessive heat from the under earth.

In the winter they are shorn of their beauty, and thrust down into all
the crevices of earth, there standing incorruptible sentinels of ice to
prevent the penetration of the cold.

The coming and going of these juices through the mould is the
respiration of the earth. The breathing of all things grows less
frequent as they increase in size. Man breathes twelve times a minute,
the earth once a year. Can the heat of all earth's time be its share of
one fiery expiration of the sun?

Grey stood gazing vacantly at the skeleton trees and the mounds of
red-yellow leaves.

Of late he had observed that his thoughts came much more slowly than of
old, and this was a mercy. This morning they scarcely moved at all.

"Like a skeleton," he thought. "The grove is like a skeleton from the
bones of which the flesh has rotted, fallen through, and is lying down
there under the ribs."

He shuddered, put his hand to his head, muttering: "No, no; I must not
think of that; I must not think of that. I must think of anything but
that. Of course, the exposure--it is nearly three months there
now--has--has--and there is nothing left but--Oh, God! No, no, no; I
must not think."

It took him a long time to collect his thoughts latterly. This morning
he was much slower than usual. It was those sleepless nights that made
him so dull of mornings now. He had such thoughts and visions in the
night that in the mornings he felt weary, worn out, jaded.

His mother!

Yes. He had not thought of that until now. That was bad, very bad. These
blows were coming too quickly and too heavily, and that one was the
heaviest of all. He had sought her in his sorest trouble, his direst
fear, and she had spurned him, cast him off, expelled him from her
presence for ever. She--she--she had been cruel to him--cruel to him.
She was all now left to him in the world. He had squandered everything
else in the world but her love and his love for her. He went to her in
his direst need, and confessed a small crime and a little sin, an
embezzlement and a lie only, and she had spurned him--more, it seemed to
him, for the lie than the embezzlement. This was too bad. If she had
spurned him for these, what would she do if he had told her of--of the
other thing? Called the police perhaps. Well, after all, the police were
not so terrible to him now, for there was no one in all the world he
cared for who cared for him, and he was free.

All things had gone well with him until now, until the funeral of the
baronet. Since then he had learned he was not the absolute guardian of
Maud, he had found out Maud had an admirer, and he had lost the
affection and esteem of his mother for ever.

The blows were too fast and too heavy.

What should he do? He could not go on in this way. He should break down
if he did not get relief. There was no use in going to the castle while
that young fellow was there, and even if the young fellow were gone, the
thinker was in no state of mind to push forward his fortunes with Maud.
Indeed, there was absolute danger in going near the castle. In his
present state of mind he might betray his designs on Maud, and that
would be ruin beyond retrieval. That young fellow was not likely to
propose to the orphan a few days after her father's death. He, the
thinker, would take a week's holiday, and come back invigorated for the
game.

That day he went to the Bank and arranged everything for an absence of a
week or ten days. He wrote a note to Miss Midharst, saying he was
compelled by ill-health to leave Daneford for a week or so. He expressed
his hope that while he was away Mrs. Grant would advise in any little
matter on which Miss Midharst might in the usual course look to him for
guidance; as to any matter of importance, they would have his address at
the Bank, and a messenger should call every day at the castle for any
message, letter, or telegram she might please to send to him. He would
send her his address; but he did not know how long he might stay in
London, where he was going first, as change was what he needed most.

To Sir William he wrote courteously and blandly to the effect that he
hoped Sir William would not forget his promise of drawing on the
Daneford Bank for the twenty thousand spoken of, and any further sum the
baronet might stand in need of. The banker regretted he was obliged to
go away so soon after the sad event at the castle; but he was absolutely
done up, and rest was the only thing to restore him to vigour. The
writer hoped to be back in Daneford in time to say God speed Sir
William, on the baronet's setting out for Egypt. While the banker was
away, Mr. Matthew Aldridge, manager of the Daneford Bank, would be
delighted to do anything in his power for Sir William.

Grey wrote a few lines to Mrs. Grant. That note was the shortest of the
three, and took him the longest time to write. He tore up two copies.
Nothing could be simpler or more guileless than the one he sent. It ran:

     "DEAR MRS. GRANT,

     "I am obliged by my health, to take a few days' rest in a new
     scene. I hope to be no longer than a week or ten days from home. I
     hope you will not think absenting myself so soon after Sir
     Alexander's death shows want of devotion to Sir Alexander's child.
     My first duty in life is to her. I need not say I leave her with
     implicit confidence in your care. I know you will always be loyal
     to the wishes of her father, herself, and yours very faithfully,

     "HENRY WALTER GREY."

When these letters had been disposed of and a few other business
matters attended to, he took train for the south-east and arrived in
London that night.

The journey fatigued him; and change of air, even when from a good into
a worse atmosphere, being beneficial, he slept soundly that night, and
awoke with less sense of distraction, less difficulty in collecting his
thoughts.

In Grey's youth he had spent much time in London, and knew portions of
the town, those west of Tottenham Court Road and Trafalgar Square, very
well. But he had little acquaintance with the City, and none with the
east. He had been frequently in the City on banking business, and knew
the ten streets confluent round the Bank. But the bulk of the City was
an unknown land to him.

Change was what he sought. Novelty without solitude. Therefore, instead
of the quiet hotel in Jermyn Street, where he usually put up, he found
himself this morning in a large City hotel not a bow-shot from the
cathedral of St. Paul.

A while he lay awake listening to the tremulous mutter of the City
traffic. What a contrast, these groans of wheels and clatters of hoofs
with the morning silence about the Manor House. Here, the walls
vibrated, the solid ground shook, the air fluttered against the
window-panes with the sway of bodies moving ceaselessly hither and
thither. There, no sound came in upon the desert realms of the morning
silence but the faint twitter of a bird or the far-off crack of a
carter's whip or a sportsman's gun.

Would it not be better for him to stop here always?

Here were no suggestions of the disastrous past. No one knew him here.
Suppose he burnt down the Manor House, took twenty thousand pounds out
of the Bank, changed his name, disguised himself, and came to live in
the middle of roaring London? Ambition he would abandon. Blows had come
so heavily and so quickly, the ambition had been beaten out of him.
Security and peace were what he yearned for. Security and peace. Peace.

If he lived in this great whirlpool in the ocean of Man, the shoutings
of his fellows would drown the memories of his ears. Who could hear the
whisperings of a woman's dress in the tumult of this great city, with
its turmoil of multitudinous wheels and clangour of innumerable bells?
Here he could take his ease for the rest of his life, and drown the
vague hideous whispers of the dead in the loud-toned wrangles of the
living.

There was, however, no necessity for his now changing his name or
adopting disguises. He had some days to rest and recruit. When these had
passed it would be time enough for him to think of precautions.

He went out after breakfast, and strolled along streets he had never
been in before.

He moved west through streets running in perplexing zigzags, a little to
the north of Cheapside, Newgate Street, and Holborn. He strolled slowly,
looking in at shop-windows, and taking interest in the disputes of
ragged boys and the bargaining of slattern women at the doors of
slopshops and marine store dealers. He was not used to such scenes, and
they took his mind off his own affairs and condition better than the
deserted parks or richer streets. It seemed to him as though he had
already severed his connection with Daneford, and lived emancipated from
the past.

At last he came to an open space, in the centre of which stood a large
heavy-looking building he had never seen before. Passing along the
southern side of this open space, he came to the entrance of that
building.

He thought: "Often as I have been in London, I have never seen even the
outside of this before. It will be a capital place to spend a few
hours."

He entered the enclosure through the small gate, and walked slowly up to
the deep portico. Under this portico he stood awhile, watching the
pigeons, and the people going in and out. Then turning his back upon the
daylight, he entered the British Museum, that storehouse for the
unclaimed personal property of intestate centuries and forgotten kings.

Passing slowly through the hall of busts, he reached the Egyptian Room.
He had no great love of the antique, no great curiosity in people who
staggered through the dark approaches leading up to the still,
unspiritualised, unexciting Greek art. He never took much interest in
art. He had been many times to the Academy. He had enjoyed going; but it
is doubtful if he were offered to be allowed to go through the rooms
alone he would have accepted the privilege.

To-day Egypt had a new meaning and a new attraction for him. From Egypt
that young man had come unexpectedly to thwart his plans. To Egypt that
young man was going back again.

What preposterous and foolish figures those around were! What impossible
creatures! Cat-headed men! Was this the kind of country that young man
had come from? Alligators, too, and crocodiles! Tombs. The Egyptians
gave more honour to their illustrious dead than we do to our living
poor. With them a dead lion was much better than a living dog.

Egypt must have been a land of monsters, fools, and tombs.

Grey was now leaning on the rail which protected a sarcophagus of
polished black stone. His eyes were fixed vacantly on the coffin.

"The Egyptians," he followed on thinking, "preserved their dead for
ever; the Greeks destroyed them at once; and we put them underground,
and let them shift for themselves.

"Put them underground--not all!"

He stopped thinking, and looked around cautiously. There were no
protecting noises here. Infrequent footsteps, and occasionally a cough,
were the only sounds invading the dull gloomy gallery. Coming up towards
the sarcophagus by which he stood was a middle-aged portly man, leading
two fair flaxen-haired children by the hand. The man was describing the
various objects they passed.

"Sometimes we don't let the living shift for themselves, we shift for
them; and sometimes without putting the dead in the ground we leave
those whom we shifted out of life to shift for themselves unburied."

The man leading the little girls reached the sarcophagus. He stopped the
children and, pointing to the coffin, said:

"This was King Pharoah's favourite coffin. When he was quite a young man
he contracted the habit of being buried in this coffin, and as he grew
older he gave way more and more to this degrading habit. Stop, let me
look closer. Upon my word and honour I have made a mistake. I see by one
of the mortuary cards issued at the death, and found when they dug up
this coffin out of the Nile, the body was that of one Ibis Cheops, who
flourished a long time ago. When he was done flourishing they put him
in here. Flourishing long ago was greatly admired; we solicitors are
dead against it now. Let me see any of my copying clerks flourishing,
and he may take down his hat and overcoat and go and enjoy life."

"Is that in the catalogue, all about this stone hearse?" asked one of
the children.

"No, child."

"Then how do you know, uncle? You told us you were never here before."

"My dear child, you forget I am a solicitor; and once a man has anything
to do with the Court of Chancery he is up to every mean dodge of human
nature. It isn't to say that the muddle-headed ancient Egyptians could
deceive or over-reach him in any way, but he is more than a match at
cheating for the modern Greeks; and that's about as stiff a competitive
examination in roguery as anyone can pass. I beg your pardon, sir; Mr.
Grey, I think, of Daneford? Am I right?"




CHAPTER IX.

THE END OF THE HOLIDAY.


Grey looked up with an uneasy start and a sudden pallor.

"You do not remember me. My name is Barraclough. I am London
representative of Mr. Evans, your Daneford solicitor."

"Of course, of course. This is about the last place in the world I
should think of meeting you, Mr. Barraclough."

"I may say the same of you, Mr. Grey. Indeed few men--none, practically
speaking--of our age come here, unless specialists of some kind."

"I have never been here before."

"Nor have I. That fact explains our presence here to-day at our time of
life. As a rule, boys are brought here when young, under the impression
they are going to have a treat; they find the thing a pedantic stuck-up
bore, get disgusted with the place, and swear an oath (most likely the
only one they swear and keep) that they will not enter this building
again. Ever after in their memory this building seems the sour, old,
crusty, maiden aunt of the sights of London. Now, my dears, just walk on
a little before us; I want to speak to this gentleman. Mind to keep a
sharp look-out for Pharaoh's favourite coffin. I'm sure it's somewhere
hereabouts. You'll know it at once by not being able to distinguish it
from the others until you shut one eye and keep the other eye fixed on
the Rosetta stone, because that is, as you know, the only key we have to
the hieroglyphics. I think they keep the Rosetta stone in one of the
cellars, for fear of the daylight fading the inscription. You shall go
down and see it presently; but now run on, and look up the coffin. My
nieces, Mr. Grey," he explained, as the children with bewildered gravity
walked on. "I live quite close--Bloomsbury Square. My wife had to go
somewhere or other to-day, and asked me to take the children out for a
few hours; so I left word at the office I should be here if they wanted
me. You are not looking quite so well as the last time I saw you."

"I have not been very well of late, and came up here for a rest from
business."

"I don't know how you bankers live. If I were one, I should worry myself
to death in forty-eight hours. I should always be thinking my clerks
were pocketing hundred-pound notes, or burglars were breaking into the
strong-box."

Grey winced a little, but said nothing. The other ran on:

"I am sure this meeting is most lucky. Will you dine with me to-day? I
got the instructions from Evans this morning, and will do the best I
can, you may be sure. I have not, of course, been able to do anything in
the matter as yet. It will take time. Dine with me, and we can talk the
matter over. We shall be quite alone--no one but my wife. We can
exchange views over a cigar."

Grey felt perplexed and confounded. He had not the least idea of what
Barraclough referred to. Could it be his head had been so much confused
he had gone to Evans, given him important instructions, and then
forgotten all about them? The thing must be of consequence. There would
be no need to discuss a trifle. It would not, however, do to confess his
ignorance or forgetfulness to this man.

"Can we not speak of it here?" Grey asked.

Barraclough looked around, shrugged his shoulders in deprecation of the
place, and said: "I think business always comes best after dessert. Do
dine with me. I promise you an excellent cigar."

Grey was sorely perplexed. He had no hint of what those instructions
were. It was absolutely necessary he should find out. This was not a
fitting place for a business chat. The idea of dining with anyone was
intolerable.

"I am very much obliged to you, and should be very pleased to dine with
you, but I--I really cannot. I must keep as quiet as possible. You will
excuse my not going; and, as a favour, tell me now what you have to
say."

"Certainly, certainly. Let me see--let me see. Of course, Mr. Grey, in a
matter of this kind we must be business-like, and take into
consideration facts we might otherwise leave out of sight."

"Of course."

What could be coming? This was a very grave prelude.

"You are executor and trustee to the will?"

"Yes." Grey started. "Sole executor and trustee."

"Sole executor and trustee! Are you sure of that? Evans said you were
one of the executors and trustees."

"I am sole executor and trustee, I assure you."

What had he said to Evans about the will? In his conscious moments he
had no intention of saying anything to Evans about the will. The blows
were coming too heavily and too quickly. His head--his head!

"Strange! Evans ought to be more careful. He said he was not sure
whether the others were living or not; but he mentioned the fact that
it would be necessary to inquire and ascertain if they were living or
dead."

The attorney looked cautiously into the sarcophagus, as though he
expected the bottom to disappear, disclosing the missing executors and
trustees.

Grey glanced at the other man in a bewildered way. The whole of his
intellect must be going. Not only had he gone to Evans and given him
important instructions about something or other, but, if he was to
credit Evans and Barraclough, he had forgotten a feature in that will,
and this very feature happened to be enough to destroy him instantly.
Could it be, good Heavens, that there was a second name in the will, and
he had forgotten it, and was roaming here about London instead of taking
the precaution of blowing out his brains!

He felt sick and faint. His head began to swim. What a blessed fate that
of those men of Egypt who, three thousand years ago, had died, and been
swathed up in bandages, enclosed in huge granite coffins, and buried in
the inviolable silence and security of pyramids! Here was he, all naked
and raw from crime, out in the rough winds, among the rough ways of
unfeeling men; and add to all this his head--his head!

"I am surprised at Evans," said Grey. "He ought to have known. He ought
to have known better."

"I should think he ought!" exclaimed the attorney warmly. "To fancy a
man instructing another to move in an important matter of this kind, to
write and say the consent of the trustees might be relied upon, and then
to find out there was but one trustee! Evans must be going mad."

"Yes; he or--I."

"Nonsense," returned Barraclough. "There is no chance of your being
wrong. Evans is either careless or mad."

"What do you purpose doing?" asked Grey cautiously.

That question might safely be put in the face of any facts.

"I shall sell, of course. Evans tells me you agree to sell; so that if
you are sole executor and trustee, there is no need to look up anyone
for consent."

What was he to hear next? This man was telling him he had a co-executor
and co-trustee, and that he had authorised Evans to sell. Monstrous!
Which was his period of insanity: when he had (if he had) given Evans
the instructions, or now? Which was his madness: in giving such
instructions, or in now believing his senses and the words of this man?
He made a great effort, pulled all his faculties together, knit his
brows, and put this question to himself: "Is the lead to overtake the
gold--to-night?" Then he put another question to Barraclough:

"What did Evans say altogether?"

"That Mrs. Grey had come to him----" Arrested by the banker's manner,
Barraclough paused.

Grey had leaned suddenly forward, thrust a pale, shrivelled face close
to Barraclough's, placed one hand on the attorney's shoulder, and,
pointing over his own right shoulder with the other hand, whispered:

"_This one?_"

"You are ill?"

"_No. Go on._"

"You really look very ill. Let me----"

"_No. Go on._"

"He said she wished to sell out her annuity of two thousand a year----"

"Who said that?"

"Mrs. Grey, your mother."

"_My mother?_"

"Yes."

Suddenly Grey's face changed. It flushed. He drew himself clear of the
attorney, and, throwing his arms aloft, uttered a loud long laugh,
followed by the words: "Before high Heaven I thought he meant my wife!"

All eyes were now directed to where the tall banker stood, with his arms
upraised, and a smile of joy upon his flushed face. Ere the last echo of
his voice had died away among these galleries of relics from the wrecks
of a hundred religions, Grey's knees shook, and, with a groan, he fell
to the ground.

It was hours before Walter Grey regained consciousness. His thoughts
were sluggish and dull. The edges of his ideas were blurred, and
wavering this way and that against the background. Around him all was
dim. It was night. A shaded lamp was somewhere in the room. He did not
know where the lamp stood.

Where was that lamp? What a strange thing no one came there to tell him
where the lamp lay! He himself could not of course get up to try and
find out where the lamp was. Of course not.

Why not? Ay, why not? Wasn't it very strange there should be no one
there to tell him where the lamp was, particularly as he could not get
up!

But why--why--why?

He lost the sense of sight, and felt his eyes pressed against
illimitable void darkness. His ears, too, were dead, plugged with thick
silence that was not clear, but confused silence, as in the ears of one
deep in water. Then the darkness and the silence shuddered with horror,
and he ceased to be aware.

It was daylight, and his tongue was very thick--thicker than ever he had
felt it. It was so thick and stiff he could not move it. This was
strange. The light, too, was peculiar. It looked as though the dawn or
daylight lay far from the window. Of course the dawn was far away from
the windows always, but it seemed immeasurably far off this morning. But
then the ringing of all those bells made up for the increased distance
of the dawn. How dull he had been not to see that at first! Of course
the bells more than compensated the distance of the dawn. How he hated
Latin! He'd never even try to learn it--never. They might flog him as
much as ever they chose, but Latin he'd never learn. Not for all the
masters in England. No; not for his father. He would not even pretend to
learn it, only for his mother. But for his mother he'd shy a slate at
the head-master, and hit the Latin man with the heavy, very heavy knob
of the big school-room poker on the bald part, right in the middle of
the bald part, of his head. They were ringing a thousand bells more now.
How the sound did thin out the dawn! It thinned it out until all was
worn away. Well, he had better go to sleep. He had a hard day's work
before him. He had promised Bee (this very day six weeks they had been
married) to take her on the river, their own river, and show her what he
could do with the sculls. He was to pull her down to Seacliff. And yet,
with that run on the Bank, how was he to sleep? Bee too was worrying him
a good deal. Why did they not stop those bells? They had changed the
measure of the bells. They had been ringing peals of joy; they now rang
ten thousand times more bells, but they were all ringing death-bells.
Ah, yes; how stupid he had been! Of course, they were burying the
universe in the Great Darkness, and these were the great bells swung in
the peaked hollows of space, ringing for the burial in chaos of the
dead stars. Now he must go.

It was afternoon before he again opened his eyes. He felt something had
happened, what he did not know. "I have had a bad fall, or an accident
of another kind; my head feels queer and I am weak. What has happened?
Where am I?"

He lay still awhile to recover strength. Then he asked feebly: "Is there
anyone here?"

A nurse showed herself. She would not allow him to speak much, but she
told him the history of his present position briefly:

While speaking to Mr. Barraclough in the British Museum, he had had an
attack, of what kind the doctor did not say. From the British Museum Mr.
Barraclough had him conveyed to this place, the attorney's house, where
he had been insensible for some hours.

Had he raved?

No; not a word.

Had any message been sent home?

Yes. Mr. Barraclough had telegraphed to Mr. Grey's chief man at
Daneford, and the gentleman was now waiting below.

Grey asked that Mr. Aldridge might be sent to him. The nurse agreed to
admit the manager on an understanding the interview was to occupy no
more than a quarter of an hour.

In a few minutes Aldridge entered the room, and having expressed his
regrets and hopes, and received suitable replies, Grey's first question
was:

"Have you told anyone of the contents of that telegram?"

"No."

"You are sure?"

"Quite sure."

"Tell no one on the face of the earth."

"I promise not."

"Aldridge, I have known you some time, and I have every reason to
believe and trust you. I am under many obligations to you. Keep this
matter entirely to yourself, and you will double all my gratitude."

"Rely on me."

"It may leak out through the telegraph office or through Barraclough. I
want you to go back to Daneford at once, see Evans, and tell him not to
say anything of my illness. This is most important. Now go. Barraclough
may have told Evans. Go at once."

"Any further orders?"

"No."

"I have paid Sir William Midharst's cheque for twenty thousand."

"All right. Don't lose a moment. Don't miss the first train."

Grey fell back exhausted. Though his head ached, it felt clearer than
for many weeks.

"It would never do," he thought, "to have all Daneford gossiping over
the infirmities of a man who must one of these days be a candidate
bridegroom. The least said about me the better. I have neither the
humour nor the strength for criticism or sympathy at present."

It was several days before he was well enough to go home. He went back
straight to Daneford.

The evening of his arrival he strolled through the city, and took no
heed of the direction in which he had wandered until he was attracted by
something unusual in a house over the way. The front of the house was
all dark. It was his mother's house. The piers of the gate were covered
with auction bills announcing in a few days the sale of the lease and
furniture.

He had, until now, forgotten what Barraclough had told him. All rushed
in upon his mind.

"She is going to sell her annuity, her lease, her furniture, poor old
woman; and I, the only trustee living, cannot prevent her, cannot
approach her. Poor old woman! Wat Grey, I never pitied you until this
moment."




PART III. HUSBAND AND WIFE.




CHAPTER I.

THE SECRET OF THE SALE.


Grey had taken all the precautions in his power to prevent a report of
his illness spreading, because he did not wish anything to get abroad
which might make his approaches to Maud seem unreasonable. That was an
important consideration. But it sank into insignificance beside the
enormous danger likely to arise from the concentration of public
attention upon him at this time.

Here was his own mother, the one owner of remaining claims upon his
better nature, imperilling his fortune--his neck. By advertising this
sale, the eyes of all Daneford would be drawn to his mother, and the
tongues of Daneford would be busy with his name. He himself did not know
why his mother had resolved upon converting all she had in the world
into cash, though he had an uneasy suspicion he could guess if he tried.
His great dread was that his mother might do some incautious thing, take
some incautious measure, in carrying out her design.

Suppose her action did not suggest examination of anything in connection
with him, he would still be in a very uncomfortable position. Surely
people would speak to him of the step his mother was about to take. What
answer should he make? What explanation could he give? If anyone asked
him why his mother was selling, he could not tell, for he did not know.
It would soon be found out that, under the simple conditions of his
father's will, his authority would be necessary to the sale. How could
he justify so unwise an act on the part of his mother? How could he tell
people he approved of it? And yet he must say he sanctioned it,
otherwise people would think there was something wrong.

But even if he said he sanctioned it, would they not think there was
something wrong? People would look first with amazement and then with
suspicion at the sale of an old woman's annuity, house and furniture,
when he, her childless and only son, was reputed to be enormously rich.
What could induce a woman like Mrs. Grey to sell her house in her native
town, and the chairs her husband had used, the table at which he had
sat, the back drawing-room furniture given her by him as a birthday
present after the coming of their only boy? Clearly nothing but want of
money.

It would be known his mother and he had been on most affectionate terms
all their lives. Why did not an affectionate son spare an affectionate
mother the unpleasantness of a sale by giving her the paltry few
thousands? Even if he was mean enough not to make her a present of them,
he might advance them upon the security she had to offer. It could not
be that mother and son had quarrelled; if that were so he would clearly
refuse his assent. It could not be she was in difficulties while her son
had money. The clear deduction, the only possible deduction left to the
people of Daneford would be that the selling was with his, Wat's, full
consent, and that the money was for him--for the Daneford Bank.

All this was quite clear to Grey; beyond it he durst not go. No, he
would not allow his mind to look behind the curtain drawn across the
remote future.

What should he do?

All night he lay awake, trying to solve that question. Morning came and
found him without a solution.

He had recovered wonderfully. His mind was now clear and vigorous. He
resolved not to go to the office this day. He could not face people
without some answer to enquiries sure to be made, and he had not yet
resolved upon the course he should pursue.

He spent the forenoon reading and writing letters. One he wrote to the
Castle to Miss Midharst, announcing his return, and that he should call
upon her next day. A second he addressed to his mother in the following
terms:

     "MOTHER,

     "One last word. If you persist in attracting attention to my
     affairs, by selling out, the chances are I shall be ruined; and
     such ruin will be mine that I shall not face it, but leave people
     to discuss my conduct over my corpse."

He did not sign this note. He sent it by James, the stupid, purblind,
discharged soldier, and bade him wait for an answer.

In an hour James returned with the answer. It was in a large envelope, a
very large envelope. The reply must have been prepared in anticipation
of the appeal. A reply so bulky must be a favourable one. If an adverse
answer had to be given, it would be brief.

With trembling hands he broke the seal as soon as he was alone. He drew
forth several documents. But the first that caught his eye was the
smallest of all--his own letter returned unopened! Upon the envelope was
written, in the unsteady hand of his mother, these words:

"Sign the enclosed papers. The signatures must be witnessed. They must
be signed and with me before the sale. I have not opened your letter. I
daresay it does not lie, but how could I be sure?"

His hand ceased to tremble. He put the unopened letter into his pocket
with a firm deliberate hand, calmly took up the legal papers, perused
them carefully, critically, and paused now and then to extract the sense
from the legal jargon.

When he had finished reading he rang the bell. James answered it.

"James, is there any other man who can read and write about the place,
besides you?"

"One of the clerks has just come with a message for you, sir."

"Ask him to step this way, please, and come yourself."

In a few minutes the clerk entered, followed by the servant.

"Glad to see you, Doughty. Got a message for me? Take a seat."

"Yes, sir. A message from Mr. Aldridge. This is it."

"Thank you. I want you, now that you have come so opportunely, to
witness my signature to documents of importance. They concern the sale
of my mother's annuity and property. I am sole surviving trustee to my
father's will, and I am now about to sign these documents, authorising
those sales. Stand up, Doughty, and look at me as I sign. James, come
near. You are near-sighted. Closer still. Now!"

He signed, and they after him.

"That will do, James. It is exceedingly unlikely there will be any
dispute. In case there should, all you have to remember is that I signed
these papers in your presence, and you in mine, and in the presence of
one another. I am not sure the last is necessary, but never mind. You
need not trouble yourselves to remember all I have said about the matter
contained in the papers. You may go now, James."

When the servant had retired he said to the clerk: "Thank you, Doughty.
You came very luckily. I will ask you to take these documents back to
Mrs. Grey's. Usually such matters reach one through an attorney, but I
am sorry to say this is not a very ordinary or pleasant transaction.
Leave the documents with Mrs. Grey. There is no answer. Then go back to
the Bank, and ask Mr. Aldridge to come to me here this afternoon or
evening. I shall not be in town to-morrow, and have something to
communicate to him. This is the reply to the note you brought from him."

When the manager of the Daneford Bank arrived at the Manor House he was
shown into the presence of the banker.

Grey received him with more of the old grave blandness than he had
displayed for a long time.

"Aldridge," he said, "I am sorry I have a little bad news. It does not
concern the Bank. It is worse than that. I wish to Heaven it did concern
the Bank. We can bear reverses in business better than home troubles."
He paused, with his eyes fixed on the ground, in deep thought.

Aldridge moved his chair closer to Grey's, to show he was giving his
best attention. He did not speak.

"You can meet a business difficulty face to face; but you shrink from
difficulties or unpleasantnesses which bring the names of those you love
and honour into the public mouth."

It was plain to Aldridge Grey was weighing his words with the nicest
care. The manager considered it better to preserve his silence still.

"I am going now," pursued Grey, "to place myself upon your honour----"

"I am sure you may do that," interrupted Aldridge with respectful
emphasis. The respect in the emphasis was not that of employed to
employer, but of sympathiser for a fellow-man, an esteemed fellow-man in
trouble.

Something in Aldridge's tone struck Grey. He stood up, stretched out his
hand to Aldridge, took the manager's hand in his, and said impressively:
"Aldridge, I am sure of that."

"Thank you. Now you may go on. I will not interrupt again."

"You know my mother has advertised her house and furniture for sale?"

"Yes."

"And that she is about to sell her annuity."

"So I have heard."

"I, as trustee, have just signed the documents. There is talk about
this affair in town?"

"There is; a good deal. People cannot understand it."

"It came as a great shock and surprise to me when I heard it. It was
that shock knocked me up in London."

"I thought it must have had something to do with it."

"It was the cause of it. Well, I am placed in a horribly awkward
position. My mother is called upon to pay a large sum of money, say
eight to ten thousand. Of course, we could easily manage that."

"Easily, I should think," said Aldridge, thinking with pride of the
gallant stand the Bank had made in the late ruinous times.

"But," continued Grey, "if I paid the money now, I might be called upon
to pay a similar or even a larger sum in six months, and again six
months later, and I could not stand that kind of thing."

Aldridge shook his head and looked grave in confirmation of Grey's
decision.

"The things must be sold," continued the banker. "When she has no
property to pledge, no annuity to pawn, I can make a suitable allowance
to her. The fact is, Aldridge, my poor mother has lost all her money in
gambling on the Stock Exchange. Her name does not appear. She did it
through some fellow in London. Now you see how there is nothing for it
but to sell out. You see that clearly?"

"Nothing in the world could be plainer. A woman of her age!"

"Isn't it extraordinary in a woman of her years?"

"Wonderful!"

"Now I told you I threw myself on your honour, and what I want you to do
is to keep the matter rigidly to yourself, except in such cases as you
in your judgment think silence would injure the Bank, and then you must
not reveal the facts except upon a pledge of strict, the strictest
secrecy. No earthly consideration would induce me to allow my poor
mother's name to become a byword in Daneford, where she has been
respected for so many years. Aldridge, Aldridge, my friend, I count on
you to do this for me."

This time it was the manager who stood up. He went to the banker, caught
his hand, and said: "You may count upon me in this, Mr. Grey, as upon
yourself. I should be the last in the world to make idle talk about the
name of Grey, and you may rely upon my keeping the secret from everyone,
except when the interest of the Bank is at stake."

"Thank you, my dear Aldridge. It is a great relief to me to have opened
my mind to you. You are the only man whose discretion I could trust in
so delicate a matter."

In a little while Aldridge took his leave, and Grey was left alone.

"By Jove," he mused, "that returned letter was a splendid tonic. It
pulled me together like magic. I feel a new man now--a new man. Now I
have only one person to take care of--myself. She would not hear me.
Because I tried to save her the misery I myself endured, because I
represented things to her as flourishing when all was gone, she turns on
me, throws me off, draws attention to my credit and my reputation when I
should have neither if the truth were known, if the lesser truth were
known; and by opening up inquiry leading to the discovery of the lesser
truth, the disclosure of the greater was risked.

"By Jove, that returned letter was my salvation! She thought she was
treating me as I deserved, severely; all the time she was only nerving
me to lace my armour and prepare for the great fight. I can easily
provide now against any course she may take short of denunciation, and I
don't think she will go so far as that.

"The reason for the sale, as Aldridge has heard it, will be known under
pledges of secrecy to-morrow to half-a-dozen of the most important men
in Daneford. That will be more than enough to counteract any sinister
rumours. The pledge of secrecy extracted from the men whom Aldridge
tells will not operate at all, save in making those to whom they give
the news very careful as to whom they in turn tell it. Thus it will
never come to her ears, even if she stays in Daneford, which I doubt;
and thus she will never have an opportunity of denying it."

He got up and walked about. His elation was great. He swelled out his
chest, threw back his shoulders, and allowed his arms to swing at his
sides. His thoughts ran on:

"I have been fencing with death, and for the moment I have disarmed my
foe. That sale might have ruined me, given me over to the hangman; I
have averted the danger, and turned the attack into a source of
security. In a moment of weakness I told her, in a moment of strength I
turned the feeble act into a fresh rampart; for how can I tell, if
things went on smoothly, as they had been going (had she not shown the
danger-signal at the Consols), I might not, in the weak and pitiful
state I then was in, have told her all? Now a gulf lies between her and
me. It is unlikely we shall ever meet again. She had the power of
exercising an influence over me which might not be to my safety. I have
ensured my future safety by getting away from the influence of the only
person who could make me indiscreetly talkative."

He paused in his walk and drew himself up before the glass. Much of the
haggard expression had left his face. He was flushed and
handsome-looking as of old. His eyes shone with excitement and the
anticipation of triumph.

Once more he strode up and down the room.

"I feel five-and-twenty to-day. Five-and-twenty; not a month older. And
though in spirits and health and strength I feel no more than half my
age, I am conscious I carry the experience of a second quarter of a
century on the shoulders of the first. I could command an army or make
love to a school-girl. I shall win yet. I shall win in spite of that
lanky nigger, Sir William. I shall win I know, I feel. These muscles are
more than a match for his; this head is more than a match for his; and
in spirits I am a long way his junior. I shall win now, for all
obstacles are out of my way. She is gone for ever, and she was the last
link with----Bah! the old time is dead. Earth to earth. I am a new man,
I say."

In all this he never thought of her as his mother. He always looked upon
her as she or her; never as mother. He treated her as if the spirit of
his mother had left the body, and the spirit of another, a stranger, had
entered in.

That night he slept well, and started early for the Castle the next
day.




CHAPTER II.

"SIR WILLIAM----" "NO; MIDHARST."


"The day after to-morrow I must leave, Maud. I shall have to spend a day
or two in London, and then I sail."

He was looking down very gravely at her.

She looked up gravely at him. "I wish you had not to go away."

"So do I, but there is no help for it. I would much rather stay in
England and look after affairs here. You never can trust anyone to carry
out your plans. You must see the men at work, or they must know you may
at any moment see them. I have planned my own designs and decorations,
and tradesmen consider it a point of honour to rob an amateur. They will
not do what an amateur tells them, and they are sure to cheat him most
liberally. The father of a friend of mine determined upon doing up his
house himself. He was not a good man of business like me, but, like me,
he knew what he wanted done. He made a rough estimate of what the job
would cost him, and when it was finished he found the bills came to
about three times his estimate. He got an accountant to look through the
bills. The first item the accountant called the attention of my friend's
father to was six white marble chimney-pieces for bedrooms at two
hundred pounds each. He had told the builder to get three
chimney-pieces; there were places in the house for only three of the
sort. On investigation the builder stated six had been got, three
having been broken after arrival. 'But,' said the accountant, 'you have
not allowed anything for the old ones. What did they fetch?' 'Oh,' said
the builder, 'they fell to pieces, and I broke them up.' Subsequently,
when going over the newly-built house of a friend, he found two
chimney-pieces, one like his old and one like his new ones. 'Where did
you get these?' 'Bought them for a dead bargain. Some man, who heard I
was building, sold me the old one for thirty-five, and the new one for
seventy.' The visitor asked for a description of the seller. It exactly
corresponded with the builder. Subsequently it came out that the new
chimney-pieces had been kept buried in sand until they could be removed
in a cart under a load of straw, and that the old ones had gone out
covered with a layer of rubbish!"

"Do you not think, William, that if Mr. Grey would consent to look after
the men, such things might be prevented?"

"Yes; I have thought of asking Mr. Grey. But he is such a busy man. He
will have, I daresay, a great deal to do on account of your father's
will. It would be too much to expect him to spare time for coming down
here and looking after a lot of lazy workmen. In fact, it would be out
of the question. As to a clerk of works, or anything of that kind, I
would not dream of such a thing. They wink at scamped work for a
consideration, and order things they do not want. Dear Maud, I weary you
with lime-and-mortar matter."

"No, no, no; I like to hear you talk in this way. It is as if--as
if----" She paused, unable for the moment to mould her thoughts into
words.

"As if what, Maud?"

"As if you liked to talk to me in this way."

Her eyes were fixed on his, his on hers. For a moment neither spoke.
Then he said:

"Yes, I do like to talk to you in this familiar business-way. You know
we are alone now in the world; and if I don't talk freely to you, to
whom else on earth am I?"

"I had a note from Mr. Grey this morning, saying he has returned, and
will be here to-day. Had you not better speak to him?"

"I will. That is settled. If he hesitates, I shall not allow him to do
it; but I shall try what he will say. Even if he refuses he may be able
to suggest some trustworthy person he knows. You see, I have been so
short a time in England, and am such an utter stranger here, I know no
one."

When Grey came he found the cousins together. Some routine matters
having been disposed of, Sir William asked the banker if he would take a
stroll with him across the Island, as he wished to speak to him about
business.

The banker would be most happy.

Arm-in-arm the two left the Castle-yard, gained the grass, and walked
towards the Ferry.

"Mr. Grey," began the young man, "I leave this neighbourhood the day
after to-morrow."

"I am sincerely sorry to hear you say so."

"Thank you. Now I am going to try and induce you to let me get even
further into your debt----"

"Sir William, it is quite unnecessary for you to say a word with such a
view. I told you to draw for any moderate sum you might require, and
your cheque would be honoured----"

"I am much obliged to you; but it is not money this time."

Grey bowed. He wondered: "Has he already proposed, and is he going to
talk to me about the will? This looks bad."

"You know what rogues there are in the world?"

"I should think I do. I have excellent cause to know of some kinds of
rogues," Grey said. He thought: "This is becoming exciting--diverting."

The banker was in the most excellent spirits this morning. He felt like
an unruly schoolboy when the holidays come. He was beyond the arm of
physical punishment still, and the phase of mental torture in which he
had existed for some time had yielded to his present jovial bravado. His
old sense of the ridiculous had returned upon him and expelled
self-consideration. While he felt profoundly the necessity for
precautions, he was careless as to the means he used, and inclined to
estimate nothing as more than a grim joke.

"You see," continued Sir William, "now that I am leaving, I am going to
throw myself upon your indulgence and good-nature. You and I have a lot
of waiting upon legal forms before we can act officially or
authoritatively in the new positions we find ourselves."

"A lot of waiting upon legal forms," assented Grey; and added mentally,
"Thank God!"

"But I suppose no one is going to say I am not the right man."

"You may build on that. I daresay"--with a bland humorous smile--"I
daresay few have greater interest in disputing your identity (there can
be no dispute of your descent) than the representatives of Miss
Midharst; and I"--with a bow and deprecating wave of the long arms and
white hands--"have no such intention."

"That is all right. Well, now I want to spend the most of that money you
were so kind as to advance me on this place"--with a comprehensive sweep
of the hand taking in the Castle and all the Island.

"Quite so. I understood that from you before. I do not think you could
do better with the money, Sir William."

"I am glad you approve. I not only want your approval, but your
co-operation also. Will you help me?"

"To the utmost of my ability."

"I do not intend beginning for a month or so; but as I shall then be
away, I shall be unable to ensure the carrying out of my plans unless I
can count on the friendly supervision, however slight, of someone who
would take an interest in the work of renovation and improvement----"

"And," interrupted the banker with a cordial smile, "you wish to know if
I would undertake to see your wishes carried out. Nothing in the world
could give me greater pleasure. I do not think you could suggest
anything I would more gladly undertake."

"Allow me to explain a little."

"I assure you no explanation is necessary."

"Excuse me, I think it is. It would be the height of impertinence in me
to ask you to do anything of the kind, but----"

"But that you know I shall always be only too glad to be of any service
to Sir William Midharst."

"You really overwhelm me with your goodness. I feel very much at taking
such favours from one who has known me so short a time."

"When people are well met, good-feeling ripens very quickly. Do you,
Sir William, believe in love at first sight?"

"Yes," said the baronet, looking up with an expression of surprise and
curiosity. "Why?" he asked, in a tone of perplexity.

"Because," answered the banker, "I believe in friendship at first sight;
and, if you will allow me to say so, I took a most friendly interest in
you from the first moment I saw you and knew who you were."

"Indeed!" murmured the young man, in a tone of reverie. Then, with a
faint smile, he added: "I certainly thought we waited a little time to
understand one another."

"I have no doubt it appeared so to you; but I was impressed at the very
beginning. You must remember the circumstances under which we met. I
had no idea who you were, and I was then under the impression the full
responsibility of Miss Midharst's guardianship lay on me. In her
interest I was bound to be cautious. Believe me, my theory of friendship
at first sight is quite as true as that of love at first sight."

"It may be--you may be right. I have never considered the question
before. I was about to explain a few moments ago that I could not think
of asking you to take any trouble in this matter, only I know you will
often be here to see Miss Midharst on business, or through kindness; and
I thought perhaps you would not consider it too much trouble to watch
how these men get on now and then, once a fortnight or so."

"Rely upon it I shall look after them much oftener than that. You may
put your mind perfectly at rest, Sir William. I have some knowledge of
things of this kind; a banker meets all sorts of men as customers, and
picks up all sorts of odds and ends of knowledge, so that there is
scarcely a trade or profession I am not familiar with the roguish side
of."

"I must extract one promise from you."

"What is it?"

"That you will not put yourself to any inconvenience in this matter."

"I promise you most unhesitatingly. A little change will do me good, and
it will be a most salutary change to come down here now and then and see
how things are going on."

"But you really need never come unless you want to see Miss Midharst."

"Quite so."

They separated soon afterwards.

"What luck I have had!" thought Grey, as he drove towards home. "To
think of how that young man played into my hands is most amusing, quite
comic. He seemed to divine that I wanted an excuse for being as much at
the Castle as possible. What more ample pleas for going than that I have
to confer with Miss Midharst over matters connected with her father's
will, and have undertaken to overlook the works about to be started by
Sir William at the Island? Stop! That thought is worth consideration."

For a few minutes he lay back in the fly perfectly still, profoundly
absorbed in thought.

"It's worth doing, and I'll do it," was the concluding link in his
thoughts.

"Driver!"

"Yes, sir."

"Back to the Ferry again. I have forgotten something."

"All right, sir."

When he arrived at the Castle he asked for the baronet, and found him at
once.

"By the way, Sir William, a matter of no absolute importance, but still
of some sentimental value to me, escaped my memory when I was a while
ago saying good-bye to you, as I thought, for some months."

"And what was that?"

"You know there is no hurry about Sir Alexander's will?"

"How do you mean?"

"Well, nothing need be done about it for months."

"What then?"

"You will be back in a few months, less than six?"

"Let us hope so."

"Well, I shall do nothing about the will until you come back. We can
then put our heads together and see what is best for Miss Midharst's
interest."

"I do not fully understand you, Mr. Grey."

"What I intend doing is this," Grey explained: "I am not bound to do
anything immediately about the will. I know the will is all right. I
will pay the small legacies myself and get rid of them, and when you
come back you and I shall go over the whole matter. I shall prove the
will and administer to the estate, and then you and I will consult as to
what had best be done for Miss Midharst's interests with the money."

"But what is your object in delay?"

"Just a whim."

"I hope, Mr. Grey," said the young man, with warm indignation, "you have
not for a moment fancied I do not think you fully capable in every way
of acting in this matter?"

"The shadow of such a suspicion never crossed my mind, I assure you, Sir
William. But cannot you understand that the position I occupy of common
friend to the two who now compose the house of Midharst would make me
desirous of having the advice of the head of the house on important
matters, such as the disposal of Sir Alexander's fortune?"

The young man looked fixedly, searchingly, at the banker's face for a
moment before he answered. When he spoke, he replied with great
deliberateness:

"There may be a good deal in what you say."

"You give me your confidence. You leave me to act as your deputy while
you are away. You, in a manner, place yourself in my hands; and you are
content with me as the guardian of your cousin's fortune. You rely upon
my integrity, upon my honour. I feel the burden I lie under. I should
feel less weighed down if you will accept my proposal as a small sign of
the esteem I hold you in, and of my simple faith with regard to your
cousin's affairs."

The banker held out his hand. He had made his speech in his old and best
manner.

The young man caught his hand swiftly, eagerly.

"Grey, I did not hope to find a man like you in you when we met first. I
know what stuff you are made of now. We shall be close friends while we
live."

"Sir William----"

"No; Midharst."

"Midharst, we shall."

They parted.

When Grey found himself alone once more, he whispered to the leafless
trees:

"Now, Mr. Prompter, ring down the drop. That's a very pretty end of the
fourth act."




CHAPTER III.

THE PARTING.


Sir William dined with his cousin that day. He was to say good-bye to
her that evening; for, although he did not intend leaving the
neighbourhood before the day after next, he had put off some business
until the last hour, and had been compelled to give up his remaining day
to dry detail and humdrum affairs.

It was only latterly, within the past few days--in fact, since he had
come into the neighbourhood of Daneford--he had discovered dry detail
and humdrum affairs. Of old details had been to him fascinating, and
affairs a passion. When a new subject came to his hand he devoured it.
When a novel situation presented itself, he dashed at it as impetuously
as a brave soldier at a breach.

Now all was changed. When he saw the Castle first his impulse was to set
men at work on it instantly. He wished to have it put in order at once;
and nothing but the appearance of indecent haste deterred him from doing
so. To-morrow he had to meet, among others, the people to whom he had
entrusted the work, and he wished them all at the bottom of the
Weeslade.

"I never knew until now I had such a taste for rural scenery. When I was
away I used to think that if I got back to England I should spend all my
time in London. Now the 'Warfinger Hotel,' overlooking the broad placid
Weeslade, seems to me all I could desire, with now and then a visit to
the Island--a stroll through its grounds and halls alone, or with
Cousin Maud.

"How cool and fresh the air is around here! Coming into a place like
this out of the great cities of the world is like escaping from a
riotous street into a cathedral where a choir is practising hymns.

"I wonder does she sing? I know she loves pansies best of all the
flowers.

"But, as I was saying, it is strange how one's most settled ideas change
as one grows older. Of course, that is but natural. When I got that pony
first I thought all living creatures must admire and envy me. There was
only one thing I envied of those around me, and that was their privilege
of standing and seeing such a splendid sight as I and my pony going
past. I would freely have given all my possessions, except my pony, for
the power of admiring on foot at the roadside the fine spectacle I and
my mount made riding by.

"Fancy Sir Alexander not keeping a horse and groom for Maud! He didn't
ride of late years, but that is no reason why she should not. She can
ride; she told me so. It is too bad to think of the dark seclusion the
poor girl has been kept in. I wonder how she lived. Upon my soul it was
a shame! There all day long, all the year round, in this gloomy relic of
the cold past, with no other change than a few hours in this sleepy
place--this humdrum city of Daneford. I am surprised she did not die. It
was enough to kill anyone. Fancy passing a whole lifetime away in that
old place and this dull town! Monstrous!

"Of course I shouldn't mind it, as I was saying a moment ago, for I have
been in the world and seen as much as I want to see. I should feel quite
content to live here always. I should never care for anything better
than a bed at the 'Warfinger Hotel,' and a stroll now and then about the
Midharsts' old place where the Fleureys once lived, a power in the
state. But Maud living here! Monstrous!

"I know what I'll do when I come back--I never thought of that
before--I'll get the house in St. James's Square put in order, and she
and Mrs. Grant shall go up there, and someone will bring out Maud, and
she shall be the beauty of the year. All the town will talk of the
lovely Miss Midharst. Then I can go and stay at Warfinger and--and see
to improvements, and so on; and then if Maud wanted me she can write or
telegraph. I can fill up a telegraph-form with only the word 'Come,' and
she can keep it in her purse and send it off the moment she wishes to
see me. I'll leave word at the telegraph-office in Daneford, that
anyone bringing me that telegram in half an hour shall have a
sovereign.

"I daresay I could have a wire to the Island, so there need be no delay.
But it would look strange. I'll make the messenger's fee five pounds,
that will be better.

"I shall keep a portmanteau always ready packed, so that there will be
no delay after getting the telegram. Even supposing the telegram does
not come for a week or fortnight, I may run up to London to see Maud and
Mrs. Grant, and make my mind easy about them.

"While they are away I can have alterations made. I can have all the
repairs and alterations done while I am in Egypt overhauled and
perfected. Maud may like many things changed; and, of course, anything
Maud wants to be done shall be done. Of course. Fancy Maud saying she
would like something or other done, and my saying, 'No, Maud; I cannot
do that!' Fancy such a thing! I wish she would ask me for something. It
is so dull to have nothing to do for Maud.

"Before I knew Maud--it seems a long time, and yet it is only a few
days: it is strange to think how long ago my previous life seems--how
much time the past ten or a dozen days cover. I have often seen
painters, when they had painted-in the solid objects of their pictures,
go over parts with thin transparent colour, and, as if by magic, the
ruin or the mountain that a moment ago pressed offensively forward
retired into its proper place in the composition, and gathered round it
mellow repose and forgetfulness. This glaze takes the heat and worry out
of the picture. It gives it moist perfume and collected dignity. The few
days I have spent here have acted like the glaze on the substantial
background of facts in my past life. Why?

"Why? Never mind why; I am content. I like the collectedness that has
come upon me. It cannot arise from the title or the estates. I am
leaving all the money behind me, and for all practical purposes the
title also. When I go away I shall be nothing more than a Government
clerk in the foreign service. When I get there, the few Europeans I know
may not have heard of Sir Alexander's death. It is not the title or the
money. What has done it?

"Before I knew Maud I always fancied anyone called Maud should be young
and fragile and exquisitely fair; and my Maud (she is mine, for are we
not of the one house?) is young and fragile and exquisitely fair.

"Maud.

"What a musical name it is! The lips and ears never tire of it. The
oftener you say it the more beautiful it seems. It is a name you must
speak softly. You cannot shout it out or fancy yourself saying it
angrily. Imagine for a moment my speaking angrily to my Maud!

"Speaking angrily to Maud! The mere supposition is like a blow. Maud is
sanctified to me doubly, as being the last daughter of our family, and
as being friendless.

"When I go away I shall leave my fortune and my title behind me. Shall I
leave anything else? Yes, everything else. Maud.

"If I leave my fortune and my title and Maud behind me, what do I take
with me?

"Nothing worth the carriage.

"Bounteous God, I thank Thee with all my heart, and all my soul, and all
the faculties of my nature, for having given love to man, and having
given me to love!"

The evening of the day Grey had visited the Island after his return from
London, the two cousins sat alone in the little drawing-room after
dinner.

"Maud, will you take great care of yourself while I am away?" he asked
very earnestly.

She was sitting by a small ebony table in front of the fire. He reclined
in an easy-chair at the opposite side of the grate.

She looked up with a childish amused smile, and answered:

"Yes; I will try and take care of myself while you are away. This is a
very safe place to live in. No one can get near us without a boat, and
everyone knows that a farmer's house would be better for thieves than
Island Castle."

"And yet, Maud, though no man come, something very precious might be
stolen by a thief while I am away." He spoke gravely, with that old
far-away look in his eyes.

"And who is the thief, and what is the thing?" she asked, with a bright
smile.

"Ruffian Death," he answered, for a moment overwhelmed by some dark
dread and chilling foreboding.

She grew paler in her black dress; the hand resting on the table seemed
whiter than life.

"But, William, I am quite well; I never felt better in all my life; and
I think, considering what has lately happened, that is very wonderful."
She was anxious, and looked into his face with eyes of grave solicitude.

Still he was following up the chain of his thoughts, and for the moment,
unaware, he uttered them:

"There is death in every day, danger in every hour; you must encounter
the danger. The way in which you meet the danger decides your relations
with death. Life is a series of compromises with death. I wish I were
not going away."

"So do I, indeed, William," she said earnestly. "But you must not be
uneasy on my part; I am quite well, and shall keep quite well while you
are away. I should be most unhappy if I thought you went away
uncomfortable on my account."

The tone of the girl's voice brought him back to a consciousness of the
situation. His manner changed. He looked up at her and smiled.

"Unhappy about you, Maud! Not I. You must not think that. I was talking
generalities; I was not alluding to your case. You see, when a man has
been a long time in a foreign country, where the speech of the people
in the streets is unknown to him, and where, among the few people who
speak European languages, there are only a couple for whose society he
cares, he falls into one bad habit certainly, that of looking at all
things in the abstract; and into another bad habit probably, that of
muttering aloud to himself. I am afraid I have been treating you to a
small example of both vices." He smiled brightly, and held out his hand
to her.

She took the small white hand off the ebony table and placed it in his.
The brown fingers closed over the white ones, and looking down at the
joined hands he said:

"Like the rough brown sheath of the cocoa-nut, and the snow-white fruit
within."

"What?"

"My hand round yours."

She said nothing.

He released her hand.

"You will take care of that hand, Maud, while I am away? Some time
someone will value that hand more than the regalia in the Tower. It will
be to him above all price. He would like to set guards over it as they
set guards over the royal jewels, and yet would allow no one to act as
sentinel but himself."

Such talk was new to her. She did not say anything.

"We have grown good friends in the few days we have been meeting one
another?"

"Oh, yes."

"The best of friends?"

"The best of friends."

"And all the time I am away you will never cease to think of me as your
best friend?"

"Never."

It almost made her cry, she could not tell why, to hear him asking such
a question.

"And should you be in any need of aid or advice, you will let me know at
once?"

"At once."

There was a pause during which Mrs. Grant entered the room.

The baronet got up, and sitting down beside the widow, said to both the
women:

"I had a chat with Mr. Grey to-day apropos of my going, and nothing
could have been nicer or more gratifying. He is, without exception, the
most straightforward and honourably-minded man I have ever met. He has,
Mrs. Grant, not only undertaken to keep his eye on the workmen when they
come here, but he has without any hint or suggestion on my part,
proposed not to do anything final with Maud's fortune until I return.
And, in addition to all this, he will pay all the legacies out of his
own pocket and at his own risk. Maud, I cannot say how grateful I am
that you have fallen into such excellent hands. You may place yourself
wholly under his direction while I am away. You need not consult me on
any subject of business; you will be quite safe with him, and he has a
thousand times my knowledge of business."

"Did I not tell you so?" asked Mrs. Grant of Miss Midharst.

"Yes," answered Maud softly.

"What was it?" asked the baronet, turning with a gratified smile towards
the widow.

"I told dear Maud long ago that she might have full confidence in Mr.
Grey," answered Mrs. Grant, with lively self-satisfaction.

"And you told her what was perfectly true. I must go now. I shall not
see you again, Mrs. Grant, until I come back from Egypt. I cannot tell
you how happy it makes me to know how good, how loyal Maud's two
friends are--yourself and Mr. Grey."

He had shaken both Maud's hands, and kissed her lips for the first time,
and shaken hands with Mrs. Grant, and was gone.

Her cousin William was gone, and she should not see him again for
months. What a pity he had to go! When he was by her side, or in
Daneford, she felt quite safe; nothing could harm her while he was near.
When her father died she had felt alone and cold in the world. She had
been susceptible to attack on all sides. She had no confidence in
herself; and although Mr. Grey had done everything man could do for her,
she owned no claim upon him.

But this cousin, this man of her own family, who, finding her timid and
unguarded, sought the privilege of shielding her from the world and the
bleak unknown lying beyond Island Castle--was a new experience, a
delightful improvement on the present.

But no sooner had she learned to lean upon his reassuring strength than
he must hurry away. What a pity!

Her cousin William would come back, no doubt; but Egypt was far off,
very far off, and the power of his protection was reduced greatly by
distance.

Why should she think she would need protection of any kind? Surely Mrs.
Grant and Mr. Grey were protection enough in a quiet well-ordered place
like Daneford and its neighbourhood?

Yes; but Cousin William had been more than a protector; he had been a
companion as well, and there was something in his talk and manner
neither Mrs. Grant nor Mr. Grey possessed. She was always content with
what Mrs. Grant said, or what Mr. Grey said. Their words always
exhausted the topic; but when he had spoken she felt led on to wonder
what lay behind and beyond what he had said.

She had told Mrs. Grant truly he had interested her; and although he
always had spoken to her as though there could be no question of the
supremacy of his will over hers, she liked that.

When Mrs. Grant told her to do a certain thing, the doing of it was dry
and uninteresting. When Cousin William had told her to do a thing, she
always did it with the sound of his voice in her ears; or she had
thought what mystery of Egypt he had before his eyes when he gave her
the command; or she had tried to fathom his mind as to the manner in
which he would best like to see the thing done.

But now all was cold and monotonous and dull. Really the place had got
so quiet of late that she found her chief delight in her old books of
Egypt, and in the geography of that country, and in following on the map
the overland route he had taken to Africa.




CHAPTER IV.

BETWEEN THE LIGHTS.


The day Henry Walter Grey bade good-bye to the young baronet he went
home to the Manor House in the best spirits.

That latest stroke of his had proved marvellously successful. In fact,
the result completely astonished him. Sir William had been civil,
polite, conciliatory to him up to that last interview. During it the
young man had thrown aside all reserve and rushed into his arms with
enthusiasm. This young man, of whom he had stood in dread a few days
ago, had been not only neutralised, but converted into a friend.

And at what cost? The voluntary promise that he, Grey, would take no
steps about the will until the return of the head of the house. What a
transcendent joke! There was nothing like it on the stage. Nothing
approaching it. He had won the young man by undertaking not to invest
money already stolen and made away with!

And how had he done it? Not by worrying and sneaking and shivering and
anticipating all kinds of evils; not by thinking and attending to his
own fears and hopes connected with matters which had been done and could
not be undone. No; but by thinking of what other people might do adverse
to him, and trying to out-manoeuvre them. The general who, upon
hearing the enemy is advancing, does nothing but contemplate the horrors
of defeat, will inevitably be defeated. It is with matters of business
as with a general in the field--to provide against nothing but defeat
is to ensure defeat and final disaster. To dread a disease is to open
the door for its reception.

Away then for ever with doubts and fears! He was still a player in the
game. It was a game of skill, and he must win. The way to win is never
to think of yourself or of the result of winning or losing, but to
concentrate every human faculty upon the game itself, and the plans for
effecting the defeat of your opponents.

And now how did his great game stand? Let him see.

Sir William Midharst would be away in Egypt some while, some months, say
three to four months, during which time it was necessary to win, by any
means he could employ, this girl Maud. He was the guardian of her
fortune and the superintendent of works about to be carried on at the
Castle. This gave him not an excuse so much as a command to be
frequently there. Thus he should have excellent opportunities of
pressing his suit. He was to consult Miss Midharst upon alterations, _et
cetera_; and that supplied the means of obtaining frequent and long
interviews with her in which they should often be alone. Good, very
good!

He felt strong and healthy and capable. His illness had cleared away the
confusion which had been gathering round him; he slept better of nights,
and awoke cheerful.

He knew he should be able to interest Maud, and to interest a woman is
to win her. Those solemn, lank, poetical men, like the new baronet, took
such a time to make up their minds, that a man of sanguine temperament
like himself won a woman before one like Sir William determined on the
first sigh. Girls don't like sighs; they prefer laughter. Good!

The Bank was all right now, and when he had married Maud there was no
one to come and pry into matters. Every one would think by his marriage
with her he had acquired upwards of half a million; and for a man in his
position to have the reputation of riches is almost as good as to have
riches. Splendid!

He had provided against injury arising out of that sale of the lease and
furniture and annuity. He had not been in a position to resist his
mother. He knew that, having made up her mind to sell, she would sell,
no matter what it cost her feelings. She would threaten to denounce him
rather than be baulked in doing what he supposed she intended with the
money. He did not think she would have gone the length of denouncing
him. She had done worse. She had shown herself indifferent to anything
he might have to say. She could not know but that letter of his told her
he had paid back all the money, or that it contained a plea for a short
respite. She had not cared what happened to him; and he--he had taken
means to protect himself. He did not feel angry with her in the least.
He had simply cut her off from his mind. There was no such person any
longer. That returned letter informed him of her death. Those documents
he had signed for her were announcements of her decease. That auction
bell would ring for the interment of the past and the future which had
of late given him trouble. With her went everything he loved. He was
alone now, face to face with his fate, and free from any unmanning
influence or depressing considerations. This was best of all!

As to the other and greater danger, that was scarcely worth counting. So
far there had not been the shadow of menace. Farleg had, no doubt, got
out of the country, and was now settled with his wife somewhere out
West. No reason existed for supposing Farleg would betray him; for he
had taken hush-money, and no reward had been offered, as nothing had
been suspected. No; he need not fear that source. Only one thing
remained to be done. He had shaken off those superstitious terrors which
had haunted him for a while. He was still menaced by the cancelled pages
in London; that was the only danger ahead. All his energy for the future
should be directed towards avoiding the consequences of his theft.

The day Sir William left Daneford Grey spent at the Bank. His private
correspondence and such account-books as he himself kept, to which no
one but himself had access, were in arrears, and had to be brought up to
the current day. He had to give a long audience to Mr. Aldridge, and
several merchants wanted to see him, so that the hours were fully
occupied, and when he got home he felt tired; it was dark, and he
resolved not to go to the Island until the early part of the next
afternoon.

When next day he got to the Castle, he found Mrs. Grant in the great
hall about to go out.

"I am lucky to meet you, Mrs. Grant. If you are not in a great hurry I
should like a few words with you."

"Certainly, Mr. Grey; I shall be most happy. I am going to town for a
few things Miss Midharst and myself want. I have not been out since poor
Sir Alexander's death; but I'm in no hurry."

They were now in the open air.

"I hope Miss Midharst is quite well?"

"Quite well, thank you."

"And not pining after her handsome cousin?" with a gay smile.

"Handsome! Do you too think him handsome?"

"Yes. But who else thinks him good-looking?" with a still brighter
smile.

"Miss Midharst says he is one of the handsomest men she ever saw."

"Upon my word I am inclined to believe with her." This was accompanied
by the brightest smile of all. "It is useful to know what she thinks of
her cousin's appearance," thought Grey gravely.

"Well, Mr. Grey, I can see nothing handsome about him. I like an
Englishman to look like an Englishman; but I forgive him his looks
because of his good behaviour. Nothing could have been better than his
conduct from first to last. He makes Miss Midharst stay here; he
promises to do up the Castle and grounds; and last of all, Mr. Grey, he
speaks of you before he goes away in words which do him credit."

"Indeed!"

"Yes. Nothing could have been more manly than the way he spoke his mind
to Miss Midharst and myself about you the other evening, the last day
you were here. I don't think he liked you at first; but he made up for
that at last. Nothing could be better than what he said."

"I am glad to find he does not misunderstand me." These were two useful
and significant facts: that Maud thought her cousin good-looking, and
that her cousin had been favourably impressed by him. "Mrs. Grant," he
said, after a pause, "you said you were going to town to buy some things
for yourself and Miss Midharst."

"Yes."

"Will you have the goodness to put this parcel in your purse? It is what
you are entitled to under the will of Sir Alexander."

He held out his hand to her with a bundle of notes.

"I really don't want it now, Mr. Grey," she said, remembering what Sir
William had told her.

They had already reached the Ferry-slip. He held out his hand to her.
She held out the notes to him. He smiled, shook his head, shrugged his
shoulders, and said:

"Give me your hand only. I want to help you into the boat. Put that
bundle in your pocket. I hope you do not think I want it."

He handed her into the boat, raised his hat, and, when the ferryman had
pulled a dozen strokes from the slip, raised his hat again and turned
towards the Castle.

As he walked he thought: "That is not the worst investment I ever made.
Prompt payment and attention go a long way with women who are no longer
young. Now for a woman who is young and charming."

"What an agreeable man Sir William is!" said Grey, when he had been some
time seated with Maud. "So affable, good-natured, and amusing. He is one
of the most pleasant young men I ever met."

"I am glad you like him," said Maud, a little surprised.

"Like him! Of course I do. He is a man after my own heart. So
open-minded and full of go, of animal spirits. You very seldom find a
man who has been long out of Europe retain his animal spirits. The
inhabitants of Asia and Africa are always afraid of sunstroke or snakes,
tigers or tyrants. In the tropics no one ever makes a joke. Life is
always serious there. Who ever heard of an Eastern Joe Miller? No; they
have proverbs and poetry, but no jokes. When you are always expecting
to find a snake coiled round the leg of the table, or an official
waiting outside the door with a drawn sword to cut off your head, you
are afraid to laugh. Now what I admire most in Sir William is that,
although he has been long in Africa, he has kept his animal spirits
unimpaired. Isn't it a great blessing?"

"Yes," answered Maud, in amazement.

"I know it is not what very straitlaced people would like, but the views
he holds of all serious things are most diverting. I am very sorry I had
to go away while he was here. It is such a privilege to meet a man like
him--a man of the world who knows everything, and can laugh at the
weaknesses and follies of the world, under which heads of weaknesses and
follies he classes much of what smug respectability calls the Generous
and Noble Aspirations of Men. I will not say I hold his views, but I
hold my sides when he tells them. Did you hear any of his stories?"

"No, Mr. Grey," answered Maud, ready to cry. Was there really this
other, this light and frivolous side to her cousin's character? She
could hardly believe it. Yet here was Mr. Grey telling her about it, and
no one could think of doubting Mr. Grey's word.

"Ah! Quite so. Yes. It is likely he thought you might not care for them.
They might seem profane to you. I have been most unwise. I felt sure he
had told them to you. He might be displeased with me if he knew I had
mentioned them to you. Will you promise not to allude to them when you
speak or write to him? I daresay he will write to you, and you will
write to him."

"He promised to write, and I promised to write to him."

What a revelation was in the banker's words! Could it be her cousin had
two sides? If it was so, where did the insincerity end? This was a
miserable discovery after she had lifted him up in her mind as a perfect
model of what a man should be.

"Of course you will write to your guardian and your only cousin; but
mind you are not to say anything about what I have been saying to you. I
should not mind speaking of it to him in your presence, but a thing of
that kind in black and white looks very bad. Have you heard from him
yet?"

"Yes; I got a note saying he was about to set off. It was written
yesterday."

Her face looked wan and weary. It was disenchanting to hear all this of
Cousin William. How could it be?

"A bad sign. A very bad sign," thought the banker. "But we must be a
match for him. We must be a match for him. No precaution shall be
neglected." Then he said aloud: "I shall be very often at the Castle
now; for not only shall I have to come and see you, but I am also to
look after the workmen for Sir William, so that I fear you will have to
make up your mind to endure a great deal of me."

"I shall be very glad to see you every day. But I think you are doing
too much for me--for us."

"Miss Midharst, you must understand once for all that there is
absolutely nothing in my power I am not anxious to do for you
personally."

He said this with great emphasis and precision, raising his right hand
slightly towards the ceiling while he spoke, as though calling Heaven
to witness his words.

She did not know what to say. There was an earnestness in his manner
forbidding commonplace thanks.

His face suddenly lightened.

"I was about to say that either I or a messenger from the Bank will be
here every day, and whoever comes can take any orders you and Mrs. Grant
may have for town. This will save Michael's going in so often. I will
get you a letter-bag. You shall keep one key and I the other, so there
will be no danger of letters getting lost. In old times Michael was, of
course, as safe as the post; but now we shall have comparative
strangers--clerks and so on--whose honesty has not been so well tried as
Michael's."

Soon he took his leave. Next day he did not call, but a clerk came with
a letter-bag and a key. There was nothing in the bag. Miss Midharst had
no letters. One from Mrs. Grant went back to town. That was all.

When the clerk got to the Bank, he handed the bag to the banker. The
banker opened it, glanced at the one letter it contained, smiled, put
Mrs. Grant's among his own letters for post, and whispered to himself:
"Everything is fair in love and war. If this had been Maud's, I should
have had just one peep."

Now he began to visit the Castle almost daily. The men had not yet been
set to work, but already the furniture makers and upholsterers were busy
in the work-shops. Hangings had been ordered at Paris; designers were
carrying out plans for restoring the great banqueting-hall to its olden
splendour; brass-founders were casting fittings; and gardeners had
inspected the grounds with a view to ascertaining their capabilities.

At first Grey made it a point not to see Maud every time he called. By
the end of a month he was at the Island six days out of the seven, and
never left without seeing her.

During that month she had twice written to her cousin. He had carried
the letters from her to the Bank, and there opened and read them. He
closed them and sent them on. There had been nothing particular in
either, beyond copious praise of Grey's great kindness to her, and his
ceaseless attention to the business of her cousin.

So far all went well. He continued in good spirits, and the people of
Daneford said he had never looked better or seemed gayer.

His mother's place had been sold out, and she had gone he knew not
whither.

"That is all the better," he thought. "The stage is clearer, and nothing
remains to distract my attention from the main thing."

He had been very cautious in his interviews with Maud. He had said or
done nothing which could give her a hint of his aim. He had been
good-humouredly and sedulously careful to do all she wished as she
wished it done. He had taken her and Mrs. Grant for drives in quiet
country places, where the freshness of their mourning would be free from
observation and remark. On these occasions, although Maud occupied the
seat of honour, he was more attentive to her companion.

But the time for winning had a limit, and at the end of the first month
he gradually changed his manner.

When they met he gazed into her eyes longer and with more interest than
of yore. He pressed her hand more warmly, and retained it longer. His
voice, when he spoke to her, was lower and softer. His solicitude for
her health gained daily, and when they walked out into the grounds
together, he chose for her the easiest ways, and showed his anxiety that
her feet should not touch the wet grass, or the ragged brambles her face
or figure.

He prolonged his visits. He always found an excuse for getting her out
into the grounds, or into some room where for a time they might be
alone. When parting from her, he would say, if no one was by:

"I am sorry I must leave now. I am sorry I am obliged to go back to
Daneford and that lonely Manor. I wish I could stay here."

And she would say:

"I am sure, if you will stay, Mrs. Grant will make you comfortable. But
you lose too much time for us."

He would answer:

"No. Oh no, dear Miss Midharst. The only pleasant time I have now is
when I am here, in your society, trying to make this place better for
you."

Then he would say good-bye impressively, and move off with a dejected
look, and turn round, when he had taken a few paces, and wave his hand
to her in a way that said: "Do not grieve because I am sad. I am
nobody."

This manner set the girl pondering, and she said to the widow one day:

"Mrs. Grant, I think living all alone in that house, where his wife was
once, is bad for Mr. Grey."

"There is no doubt of it, my child. It will kill him, I am sure. He
ought to marry again soon."

"Marry again soon!" cried the girl in surprise. The idea that he might
marry again had never suggested itself to her mind, and it seemed very
wonderful.

"Yes, my dear. He's a young man. A much younger man than many men of
thirty."

"I know he is very amusing, but I had never before thought of Mr. Grey
marrying again."

To Maud the idea was not only novel, but a little shocking at first. She
had been in the habit of classing him with her father. Now for the first
time she had come to think of him as a man who was not only not nearly
so old as her father, but relatively young.

All at once the recent change in his manner towards her struck her, and,
little as had been her experience of the world, or her knowledge of its
ways, she could not but see a desire on Mr. Grey's part to be
particularly agreeable to her. This, coupled with the fact that she
could no longer regard him as a man the events of whose life were merely
awaiting the final audit to be posted into the eternal ledger, made her
feel an awakened interest in him. He was a new man, an individuality
hitherto unexplored.

Another thing struck her at the same time.

Her cousin, whom she had taken as a grave, serious-minded, chivalric
soul, turned out to have two sides to his character. When not with her,
he could be light, trivial, profane.

The banker also had two sides to his character. He was robust, honest,
jovial, in general. But at home sorrow and loneliness were eating him
away in the house where once he had been happy with the wife so suddenly
taken from his side.

What a strange discovery! Were all men who were not as old as her
father double-sided like these? She should not like to ask even Mrs.
Grant that question. Then what a contrast did these two men afford: the
one assuming or wearing naturally towards her the manner of earnest
collectedness, while towards others he showed questionable levity; the
other showing her a steady brightness, while in reality his heart was
consumed by a great sorrow! Were all men like these? How wonderful it
seemed!

The contrast revealed to her by these two men first aroused Maud
Midharst to perceive men's minds and ways differed widely from the minds
and ways of women. Of old she had known men were stronger than women,
had greater capacity for affairs, more knowledge of the world and more
wisdom. Until now she had never reached the fact that there were in the
minds of men faculties differing from those of women, not only in
quality and intensity, but also in kind. Instantly her wonder at the
superiority of men left her. She no longer felt astonished at disparity
between mental faculties common to men and women. She suddenly awakened
to a curiosity never felt before. She was now interested in all things
which enabled her to discover where the thoughts of men differed from
the thoughts of women.

When she had heard her cousin speak on the day her father was buried,
she had felt surprise and interest. What he said had given her a
pleasant shock. Now she had gone a post farther on the great road of
life. She had learned to speculate.




CHAPTER V.

"A WOMAN OF NO NAME."


One day when Maud was sitting alone in the library by the fire reading,
a servant entered with word a lady who declined giving any name wished
to see Miss Midharst. She was, the servant said, a thin, tall, old lady,
dressed in black.

No ladies called at the Castle. What could this woman want? Maud
wondered. Who could she be? A tall, thin, old lady, dressed in black.
Had she asked by name for Miss Midharst?

"Yes; she said she wanted to see Miss Midharst. I asked her would Mrs.
Grant do, and she said No, she wanted to see Miss Midharst alone."

"Alone?"

"Alone."

Who could it be? The last person who had asked to see her and declined
to give a name was William. (She would write to William to-day and tell
him what she thought. It was a strange thing for her to have to write to
him. But she did not know what to do. William was her only friend. She
was afraid to speak to Mrs. Grant about it. If she mentioned the matter
to Mrs. Grant, no one could tell but it might get back to Mr. Grey's
ears, and that would never do. Never.) Ah, the servant is waiting yet.

"Where is the lady?"

"In the hall-room, madame."

"Tell her I will come to her at once."

Maud rose slowly and put down her book. As she moved along the
corridors, she thought:

"This is most unpleasant, it is terrible. My father is not yet two
months dead, and Mr. Grey's manner frightens me. At first I did not
notice it, but now--now I can have no doubt. He has not said anything
plain yet, but he can mean nothing else. He calls me Maud, and not Miss
Midharst. He takes my hand, too, when we are alone, and looks in my eyes
and frightens me. His eyes are queer. When he is looking at me he seems
suddenly to forget who I am, or where he is. It is only within the past
week I noticed this; and yesterday he looked at me with those awful
eyes, and begged me to be good to him and come, for God's sake, and take
the thing away from the dark passages and the doorways. Then he asked me
if I smelt blood, and burst out laughing, and said all this was part of
a play he was writing. Judas Iscariot, the hero of his play! What a
horrible thought!"

She reached the hall-room. It had long ago been used by the family as a
breakfast-parlour when few guests were at the Castle; for many years it
had been made a waiting-room.

Maud opened the door and entered. The day was cold, and she directed her
glance first towards the fire. No one was there, but she saw standing
with her back to the window a tall, thin, old woman.

The stranger did not move. She fixed her eyes on Maud, and stood staring
at the girl.

Maud moved slowly and timidly up the room. When within a couple of yards
of the other she said:

"I am Miss Midharst. You wish to see me. Will you not take a chair near
the fire?"

"Yes, I wanted to see you. I want to see you."

She did not move. Her voice was firm and hard, with a tone of menace in
it.

"I--I cannot recall your face, and the servant did not bring your name."

"We never met before. The servant did not bring you any name, for I have
none. I am a woman of no name."

"A woman with no name!" cried Maud, with a feeble attempt at a smile.
There was no provocation for smiles in the words or manner of the
unknown, and Maud felt uneasy.

"Yes; I once had an honourable name, and was connected with honourable
people who bore it. But that name was dishonoured by one who owned it,
and the name died. My name would not live dishonoured." The voice was
firm and hard still, and the original pose unbroken.

"I am sorry for that," murmured Maud, not knowing anything else to say.
What a contrast between this unknown visitor and the former! And yet,
although a strong contrast appeared, there was a subtler similarity.

"And I am sorry for you."

Maud started and repeated: "Sorry for me! Why are you sorry for me?"

"Because you are young. I used once, until lately, to think it a
privilege to be young; now I consider it a privilege to be very old or
dead."

Maud felt more and more uncomfortable. This was not a cheerful way of
looking at things. Maud had quite enough unpleasant matters to occupy
her mind, and she was quite unstrung. What business had this woman with
her? She would try. She spoke somewhat tremulously:

"Can I be of any use to you?"

"No. Nor can I be of much to you."

"To me!" said Maud in surprise. "I hope no one has been asking you to
do anything unreasonable for me. Of course, as I did not know you until
now, and never heard your name, you will excuse my not thanking you for
what you may have done for me."

"I have done nothing for you but evil."

"Evil! I assure you you must be mistaken. No one has done me harm, as
far as I know."

"But there may be evil you do not know of, and I may have been the
innocent cause of it."

"But if you were innocent you must not trouble yourself about it; and
besides, whatever the harm was, it has not hurt me, so that you must
make your mind easy."

"The evil may be done, and yet unfelt, and may be felt later on, and the
evil may not be done yet."

"I do not clearly understand you."

"I do not intend you should. I do not know why I have spoken so much. I
cannot say more. I have merely called to deliver into your hands a
parcel of some consequence. The contents of this parcel is yours. I said
I cannot do much for you. I can do no more than give you this. You must
promise me not to open this parcel until to-morrow morning. You need not
be afraid of it. The things in it are good things. You promise?" The
woman held out her hand with a small parcel in it.

"Yes," answered Maud, taking the parcel.

At that moment the door opened, and a voice said:

"I beg your pardon, Miss Midharst; I did not know there was anyone
here."

Maud turned round, and saw Henry Walter Grey smiling and bowing in the
doorway. With the handle of the door still in his hand, he took a
backward step, when the old woman said:

"Come in. I have finished with Miss Midharst."

At the sound of the voice Grey sprang back a step, thrust his head
forward, and uttered a low cry of surprise and pain.

Maud moved towards him, saying:

"Are you ill, Mr. Grey? Are you ill?"

His face was shrivelled and his mouth hung open.

Before Maud could take another step the hand of the old woman was on her
shoulder, and the voice of the old woman was in her ear, firm and hard
as before:

"Remember your promise! Good-bye."

With erect head, bright eyes, and a quick step, the stranger walked to
the door, on the outside of which Grey stood paralysed. He bowed and
groaned as she approached, and as she passed him he crouched against
the wall.

She swept by him without looking at him, turned the corner of the
corridor and passed out of sight.

Maud, transfixed with amazement, stood where the old woman had arrested
her.

When the stranger had disappeared, Grey made a prodigious effort, shook
himself, assumed a sickly smile, and straightened his figure.

The action of the banker dissolved the stupefaction of the girl, and she
moved rapidly towards the door to escape. Just as she reached it the
manner of the man suddenly changed. His face became dark and
threatening, and he bounded into the doorway, barring the exit and
crying:

"Stop! I must speak with you before you leave the room!"

The girl recoiled in terror, and began with "Mr. Grey!" in a tone of
fear and expostulation.

"Go back. I say I _must_ speak with you before you leave this room!"

She struggled with herself for a moment, and then summoned courage
enough to begin with:

"By what right, Mr. Grey----"

"By any right or by any wrong you must speak with me. Do I look like a
child, or a fool, or a woman?"

His manner was vehement and over-powering. For an instant she resolved
to defy him, but by a powerful sweep of his arm he indicated that denial
was out of the question. With a palpitating heart and confused head she
stepped back into the room.

He followed her and locked the door. When she heard him do this her
strength gave way altogether, and she sank on a chair.

He walked up and down the room some time before he spoke.

"Tell me, what did that wretched woman say to you? What was her business
with you? What brought her here?"

"She told me she had wronged me innocently."

"How?"

"She would not say."

"What do you mean, girl? Do you dare to tell me she said she had wronged
you and did not tell you how?" He drew up in front of her chair.

"Yes."

"Is that a lie?"

"Is what a lie?"

"Have you, girl, told me a lie?"

"Mr. Grey, I----"

"Girl, I will have no pretty sentiments! I am talking business now. Such
business as you never even heard of. You may not know the results
hanging on your words. Did that wretched woman tell you the injuries she
had done you?"

"She did not." Maud felt she should faint.

"Listen to me now, girl: this is business. Attach ten thousand times
more value to the answers you are going to make me than to any other
answers you gave in all your life. My question is: What names did she
mention?"

"None. She mentioned no name."

"Absolutely and literally no name?"

"She mentioned no name."

"Not even her own?"

"Not even her own."

"But you know, of course, who she is?"

"I never saw her before. I do not know who she is."

"The servants know her name."

"Jordan told me a lady wished to see me in private. He did not know her
name."

"Are you sure of all this?"

"Yes."

"What was her business with you?"

"She left me that packet on the table."

"Did she say nothing about it?"

"That it contained something of mine, and that I was not to open it
until to-morrow morning."

"Is that all?"

"That is all."

"Swear it to me."

"Mr. Grey!"

"I know; but swear all the same."

"I will not."

"Then you have been lying."

"I have not. How dare you say such a thing, Mr. Grey!"

"Well, there, Maud, dear Maud, let us drop the comedy. I am afraid I
have carried it too far already. You know really who the poor creature
is?"

"I have told you I do not."

"She is a harmless old woman who is mad on religion, and goes about
doing this kind of thing, and leaving bundles of tracts like this." He
took up the parcel off the table. "She must not be allowed in here
again. I will give orders that she shall not be admitted. And now can
you guess the reason for my comedy?"

"I cannot."

"It was, dear Maud, because I heard to-day there is some chance of the
will being disputed, and I wanted to try how you would go through the
ordeal of a severe cross-examination. And I must say, anything to equal
my Maud's admirable coolness I never saw. You did not for a moment fancy
I was in earnest?"

"I don't know what I thought. I was greatly frightened."

"Well, I admit I did go too far. But it was in your own interest, dear
Maud--in your own interest. You are all right again, dear Maud?"

He took her hand in his.

"I feel a little nervous and hysterical. Please open the door and let me
go."

"Certainly; it was carrying the joke too far to lock the door; but I was
borne away by the spirit of the thing. You will forgive me."

"Oh, yes."

"Well, dear Maud, good-bye now. You are leaving your parcel of tracts
behind you. Never mind; I'll read them for you."

When she had left the room he took up the parcel, dropped it into his
pocket, and started at once for the city.

That day Maud wrote to her cousin, Sir William Midharst. The concluding
paragraph of her letter ran thus:

"I do not know what is the matter with Mr. Grey; his manner terrifies
me. If you can, come back at once."




CHAPTER VI.

PENNILESS.


As Grey drove home he thought: "Was ever man so lucky as I! She did not
denounce me. She did not give her name. She did not mention mine. She
did not tell the nature of the injury she had been the innocent cause
of, and I was in time to prevent surprise being aroused by the contents
of that packet. Was ever man so lucky as I!

"I think I half convinced Maud the scene between her and me was a
rehearsal. If I have not, I am sure to be able to do so later on. Maud
had no suspicion that woman was my mother; and if she had she could in
no way trace my manner to the presence of my mother. Even if she
discovers later on it was my mother, I shall be able to find out some
back door, some means of escape. It is time enough to say good-day to
the devil when you meet him; so I will not waste time in providing for
what may never arise.

"This parcel is money, of course. It is a large slice out of the sales
of the annuity, house, and furniture. I don't know what the gross sum
was, but I should not be surprised if she left half of it with Maud. Let
me see."

He cut the cord, and opened out the parcel. There were two or three
folds of brown paper; then came a bundle of notes, and in the middle one
note doubled up, and in this innermost note four sovereigns, seven
shillings, and a fourpenny-piece. There were seven one thousand pound
notes, three one hundred, and eight tens, making seven thousand three
hundred and eighty pounds in notes, and four pounds seven shillings and
fourpence in coin; in all, seven thousand three hundred and eighty-four
pounds, seven shillings and fourpence.

Grey knit his brows, counted the money over again, twisted the gold and
silver inquisitively through his fingers, and uttered an exclamation of
dissatisfaction.

"Of course," he thought, "they could have traced these notes to her as
easily as though her name was written on the back of each. I can now cut
off their history as long as I like. I cannot understand how she got so
much for the lot. Double this would be a thing far above my estimate. At
the very outside I don't think the three things were worth more than ten
thousand. It might have gone to eleven thousand. I should not have
thought so much, certainly not a penny more. This would be about
two-thirds of eleven thousand--a trifle more than two-thirds. Can this
woman have given Maud two-thirds of what the property brought, and left
herself with short of four thousand pounds, when she may live ten or a
dozen years yet? Monstrous!

"My mother, upwards of seventy years of age, with a bankrupt son and
four thousand pounds--a hundred and fifty pounds a year! Monstrous! I'll
go to Evans and find out the facts of the case, and relieve myself of
this heavy suspicion."

He drove to Evans's. The solicitor was in an outer office among his
clerks. Grey was too impatient to wait until they could reach the
private room, and too cautious to allow Evans to answer his question
aloud. He took up a sheet of paper and wrote on it:

"What were the net proceeds of my mother's sale?"

He handed this to Evans.

The solicitor wrote some figures, and returned the paper to Grey.

The banker turned down the side of paper with the figures, and went to
the window. With his back to the attorney and clerks he read the
figures. The paper fell from his hand. He raised his face against the
thin winter light. He folded his arms tightly across his chest. A
convulsive movement began at the shoulders and descended throughout his
body. He swayed to and fro violently.

Evans raised his head, and saw something was wrong. He stole softly
behind the banker, and placed his hand on the other's arm.

"Come this way. Come to my private room," whispered the solicitor
gently.

Grey moved away mechanically. Even with the attorney's assistance he
walked unsteadily.

When he had reached the private room Evans pressed Grey into a chair,
locked the door, and said:

"Rest a while. Rest a while, and then tell me."

Grey rose to his feet laboriously, as if his joints were frozen. He
placed a hand on each shoulder of Evans, and said, in a heavy husky
voice:

"Evans--my God! Evans--do you know what has happened?"

"No."

"My mother, upwards of seventy years of age, has left Daneford and gone
I don't know where; and she has not a roof to cover her, a meal to eat,
or a shilling in her pocket."

The sum Evans had written on that piece of paper was seven thousand
three hundred and eighty-four pounds, seven shillings and fourpence.

"Evans, she hasn't kept a copper. By this time she may be without a
shilling."

Half an hour elapsed before Grey found himself able to command himself
sufficiently to face the public eye.

Evans offered to do anything in his power. He undertook to find Mrs.
Grey and ascertain her condition; but Grey refused all help. He felt
perfectly convinced his mother would allow nothing to be done for her by
him. If she beggared herself to pay some of the stolen money, it was not
likely she would accept money from him who had committed the theft.

When he left Evans's office he walked slowly and sadly towards the Bank.
It was now dusk. He went to his private-room, and, flinging himself into
a chair, sat long gazing at the fire.

He had, he had fancied, banished all thought of his mother from his
mind for ever. He had flattered himself he had cast off all his old
affection, so that it might be no longer a stumbling-stone in the path
of his ambition. But this horrible discovery of the old woman's absolute
destitution could not be resisted.

His mother a homeless wanderer among strange people in the winter time!
Unendurable thought! She to whom he had looked up with love and
reverence all his life, who had soothed and cheered him in the little
griefs of his boyhood and the trials of his manhood, now without a
fireside of her own!

He had himself never known what poverty, actual poverty, was; but he had
heard and read of it, and had come in contact with it as a man connected
with the treasurership held by him. There were people in the world at
this moment who were hungry and had not a penny to buy bread. Had not a
penny such as this.

He had taken a coin out of his pocket, and now held it in his left hand.
He was bent forward; his right elbow rested on his knee; his head
drooped over the left palm, in which lay the coin.

People who starved for want of such a coin as this! Under privation it
was the children and the old people succumbed first. People of middle
life like him lived through sieges and famines when the young and the
old died.

To think of people being hungry for want of such a coin as this!

He had seen the old hungry. As president of the Coal Fund he had visited
poor old people. He had seen their dropped jaws, their dim eyes, their
feeble gait, their degraded humanity. He had seen women, old women who
had once occupied comfortable positions, hobbling along the frozen
streets with tickets for coal in their hands, while boys followed
jeering at them. He had heard these respectable old women utter words of
gratitude so humiliating to themselves, that he had felt to listen was
more the punishment of a crime than the reward of a humane action.

Once at a Christmas-time he went to see a poor widow on behalf of whom
application had been made to the fund. Her husband had been a well-to-do
tradesman of Daneford. He found the poor creature in a most pitiable
plight. She had nothing but a bundle of straw for a bed, and the ragged
remains of an old patchwork counterpane. There were two broken chairs, a
delf cup, and no saucer. This was a full inventory of the widow's goods.
The old woman said she did not feel hunger half so much as cold. She was
used to hunger all the year round, now and then; but the winter cold
was terrible. When hungry and cold, you were tortured from within and
without. For twelve months she had not tasted hot meat, and for six
months neither eggs nor butter. Sprats were then three-halfpence for two
pounds, and bread three-halfpence a pound. Two pounds of sprats, two
pounds of bread, and the use of a neighbour's fire, carried her over two
days very nicely, but that came to fourpence-halfpenny; and when she had
paid eighteenpence a week for the room, it was not easy to find
fourpence-halfpenny every two days for living. In coming away he gave
her half-a-sovereign. She threw herself down on her knees to him, and
thanked him and Providence that she should now have warm stockings and
taste meat once more before she died. That thin old woman had thrown
herself on her knees to _him_ because she was hungry and cold, and he
had given her half-a-sovereign! Thrown herself on her knees to him! When
he came home he told Bee, and Bee had wept and sent the old woman
clothes. He told his mother, too, about this old woman, and his mother
had gone to see her and sat with her, and never lost sight of her until
the poor woman died.

What changes since then! Bee had gone, and his mother was a pauper
fugitive.

His stately keen-minded mother a penniless fugitive! Intolerable! There
must be some mistake. Fancy for a moment his proud high-spirited mother
being obliged to stoop and accept help! Fancy such a thing, she who had
always had a full larder and purse at the service of royal generosity!
The mere idea was preposterous on the face of it. And yet there were the
figures of Evans. His mother prostrate at the feet of a stranger,
thanking him for food!

"Oh, God, who is our master, and who is the master of our joys and our
woes, afflict me with what Thou wilt, but take away that vision! Take
away that vision from before my eyes! Give me all other pains but that
sight, the result of my misdoings."

He had risen, and was praying with all the might of his soul, his face
and hands thrown up, and the tones of terrible beseeching in his voice.

Suddenly he sank to his knees and drew his arms swiftly and strongly
across his eyes; swaying his body to and fro, he moaned out in piteous
entreaty:

"Oh, God of mercy, show mercy to me, and turn away from me my mother's
eyes!"

There was a knock at the door.

He staggered feebly to his feet, and took a few hasty inspirations
before asking:

"Who's there?"

"I, sir."

"What do you want?"

"The mail is going out, sir."

"Well?"

"Have you any letters to go?"

"No, Doughty."

"But there's the Castle bag, sir. I want the letters out of that."

"True; thank you for reminding me of them." He opened the door. "Here is
the key." He handed it through the door, adding: "I am most particularly
engaged. Let no one come to me."

He retired from the door feebly. He went back to the fire and sat down.

In half an hour he rang his bell. The porter entered.

"Are the letters posted?"

"Yes, sir."

"All gone?"

"Yes, sir."

"That will do." To himself he thought with his hand on his brow: "I
forgot something about the Castle letters. I forget still what it was. I
should have--I remember now. Well, it does not make much difference."




CHAPTER VII.

LOSING.


For a few days after the meeting between Grey and his mother at the
Castle he did not go to the Island. Something repelled him. The thought
of the Castle made him chill and uncomfortable now. He had never gone so
far as to try and persuade himself he was in love with Maud. He never
pretended to himself he felt more than a mild interest in her. The
nature of the circumstances surrounding him and impelling him towards
Maud had almost wholly obliterated the personality of the girl. She was
a minus quantity in the equation of his life. Could he bring her over
to the other side, the minus would become a plus, and he should be
saved. He was too much impressed with the necessity of winning her to
regard her personality with much interest.

Now he seemed to have receded further from her. He was no less impressed
with the necessity of winning her than before, but between her and him
had come of late a shadow, stretching from that interview at which his
mother, Maud, and himself, had assisted.

At first this shadow was vague, indistinct, a source of indefinable
uneasiness rather than absolute pain. Gradually, hour by hour after that
interview, his subsequent discoveries in the fly, and at Evans's office,
the appearance of vagueness disappeared, the repelling image took
absolute form, and between the girl and himself flitted the form of a
feeble beggared mother.

He had made no effort to trace Mrs. Grey. He knew nothing on earth would
induce her to take aid from him. He knew she could not be reached
indirectly, for she would suspect any side approach to be of his
contriving. When she would not keep a shilling of her own honest money
to buy bread, there was no likelihood of her receiving stolen money from
his hand.

"I have already sacrificed two women, am I about to sacrifice a third?"
He put this question to himself often, but took little interest in the
answer. If any other means of extricating himself offered, he would have
abandoned his design of marrying Maud. He saw no other loophole of
escape.

"If I don't marry Maud, sooner or later it will be found out I have made
fraudulent uses of my power of attorney, and they will seize me, search
the Bank and the Manor, and--hang me out of one of the crossbars of
that tank--always supposing I do not take the liberty of cheating the
hangman by making away with myself."

He began to feel jaded, and people saw changes in him, and asked him if
he was quite well. When not racked by dread or torn by remorse, a
strange languor fell upon him, and he could not rouse himself to do
anything not absolutely necessary.

In these languid moments he would think to himself: "I have been
over-trained by crime, and I am not capable of fighting as of old."

The first day he called at the Castle after meeting his mother there,
Maud could not be seen. She sent down Mrs. Grant to say she hoped Mr.
Grey would excuse her, as she had a headache, and Mrs. Grant had
recommended her to keep to her room.

This was an agreeable disappointment. He had come to the Island and
requested he might see Maud, not as a matter of liking at the moment,
but as part of a scheme of self-protection laid down when full of life
and vigour, and now carried out with diminished forces.

He formally examined the work upon which the men were engaged, and took
an early leave of the Island.

A meeting with Maud that day would have been too much for him. He did
not feel equal to urging his suit; allusion might have been made to his
manner on the last occasion, and he felt he could not carry off the
fiction of the imaginary dispute of the will with a hand sufficiently
light and firm.

He had now a vague fear--it went beyond fear, and assumed the settled
form of conviction--that his explanation of his violence had not
satisfied Maud. She might really have been indisposed, but of old so
slight an indisposition as headache would not have excluded him from her
presence. He was quite sure Maud had told him the truth, and that his
mother had divulged nothing prejudicial to him. But this was not all.
His mother may have divulged nothing, and yet his manner, his terror at
the sight of her, his violence when she had gone, and his subsequent
statement that litigation was not impossible, might have created an
impression not to be removed easily from the mind of the girl.

He allowed a few days more to elapse before calling again.

Mrs. Grant came to him and said Miss Midharst was so miserably wretched
and unwell she must ask Mr. Grey to be good enough to excuse her not
receiving him.

"I have been very unfortunate with Miss Midharst of late," said the
banker, with a smile to the little widow.

"She is so nervous and excitable," said Mrs. Grant, who seemed uneasy
and disconcerted.

"Until quite lately I have had the pleasure of seeing Miss Midharst
daily. I have not been able to come here so often as of old, and when I
do come I am so unfortunate as to find Miss Midharst laid up." There was
complaint in his tone.

Mrs. Grant felt exceedingly awkward. Maud had told her of Mr. Grey's
extraordinary conduct at their last interview. At her suggestion Maud
had written to Sir William and avoided an interview with the banker.
Maud had had a headache when he called last, but it was not bad enough
to prevent her seeing him if nothing unusual had happened. To-day she
was not unusually nervous, but she dreaded an interview with the banker
so much she became hysterical when his name had been announced. Still
Mrs. Grant's old feeling for Mr. Grey could not be put aside in a
minute, and now that she was face to face with him who had been so
useful and so kind, and found him complaining of exclusion from the
presence of her over whose fortunes the dead baronet had made him
guardian, she felt powerless and wretched. She said, in an unsteady
voice and confused manner:

"I am sure I am very sorry you should have been twice disappointed in
seeing Miss Midharst. It is unfortunate. But I hope you will not think
she intends any disrespect to you. I know nothing is further from her
thoughts."

Grey took the widow's hand gently in his. He felt conscious he was not
as strong as formerly. He had now no friend in the world. A woman, a
widow, had been his greatest friend. He knew Mrs. Grant meant him well.

"Mrs. Grant," he said, "I am sure I have a sincere friend in you."

"I am sure you have," she answered tremulously.

"Will you do me a great favour?"

"There is no one in the world, except Maud, for whom I would so soon do
all I can," she said earnestly.

"You will be candid with me, I know. You will be candid with me because
you could not be otherwise with anyone, and you will answer my question
as a favour?"

"If I can I will; you may rely upon that."

"I knew I was right. My question is: Has anything occurred to make Miss
Midharst disinclined to meet me?"

"She is not very well."

"You were good enough to tell me that some time ago. My question has
reference to something else. Has anything of a personal nature occurred
to make Miss Midharst disinclined to meet me?"

"You know, Mr. Grey, that when Sir William was here Maud made a promise
to him."

"Yes. That she would look upon him as her personal guardian. Is it to
that you refer?"

"It is. I believe Miss Midharst wishes to consult her cousin on some
subject of importance. She has written to him."

"And will not receive me until she gets his reply? Is that what I am to
understand, Mrs. Grant?" Grey's voice quavered, and his whole body
shook. How had that letter escaped him?

"I do not think Maud will be quite strong enough to see you for a few
days more."

"That is, until she hears from her cousin?"

"Until she sees him."

"_Sees him!_ What do you mean?"

"She wrote him, asking him to come back, if he could."

"That is not true. I never saw the letter," he whispered.

"Yes. She wrote him the day she saw you last, and he is coming back. He
has telegraphed to her saying so."

"The day she saw me last! The day I met another woman talking to her."

"Yes."

"Was it at the suggestion of that woman she wrote for Sir William to
come home?"

"No; that lady did not, as far as I can hear, mention Sir William's
name."

"And that was the day," said Grey, letting fall Mrs. Grant's hand and
pressing it against his throbbing forehead--"that was the day I forgot
the bag. How soon is Sir Alexander expected here?"

"Sir William, you mean."

"Ah, yes; Sir William I mean, of course. I forgot--I forgot!"

"We don't know exactly when he may be here, but he will certainly not be
longer than a fortnight."

"And between this and then Miss Midharst will not see me?"

He had still his hand on his brow. She did not answer.

Without taking any further notice of her he walked feebly out of the
room. For an hour he wandered aimlessly about the Castle grounds. There
were men at work, but he took no notice of them. When it grew dusk he
crossed over in a boat to the mainland, and set out to walk home.

The cool air and the walking gradually improved his tone, and little by
little he became familiar with the new aspect of affairs. He was
conscious of mental indifference, weakness, or numbness--he did not know
exactly what it was. Thoughts and ideas and things had lost half their
values to him. He felt like a man who wakes for the first time in a
prison where he is to pass his life, only the prisoner's heart is
afflicted with the memory of a better past. Grey, as he walked along,
did not once turn his eyes back. He kept them fixed rigidly forward.

In the immediate future he saw he should lose all influence at the
Castle. The moment Sir William came home his suspicions would be
aroused. He would make inquiries, and find not a single shilling of Sir
Alexander's money in the books of the Bank of England.

Then would come ruin and death, or death and ruin--put it either way. He
was beaten. He confessed it to himself. Discovery could not be three
weeks off. There was no loophole--no means of escape. The days of
abduction were dead and buried long ago. He could not carry Maud away
forcibly and marry her. He had, by law, no control over her person. She
would not see him until Sir William's return. Most likely she was acting
under the young man's advice in not seeing him.

A month ago he was keener, and would have felt angry at the interference
of this young man and the stubbornness of this girl; but he was past all
that now. He was beaten, beaten beyond all hope of retrieving his
fortune. His life was forfeit. His name would be branded for ever in the
town where it had been almost worshipped for years.

And when he had died by his own hand, and all had been discovered, his
mother, a wanderer on the land, would, as she sank into a pauper's
grave, learn the enormity of his crime, and call out that the sin of
having brought such a monster into the world might be taken away from
her in consideration of the wrongs he had done her.

No! no! no! Ten thousand times No! His mother should never hear the
awful words: "Henry Walter Grey found guilty of Wife Murder," or,
"Discovery of the body of Mrs. Henry Walter Grey, with a history of her
murder by her husband."

No; that must never be. But how was he to prevent it? Only one way
remained.

If he could hide the embezzlement, he could hide the murder. There was
now only one way of hiding the fraud: he must throw himself on the mercy
of Miss Midharst and her cousin. The moment Sir William returned, he
should make a full confession. While there is life there is hope, and
that was not a foolish hope. Sir William was young and chivalric. Sir
William would listen to his prayer and show mercy.




CHAPTER VIII.

"I AM HE. FIRE."


The morning after Grey had been at the Castle, he awoke cold and
depressed. The magnitude of the misfortune just come upon him was more
apparent than the evening before. Up to yesterday he had been fighting
to defeat the past and render the future glorious. Henceforth all
thought of glory must be cast aside, and the struggle conducted solely
with a view to prevent fatal disgrace. He had lost the stake, and ran a
grave risk of losing his life. He had been playing against Sir William
Midharst. Now he was playing against the hangman.

The day of the baronet's return was not known. The young man must pass
through Daneford on his way to the Castle. More than likely he would
call at the "Warfinger Hotel," to leave his luggage there before setting
out for the Island.

Grey went to the "Warfinger Hotel," saw the landlord, told him Sir
William was expected home; and requested him to send instantly to the
Bank word of the baronet's arrival.

He felt queer to-day. That old sensation of everything being far away
and of little interest to him had come back upon him fourfold. He went
through the routine business of the Bank with as little interest as a
copying-clerk. He signed papers without reading them, and did not
understand those he read.

And now day after day the banker lived without change or adventure. All
his life he had been a man of action, a leader, and now he was wearily
waiting, waiting in weak hope haunted by fierce terrors. He felt his
physical health declining under the ordeal, but he had no alternative.

At last one afternoon, as he was sitting alone in his private office a
messenger came from the "Warfinger Hotel" announcing the return of Sir
William. The baronet had just arrived and ordered luncheon, so that in
all likelihood he would be at the hotel for an hour or two.

Grey rose heavily and walked to the hotel with a misgiving heart. He
carried in his hand his small black bag.

What reason had he to think this young man would take a merciful view of
the case? All his pride was gone now, except the pride in a good name he
did not deserve. He would crawl on his knees in private to this young
man, rather than lower his front a jot before the public. If he could
win over this young man he might save his name. It was not the hangman
he dreaded most. It was not death. It was the groans and execrations of
people over whom he once held imperial sway, and by whom he had been
regarded as the high-priest of humanity and justice.

When he arrived at the hotel, he sent in his card and was instantly
admitted.

The young man fixed his dark dreamy eyes upon the other as he entered,
rose slowly from his chair, and held out his hand freely, saying:

"I am very much obliged to you for calling. I wanted to see you
particularly."

This was unexpected. Grey thought Sir William would refuse to meet him
until after a visit to the Castle. What did the young man know? Grey
said:

"I have to speak to you on a very important matter indeed, and I would
wish to speak to you about it at once."

"I am quite at your service for an hour. Sit down. You are not looking
as well as I should like to see so good a friend."

"Friend!" sighed Grey. "Don't use that word again until I have
finished."

A quick look of present interest came into the dreamy eyes. The baronet
said: "I am ready to hear."

"I have been told by Mrs. Grant that you have come home to consult with
Miss Midharst about some important matter--I do not know what, and I do
not seek to know. Before you see Miss Midharst, I want to say to you
some words of the deepest importance, and I want you to permit me
to--lock the door." He was grave and collected in manner, and as he said
the last words he waved his hand softly towards the door.

"You may lock the door," said Sir William, taking an easy-chair, and
relapsing into his dreamy manner.

The banker walked slowly to the door, locked it deliberately, and then
came back to the window at which the young man was sitting. Then he sat
down on a chair opposite Sir William, having placed his bag on a small
table that stood between them.

The day was bright and clear. Past the wall of the hotel through which
that window looked ran the Weeslade. It was ebb tide, and now and then
down the river shot a small boat or glided a barge, while from the upper
wharves came the sound of chains and tackles, and the hoarse hoot of the
steamboat blowing off steam.

For a few seconds Grey sat silent, resting his head upon his hand. At
last he spoke:

"You have been asked to come back from Egypt to give advice to Miss
Midharst on some subject of importance. You are by your relationship
with her, and by her own agreement with you, the guardian of her person.
I am by the will of her father the guardian of her fortune. _Yours_ is a
precious trust."

Grey paused here to give the young man an opportunity of saying
something. Sir William merely said: "That is so."

"What I have further to say to you," continued Grey, "is in the nature,
Sir William, of a confession. A confession so degrading and humiliating,
that I have debated a thousand times whether I should make it or put an
end to my life."

"I am sincerely glad you adopted the alternative of confiding in me."

"Sir William, what do you consider the greatest calamity which could
befall Miss Midharst?"

"Really I have not thought of such a question, and could not answer it
off-hand."

"What would you do to the man who behaved in an unscrupulous manner to
Miss Midharst?"

Suddenly the young man lost his languid manner, sat bolt upright in his
chair, looked with a strong present interest in his eyes at the banker,
and demanded sharply: "What do you mean?"

Grey raised his head, and for the first time the eyes of the two men
met.

"A terrible injury, an irreparable injury; who had inflicted upon her an
injury so great that the sacrifice of his life could not atone for it,
not the devotion of a lifetime undo it?"

"Shoot him. Where is he?"

Grey opened the black bag, took out the revolver, and holding the muzzle
pointed at his own breast, handed it to the baronet, saying: "I am he.
Fire."

The young man sprang to his feet, seized the revolver, and keeping the
banker covered with it, said thickly through his clenched teeth: "A
moment. Wait a moment."

For some seconds there was neither motion nor word. The one man stood
over the other, the revolver in his hand, his finger on the trigger.

"I have thought of Maud until I am ready to shoot you here. Now speak.
What was it?"

"She is a beggar."

"How?"

"I have stolen all her fortune. I sold out the Consols and used the
money. The money is all gone."

"Have you confessed all?"

"Yes; all."

"And are you ready to die for that?"

"I am."

"There is nothing for you to add about Maud?"

"No. I have told you all candidly."

The young man seized Grey by the throat, and pulled him upon his feet.
For a moment he swayed the banker to and fro.

"Not this. Fire if you are a man. Not this."

"Damnation seize you for a fool! You terrified me about nothing." He
flung Grey violently from him.

"About nothing! I told you all her money is gone."

"And when did I tell you I wanted her money?"

"You never said anything to me about it."

"You are a fool, sir, and have terrified me for nothing."

Sir William stooped down, picked up the revolver, which had fallen from
his hand in the scuffle, and raising the window quietly dropped it into
the Weeslade. Then turning to the banker he said:

"Who knows of this?"

"Only you and I and my mother."

"That is true, is it?"

"It is."

"Miss Midharst has no suspicion of it?"

"Not the slightest. Only three people on earth know it. The three I have
named."

"Keep the secret where it is, and meet me here to-morrow at noon. I
shall then let you know what I intend doing."




CHAPTER IX.

BANKER AND BARONET.


Next noon, as appointed, Grey called at the "Warfinger Hotel" and saw
Sir William. The interview was a brief one. Sir William informed the
banker he had made up his mind to only one thing so far, namely, to keep
the secret and do nothing for a month or two. "This looks very like
compounding a felony," said the young man, "but I am prepared to take
that risk."

Grey went away respited. It was a great relief nothing was to be done at
once, but when something came to be done what would it be? That was the
question which followed Grey day and night, waking and sleeping, through
two long weary months. One qualifying fact operated greatly in his
favour: day after day he lost susceptibility. Something was happening
which dulled his sense of danger or exposure. He had begun to forget
more and more, and it was only on rare occasions he had a clear and
well-defined idea of his position. He had a weak conviction Sir William
would not have him prosecuted, but what would the young man do?

But if the tyranny of the theft had lost its poignancy, he had two
fiercer troubles left.

Every old broken-down woman he met in the street was his mother. By day
he met his mother a thousand times; she crawled close to the wall, she
had sold all her clothes for bread, she had worn out her boots, and her
bare feet, her poor old bare feet, touched the cold wet streets. If he
took up a paper his eye fell on some paragraph relating to the death in
great misery of an old woman over seventy who had seen better days.

But it was when the twilight had died, and all the land lay in the dark
trance of night, the prime actor in his mental disaster entered on the
scene.

In order that he might marry Maud and so cover up his robbery, he had
taken upon him the awful burden of blood. Now Maud had slipped through
his grasp, and there was a chance his theft might still remain
undisclosed. What was his position with regard to the deed of the
seventeenth of August? If the warm-breathing body of his wife were by
his side he should be in no worse position.

When the dusk came down upon the earth, when the fields lay under the
shadow of the wings of ill angels, the warm and breathing body of his
wife was not at his side, but there, no matter where he might sit, was
the clammy cold thing he had left that night on the top of the Tower of
Silence. It lay in passage and hall, and in the dining-room it was
always stiff and stark behind his chair, where he could not see it, but
whence the clammy chill radiating from it reached his back and froze his
spirit.

That was not the worst, for it was vague; not the figure of his wife so
much as that of the victim of murder. Over one shoulder, he knew not
which, came that face, not now calm and passionless as before, but full
of love and tender reproach, an expression in which the love
out-measured the reproach ten thousand-fold. It was this new look of old
love made him shut his fists, and grind his teeth, and sob and groan.

From the ghastly caverns of night's silence whispers of her voice came
to him pleading for mercy.

"Do not, for God's sake, Wat, do not send me in my sin before my Maker!"

These awful whispers made him start and stare, and caused the cold sweat
to start from all the pores of his body.

Then followed night and dreams. When he awoke after dreams he always
thought the dreaming worse than waking. When he sought his bed at night
he prayed for dreams as a relief. In the privacy of his own room, and in
the still deeper privacy of dreams, he was always in her presence when
the rustle of her dress made his pulses thicken with joy.

These dreams were his only resting-places. But, unfortunately, not only
did they not last always, but towards the end of each it changed and
died in an awful sense of unascertainable disaster. Something had
happened to his love, something so hideous and unheard of, that not man
or woman, beast or stone, would tell him the secret. With a great shout
he awoke, sprang out of bed to seek for his love through all the world,
tore open the door, and found his murdered wife lying across the
threshold, and upon his hands her blood.

Day by day the influence of these terrors wrought on Grey until his eyes
grew dim, his hands palsied, his gait feeble, and his mind dull. He
forgot oftener now than formerly. In the midst of business transactions
he would stop suddenly, put his hand to his head, mutter a few
incoherent words, cease speaking for a while, and then exclaim
piteously: "I have forgotten something! I have forgotten something!"

All who came in contact with him saw he was breaking down. They said:

"Poor Grey loved his wife so deeply, so tenderly, he is losing his
reason for loss of her."

This popular verdict was not only a great cause of drawing sympathy
towards the widower, but almost wholly washed away the stain which had
smirched his dead wife's name. For those who had heard of her failing,
and believed it fact, now asked themselves:

"How could any man care for a woman so afflicted? How could any man wear
away his life in sorrow for the loss of an intemperate wife?"

The evening Grey first visited Sir William Midharst at the "Warfinger
Hotel" the young man went to the Castle and had a long talk with Maud,
in which she told him of Grey's extraordinary conduct on the occasion of
the unknown old woman's visit. She did not tell him she suspected the
banker had been trying to make himself more than agreeable to her. He
did not say anything to her of the scene between the banker and himself
at the "Warfinger." He heard all Maud had to say to him without comment
beyond expressions of surprise.

"I know the whole secret," he thought, "but I must have time to think
out the situation before I decide on a course of action. When I have
considered all the points I shall not be slow to move."

As he was going down a corridor after saying good-night to Maud Mrs.
Grant overtook him.

She said: "How can you account for Mr. Grey's conduct, Sir William? I
cannot understand it at all. Of course Maud told you all. You do not
think his manner of wooing likely to win?"

"His manner of wooing! I was told nothing of his wooing. Did he make
love to Maud?"

"Ah, did she not tell you. I suppose the poor child felt it might not
be delicate to mention the matter. He has been making downright love to
her. She told me all about it. That's the extraordinary part of the
thing; he has been making love to her, and then he breaks out into that
violent manner all at once. Acting, indeed! I don't believe a word of
it."

"So," thought Sir William to himself, as he went home to his hotel, "I
did not know the whole secret, but I think I have it all now. Of course,
if he married Maud he need say nothing about the money. It's all gone,
no doubt. A man would not tell such a lie and offer to back it up with a
bullet. Let me see now. My return has forced his hand. He saw he had no
chance of winning Maud. What a preposterous idea to think of his making
love to my angel Maud! What insolent presumption! Poor Maud a beggar
through his means! It is well I am not. I suppose we can live on the old
estate as the Midharsts have done for generations before us. I am full
of hope. I am drunk with the belief Maud shall be mine. I think she is
glad I am back, and will be glad to see me every day. Fancy seeing Maud
every day from this out! Fancy being permitted to take her hand, and to
feel that hand on my arm! Fancy being able to say 'Maud' a thousand
times a day to herself and not to an image of her. Oh, Maud, my
beautiful, be with me for ever as the flowers are with summer.

"What shall I do with this scoundrel Grey? He was very nearly too deep
for me. He imposed on me, but that is all over now. What am I to do with
him? If he is prosecuted there will be worry, and the past will be gone
into, and the peculiarities of Sir Alexander, among other things his
hatred of me and the, let me say, friendship between his daughter and
me.

"They might call Maud, these lawyers have no taste, no sense of
propriety. Think of putting Maud in the box and cross-examining her,
and--yes, by Heavens, some of those legal bullies might be ungentle to
my lily sweet Maud.

"What a wonderful thing Maud's hand is. It is like the moon, always the
same, and yet you can't be in sight of it without looking at it often.

"But this scoundrel Grey. I wish I were done with him. I have given up
all taste for affairs and difficulties. I am become bucolic. Suppose he
is prosecuted we can't get the money back, for such a prosecution would
shut up his Bank. We should have all the trouble and worry for nothing.
Then what is the object of prosecuting the scoundrel?

"It is strange about Maud's hand. I thought as I looked at it this
evening that if I were dying of wounds on a battle-field, parched with
that last terrible thirst, and Maud came and put her hand on my
forehead, the thirst would leave me. I know it would.

"But about Grey?

"Yes. Isn't it too bad that when I have Maud to think about this
wretched Grey should thrust himself in between Maud and me. I wish the
devil would take Grey. He'll want that bland burglar sometime, and he'd
oblige me greatly by taking him now.

"What a beautiful thing Maud's ear is. While I was looking at it
to-night I found out why when I speak to her I seem to pray; it is
because I know my words must reach the spirit of a saint.

"But here is this Grey. I am to meet him to-morrow and let him know my
decision. I wish the devil would take him now, or Heaven would inspire
me what to do with him. If the money had been mine I should before going
to bed to-night sign a receipt for the full amount, send the receipt to
him, and beg of him never to allude to the matter again.

"If the money was mine!

"Ah! That is a thought worth considering twice.

"If I marry Maud the supposititious money will be mine. I don't want the
money if I could get it, and I can't get it, or any of it, if I wanted
it. The prosecution would involve nothing but trouble and worry.

"Come, on the day I marry Maud, I'll give him a clear receipt for it!
But I'll put him off for a couple of months and then tell him.

"If all the rest of the world were mine on the day I marry Maud, and it
would save her worry not to take it, I should pass it by.

"My gentle Maud, you are the infinite sum of all my earthly hopes to
which nothing can be added, from which nothing can be taken away."




CHAPTER X.

GREY REMEMBERS.


Grey sat in his breakfast-room turning over his letters. Suddenly his
eyes fell on one and remained fixed on it.

"At last," he thought, "at last I am to hear something of her, of my
poor old mother. Whatever this tells me is all I am likely ever to know
of her until I die. To-night I cut off for ever my connection with the
career of Wat Grey. To-day Wat Grey departs this life of Daneford."

He broke the envelope and found these unsigned, undated words:

"Through the kindness of some honest friends of your honest father I am
now in a London almshouse, so I am fully provided for. I think it only
right you should know this. I have seen by the papers that Sir William
Midharst will, the morning you get this, marry Miss Midharst. I handed
that lady all I had in the world to the last penny. I do not know how
you have evaded discovery so long. But follow my example, and give back
to the robbed all you have left in the world. These are my last words to
you."

He put down the letter, sighed, and muttered:

"An ungracious final leave-taking, mother, an ungracious farewell. The
giving back forms no part of my plan. Sir William would not touch a
penny. You yourself will relent and be sorrowful when you hear of this
day's events, for they will get into the papers as well as the marriage
of Sir William. The newspapers will have the marriage paragraph, and
then one headed, 'Shocking Death of Mr. Henry Walter Grey.'

"No, mother, I must save my name and save my reputation, and both can be
best preserved by sacrificing Wat Grey. Wat Grey must go to keep his
name good. There is no need he should really die. It will be quite
enough if he change his habitation and his name.

"I am not strong enough to fight it out any longer. I cannot leave this
house as it is, and this house is killing me. It is killing me slowly
with its awful sights and sounds and memories. I must, I will fly. This
very night I shall leave it for ever, and I shall leave it incapable of
telling any tales.

"At one blow I shall destroy its sights, and its sounds, and its
memories, and cut myself off from it, Daneford, and the past for ever.
I shall get rid of all the burden I bear. I shall break away from all my
old associations, all things to remind me of the past. With twenty
thousand pounds in my pocket, and the whole breadth of sunny France
between me and this place, I shall be at ease. They may charge my memory
with the crime of theft, but I shall leave evidence of my innocence
behind me. Farleg may come back and accuse my name of murder; but he
will have neither Wat Grey nor evidence against Wat Grey, for Wat Grey
and the evidence against him will disappear together, and I will live a
quiet life beyond the Alps or the Pyrenees."

He leant back in his chair and reviewed his preparations with the
deliberate complaisance of one whose plans were unassailable.

"Yes, everything so far is arranged. I have the money. I have the
letter written to Aldridge, saying I enclose Sir William's
acknowledgment for the amount of Consols converted into cash at his
request, and handed to him on this the day of his wedding with Miss
Midharst. I also tell Aldridge I send him this to put in the
strong-room, as I shall not go into town to-morrow, but stay at home
attending to some final business connected with the Midharst affairs. I
have paid all the small legacies, and made investments to yield the
annuities. For two months I have been sleeping in the tower-room, so
that no one will expect me to sleep anywhere else. I have got that
rope-ladder ready to hook on the bar of the back window, and the piece
of twine rove through the hook to unship the ladder when I am down safe
on the ground. Once I am on the ground I start on my way to France, and
I walk to-night at the burial of the past. There can be no hitch.
Things must run smooth. To-morrow I shall be free! Free!"

He stood up and looked around him triumphantly. Suddenly his face grew
pale and expressionless. He pressed his hand to his forehead, his lips
opened feebly, and he muttered:

"I have forgotten something! I have forgotten something!"

He dropped down in his chair, and for a few minutes his face did not
alter. All at once the natural look came back. He rose again, shook
himself briskly, and said:

"Another of those half-fainting fits I have been free from so long. They
were worst when my mind was most tortured. Of late I have been almost
free from them. They will disappear altogether when I get south, and
to-morrow at this hour I shall be out of bondage."

It was now time to set out for the Castle. It had been arranged that he
should attend and give away the bride. "If I am not present," said the
banker to Sir William, "there will be no end of remarks made, and if I
do attend it will be as Miss Midharst's guardian, in which capacity,
there being no relative, I ought to give away the bride." And Sir
William, seeing no harm in this, and wanting to avert comment as much as
possible, consented.

A full year had not elapsed since the death of Sir Alexander, but
several considerations beyond the impatience of the baronet made it
desirable the wedding should take place at once.

Maud was alone in the world and had no protector but him. She was in
mourning, and objected to go to London and be brought out so soon after
her father's death. The Castle was lonely and dreary. They were engaged
to be married, and it could make no difference to anyone, and could be
no offence against the puny laws of society, if they got married within
the year and lived quietly at the Castle until the time of mourning had
passed. Then they could go to London. They should know very few people
at first, but that would soon be altered.

So the marriage had been fixed to take place on Wednesday the 8th of
August, 1877.

The wedding was to be strictly private. No one was to be present but
Mrs. Grant and Mr. Grey. The ceremony was to be performed by the rector,
and the tenants were informed that the bride and bridegroom desired no
demonstration of any kind.

After the ceremony Sir William and Lady Midharst were to return to the
Castle, where no unusual preparation would be made to receive them.

This simple programme was carried out without let or accident. Grey and
the baronet drove from Daneford, Maud and Mrs. Grant from the Castle, to
the quiet country church, where the rector performed the short service
by request. In the vestry Sir William handed Grey an envelope containing
something. He said, "This is it, Grey." No more.

From the church the four drove back to Island Ferry. Here Grey bade the
party good-bye. Sir William in saying good-bye added, under his breath,
so that no one but Grey heard him, "for ever." Grey echoes the "for
ever" in his heart, but took no further notice of the supplement to the
farewell.

The banker then drove back to the Manor House.

"My last visit to the Castle," he thought, as he swept up the
carriage-drive. "My last entry into the Manor House. To-day I bid a
life-long adieu to the Weird Sisters. I am not sorry. I am over weary
and want rest. I have allowed nothing to stand between me and ambition.
I have lost the game and now I want only peace. What I have done cannot
be undone. In a new climate, among new people, the past, the Weird
Sisters, the Towers of Silence, and the story of my tower will fade into
the background, and the things of the seventeenth of August will become
as vague and shadowy to my mind as the story of the Spanish lady whose
bones were found on the top of the tower in Warfinger Castle."

He had many things to arrange at the Manor that day, and had determined
not to go to the Bank. He opened the envelope Sir William had given him,
and found in it what he had been promised: a receipt in full for claims
upon him in settlement of Miss Midharst's money. This receipt he put
into the letter he had ready written for Aldridge and posted it. There
had been trouble about the marriage settlement, but as Grey was
guardian, and the baronet knew all about the money, things had gone
smoothly in the end.

He spent most of the remainder of the day in the library looking through
various books and accounts, but having slight interest in them. The day
before a girl marries she cannot take a very lively interest in the
gardener's work at her father's house. She is going to wear another
name, break from old associations, and take up her residence in a new
home. By to-morrow Grey would have changed his name, broken from old
associations, and taken up his residence in a new home.

Day grew on and at last dinner-hour arrived. He was too much excited to
eat; he played with a cutlet, and drank three glasses of marvellous
brown sherry for which he was famous. After dinner, although he rarely
touched spirits, he had a glass of brandy-and-water with his cigar.

At eight o'clock he rang for coffee. When James came with it he said: "I
am going to bed soon. I shall not require you or any of the others again
to-night. I shall want breakfast half an hour earlier than usual in the
morning, at eight o'clock. Call me at five minutes to seven. I am not
going to town to-morrow, but shall stay at home all day. Good-night."

Grey waited a few minutes to give James time to get out of hearing. Then
he rose, and took his way to the room he had slept in of late, the first
floor of the Tower of Silence.

It was now half-past eight.

"In half an hour I shall be free," he exclaimed rapturously to himself,
as he turned up the gas.

He shook the thick shutters of the window to ascertain that they were
secure. He lit a candle, went up those hideous stairs to the first
floor, bolted the shutters on the front window there and the shutters on
the landing window.

"I do not want the neighbours to see it too soon or they might come and
_rescue_ me." He chuckled at the idea of being rescued, and descended to
the storey beneath. On the landing here the window stood open. He looked
out. All was still below. None of his household had ever occasion to go
to the rear of the house after nightfall. No stranger could approach the
house at the rear unless by passing through that hideous grove.

The night was calm and dark and still. "Nothing could be better,"
thought Grey, as he fixed the hooks of a ladder of ropes to an iron bar
of the small balcony, and ascertained that the twine by which these
hooks were to be unshipped ran freely through the ring screwed into the
window-frame.

"All's well," he thought. "Now be quick!"

Going back again into the first-floor room, he rapidly took off his
black frock-coat, light trousers, and waistcoat, and put on a
tight-fitting corduroy suit, a pair of false whiskers and moustaches,
and a low round hat.

When this was done he looked in the glass, and started back with a
shout. "By Jove!" cried he, after a moment; "I thought all was lost. I
thought my own reflection was another man's! I _am_ already another man.
I feel it in every fibre. No one who knew me, and thinks I am dead,
would recognise me. I might walk down the streets of Daneford
to-morrow, and talk about my own sad end to my most intimate friend, and
he would not recognise me. The Daneford Bank would open an account for
me to-morrow in the name of Grey, and observe no likeness between their
new customer and their old master. I am a new man already. I feel new
blood in all my veins, new sinews in all my limbs; the nightmare of the
past is vanishing; I shall sleep now of nights, and whistle once more
while I dress of mornings. Ten thousand times better this feeling than
all the pomp my ambition longed for with the canker and the care."

He took from the pocket of the coat he had removed a small packet,
thinking: "All I want is the money. Twenty thousand pounds will be a
large fortune in either Spain or Italy."

He threw the clothes he had worn on the bed, opened the cupboard, and
took out one after another four cans. Two of these he emptied over his
own bed, one on the floor and furniture, and one on the landing and
first flight of the stairs. Turpentine!

He then threw the four cans on the bed, wrenched off the gas-brackets
and set fire to the gas at the ends of the broken pipes.

He cast one hasty glance round.

"All right!"

He struck a match and held it to the saturated bed.

A little spirt of flame shot out of the counterpane to the match. The
spirt of flame then fell back and spread slowly until it formed a spire
as large as a pine-cone.

Grey backed to the door and seized the handle.

From that cone flashed twenty javelins of light this way and that. The
air of the room sobbed, and a solid mass of white flame stood up over
that bed.

Swiftly opening the door Grey sprang out, and shut the door leading to
the landing. A second he stood there, threw up his hands, and cried in a
husky voice:

"Saved!"

He looked out of the window.

"All right."

He put his hand on the iron bar.

"Quite firm."

Suddenly he drew back. Had he seen anyone below?

No.

He put his hand on his breast.

"The money is here," he whispered to himself, "but I have forgotten
something. What is it?" A few seconds passed and he yelled: "I know! I
know! What I forgot is on the roof."

With furious speed he dashed up the noisome stairs.

As he did so there arose a soft flapping sound at the door on the
landing, and a lazy serpent of white flame crawled across the landing
and climbed up the stairs.

       *       *       *       *       *

A sweetheart of one of the maid-servants, leaving the Manor House by the
side door at half-past nine, saw fire issuing from the window on the
first floor of the tower, ran back to the servants' hall, and gave the
alarm.

By that time the fire raged madly, rioting on the parched woodwork of
the staircase and the dry joists and planks of the floors. The staircase
was a cavern of white flame. In front of the glare rushed a fierce
column of black suffocating smoke. Twice already had a man tried to
force his way down, and twice had he been driven back before the
scalding vapour. Now he crouched on the roof in the corner furthest from
the tank.

By ten a small crowd had assembled and he could hear men at work. The
roof was getting hot; now and then the opening from the staircase panted
forth a cloud of sparks.

"If they see me they will try to save me. They will come here, find out
all, and save me--for the gallows. Better the fire."

He crouched closer and held his breath lest they should hear him
breathe. He had no memory of how he came to that roof. He must have
rushed there in one of those unconscious moments.

At half-past ten red tongues began to issue from the opening in the
roof.

By a quarter to eleven the weight of the tank told on the sapped roof.
That portion showed signs of subsidence.

Still the man crouched low, his eyes now fixed in agonised expectation
on the tank.

The man on the roof heard the clocks of Daneford strike eleven. Just
then the tank trembled, swayed a moment, then shot downward with a roar.
Up the hole made by it danced a cloud of flame.

The man on the roof sprang to his feet, and with a shout leaped on the
parapet crying:

"Help! Help! For God's sake, help!"

With that tank the evidence against him had vanished.

A groan came up from the people below, and then a cheer.

"The fire-escape is coming. Have courage!"

Shading his eyes with his hands he looked in the direction of the lodge,
and saw approaching by the carriage-way the fire-escape.

"Help! Quick!"

"Courage, Wat! We will save you!"

Another crash. Something warm struck his back. He turned round. All the
roof was gone now. He looked into a pool of flame.

A fiercer blow than the former. Sight gone. Head giddy. Ah!

They saw the flame touch him; they saw him thrust his arms before his
face. They saw him sway, and fall into the crater.

They knew he had lost his life in the tower that night, but they never
knew that tower was the tomb of husband and wife.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, Maud, as we are not leaving home for our honeymoon, and there is
only one place in the Castle where you have never been--the top of the
Tower of Silence, suppose we take lanterns and go there for an hour. I
am curious to see this historic tower, this Weird Sister dowered with a
legend of blood. You are not afraid to go."

"I should like to go. There is nothing I would like better. It will be
an adventure."

When they were there he said: "I am glad we came. We are promised a
glorious view presently. There is the moon rising."

"The moon does not rise there. It rises here," pointing.

"Then there must be a fire."

"That is the direction of the Manor House----."


THE END.

CHARLES DICKENS AND EVANS, GREAT NEW STREET, FETTER LANE, E.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE.

Now ready, at every Library in the Kingdom,

THE MYSTERY OF KILLARD.

A New Novel.

By RICHARD DOWLING,

AUTHOR OF "THE WEIRD SISTERS." In Three Vols.

     "A noticeable book; it contrives to arouse and maintain interest
     with a very small number of incidents and personages, dramatically
     handled. Hugo might in his younger days, and before he had learnt
     the fatal lesson of setting his own personality above the claims of
     art and reason, have given us such pictures."--_Academy._

     "All things being taken in consideration, it may be pronounced a
     decided success ... This work alone would have been enough to have
     established the author's claim to a place amongst the first of
     living writers of exciting fiction of the more intense
     kind."--_Morning Post._

     "Full of dramatic action. Clever delineations of strongly
     contrasted human eccentricities, interwoven with which is a
     love-story of singular freshness."--_Illustrated London News._

     "The nature of the novel is indeed uncommonly fine."--_World._

     "Novels are so apt to belie their name by running in the most
     well-worn of ruts, and by exhibiting a striking deficiency of
     novelty, that we welcome with special eagerness any outcome of real
     imaginative invention; and the conception of the original
     situation, the nature of which is sufficiently indicated here,
     amply proves that Mr. Dowling possesses a large measure of genuine
     creative power."--_Spectator._

     "There is not a single bit of 'good society' in the whole book, an
     omission for which readers may well be thankful. The story is kept
     mysterious with success."--_Athenaeum._

     "The novel is unquestionably powerful, well written, true to the
     life which it describes, and eminently pure and healthy in
     tone."--_Globe._

     "Mr. Dowling has wisely avoided the footsteps of his predecessors,
     and has given us a powerfully realistic picture of the wild
     unexplored beauty of the coast of Clare and its inhabitants, not
     relying upon such poor phrases as 'begorra' and 'bedad' for humour.
     The characters are well drawn, the descriptions are almost
     photographic, and the story is vigorously written."--_Whitehall
     Review._

     "He has given us a book to 'read,' and one we can commend to all
     who care for a realistic picture without the too common trash
     associated with the ordinary novel."--_Examiner._

     "Is a psychological study. The style is all that it should be:
     simple, graphic, and at times powerful. We have not read a novel
     with so much pleasure for a long time."--_John Bull._

     "_A book to read and be thankful for. It will be a day to be marked
     by a white stone when Mr. Dowling gives us another
     novel._"--STANDARD.

       *       *       *       *       *

TINSLEY BROTHERS' NEW NOVELS.

BY THE AUTHOR OF "A LONDON SEASON."

COUNTY PEOPLE. By Mrs. PENDER CUDLIP, author of "A London Season,"
"Denis Donne," &c. 3 vols.


BY THE AUTHOR OF "PRETTY MISS BELLEW."

A GARDEN OF GIRLS. By THEO. GIFT, author of "Pretty Miss Bellew," "True
to her Trust," "Maid Ellice," &c. 3 vols.


BY THE AUTHOR OF "A WOMAN SCORNED."

MOLLY CAREW. A New Novel. By E. OWENS BLACKBURN, author of "Illustrious
Irishwomen," "A Woman Scorned," &c. 3 vols.


BY THE AUTHOR OF "WILD GEORGIE."

SEALED BY A KISS. By JEAN MIDDLEMASS, author of "Mr. Dorillion," "Wild
Georgie," &c. 3 vols.


BY THE AUTHOR OF "JENNIE OF 'THE PRINCE'S.'"

NELL-ON AND OFF THE STAGE. By B. H. BUXTON, author of "Jennie of 'The
Prince's,'" "Won," "Fetterless," "Great Grenfell Gardens," &c.


BY THE AUTHOR OF "THE MYSTERY OF KILLARD."

THE WEIRD SISTERS. By RICHARD DOWLING, author of "The Mystery of
Killard," &c. 3 vols.


BY THE AUTHOR OF "AN INNOCENT SINNER."

OUR BOHEMIA. By MABEL COLLINS, author of "An Innocent Sinner," "In this
World," &c. 3 vols.

"You shall see great difference betwixt our Bohemia and your
Sicilia."--_Winter's Tale._


BY THE AUTHOR OF "THE WEIRD SISTERS."

THE MYSTERY OF KILLARD. By RICHARD DOWLING, author of "The Weird
Sisters" (see "Tinsley's Magazine"). 3 vols.


BY MAURICE LEE.

O WHERE AND O WHERE? 2 vols.


BY THE AUTHOR OF "JULIET'S GUARDIAN."

POOR WISDOM'S CHANCE. By Mrs. H. LOVETT CAMERON, author of "Juliet's
Guardian," &c. 3 vols.

THE BLACK COTTAGE; Or Tom Brace's Picture: _A GHOST STORY FOR THE
FIRESIDE._ BY W. E. BROUGHAM.

       *       *       *       *       *

TINSLEY BROTHERS' NEW PUBLICATIONS.

Illustrated with upwards of 400 ENGRAVINGS from DESIGNS by GERMAN
ARTISTS.

Now ready, in 2 vols.

BERLIN UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE.

Its Institutions, Inhabitants, Industry, Monuments, Museums, Social
Life, Manners, and Amusements.

By HENRY VIZETELLY.

AUTHOR OF "THE STORY OF THE DIAMOND NECKLACE," ETC.

     "There is no lack of lively matter in Mr. Vizetelly's volumes,
     while they embrace a vast amount of information of general interest
     and permanent value. In a book which goes far beyond Berlin, Mr.
     Vizetelly sketches with a vigorous hand the political and social
     system of the Empire.... Nor less entertaining than these clever
     social sketches are the political portraits, including public men
     of all parties and of any note, from the Emperor and his mighty
     Chancellor to the Socialist members of the Chambers. Nor, talking
     of sketches, can we conclude our notice without referring again to
     the excellent illustrations, chiefly of a humorous character, which
     makes one smile over the perusal of the gravest chapters. The
     selection is worthy of the author's reputation as an
     artist."--_Times._

     "We have to thank Mr. Henry Vizetelly for a really instructive
     book. 'Berlin under the New Empire,' published by Messrs. Tinsley
     Brothers, is a work of substantial information, conveniently
     arranged, clearly and agreeably written, and mingled with
     entertaining descriptive passages, and with lively notices of the
     habits of the townsfolk.... These volumes contain, in short, a
     large amount of materials for the understanding of present home
     affairs in Prussia and North Germany, which are frequently made the
     topic of remarks in the current journals of political
     discussion."--_Illustrated London News._

     "Mr. Vizetelly seems to have forgotten and omitted nothing that
     could render these volumes instructive or contribute to the
     entertainment of the reader; and the plentiful drawings with which
     every page is furnished bring home to us with striking reality the
     scenes so graphically described by the author."--_Daily News._

     "Mr. Vizetelly's book, every page of which is interesting, is
     unquestionably one of the best books of its kind that has appeared
     in England for many years. In fact, we scarcely remember ever to
     have read a more entertaining volume, or one which contains so much
     valuable and evidently accurate information. It instructs and
     amuses in equal degrees."--_Morning Post._

     "After having discovered that a tribe of savages live in a sandy
     desert somewhere in the north of Germany, and that their chief
     kraal, a miserable stucco erection, is called Berlin, the author
     proceeds to tell how those creatures manage to exist, what are
     their institutions, manners, amusements, industries, and so
     on."--_Athenaeum._

       *       *       *       *       *

FEMALE WARRIORS. Memorials of Female Heroism, from the Mythological Ages
to the Present Era. By ELLEN C. CLAYTON, author of "Queens of Song,"
"English Female Artists," &c.

     English and Scotch Heroines; French, German, and Genoese Amazons;
     Female Warriors of the Reformation; Heroines of the Irish
     Rebellion; Captain Rodeaux, Female Officer in the French Army;
     Christian Davies, Female Soldier in the 20th Foot; Hannah Snell,
     Private in the Line and Marines; Phoebe Hessel, Private in the
     5th Regiment; Hannah Whitney and Ann Chamberlayne, Female Sailors;
     Mary Ralphson, Jenny Cameron, Pretty Polly Oliver, &c.

     "The most successful of Miss Clayton's attempts to fittingly
     commemorate the actions of the illustrious members of the softer
     sex."--_Court Journal._

       *       *       *       *       *

TYPICAL WORKING MEN AND WOMEN.

By a WORKING MAN.

     The Lushington, The Above-their-Business Order, The Club Man, The
     Job-for-Life Man, The Rolling-stone, The Handy Man, The Workshop
     Bully, The Workshop Oracle, The Saint Mondayite, The Unskilled
     Labourer, The Regular Roadster, The Workshop Orator, The Hard
     Bargain, The Cas'alty Man, The Thoroughly Domesticated Man, The
     Evening-from-Home Man, The Single Man, The Wasteral, The Scholar,
     The Last-Year Apprentice, The Bred-and-Born Housewife, Mrs. Muddle,
     The Motherly Woman, Mrs. Meddle, The Woman who Works, Dorothy
     Draggle-tail, &c.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Weird Sisters, Volume III (of 3), by
Richard Dowling

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WEIRD SISTERS, VOLUME III ***

***** This file should be named 41554.txt or 41554.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/5/5/41554/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
